- SECRECY ORDERS AND PROSECUTING LEAKS: POTENTIAL LEGISLATIVE RESPONSES TO. DETER PROSECUTORIAL ABUSE OF POWER

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SECRECY ORDERS AND PROSECUTING LEAKS:
POTENTIAL LEGISLATIVE RESPONSES TO DETER
PROSECUTORIAL ABUSE OF POWER

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 30, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-31

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-313                     WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chair
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania, Vice-Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Ranking Member
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,      DARRELL ISSA, California
Georgia                          KEN BUCK, Colorado
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAREN BASS, California               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island     TOM McCLINTOCK, California
ERIC SWALWELL, California            W. GREG STEUBE, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          CHIP ROY, Texas
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
GREG STANTON, Arizona
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MONDAIRE JONES, New York
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CORI BUSH, Missouri

PERRY APELBAUM, Majority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Minority Staff Director
------

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, June 30, 2021

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of New York...........................     2
The Honorable Jim Jordan, Ranking Member of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of Ohio...............................     3

WITNESSES

Eve Burton, Executive Vice President & Chief Legal Officer,
Hearst Corporation
Oral Testimony.................................................     6
Prepared Testimony.............................................     8
Tom Burt, Corporate Vice President, Customer Security & Trust,
Microsoft Corporation
Oral Testimony.................................................    20
Prepared Testimony.............................................    22
Jonathan Turley, J.B. and Maurice C. Shapiro Professor of Public
Interest Law, The George Washington University Law School
Oral Testimony.................................................    29
Prepared Testimony.............................................    31
Lynn Oberlander, Of Counsel, Ballard Spahr LLP
Oral Testimony.................................................    47
Prepared Testimony.............................................    49

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Materials submitted by the Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the
Committee on the Judiciary from the State of New York for the
record
A letter from 23 civil society organizations, June 18, 2021....    64
A statement from Frederick J. Ryan, Jr., CEO & Publisher, The
Washington Post..............................................    66
A statement from Karen Kaiser, Senior Vice President, General
Counsel and Corporate Secretary, The Associated Press........    68
An article entitled, ``Rosenstein launched `hostile' attack in
May against Republicans over Russia records: congressional
email,'' Fox News, submitted by the Honorable Matt Gaetz, a
Member of the Committee on the Judiciary from the State of
Florida for the record.........................................    88

SECRECY ORDERS AND PROSECUTING LEAKS:
POTENTIAL LEGISLATIVE RESPONSES TO.
DETER PROSECUTORIAL ABUSE OF POWER

----------

Wednesday, June 30, 2021

House of Representatives

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:08 a.m., in Room
2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jerrold Nadler [Chair
of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Nadler, Lofgren, Jackson Lee,
Cohen, Johnson of Georgia, Bass, Jeffries, Cicilline, Swalwell,
Lieu, Raskin, Jayapal, Demings, Scanlon, Garcia, McBath,
Stanton, Dean, Escobar, Jones, Ross, Bush, Jordan, Chabot,
Buck, Gaetz, Johnson of Louisiana, Biggs, McClintock, Massie,
Bishop, Fisch-bach, Spartz, Fitzgerald, Bentz, and Owens.
Staff Present: Aaron Hiller, Deputy Chief Counsel; Arya
Hari-haran, Chief Oversight Counsel; John Doty, Senior Advisor;
Moh Sharma, Director of Member Services & Outreach and Policy
Advisor; Jacqui Kappler, Oversight Counsel; Priyanka Mara,
Professional Staff Member and Legislative Aide; Cierra
Fontenot, Chief Clerk; Gabriel Barnett, Staff Assistant; Ben
Hernandez-Stern, Counsel, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and
Homeland Security; Ken David, Minority Counsel; Sarah Trentman,
Minority Senior Professional Staff Member; Michael Koren,
Minority Senior Professional Staff Member; and Kiley Bidelman,
Minority Clerk.
Chair Nadler. The House Committee on the Judiciary will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the Committee at any time.
We welcome everyone to this morning's hearing on ``Secrecy
Orders and Prosecuting Leaks: Potential Legislative Responses
to Deter Prosecutorial Abuse of Power.''
Before we begin, I would like to remind Members that we
have established an email address and distribution list
dedicated to circulating exhibits, motions, or other written
materials that Members may want to offer as part of our hearing
today. If you would like to submit materials, please send them
to the email address that has been previously distributed to
your offices, and we will circulate the materials to Members
and staff as quickly as we can.
For those in the room, current guidance from the Office of
the Attending Physician is that individuals who are fully
vaccinated for COVID-19 do not need to wear a mask or maintain
social distancing. Fully vaccinated individuals may of course
choose to continue wearing masks based on their specific risk
considerations. If you are not fully vaccinated, the Office of
the Attending Physician requires you to wear a mask and
maintain six feet of social distance.
Finally, I ask all Members, both those in person and those
appearing remotely, to mute your microphones when you are not
speaking. This will help prevent feedback and other technical
issues. You may unmute yourself anytime you seek recognition.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.
On May 7th, 2021, The Washington Post reported that the
Trump Administration secretly obtained phone records and had
sought email records of certain of its reporters. Later reports
showed that the department made similar attempts to access the
communications records of a CNN reporter and multiple
journalists at The New York Times.
On June 10th, it was reported that the Trump Administration
had also requested the records of multiple Members of Congress,
their family members, and congressional staff. On June 13th,
The New York Times reported that the Trump Administration had
sought similar records from accounts associated with former
White House counsel Don McGahn.
Even if that were the end of the story, if all the
Department had done was target these reporters and these
Members of Congress this one time, we would have reason to be
concerned. A free press is vital to our democratic system, and
the Constitution grants extraordinary protections to the
official communications of Members of Congress and their staff.
Of course, these reports do not constitute an isolated
incident. The Department of Justice has a long history of
targeting reporters and misusing its surveillance authorities
to bypass basic constitutional protections. President Nixon's
Justice Department tried to silence the publication of the
Pentagon Papers. President Bush's Justice Department went after
the reporters who helped expose the NSA's expansive warrantless
surveillance programs. President Obama's Justice Department
went so far as to charge a reporter as a co-conspirator in
violation of the Espionage Act. President Trump's Justice
Department appears to have targeted reporters and Members who
were focused on investigating Russia's interference in the 2016
election. Now, we know that President Biden's Justice
Department sought to renew at least some of the secrecy orders
associated with these cases.
In each of these cases, the Department took advantage of
outdated policies that make secrecy the norm, not the exception
to the rule. In fact, these recent cases appear to have
targeted journalists, Democratic Members of the House--of
Congress, and the former White House counsel. We have no
immediate way of knowing how big the problem is because each of
these cases was accompanied by a DOJ-requested, judge-imposed
gag order that prevents anybody from talking about them for
years.
Now, we have asked the Department to explain the extent of
these troubling cases. This hearing is not about that
investigation, at least not directly.
Today, the Committee is going to focus on a related policy
problem that has troubled Members on both sides of the aisle--
namely, that technology has vastly outpaced the law when it
comes to the government demanding your data from a third-party
provider and that the gag orders accompanying those demands
have become standard practice in cases where timely notice
would make far more sense.
In the 21st century, Federal prosecutors no longer need to
show up to your office; they just need to raid your virtual
office. They do not have to subpoena journalists directly; they
just need to go to the cloud. Rather than providing Americans
with meaningful notice that their private electronic records
are being accessed in a criminal investigation, the Department
hides behind its ability to ask third-party providers directly.
They deny American citizens, companies, and institutions
their basic day in court, and, instead, they gather their
evidence entirely in secret. Just because it is easier for
prosecutors to seek sweeping amounts of data from these service
providers does not mean that they should be allowed to do so.
This Committee has long recognized the Justice Department's
need to investigate the unauthorized disclosure of classified
information, and it supports those investigations whenever they
are properly predicated. Our responsibility to combat leaks is
not, however, carte blanche authority to engage in sweeping
surveillance of American citizens, businesses, newsrooms, and
universities. It was not tolerable after 9/11, but it is not
acceptable now.
If history and recent reporting has taught us anything, it
is that we cannot trust the Department to police itself. It is
imperative that the Committee fulfill its role and ensure our
laws are keeping pace with rapidly changing technology. We need
to guard against future overreach of Federal prosecutors by
implementing reform now.
I thank our Witnesses for being here today. I look forward
to hearing their ideas on what reforms we should consider
moving forward, and I look forward to working with Mr. Jordan
and our Republican colleagues on this matter.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the Judiciary
Committee, the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Jordan, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, in the United States of America, the government
should not spy on its citizens, plain and simple. In the
limited cases when surveillance on Americans is necessary to
prosecute crimes or prevent acts of terror, there should be a
high burden, a very high burden, for the government in getting
approval to do so.
What came out of the Church Committee's investigation into
the FBI'S rogue actions in the middle of the 20th century
provided a roadmap for righting the wrongs of domestic
surveillance. An entire apparatus of checks and balances was
set up to hold government accountable when it sought to invade
the privacy of its citizens.
This process again is now in need of reform. The laws and
guidelines governing surveillance are opaque, antiquated, and
easily skirted. Our system of warrants, subpoenas, national
security letters, secret courts, and other tools at the
government's disposal must be brought in line with
constitutional considerations of basic due process. We have
tried to make progress in recent years, but we have much work
left to do.
For instance, the USA FREEDOM Act made significant
improvements to the PATRIOT Act to safeguard civil liberties,
but many deficiencies remain, like the simple fact that the
Obama FBI spied on President Trump's campaign, used a dossier
that they knew to be false at the time to be able to surveil
the activities of Carter Page. Further improvements are--quite
frankly, a complete overhaul of FISA is something this
Committee should again take up.
More recently, Tucker Carlson stated on his show the other
night his belief that the NSA was monitoring his
communications. While the NSA said in a carefully worded
statement--and I would encourage all of you to read that Mr.
Carlson was not a target, they didn't deny that they had
reviewed his communications.
Additionally, reforms to the Electronic Communications
Privacy Act, or ECPA, passed the House in two recent
Congresses, only to stall in the United States Senate. As most
of our colleagues know, ECPA is the cornerstone law governing
Americans' privacy with respect to email and other electronic
data. The problem is that this law was written in 1986 and did
not contemplate, not even close to contemplate, all the facets
of our digital age today. The result has been a patchwork
system of demands from law enforcement to technology companies
in a constitutionally dubious fashion. Courts are split, for
instance, on how to interpret parts of ECPA, and this
uncertainty allows for data to be swept up by law enforcement
agencies without warrants.
Another area where we can work together is on protecting
the public's right to know. An informed public is critical to a
well-functioning democracy. When the Department of Justice
prosecutes journalists or implements a gag order so that people
cannot speak out about the government's actions, our democratic
values are undermined. There are bipartisan bills that will
protect journalist sources. This legislation was originally
authored by Vice-President Pence when he was a Member of the
House. We should revisit this legislation and measures related
to gag orders so that the public can be as informed as
possible. It should be incredibly rare in the United States
that people are not allowed to speak freely about the
government's actions.
I look forward to today's discussion, and, frankly, like
the Chair said, ``I'm optimistic about an opportunity to work
with our colleagues on the other side to make some improvement
in all these areas.''
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chair Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Jordan.
Without objection, all other opening statements will be
included in the record.
Chair Nadler. I will now introduce today's Witnesses.
Eve Burton is an Executive Vice President and the Chief
Legal Officer of the Hearst Corporation. Prior to joining
Hearst, Ms. Burton served as Vice President and Chief Legal
Counsel at CNN, where she oversaw all legal matters relating to
news and other programming on CNN networks and websites.
Previously, she was a Deputy General Counsel at the New York
Daily News. She also clerked for Judge Leonard Sand in the
United States District Court of New York. Ms. Burton holds a
B.A. from Hampshire College and a J.D. from Columbia Law
School.
Tom Burt is corporate Vice President for customer security
and trust at Microsoft Corporation. Among his department's many
responsibilities is responding to law enforcement requests for
access to data and managing Microsoft's government clearance
and national security compliance. Mr. Burt joined Microsoft in
1995 and has held several leadership roles in the corporate,
external, and legal affairs departments. He received an A.B.
from Stanford University and a J.D. from the University of
Washington School of Law.
Jonathan Turley is the J.B. and Maurice C. Shapiro
Professor of Public Interest Law at The George Washington
University Law School. After a previous position teaching at
Tulane Law School, Professor Turley joined the G.W. law faculty
in 1990, and in 1998 he became the youngest chaired professor
in the school's history. In addition to serving as counsel on a
number of significant cases, he has written numerous articles
for a variety of law journals and national publications.
Professor Turley earned a B.A. from the University of Chicago
and a J.D. from Northwestern University School of Law.
Lynn Oberlander is of counsel with the law firm of Ballard
Spahr LLP. Previously, she served as In-House Counsel to
numerous broadcasters, publishers, and digital platforms. She
was a Senior Vice President and Associate General Counsel for
media at Univision Communications, Inc., while also serving as
Executive Vice President and General Counsel at Univision's
subsidiary Gizmodo Media Group. Previously, she was the General
Counsel for media operations at First Look Media Works, and
before that she was the General Counsel of The New Yorker,
where she also wrote for newyorker.com on media law topics.
Earlier in her career, she also worked at Forbes and NBC. Ms.
Oberlander received her B.A. from Yale University and her J.D.
from Columbia Law School.
We welcome all our distinguished Witnesses, and we thank
them for participating today.
I'll begin by swearing in our Witnesses. I ask that our
Witnesses in person please rise and raise your right hand. I
ask that our remote Witness please turn on her audio and make
sure I can see your face and your raised right hand while I
administer the oath.
Do you swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that the
testimony you are about to give is true and correct to the best
of your knowledge, information, and belief, so help you God?
Let the record show that the Witnesses have answered in the
affirmative.
Thank you, and please be seated.
Please note that each of your written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety. Accordingly, I ask
that you summarize your testimony in five minutes. To help you
stay within that time limit, there is a timing light on your
table. When the light switches from green to yellow, you have
one minute to conclude your testimony. When the light turns
red, it signals your five minutes have expired. For our Witness
appearing virtually, there is a timer on your screen to help
you keep track of time.
Ms. Burton, you may begin.

TESTIMONY OF EVE BURTON

Ms. Burton. Chair Nadler, Ranking Member Jordan, Members of
the Committee, good morning. My name is Eve Burton. I am an
executive vice President and the chief legal officer of the
Hearst Corporation. I am pleased to appear before you today to
discuss this critical issue.
This is not a partisan, political matter. It is not a
concern limited to the press or the Congress. It is an American
issue, and how we approach it will tell a lot about what kind
of country we want to be.
I want to acknowledge the obvious. There is a natural
tension between prosecutors' interest in exercising their
investigative power and the individual's interest in protecting
their constitutional rights, and these are difficult interests
to balance.
That is the key: They must be balanced fairly and
consistently. Our constitutional system requires that due
process is accorded all citizens through the application of
proper procedures that protect fundamental rights. With rare
exceptions, these matters should not be decided in secret.
Recent revelations about the DOJ's use of its investigative
powers to secretly obtain citizens' communications records
directly from telephone and email providers should be of great
concern to every American. We all rely on these services in our
daily lives.
While we do not yet know all the details of how or why the
DOJ went about this secret collection, enough facts have
emerged to suggest that Congress should consider legislation to
ensure appropriate balancing and adequate protection of
individual rights in the future.
Congress has stepped in before to provide legislative
protections for important rights as it did with the 1980
Privacy Protection Act. The PPA established strong procedures
for news organizations to challenge search warrants of
newsrooms, which were until then planned and executed in
secret.
Congress should do more, especially where third-party
communication companies are concerned. That is the principal
unad-dressed problem in 2021.
The aim of my testimony is to share my views on what should
be central components of any legislative reform in this area.
My written submission provides an expanded discussion of these
necessary pieces, but I will summarize them here.
The single most important step and one that is steeped in
our shared American values is to recognize the importance of
due process and procedural safeguards. This could be done by
codifying something like the DOJ subpoena guidelines. They lay
out procedures to protect fundamental press rights from
investigative power. This is a good baseline for legislation to
address today's problems. The guidelines are just a starting
point, and we must go forward.
Further, to that end, a critical second step is to
recognize the necessary role of Article III Judges in balancing
competing interests. The DOJ should not be prosecutor, judge,
and jury when it comes to citizens' fundamental rights. The
Department simply has an inherent conflict.
A third step is the establishment of procedures that
specifically recognize the realities of modern communication
technology. The same protections must apply whether the
information is sought in an Office file or on a cloud server
across the country or the world managed by Google, Microsoft,
Apple, or Verizon.
These are not theoretical issues; they are practical
issues. We must extend procedural protections to records stored
with cloud companies, or else we may never know when our
records are seized by the government.
Presently, the protection of our constitutional interests
is in the hands of middlemen who have no incentive to battle
with the government on behalf of customers or citizens. To the
contrary, in my experience, some communication companies have
historically seen it as their responsibility to assist the
government in obtaining what it wants.
Finally, legislation should be clear there is a presumption
against secrecy orders, and the government must bear the burden
of overcoming that presumption. The Pentagon Papers case,
decided exactly 50 years ago today, reminds us that prior
restraints are rarely, if ever, constitutionally permissible,
even when the government invokes national security concerns
during wartime. This is the constitutional presumption against
which gag orders must be judged.
I would like to close my testimony by reiterating my belief
that much of our concern about prosecutorial abuse of
investigative power can be addressed in a way that should not
be controversial or interfere with legitimate government work.
Instead, I believe we can all agree that many of these
concerns can be addressed with clear procedures that establish
a presumption of openness, with notice and an opportunity to be
heard, as the norm and the expectation. This assures that
difficult questions about the balancing of constitutional
interests that must occur will be properly decided by our great
and independent judiciary.
I look forward to our discussion today and thank you all
for the opportunity to participate in this hearing.
[The statement of Ms. Burton follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Burt, you may begin.

TESTIMONY OF TOM BURT

Mr. Burt. Chair Nadler, Ranking Member Jordan, and Members
of the Committee, my team at Microsoft is responsible for
responding to government data demands, so I appreciate the
opportunity to testify on the need for legislative reform on
secrecy orders.
While the recent news about secret investigations is
shocking, most shocking is just how routine secrecy orders have
become when law enforcement targets an American's email, text
messages, or other sensitive data stored in the cloud. This
abuse is not new. It is also not unique to one Administration
and is not limited to investigations targeting the media and
Congress.
Secrecy orders are too often used for routine
investigations based on a cursory assertion that the government
has met a statutory burden. The Justice Department's own
template does not even require facts justifying the need for
secrecy. Instead, the template merely asserts that any
disclosure would seriously jeopardize the investigation for a
variety of boilerplate reasons.
It's no surprise, then, that throughout the Obama, Trump,
and Biden Administrations, up to a third of all legal demands
we receive from Federal law enforcement include secrecy orders,
up to 3,500 in just one year. These are just the demands on
Microsoft. Add the demands likely served on Facebook, Apple,
Google, Twitter, and others, and you get a frightening sense of
the mountain of secrecy orders used by Federal law enforcement
in recent years.
As has been pointed out, this is very different than
investigations conducted before the advent of cloud computing.
If law enforcement wanted to get access to data on a computer
or a network in your home or your office, they would have to
obtain and serve a warrant to enter your premise and collect
evidence. If law enforcement wanted to secretly search your
physical office, it had to meet the heightened standards
required to get a so-called ``sneak and peek'' warrant.
However, today, if law enforcement wants to secretly search
your virtual office in the cloud, they just serve a boilerplate
warrant and secrecy order on your cloud provider that prevents
notice to you.
Microsoft scrutinizes each legal demand we receive to
protect our customers' interests. We often challenge
unnecessary secrecy orders through negotiation or litigation in
court. Some examples, just examples, of some of the recent
abuse we've seen are: Secrecy orders when the account holder
was a victim, not a target, of the investigation; or when the
investigation targets just one account at a reputable company,
government, or university but the secrecy order bars notice to
anyone in that organization; or where the government has
secretly demanded records to evade an ongoing discovery
dispute.
While Microsoft has long successfully challenged these
secrecy orders in courts, litigation is no substitute for
legislative reform. We worked with other technology companies
and have reforms that we have proposed that permit secrecy
orders for those rare cases where they are truly necessary.
We have four primary recommendations. First, Congress
should end indefinite secrecy orders for good. We suggest that
they last for 90 days, with a 90-day extension if proven
necessary. Second, Congress must end rubber-stamp secrecy
orders and require that judges engage in a written analysis of
the relevant facts. Third, courts should apply strict scrutiny
when issuing an order instead of only after it has been
challenged. Finally, Congress should codify a statutory right
authorizing cloud providers to challenge harmful secrecy orders
to protect their users' rights.
Let me be clear, secrecy orders are sometimes necessary,
such as to investigate cyber-attacks, to keep our children safe
from online exploitation, or to prevent terrorist attacks. We
don't suggest that the government must meet an impossible
standard. We are asking for a meaningful one.
Notice to targets is an important safeguard for our
constitutional rights. Reform is necessary to protect the
fundamental values that are the bedrock of our democracy.
Without reform, abuses will continue to occur, and they will
occur in the dark.
Thank you for your time and attention.
[The statement of Mr. Burt follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. Thank you for your testimony.
Professor Turley, you may begin.

TESTIMONY OF JONATHAN TURLEY

Mr. Turley. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Ranking Member Jordan,
Members of the Judiciary Committee. Thank you for inviting me
to speak today.
The reported targeting of reporters and Members of Congress
in the recent leak investigation is a serious matter that cuts
across areas of constitutional and statutory law. It should
also cut across partisan lines to unify the public and the
Congress in seeking answers to these difficult and troubling
questions.
Today's hearing occurs on the 50th anniversary of The New
York Times' publication the Pentagon Papers, an act that
triggered one of the most consequential legal battles in the
history of this country, a battle that ultimately helped define
the rights of the free press.
It also reminds us that drawing the line between national
security and press freedom continues to evade clear
demarcation. Indeed, it was 15 years ago that I testified
before the House Intelligence Committee and called again for
the enactment of a Federal shield law. It's a reminder of how
this area remains dangerously ill-defined and uncertain for
reporters, particularly with the growth of new technology that
has made a mockery of many of our protections.
This is a difficult area because there's compelling
arguments on both sides, by the Department of Justice and by
the media, and courts have struggled with what is often
presented as a zero-sum game. You can see that in the cases
that I discuss in my testimony.
So, this is a very serious matter. We don't know all the
facts, but it cuts across and raises issues of separation of
powers, the free press, and privacy. I would like to, however,
focus on where I ended 15 years ago, and that is on the
necessity of a Federal shield law. I will note that my
testimony identifies six areas that I believe should be
explored in light of this controversy.
Frankly, for those of us who have advocated for the free
press and for free speech, this is what Yogi Berra meant when
it was all ``deja vu all over again.'' We have seen this in the
Bush Administration, we've seen it in the Obama Administration,
we've seen it in the Trump Administration, we saw it at the
beginning of the Biden Administration. It's foolish to believe
that anything is going to change. In fact, that, I believe, is
the definition of ``insanity''--of doing the same thing,
expecting a different result.
The fact is, we rely uncomfortably on self-regulation by
the Department of Justice. They have not met that burden. They
have failed over and over again.
It is not partisan. It cuts across parties and
Administrations. It is a record of failure that puts at risk
one of the most precious rights, one of the most essential
rights in our constitutional system, and that is the free
press.
The six areas I laid out include concerns over the
authorization in this matter, what I call ``reverse
engineering'' of leak investigations, gag orders, fishing in
the cloud, which is a major problem, national security letters,
and defining ``journalism.''
I really would like this Committee to begin and end--and
this will come as no surprise to the Chair and the Ranking
Member, that I invoke James Madison. As a Madisonian scholar, I
think most things begin and end with James Madison. Madison
said most famously, ``A popular government without popular
information or the means of acquiring it is but a prologue to a
farce or a tragedy or perhaps both. Knowledge will forever
govern ignorance, and people who mean to be their own governors
must arm themselves with the power that knowledge gives.'' It's
the free press that gives us that knowledge. It's the free
press that protects us most certainly from tyranny.
I won't address the case law that I have discussed, but I
will note this: The State legislatures have been for more
protective of the free press than this body. There are 16
States and the District of Columbia that have absolute
privileges for the media. There are 24 States that have
qualified privileges for the media. Other States that don't
have those shield laws actually have common-law protections for
the media.
The Free Flow of Information Act of 2017 is a great
platform. It is supported by both parties, and it is time that
we move that to enactment. I am critical of aspects of the law,
even though I would take that law right now in a heartbeat to
try to gain that protection for the media. I note that it could
be strengthened with a greater explanation of presumptions.
Also, I believe it has to be rewritten on the definition of
what constitutes a journalist. Journalism has changed in this
world, and the definition in the law is frozen in journalistic
amber that is ages out of date. So, I would suggest examining
that.
I will only end with this, as I did 15 years ago: We cannot
afford the consequences of leaving the media exposed the way we
have. That will leave not just them exposed but the public in
the dark. It will be, as Madison said, ``a prologue to a farce
or a tragedy or both.'' We can avoid both, and we need to pass
this law.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Turley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. Thank you for your testimony.
Ms. Oberlander, you may begin.

TESTIMONY OF LYNN OBERLANDER

Ms. Oberlander. Chair Nadler, Ranking Member Jordan, and
Members of the Committee, thank you inviting me to testify
today.
We have learned in the last few weeks that the Justice
Department has secretly sought the email and telephone records
of eight journalists who work for three media companies in what
appears to be a purposeful attempt to evade the protections of
the law and of the Department's own guidelines.
As a longtime media lawyer who has worked in many newsrooms
and with hundreds of journalists, I can report that these
actions have had and will continue to have a profound and
disruptive effect on the ability of journalists to practice
their craft and to report stories of vital public importance to
our democracy.
By sending secret subpoenas to the service providers for
The New York Times, The Washington Post, and CNN and then by
gagging the recipients, the Department of Justice performed an
end run around the protections for the news media provided in
both the Privacy Protection Act of 1980 and the Attorney
General's own news media guidelines.
Had the subpoenas come directly to the media organizations
or if they had been notified at the time of their issuance, the
media organizations would have been able to challenge them in
court. Instead--and even though the prosecutors were seeking
three-year-old records for an already-public leak
investigation--the Department of Justice was able to convince a
magistrate judge in at least one of the cases that informing
the journalists of the request would, quote, ``seriously
jeopardize the ongoing investigation by giving targets the
opportunity to destroy or tamper with evidence.''
Congress should now act to more fully protect the rights of
journalists to bring crucial information to the public. The
honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee should consider
several legislative enhancements.
The strongest and simplest way to protect the rights of
journalists to report on the actions of government and the
rights of the public to receive such reporting would be to pass
legislation banning governmental inquiries into journalist
sources, as Attorney General Garland has now said that he would
strive to do. This would be the simplest response and would
demonstrate the importance of the free flow of information to
the public.
Even in the absence of such a ban, there are other ways to
improve protections for journalistic process. Independent
judicial review of any prosecutorial attempt to access
journalist materials is crucial. Ensuring that it's a stringent
review that appropriately weighs the public's interest in news
gathering with the government's interest in uncovering a source
is central to protecting the important First Amendment
interests that are at stake here.
While the current Attorney General guidelines are not
perfect and, crucially, are not enforceable by journalists,
they provide an excellent starting point in looking to
strengthen the legislative protections. The guidelines
recognize that, quote, ''freedom of the press can be no broader
than the freedom of members of the news media to investigate
and report the news,'' and note that subpoenas and search
warrants are ``extraordinary measures, not standard
investigatory practices.'' To this end, all such process may be
issued only with the approval of the Attorney General or
another senior official and only when the information sought is
essential to a successful investigation, after all reasonable
attempts have been made to obtain the information from
alternative sources, and after negotiation and notice with the
affected members of the news media. These protections should
now be statutorily enacted.
The government must provide notice to the news media
whenever information is sought, whether it's directly sought
from the media itself or from their service providers. It is an
accident of technology that the government is able to bypass
the affected journalists. If the media company maintained its
own email servers, for example, it would be impossible to seek
the records without notice.
Notice provides an opportunity for the affected media to
seek judicial review from an Article III Judge and to challenge
the government's purported rationales for seeking the
information.
The Department of Justice believes that prior notice and
negotiation is impossible in certain cases, particularly where
it threatens grave harm to national security or the
investigation's integrity. In such extremely limited cases,
Congress should consider legislating a duty of candor, an
affirmative obligation to notify the third-party providers that
it is seeking journalist materials, and not to hide the request
within a broader request, as was apparently the case with a
subpoena to Apple for information about Members of Congress and
their staffs.
Congress should also consider requiring a confidential
advocate to represent the media's interests before the court
considering the application for the subpoena, the court order,
or other process. This would not be unique. The USA FREEDOM Act
permits a similar type of special advocate in proceedings
before the FISA court.
Finally, this moment presents an excellent opportunity to
pass a strong statutory shield law that would codify protection
for journalists and mandate a consistent test for when, if
ever, the government or private individuals can seek journalist
work product and the identity of confidential sources.
Today's patchwork of shield laws and conflicting standards
of protection between the State and Federal courts leads to
inconsistent results and prevents journalists from adequately
informing their sources of the risks they face in coming
forward with crucial information for stories of public
importance.
Truly a fourth estate to our tripartite government, the
press, protected by the First Amendment, stands as an essential
bulwark of our constitutional arrangement. Congress can help
the press serve its vital role in our democracy. I urge you to
do so.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Oberlander follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. Thank you.
We will now proceed under the five-minute rule with
questions, and I will recognize myself for five minutes.
Before I begin my questioning, and without objection, I
will place the following into the record: A letter from over 20
civil society groups calling for reform; a statement from
Frederick J. Ryan, Jr., CEO, and publisher of The Washington
Post; a statement from Karen Kaiser, Senior Vice President,
General Counsel, and Corporate Secretary of the Associated
Press.
Without objection.
[The information follows:]

CHAIR NADLER FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. The technological landscape has changed
dramatically since Congress enacted the Stored Communications
Act in 1986.
Mr. Burt, how has the government become more and more
reliant on section 2703 electronic surveillance orders since
the passage of the Stored Communications Act of 1986?
Mr. Burt. Government has become increasingly reliant on
these secrecy orders since that time, and that has been largely
the product of the advancement of technology.
At that time, the cloud didn't exist. The substantial
extent to which citizens, organizations, corporations, and
society in general stores their private communications, their
corporate records in the cloud, that didn't exist.
So, today, what we have is a world where access to that
information and the application of a secrecy order enables law
enforcement to conduct these investigations and get access to
citizens', organizations', and corporation records without
notice to the organization or the individual whose records are
being obtained. That is a dramatic shift in the way law
enforcement can and should conduct its operations.
Chair Nadler. Ms. Burton, what are some examples of cases
in which you think the government would not need to rely on
section 2703 orders but it, in fact, does?
Ms. Burton. I would point the Committee to the BALCO case,
which was a series of stories by the San Francisco Chronicle on
sports and steroids, where the government had a two-party
process to get information. They were going through the courts,
and they didn't like the results they were getting, so they
turned around and they went back to the service providers, and
they sought the telephone records of the reporters in court
without any notice to us. That order is still sealed. We have
no knowledge whatsoever what the telephone provider argued in
the courtroom.
A perfect example of a relatively routine case. The
government was embarrassed about what happened in the grand
jury and what came out of the grand jury. It just wasn't
necessary. The usual constitutional protections and the courts
balancing those and with notice to these reporters was a
perfectly fine way to proceed. Whether they won or lost the
case, it was fair under a constitutional scheme.
So, there is an example where it was just easier for the
government to get what it wanted, and it got it, and it acted
in accordance with process that's just not defensible in this
country under our aversion to secrecy, as Representative Jordan
spoke about when he started with you in this proceeding.
Chair Nadler. Mr. Burt, same question.
Mr. Burt. In addition to the examples that I described in
my testimony, let me just offer a very recent example.
We received just yesterday a demand for access to data of a
single employee of a major American city in an investigation
that has nothing to do with national security. The gag order,
therefore, prevents us from notifying anybody in the city--not
its mayor, not its city attorney--that an employee of theirs
has had their information taken by the government.
More importantly, we also saw with this particular gag
order a new trend, or an example of a new trend, a troubling
trend that we're observing, which was, this gag order wasn't
just about that subpoena; it was a blanket gag order that
purports to cover all subpoenas, all warrants, every process in
that entire investigation, in that entire case, all based on
one boilerplate submission to a magistrate.
That's the kind of--our law enforcement agents work hard to
do a very important job, but the laws that currently exist
enables them to act this way out of expediency and convenience,
and that's why we need reform.
Chair Nadler. Thank you.
If the recent reporting is true, gag orders prevented
counsel within these targeted media companies from sharing any
information about the requests for information with the
affected reporters. These dynamic strains the attorney-client
relationship, to say nothing of its effect on a free press.
Ms. Oberlander, does the Department's use of secrecy orders
violate due-process protections? Why do you believe the
Department defaults to section 2703 and secrecy orders in this
way?
Ms. Oberlander. Well, I absolutely believe that it does
violate due process. It creates incredible stress for the media
organizations and for the lawyers at issue here, the in-house
counsel who were aware of the requests but who weren't allowed
to tell their bosses, their supervisors, or the journalists or
even the newsroom that these requests had been made. It puts
them in an incredibly difficult position, as I'm sure, as many
of you are members of the bar, you can imagine, when you cannot
tell your client crucial information about what is being asked
of them and going on.
The other big problem is that, when you have these secret
orders, you can't negotiate them. I mean, if the order had come
through and the people were allowed to know about it, then they
could go back and say, you don't really--even if you want this
information, which we don't think you should have, you don't
want this other information. We want to make sure that you're
not getting other communications that may show our other
sources, our other work product, our other confidential
investigations.
So, it really makes it very, very difficult for in-house
counsel and outside counsel to work effectively with the
government and to protect their First Amendment rights.
Chair Nadler. Thank you.
My time has expired.
Mr. Jordan?
Mr. Gaetz?
Mr. Gaetz. We're on a roll, Mr. Chair. Last week, you
brought Big Tech to heel; this week, bringing the Department of
Justice to heel. My heart flutters to think what might be in
our next Committee week. Maybe we'll reform FISA and continue
the bipartisan momentum.
I believe that the Department of Justice and the
intelligence community shouldn't threaten or spy on Members of
Congress, our staff, or the press for politics. President Biden
believes the same thing. In response to questions from CNN's
Kaitlan Collins, President Biden committed that he would not
allow the weaponization of his government against the press.
Chair Nadler agrees. As a matter of fact, Chair Nadler
stated, and I'm quoting directly, ``Congress must make it
extraordinarily difficult, if not impossible, for the
Department to spy on the Congress or the news media. We cannot
rely on the Department alone to make these changes.''
When I saw the reports about Members of Congress's offices
being targeted--Mr. Swalwell, Mr. Schiff--I was the first and
the only Republican to say that was improper. More of my
colleagues should join me.
It was easy to believe that the Department of Justice would
do that to the Democrats because they threatened to do it to
us.
Mr. Chair, I seek unanimous consent to enter into the
record a FOX News publication from September 27th, 2018:
``Rosenstein Launched `Hostile' Attack in May Against
Republicans Over Russia Records.''
Chair Nadler. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

MR. GAETZ FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Gaetz. Rosenstein threatened Kash Patel, who was a
Member of Republican staff, with criminal process if he did not
bend to what Mr. Rosenstein wanted at the time. So, it's not
hard to believe.
The most-watched cable news host has been stating for the
last several nights that the NSA has been monitoring his
communications. Amazingly, the NSA has issued a statement that
is so couched it is functionally an admission.
Let's review. The NSA says--on June 28th, 2021, Tucker
Carlson alleged that the National Security Agency has been,
quote, ``monitoring our electronic communications and is
planning to leak them in an attempt to take this show off the
air,'' close quote. This allegation is untrue. Which
allegation? The statement continues, ``Tucker Carlson has never
been an intelligence target of the Agency, and the NSA has
never had any plans to try to take his program off the air,''
and the statement continues. What's interesting is that there
is no denial that they were monitoring Tucker Carlson even if
he wasn't the target.
We saw this exact playbook with Carter Page and Donald
Trump, where, to try to assess information from one person, the
intelligence community will utilize authorities to go after
someone else to try to ensnare their true target. I think
that's why they were going after Democrat staff, to try to get
to Schiff and Swalwell. I think it's the reason they were going
after Republican staff, perhaps to target Mr. Nunes or others.
I think it's why they were going after Carter Page, to get to
Trump.
I think that there was probably somebody in Tucker
Carlson's orbit that NSA was monitoring, and there's no denial
that they caught up Tucker Carlson in that monitoring. By the
way, there's also no denial that there was a plan to leak the
information to try to in some way embarrass Tucker Carlson. The
only denial is that they weren't expressly trying to get his
show off the air.
It's not like the NSA has never lied to us. I mean, we were
told that there was no bulk collection of Americans' data.
Turns out, there was bulk collection of Americans' data. No one
ever was held to account for that.
The Chair's right or Professor Turley's right, too, we
cannot count on these people to police themselves. So, it's my
expectation that there needs to be greater review here.
So, Mr. Chair, I am inviting you to continue this
bipartisanship. Join me in calling for an inspector general
investigation into any monitoring that the NSA or any other
element of the intelligence community has engaged in relative
to Tucker Carlson. Because these denials, these couched
denials, raise more questions than they provide answers.
By the way, if Democrats don't do this, if you're only
outraged when your Members and your staff and the press that's
close to you and that amplifies your messages is targeted, then
we never are going to solve anything. It will, in fact, be deja
vu all over again, as Professor Turley said. I am equally
outraged when they target the people I like and the people I
don't like, when they target the press that I watch and the
press that I despise.
I would greatly seek any bipartisan agreement. Last week,
we were on such a roll; we brought Big Tech to account. My hope
is that we can join together again and address this
legislatively but specifically with a call for an inspector
general investigation into these allegations.
I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Lofgren?
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
As I listen to these very skilled and knowledgeable
Witnesses, it occurs to me we're being asked to provide
additional protection to the press because of the First
Amendment, but it seems to me our real focus--not that the
press doesn't need additional protection under shield laws--
ought to be on the Fourth Amendment.
Once again, we are called to ask whether the Fourth
Amendment is really still alive in the digital age. The warrant
requirements and the guarantees against unreasonable search and
seizures really are--they're foundational rights. They're not
just to the press, and they're not just to Members of Congress;
they're to every American. I do believe that the situation we
have here is an end run on the protections that the Fourth
Amendment is supposed to provide to every American.
It's true that if the information sought was on a person's
desktop, a warrant would have to be issued. There wouldn't be a
gag order; there would be notice. The fact that the information
is stored in the cloud instead is really meaningless. The
expectation of privacy on the part of the individual is that
it's their data.
I think we really need to revisit the whole scheme that we
have here about Americans' expectation of privacy. When these
laws were written, there was no cloud. We ought to extend the
Fourth Amendment protections to individuals' data, wherever
held, when there is an expectation of privacy.
Now, Mr. Burt, I'd like to ask you about compelling cloud
providers, like Microsoft, to produce communication records.
The Stored Communications Act allows the government to compel
such data upon a showing of reasonable suspicion. Do you think
that this standard is sufficient to protect the privacy rights
of individuals who have their data stored in your cloud?
Mr. Burt. No, that standard is clearly not sufficient.
That's why we're recommending the heightened standard that we
do recommend that the Committee consider in legislative reform.
That standard has been turned into these boilerplate
approaches that we discussed that enable law enforcement to
just simply assert a conclusion that the secrecy order is
necessary. Then, as you point out quite accurately, that denies
the target of that investigation any opportunity to exercise
their Fourth Amendment rights, because they don't know that
their property is being taken and searched and seized.
What we've done in our litigation is assert our First
Amendment right to inform our customers. While some courts have
recognized that we do have a First Amendment right to inform
customers--and that's why we also believe part of the reform
should clarify that that First Amendment right does exist for
cloud providers, because there have been some courts that have
found the opposite.
We really need to ensure that citizens have the opportunity
to exercise their Fourth Amendment rights. That requires a
heightened standard. It requires the specific findings of fact
that a secrecy order is truly necessary under the existing
statutory factors and a record so that only in those very
limited instances where it's truly necessary in the national
interest is a secrecy order applied, and not 3,500 times a year
just to one cloud provider.
Ms. Lofgren. Right now, the entire burden of protecting
Fourth Amendment rights falls upon the service provider. Now, I
heard your testimony that Microsoft is active in protecting
those rights, but there are other providers that may not be
active. The fact is, it's the individual whose rights are being
challenged who should have the opportunity to contend and to
protect.
I would like to think, what happens when a court issues a
secrecy order that later turns out to be totally unsupported
and yet the government uses the information it gets in the
request to bring a criminal prosecution? Can the defendant use
the secrecy order as a basis for suppression? Do you know that?
Mr. Burt. I would yield to Witness Mr. Turley to see if
he's got a specific analysis of that. I believe the answer is,
there is no opportunity for the defendant then to challenge the
evidence that's seized in that way under a secrecy order under
the Fourth Amendment.
Chair Nadler. The time of the gentlelady has expired.
Mr. Biggs?
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks to you for holding
this very important hearing, and thanks to the Witnesses for
being here today.
I associate myself with basically everything that's been
said here today. It's been remarkably agreeable, which is
really pleasant and surprising. I hope that we can work
together to try to bring clarity and rectification of these
problems.
So, here's my first question goes to Ms. Burton, this is
for you. You said in your written report, because information's
in the cloud storage bin rather than in a file cabinet--and, by
the way, this was iterated by every Witness--the government
should have no greater investigative and secrecy interest due
to the case--due to the ease of access.
So, I guess my question is, if you were the DOJ or
government, how would you respond to that? Because, I mean,
that's the blankest statement, is that there is no greater--
just because it's easier to claim secrecy, there's no greater
case for it. How would you respond if you were DOJ to that?
Ms. Burton. I mean, if I were the Attorney General--and I
think he's headed in this direction--I would want to be
responsible, as a citizen of the country, to balance all rights
and all needs.
That's why we have judges. That's why we have notice.
That's why we should not be putting our cloud providers,
effectively, above the Constitution. As you say, Microsoft
makes some efforts in this regard, but that is it not
universally the issue.
I would tell you, there's a lot of things we don't know
right now. If I'm the DOJ, I don't want to be convicting people
or bringing cases where I can't defend in full measure the
evidence that I put before a court and give someone the right
to challenge that. I think that's just playing, should we say,
pro ball in a bad way.
Mr. Biggs. Well, I don't disagree, but I haven't heard,
basically, from any of the Witnesses, nor have we seen in
practice over years, that DOJ really is concerned with being a
pristinely good, due-process adherence, and protecting the
rights of everybody. I mean, you've all iterated examples where
they've abused this authority.
Mr. Burt, this is coming into your shop 3,500 times a year,
and so we're led to believe that this could be many thousands
of times.
So, you've given your set of prescriptions as well, but why
do you think it should be--on a physical warrant, with physical
materials being seized, it's a 30-day--if it's going to be
secret, it's 30 days per statute. Why do you think it should be
90 days for data?
Mr. Burt. That's a very good question. Any reasonable time
is acceptable to us and to the technology industry. What we're
trying to do is rein in what we have seen, which are indefinite
secrecy orders that have no termination date.
What we've seen since the DOJ formulated its policy in
response to litigation, we filed back in 2017, we've actually
seen somewhat of a decrease in those indefinite orders, but we
still get hundreds of every year. The standard that we see,
typically, is a year. That's just far too long a time period,
even when it's actually justified to have a secrecy order.
So, our response would be, there's a very small universe of
truly justified secrecy orders. Where those secrecy orders are
truly justified, then as long as 90 days might actually be
acceptable.
Mr. Biggs. I just have just about a minute left, and I
would like each of you to respond to this. Because each of you
have talked about, one way or another, reliance on the courts
as arbiters here, and yet they seem to be just rubber-stamping
boilerplate language.
I am concerned about what I view as a necessary stick
approach to DOJ for their abuse. What is an appropriate
punitive measure?
I mean, in a regular criminal case with physical evidence,
you're going to have the exclusionary issues that will come in
if there's fruit of the poisonous tree, et cetera. What happens
here? What is the punitive measure that devolves to bad actors,
DOJ?
Professor Turley, we'll go with you and then right down the
table.
Mr. Turley. Well, I certainly agree with your point that
the courts have not exactly covered themselves in glory. Part
of the problem here is that these judges are getting thousands
of these things, and they don't want to go into the weeds on
some of these issues.
So, you have cases like In re Grand Jury out of the ED New
York that are saying, look, this is boilerplate, we are just
getting boilerplate over and over again, and that's not saying
anything.
You're going to have to structure what a court has to find
and what a court must establish in writing if we're going to be
able do anything. I think you have to establish standing in an
appellate procedure with adversarial process. Those are the
things that will result in a change.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chair, thank you so very much.
I view this as enormously crucial in holding this
bipartisan hearing, and it gives me reflections down memory
lane of the Patriotic Act and the urgency after 9/11 to deal
with both, as we fought for in the Judiciary Committee, the
balance of civil liberties, as well as this major effort to be
able to protect America.
We've come full circle, I believe, and we are here to
protect America again. We're doing it from a different
perspective.
Allow me just to lay a predicate, if I might, that under
the Trump Administration's Justice Department they sought the
phone and email records of journalists, Members of Congress,
their families, and their staff. I think we should just dwell
for a moment: Staff and families.
Now, I imagine there's an array of family members and there
might be a toddler. Some said there was a child whose various
resources were sought as well.
Donald Trump's determination to repeat the abuses of
President Nixon was carried out in his contempt for the
invaluable service to democracy performed by a free and
independent press, his desire to punish politicians who opposed
or criticized his policies and actions.
As I pointed out during the impeachment proceedings against
Donald Trump, his conduct reflects and reveals a person whose
character is thus marked by every act which may define a tyrant
and shows he is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
I say that for the record, not to suggest that what we're
doing today should appeal or apply, appeal to all of us and
apply to all of us regardless of our political perspective, as
I heard Witnesses say.
In fact, Ms. Oberlander, you indicated, if sunshine is the
best disinfectant, it is obvious that this shadowy State of
affairs allows for all manner of dark things to grow.
We worked very hard in the PATRIOT Act to pull back, dealt
with Pfizer. Even in our effort to do so we have had our ups
and downs.
So, let me ask all of you a question. It is just a yes or
no to all the Witnesses. Then, with the time remaining, I'll
ask a specific question. Let me start.
Professor Turley, do you believe that Congress definitively
needs to act in the midst of what we're dealing with at this
time?
Mr. Turley. Yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Burt?
Mr. Burt. Yes, I do.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Oberlander?
Ms. Oberlander. Yes, I do.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I believe Ms. Burton?
Ms. Burton. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
So, let me pose this question to Ms. Burton.
How might the use of electronic surveillance gag orders
used to further a President's personal crusade, what impact do
you think that has as relates to the industry?
Ms. Burton. I would say, Representative, that what you need
to do in our answer to yes, and how it would affect not just
the industry of the media, because I think what we have really
determined here is that this affects all Americans.
So, I would urge you to put forth legislation that would
have a foundational matrix that could apply to the First
Amendment, the Fourth Amendment, a narrow statute that covers
broad constitutional considerations. That would be to give
notice, due process standards, courts, judges, and no secrecy.
I think that combination of things in a narrowly stated,
not all the other issues that we've touched about on a lot of
issues, but something very simple and clear that would
effectively help our industry and the American public to no
end.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Ms. Oberlander.
Let me ask you the question from the reverse.
What should be the limitations on our effort to protect the
American public against these random securing of data now in
the light of the cloud? Should there be from, your perspective,
the First Amendment specialists, what limitation should we
consider, if any?
Ms. Oberlander. Congresswoman, I think that, frankly, the
protection for the media should be broad and it should be
subject to strict judicial review any time you're trying to
get--government is trying to get this material to invade the
privacy of the journalists, to invade the privacy of the
reporting process.
It may be that there are specific places where you could
override that, perhaps on acts of terrorism, obviously, if
there is a reason to believe that there's communications around
terrorism or the identity of the terrorist. That might be one
of the places where you would have a narrow exception. I do
think it is--or imminent bodily harm, or violence, or immediate
death.
In general, I think the protection should be very, very
broad and subject to independent judicial review. As the other
Witnesses have said, there should also be the right of
interlocutory appeal for that.
Chair Nadler. The time of the gentlelady has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I yield back.
Chair Nadler. Mr. McClintock.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I find myself in complete agreement with Ms. Lofgren. This
is not a matter of special protections for journalists or
public officials. This is a matter of the Fourth Amendment
right of every American citizen.
It was John Adams, who was certainly in a position to know,
who said that in his opinion the American Revolution started
many, many years before 1776 with the King's abuse of general
warrants. That's when he said the ``Child Liberty'' was born.
We wrote our Fourth Amendment to assure that such abuses could
never threaten Americans.
Professor Turley, I am not an attorney, but perhaps you
could give me a little bit of schooling.
It is my understanding that if the government wants to go
through my papers to search for a document, an incriminating
document, it first has to go to a judge, convince that judge
there is probable cause to believe that I have committed a
crime, and that the evidence for that crime is likely to be
found among my papers.
Do I have that correct?
Mr. Turley. That is correct. They have to satisfy the
standard of probable cause.
Mr. McClintock. So, does it make a difference if that paper
they are looking for is in my safe deposit box at my bank?
Mr. Turley. No. That's the oddity about this situation, is
that because of this new technology and storing on the cloud,
suddenly a large amount of your information has become
vulnerable to being seized.
Mr. McClintock. Why would that make any difference? It
could be seized sitting in my safe deposit box, but they can't
just go and seize it. They have to first abide by the
protections afforded me under the Fourth Amendment. Is that
correct?
Mr. Turley. It shouldn't. What they are getting thorough
metadata and other types of searches is a great deal of
information that people would believe is private.
Mr. McClintock. My point is, whether I wrote those
incriminating words on a piece of paper or wrote them
digitally, it's the same thing exactly. Whether I store them at
home or in a safe deposit box in the case of a paper or on
somebody's server in the case of the cloud, it makes no
difference, it is the same thing.
Mr. Turley. That's right. What's particularly bizarre here
is that the most famous case of the Supreme Court in the
privacy area is Katz, where the court said that the Fourth
Amendment protects people, not places. Yet we have the ultimate
rejection of Katz because if you move information from one
place to another it suddenly moves out of a warrant and
probable cause protection.
Mr. McClintock. How have we allowed ourselves to get so far
from these fundamental Fourth Amendment principles that
underpin our liberty?
Mr. Turley. It's really two things. One is the court opened
us up for this when it decided in cases like Smith v. Maryland
that pen registers don't require warrants. A lot of that is
based on a myth. The Court said, well, you give your phone
number to a third party, i.e., the telephone company.
Well, it used to be a human being there putting in your
phone number. Now, of course, you are giving it to a computer.
So, people are not giving their information to a third party
knowingly. The Court has never corrected that misunderstanding,
in my view, of the privacy dimension.
The other aspect to this is just new technology. We have
constantly seen privacy protections that have failed with new
technology. This age we're living in is making a mockery out of
the standards created by the court.
Mr. McClintock. The technology may change, but human nature
doesn't change and the principles that undergird our
Constitution don't change because they are rooted in human
nature.
Mr. Turley. Mr. McClintock, I also want to note that
there's a growing gap because the court just decided in
Carpenter that you need a probable cause determination and a
warrant to get the location off people's cell phone. All of us
celebrated that as a victory of the Fourth Amendment. Yet, you
don't need a warrant to get information from the cloud. From a
privacy perspective, this is not just nonsensical, it's
dangerous.
Mr. McClintock. Yeah. Well, I just wonder, how are secret
courts and secret subpoenas and secret letters compatible with
a free society? Can a free society exist if its government can
secretly surveil its citizens in this manner in direct
contravention of its most fundamental law?
Mr. Turley. Yeah. One of the great dangers, by the way,
Katz had within it seeds of its own destruction, because it
bases the test of privacy on our reasonable expectations of
privacy. So, as our expectations fall, the government's ability
to engage in warrantless surveillance increases, and that could
become this race to the bottom.
Mr. McClintock. They say this is necessary for our national
security, for our country. The only oath that any public
official takes is not to support and defend the country, not to
support and defend the government, it is to support and defend
the Constitution. There's a reason for that. Our Founders
understood if we ever lose our Constitution, we've already lost
our country.
Chair Nadler. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Most of the questions I think have been asked that are
pertinent but let me ask this? I'm not sure if this is to the
right person, because we probably should have the Justice
Department before us, as well to let us know what's been going
on.
Ms. Oberlander, do you know of any cases, or do you have
reason to believe there are other cases that have not been
reported where there has been surveillance that would concern
the American public and this Committee?
Ms. Oberlander. I don't actually have any direct knowledge
of any cases that haven't been reported. I would imagine that
there are. We have just learned about a significant number of
attempts to find out the information of various journalists and
various other Members of the Congress. I don't have any direct
knowledge of that, though.
Mr. Cohen. Ms. Oberlander, you're a representative of the,
I guess, the Fourth Estate, the press, and they are protected
by the First Amendment. We as Congress people are concerned
about Article I.
The public, as Mr. McClintock and Ms. Lofgren have
discussed, they are the subject we most need to be concerned
about.
Do you have any--what are your suspicions on what type of
cases and what people have been spied upon through this means?
Ms. Oberlander. Outside of journalists?
Mr. Cohen. Outside of journalists.
Ms. Oberlander. Actually, honestly, really, I am a
representative of the Fourth Estate here and I am unaware of
whoever else may or may not have been spied upon outside of the
media.
Mr. Cohen. Well, thank you.
Mr. Turley, I think you've discussed some of the exceptions
that might be made if we had a law, and I don't know who it was
addressed to, that we should have--they should all be warrants
and they should be somehow adversary hearings and appealable to
some higher-level court.
Are there other suggestions that would you make to protect
the public in these circumstances?
Mr. Turley. My testimony actually does contain some initial
suggestions.
It's very important to address the standing issue. We've
had cases in which people, particularly media, have tried to
get this issue into court and they've just been told, ``You
don't have standing,'' which is completely bizarre, because
this goes directly to who the media is and trying to protect
their constitutional function.
There are also limitations on appeal that you can look at.
I think you can also in drafting language create more of a
legislative presumption that applies in these cases to make it
clear to courts that the default position should be not to have
a gag order, the default position should be not to have these
secrecy issues.
To give you an example, the important thing here is
remember that prosecutors are rational actors. Many are my good
friends; I litigate against them. They are rational actors, and
they follow the path of least resistance.
If you look, for example, at studies with the national
security letters, from 2000-2005 the number of national
security letters went from 8,500-47,000.
Now, you only have that exponential growth if it is the
path of least resistance. You have to make that path a little
more difficult.
Mr. Cohen. Well, I agree with you. We need to make it more
difficult, and we need to protect the citizens.
What concerns me--and I think we're going have a briefing
from the Justice Department after the break--is when did they
know, the new team, and what do they know about these
intrusions on the Congress and the press and the gag orders?
Did they only come to the public's attention after The New
York Times had reported them? If so, if they had knowledge
beforehand and waited, didn't plan to make this public, then
I've got concerns.
I think that I have faith in Merrick Garland, I have faith
that he will change the Justice Department's personnel to get
it to be more transparent. It would be disturbing to think that
they had this information and only but for The New York Times
reportage was this forthcoming to the public about the
intrusion into Mr. Schiff and Mr. Swalwell and everybody
else's--and the reporters'--otherwise, private communications.
So, I think we've got to go further, but we do need to
draft legislation that protects the public, that does put this
in front of a court.
Professor Turley, do you think there ought to be--is there
just one court that issues these or are there many courts?
Mr. Turley. I think you can still--the problem is that the
sheer number of these cases is just breathtaking. So, if you
pour all these into a single court, you're going to have a
massive court. Judges can handle these questions, but they need
more structure from you.
I also want to echo; I have faith as well in Attorney
General Garland. In fact, I think that he is ideal to deal with
this question because he's walked the walked. He's been a
judge. He's dealt with these types of docket issue. He is now
at the head of the Justice Department. I think that he could be
a really terrific ally if he means what he says, and we can try
to solve this problem.
In the past, the Justice Departments has not been a
faithful ally, I must tell you. Fifteen years ago, we talked
about this, and the Justice Department was opposed to shield
laws and a lot of these provisions.
I do have faith in General Garland. I am hoping that faith
is well established.
Chair Nadler. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Massie.
Mr. Cohen. In my last [inaudible], Mr. Chair, I would just
like to say to Professor Turley, the last time we had contact I
was a little brusque maybe with you, a little rough shoulders.
You're a gentleman and a scholar. I appreciate you. I apologize
if I want too far.
Mr. Turley. Thank you very much, Representative.
Chair Nadler. Mr. Massie.
Mr. Cohen. You're welcome.
Mr. Massie. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I would like to associate myself with the comments from Mr.
McClintock and Ms. Lofgren that any protections that we provide
shouldn't be for a special privileged group of people. I mean,
that's not the way the Constitution was written.
Ms. Oberlander referred to the press as the Fourth Estate,
which prompted me to look up what are the other three estates.
It's a reference actually not to the three branches of
government, but to the three estates in Europe, which were the
clergy, the nobility, and the commoners.
I think all of them, including the Fourth Estate, deserve
the protections of the Fourth Amendment. So, whatever we draft,
I hope it is not just particularly for Congress or for the
media.
Professor Turley, you touched on something earlier but
didn't get to spend enough time on it, about the third-party
doctrine. Can you explain to us in a little more detail how
that came about and what we could do in Congress to sort of
rein that back in?
Mr. Turley. Yeah. Quite frankly, I think the Supreme Court
has made an utter mess of this area. I think even people like
the late Justice Scalia made reference to the fact that
constitutional criminal procedure, which I used to teach, was
just an absolute morass created by the Supreme Court.
Part of the problem is this idea of third parties, that if
you give things to third parties you don't have that same
expectation. They treat things like pen registers, giving phone
numbers, almost as equivalent of, like Greenwood, of putting
your trash on the curb, that you give up all expectations of
privacy because you're giving it to someone that you don't
know.
Of course, when people put in phone numbers, they are
giving it to a computer that they assume is subject to some
types of regulation.
That has gradually expanded where the exceptions are now
the rule. So, you have with cases like Smith v. Maryland a
lower standard than probable cause under the warrant clause.
What you have to understand is every time the court creates
one of these exceptions' prosecutors pour into the gap. It is
not because they are little petty tyrants, it is because they
have a lot of cases, and they believe very strongly in getting
information. They want to get it fast.
That's why you've had this massive increase in national
security letters because it's so much easier. You virtually
have to show nothing.
So, it's going to be up to the Congress to make that path a
little more difficult, to require showings. The most important
thing is to have some adversarial process and standing so that
people like us can come and challenge these things.
I do classified work in the national security area, and I'm
read into programs so that the judge and the cleared prosecutor
and I can argue about evidence. Those are the most extreme
possible cases you can imagine. Some of those cases are really
classified at the highest level.
This should not be so difficult, because this is not highly
classified information in the vast majority of these cases.
What I think you heard from Mr. Burt is very important. I
mean, his company is getting 3,500 requests a year.
Mr. Massie. Shouldn't the analogy, instead of being taking
your trash out to the corner and leaving it there, treating
your data that way, shouldn't it be more like a safe deposit
box?
If I put something in the cloud, I have an expectation that
you're going to do your best effort to keep it private. Yet,
we've turned the third-party doctrine, which we somehow are
still clinging to, is turn that on its head. I hope we do take
that on.
I would just throw out a couple ideas here.
If we were really, really, really serious, we would pass a
law that has criminal penalties for those who invade your
privacy at the DOJ, FBI, and NSA. I don't care if it is just a
$50 fine and 30 days paid leave, whatever it is, if there was
some crime associated with doing this. Now, the penalty should
be much stiffer than that, obviously.
So, that's one thing I think we would do. The other thing I
think we could do is to legalize technical solutions to
privacy.
It's technically illegal to make a phone call from a
location that can't be determined by the government to a
location that can't be determined by the government. Why is
that?
It is technically illegal to have encryption that the
government doesn't have a key to. Why is that? Why are we
outlawing the technical solutions to this problem.
I mean, we're afraid of privacy, but we're clinging to this
notion that we can give all the keys to these things to some
folks and not supervise them and trust that they won't be
rifling through our stuff.
So, those are just a couple of suggestions.
Mr. Burt, I like your suggestion of making sure that all
the national security letters or the secret requests are not
indefinitely kept secret, but eventually we know about those.
That's just critical. We've got to know what we've trying to
legislate.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for holding
this very important hearing.
We are here today because the Department of Justice has
come up short. Recent reports document that in 2020 the Trump
Administration secretly obtained from third-party platforms the
phone and email records of reporters.
This is not the first time or the first Administration
under which the Department has done so. We've heard testimony
today that DOJ has routinely misused secrecy orders to avoid
basic due process protections in criminal prosecutions.
As a country, we've watched Presidents as far back as Nixon
use the legal system to aggressively pursue the sources of
information and leaks.
Ms. Oberlander, what changes should the current
Administration take to ensure that it does not allow its
Department of Justice to overreach in terms of secrecy orders
and destroying the ability of the Fourth Estate to do its job,
which is to maintain our democracy through free and fair
sharing of information that is sometimes critical of
government?
Ms. Oberlander. Thank you, Congressman.
So, first, I do think it is a great idea to, as Attorney
General Garland has said, to basically legislate, to work to
legislate that the Department of Justice is no longer permitted
to come after journalists' source information. I think that
would be fantastic.
Short of that, I think you should legislate particular
higher standards before the Department of Justice can get
access to journalists' materials.
Specifically, there should be--and it should be, again, as
people have said, not up to the Department of Justice itself,
but it should have to come to an Article III Judge and they
should show that the information is absolutely crucial to
whatever investigation there is, that they have tried all
alternative sources to get that same information and have
failed.
There should also be a balancing test by the judge as to
whether the information is important enough to outweigh the
incredible ability of the press to inform the public about
issues of public importance.
So, essentially it is a very high standard. The judge
should have to consider that. Then, as we talked about, the
media should be able to have notice of it, to be able to
participate in it, to argue about it. It should be adversarial
and there should be a right of appeal.
I mean, these are very, very serious rights that are
being--and they should be subject to judicial review. That
would go a long way, frankly.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Okay. Do you believe that the Trump
Administration followed the Department of Justice guidelines
when pursuing journalists' sources in the cases of CNN, The New
York Times, and The Washington Post that were recently
revealed?
Ms. Oberlander. Well, the Department has said that they did
follow the guidelines. We don't know. There's a lot of
information we don't know. We don't know what information they
put before the court in their warrant applications, in the
applications before the court to get this information. We'd
like to see that.
We'd like to see why a secrecy order was necessary. As I
mentioned, these were records that are years old that they were
looking for in public--leak investigations that had already
been made public.
So, there was no real, at least to my perspective, there
was no real risk that having a notice go to the media would
have in any way tipped off the subjects of the investigation or
allowed anyone to destroy the evidence.
Furthermore, this material was, in fact, in the possession
of the third-party data provider. It wasn't even in the
possession really of the media entity. So, the idea that they
could then turn around and destroy it is somewhat--doesn't
actually make any sense.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. The length of the gag orders in
these cases was quite excessive. Would you agree?
Ms. Oberlander. I would.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I mean, two years--
Chair Nadler. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Burt, I think it bears repeating something that
Professor Turley referred to in your testimony, that
``Microsoft reviewed the number of secrecy orders that Federal
law enforcement agencies have presented to us from 2016 to the
present. We found that while the number has increased some,
Federal law enforcement has consistently presented us with
2,400-3,500 secrecy orders each year, or 7-10 per day.''
Is that correct?
Mr. Burt. Yes, that's correct.
Mr. Bishop. That's an amazing number, particularly when you
try to imagine what that might be when you go to the other big
tech firms.
Professor Turley, you have a figure--and forgive me for
this ignorance--but you have a figure in your testimony, and
you mentioned that the national security letters have gone from
2000-2005, I believe it was, it went from 8,500-47,000 per
year?
Mr. Turley. That's correct.
Mr. Bishop. Now, here's my ignorance.
Would the secrecy order, Mr. Burt, that you're describing
be the same? Would that include or overlap with national
security letters?
Mr. Burt. No, Representative. It would be in addition to.
Mr. Bishop. So that would be separate, right? So, in other
words, a national security letter sort of does similar--there
are similar concerns associated with that. That would be over
and above what you are talking about, secrecy orders in
connection with search warrants.
Mr. Burt. That's absolutely right.
Mr. Bishop. Are those data published in the aggregate that
you know about? Do you understand what I'm asking, Mr. Burt?
Mr. Burt. Yes. The answer is there isn't any reliable
source of that information in the aggregate. In fact, with
regard to national security letters, we had to sue the
government to be able to say anything about that.
The resolution of that was that we can only describe the
number of national security letters we get in these broad
categories. For example, I can report that--and we do
transparently report--that in the last reporting period, twice
a year, we got between zero and 499. That's the most specific
we can be.
Mr. Bishop. Fascinating.
Professor Turley, you spoke about in your testimony--I am
afraid I didn't get your testimony before the hearing, so I
haven't had occasion to digest it--but you advocate for a
shield law. You mentioned one that's drafted. You said that it
needs to have the definition of journalist modified. As I
skimmed through, it looks like you think there needs to be a
broader definition of journalist.
This sort of goes to some of what Mr. Gaetz was saying, and
I think Mr. McClintock responded to, about the possibility of
setting up special privileges for an elite class.
If journalists are partisan instruments of politicians--or
the reverse, that is, they direct politicians, in effect--if we
establish special privileges for them to be able to take
information and disseminate it that is by law confidential,
doesn't that grant the power to unilaterally not nullify a law?
If you take the ProPublica information recently, the
disclosure of thousands of wealthy taxpayers, selectively
published, they said they thought about it, they know this
information is unlawful to publish, but they've decided that
their advocacy interests trump the law.
How do we deal with that problem?
Mr. Turley. Well, this isn't an absolute right. I mean, the
media is subject, for example, to defamation, they're subject
to being prosecuted for crimes committed directly by reporters.
What we're talking about is a constitutionally founded
privilege. In the critical case of Branzburg, the court heavily
fractured over this question of privilege. There were some,
like Douglas, who always believed we should have absolute
privilege. A number of the Justices felt we should have a
qualified privilege. In fact, most of the qualified privilege
statutes are based on the language out of that case.
A qualified privilege just simply gives some added scrutiny
and protection to the media. It can be overcome in extreme
cases. It's there to protect this core function of the media.
If you take a look at the States, there's 40 States with
these privileges. They haven't shut down prosecution. It has
not been overwhelmingly burdensome. The judges have been able
to use them. I think the same would happen with the Federal
system as well.
Mr. Bishop. In the 40 seconds I have got left, can you
characterize, what is the privilege, what are they privileged
to do? What are the qualifications upon that or conditions?
Mr. Turley. Well, what the privilege does is it basically
gives a full stop for the court. Before you allow reporters to
be compelled to turn over information, you have to establish
that you can't reasonably get the information from another
source, that you have a clear need for this information, where
the court's going to balance these interests.
Some of these State laws are quite interesting. In New
York, they have a different standard. If you go for privilege,
sort of core news stuff, you have an absolute privilege. If you
go for less key material, you have a qualified privilege.
There's a lot of States that have explored different types
of approaches to this and it gives you a lot of models to look
at.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I think it's safe to say that all of us were very upset
when we read the reports detailing how in former President
Trump's Administration the Department of Justice surveilled not
only journalists, not only Members of Congress, including a
Member of this Committee, but even Members' staff and family.
So, I thank you for holding this hearing today and giving
us an opportunity to really look at the potential abuse of
power, and particularly the secrecy surrounding these efforts.
I want to first say I agree with Ms. Oberlander. I think
there is a higher standard that ought to apply to the press. I
think that is reflected in the Free Flow of Information Act
that Congressman Raskin has introduced. It has always been
bipartisan.
I also think making sure this applies, these protections
apply to everyone is important, as Mr. Massie and Ms. Lofgren
have said.
One easy way to accomplish it, of course, would be to say
the Fourth Amendment applies to the data that you generate,
that you have a reasonable expectation of privacy of what you
create, and all the Fourth Amendment rights would attach to
that.
What I want to focus on in my questions is the secrecy
surrounding this, because while Microsoft is an example of a
company that takes this responsibility seriously, to litigate
it and challenge this, we have no assurances other companies do
the same.
Many of these big technology platforms don't have
competitors. So, if they are willy-nilly giving your stuff away
without contesting it, we don't know about it and we can't
choose to go to another platform, because they don't exist.
They are monopolies.
So, I want to really dig down on the secrecy, because I
think that's really one of the important issues here. I think
we don't have a full understanding of what's presented to a
court and what the court has to consider allowing these gag
orders to be put in place.
So, I am going to begin with you, Mr. Burt.
What level of details are prosecutors required to provide
both the court and the providers when they are seeking a gag
order? Do they simply have to say, ``We meet the statute,'' or
do they have to present facts which show, in fact, disclosure
would result in one of the things articulated in the statute?
Mr. Burt. It's a great question, Representative. The answer
is that today they only have to present to the court this
boilerplate assertion that they meet the criteria of the
statute and that there's a reasonable suspicion that they can
meet that standard.
Mr. Cicilline. No facts underlying that assertion?
Mr. Burt. That's right. The Justice Department's policy
that they articulated in 2017 in response to our litigation
said that they should articulate those facts.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Mr. Burt. Their own--
Mr. Cicilline. No, I appreciate that.
Mr. Burt. Their template says they don't have to.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Ms. Burton, what about after the secrecy order is lifted
and the provider is able to give notice, how much information
is shared with the targeted party? Is it required that the
information be shared once the secrecy order has lifted?
Ms. Burton. No, it's not, Congressman. That's one of the
problems. I mean, it's an entirely self-regulated process at
the Department of Justice.
To take your concerns, I agree with you. It is not just a
First Estate concern, and it is really a self-regulation
concern. You cannot have the Department of Justice being
prosecutor, judge, and jury. They determine when you get
notice, they determine what you know, and you go to an Article
III Court and you may or may not have enough information.
Which is why I think you all are very much on the right
track to have a procedural set of requirements that are in a
statute, that it can apply more broadly, and we leave it to
judges, who now have a standard, and there's notice to the
parties, and it's not secret.
We don't allow prior restraint in this country of the
press. It should not be--
Mr. Cicilline. I'm trying to get in a couple of questions.
I appreciate that. Thank you.
Mr. Burt, once the electronic surveillance-related gag
order expires, is there currently an obligation for the
Department of Justice to at least notify the target of the
warrant that a gag order was in place?
Mr. Burt. Absolutely not. In fact, they don't typically do
that, and so it falls upon us do that.
Mr. Cicilline. That burden that falls entirely on you, are
you required to notify your clients or users or does that vary
on a contractual basis?
Mr. Burt. We are not required to, but we have a firm policy
that we do notify in all cases.
Mr. Cicilline. Is that same policy in place, to your
knowledge, with respect to all the other large technology
platforms?
Mr. Burt. To my knowledge, that policy is not in place with
all technology platforms.
Mr. Cicilline. What limited information should the
government communicate to suspects, in your view, that their
Fourth Amendment rights may have been implicated by one of
these orders or collections?
Mr. Burt. Well, we believe that in those very rare
instances where this kind of a secrecy order is justified--and
we think the standard should be probable cause, facts should be
presented, courts should find that the facts are sufficient--
but in those rare instances where that standard is met, then
when the gag order expires, the target should be informed that
there was a gag order and should be informed of the scope of
the search.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you very much.
Again, it seems to me it is inappropriate for us to expect
that third parties are going to fiercely defend the privacy
rights of individuals, which this current architecture requires
some companies take it seriously, some don't, but citizens and
users lose as a result.
I thank you again for your testimony.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Spartz.
Ms. Spartz. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm actually kind of listening to all this discussion very
surprised how many loopholes our laws have and very surprised
to hear our Constitution hasn't changed, thank God. Ultimately,
what Mr. McClintock brought up, what's happening, it is really
appalling to me. No wonder our citizens are not trusting
government and it's very bad.
So, I have a quick question. I think Congressman Biggs
brought another good question of rubber stamping. I will yield
to him in a second, because I would like to finish that
conversation.
Professor Turley, just for you, what allowed for us to have
these loopholes? Is it interpretation of the courts? Or is it
really something in legal framework that's so ambiguous that we
need to clarify? What is allowed?
Because it seems like this due process should exist
regardless of if we have a new technology or old technology,
where we are. What's happened?
Mr. Turley. Well, it's a perfect storm, because you have
the court that opened this up creating a whole group of body of
searches that can occur below the probable cause level with
reasonable suspicion. That snowballed within a short time. They
viewed those as narrow exceptions. It became the exception that
swallowed the rule.
Then you had technology that poured into that gap. That is,
it happened to be technology that fell in those areas. Suddenly
we're not protecting people, we're protecting places, or in
this case we're not protecting places like the cloud.
So, if you take stuff from one source to another, it's
protected over here. The minute it goes to a cloud, which you
have to use in many cases, or you use as a matter of course, it
loses that protection.
I think your point is really the vital one. I think a lot
of people would be very surprised when they find out that their
information is so readily available to the government.
That itself is a very corrupting aspect in a free society,
that the public has a different view of what their privacy is
from what the government is actively doing, not in a small
number of cases, in massive numbers of cases.
Ms. Spartz. That sounds more like a surveillance State. We
have to deal with that. You believe it needs to have some legal
actions from Congress to be able to remedy this situation?
Mr. Turley. This is not a particularly difficult problem to
solve. It only takes will. You can easily create a framework
that will protect privacy and fill this gap.
Ms. Spartz. Well, thank you very much.
I yield to Mr. Biggs.
Mr. Biggs. I thank the gentlelady for yielding.
When we left off, when I ran out of time, Professor Turley
just answered my question. I'll just remind you of what it is
and give you the context.
I was asking about the stick that might be necessary to
help what we typically would think of as an independent court.
So, you all seem to be in agreement with guidelines, et
cetera, statutory guidelines. How do you make sure that those
are going to be tough enough?
Mr. Burt. If I may--
Mr. Biggs. Yes, Mr. Burt, and then down the line, then Ms.
Burton.
Mr. Burt. If I may, I think the concept of extending the
Fourth Amendment to data that is stored in the cloud is a
reasonable framework to consider here, because then that would
take all the existing sticks, as you put it, that would apply
when government overreaches and violates Fourth Amendment
rights, exclusion of evidence and so forth. It would be
applicable here as well.
The irony is that Fourth Amendment jurisprudence is based
on this notion of reasonable expectation of privacy. In fact,
your security and privacy of your data is higher in the cloud
than it would be if you kept it in your premises or on your
network at your corporation.
So, the law has not advanced with the technology to protect
our citizens and our organizations' information.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you.
Ms. Oberlander. Just to add what my colleague here said,
one of the reasons that media organizations are putting their
data in the cloud is because they are also concerned about the
security and that they can't afford to have the kind of
technologies and technologists in their shops, in their shops
who could protect from hacking and phishing and all the other
problems that we have with our data. So, it puts them in a--
puts many of the media companies in a really tricky position.
To the point about what kind of penalties you could have,
there is the possibility perhaps of a 1983 action if rights
were violated, and journalists have used that successfully in
certain cases.
Mr. Biggs. Ms. Burton, before you answer this, I think we
all would presume, at least I do anyway, that there is a
private property interest. You have private property rights in
your data, right?
It begs the question that Mr. McClintock and Ms. Spartz
were raising, and actually Ms. Lofgren, and then Professor
Turley expounded on it. Why then do we have these loopholes
that attack Fourth Amendment rights over your otherwise well-
known, and it should be established, private property interest
in your data?
Chair Nadler. The time has expired. The Witness may answer
the question.
Mr. Turley. If it's to me, the answer--
Mr. Biggs. Ms. Burton.
Mr. Turley. Oh, Ms. Burton. I'm sorry.
Ms. Burton. I think that the minute we get enough process
into a statute that you're going to see prosecutors act more
rationally. I would leave it to the courts to suppress the
evidence and to dismiss cases. I think that, from a
prosecutor's point of view, is remedy enough.
I'm not in favor of creating lots more causes of actions
around this. I think we're trying to simplify it. I think we're
trying to protect rights. I think the courts would actually
make sure that occurred.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chair Nadler, for holding this
important hearing.
Professor Turley, I'd like to follow up on Congressman
McClintock's line of questioning and just walk through some
standards and whether judges are involved.
So, I wanted to talk about the difference between their
contents of, let's say, a document versus metadata. So, if the
Department of Justice wants to get the contents of an
electronic letter that is on your home computer, they would
need a warrant signed by a judge. Is that right?
Mr. Turley. That's correct.
Mr. Lieu. If they want the contents of that same electronic
letter stored on a cloud, they will still need a warrant signed
by a judge. Is that right?
Mr. Turley. Right. If they get at the contents, if they can
get metadata, they can show a--
Mr. Lieu. No. I got it. No, no. Let's not confuse things.
If they want the same, the content of that electronic letter on
a cloud, they will need a warrant signed by a judge, right?
Mr. Turley. Yes.
Mr. Lieu. Okay.
Now, let's talk about metadata. First, what is metadata?
Mr. Turley. Well, it was defined by one person as basically
data about data. That is metadata describes data. That can also
then give you information as to the senders, the
identification, the subject. That's a lot of information that--
Mr. Lieu. Understood. Okay. So, let's say the Department of
Justice wants to get metadata that they believe is stored on
your home computer. They would need a warrant signed by a
judge, right?
Mr. Turley. To get access to a computer, that's correct.
Mr. Lieu. Okay.
Now, if they want to get metadata stored on the cloud, they
could simply send a subpoena and get that data without a
warrant. Is that right?
Mr. Turley. Yeah. In addition, they make companies like Mr.
Burt's company essentially the unwilling participants in that
type of disclosure. They are being potentially commandeered.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Basic question here. Grand jury subpoenas, a grand jury
subpoena for metadata, is a judge involved in that process at
all?
Mr. Turley. For a grand jury, grand juries can issue for
document production at a standard lower than probable cause.
Judges are supervising that procedure. In most cases these
things are issued with very little review. More importantly,
grand jury subpoenas can come under the probable cause standard
for document production.
Mr. Lieu. Got it.
So, let's go back to this example where if you had metadata
that happens to be stored on the cloud, there is no longer a
warrant requirement. What if Congress simply put in a warrant
requirement for metadata stored on the cloud, what's your sense
of that proposal?
Mr. Turley. Well, you could do that, because remember, the
probable cause standard is not some huge standard. It's
actually--as a criminal defense attorney, I can tell you it's a
pretty easy standard for the prosecution to meet. You have to
have clearly articulable facts for getting that type of
information.
I don't think that the world come to a sudden stop in terms
of prosecutions. It would make this--you would change the grade
a bit to make it a little more of a climb for prosecutors.
Because right now, this is similar to the false lantern
approach in the East Coast when people would put a lantern to
confuse people to think there was safe harbor and this was a
lighthouse.
So, people go to the cloud thinking--correctly--that the
cloud has lots of protection for their data, and it turns out
it's a myth once you do that.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Now, I am sensitive to the view that we don't want to draw
lines around certain groups of people and not others. I do know
that the Constitution specifically talks about the free press.
So, journalists are in fact in a different category.
The Constitution also does put in just structurally
separation of powers. When you have one branch, the Executive
Branch, trying to intimidate, for example, Congress and seizing
all sorts of information, that does pose problems.
So, my view is that we could, in fact, try to do something
different. I want to get your thoughts. What if the Department
of Justice, when they are getting information on either
journalists or Members of Congress, they had to provide
notification, for example, to the Department of Justice
Inspector General, just as sort of a second check on exactly
what they are doing? What do you think about that?
Mr. Turley. I think that would be a great idea in terms of
greater transparency.
I want to note that some aspects of this confuse me. You
have three former and current Attorneys General saying they
were not aware of this program. That's not supposed to happen.
Since the 1970s, either the Attorney General or a Designated
High Official is supposed to sign off on this.
So, I don't know what happened there. It's one of the first
things I think this Committee should try to find out about.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
My last question is to Mr. Burt at Microsoft.
This increase in these secrecy orders, do you know what the
investigations are about? Could it be, for example, about child
pornography or something else? Does the DOJ tell what those
investigations are about?
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Burt. We don't always know what the investigations are
about. We do know enough to know that in the vast majority of
these cases they are just routine investigations that are not
about child abuse online or about national security issues, but
they're just routine.
I do want to make one thing clear, because I may have
contributed to this confusion. When we talk about a standard
like the warrant standard, the probable cause standard for a
warrant, yes, we have to get a warrant before we produce
content, email for example. Just a subpoena is all that's
necessary to get metadata from us.
What we are here talking about today is the secrecy order
that accompanies that warrant or that subpoena. It's there that
we need a higher standard and actual findings of fact to
establish that a secrecy order is truly necessary.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Fitzgerald.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sometimes I think we are kind of our worst enemies on this,
whether it's Congress or as the judiciary was brought up
earlier.
Could you comment, Mr. Burt and Professor Turley, a little
bit about changes or accommodations that have been made under
the auspices of either national security or public health when
it comes to kind of watering down of how this is viewed?
Mr. Turley. Do you want to start?
Mr. Burt. Go ahead.
Mr. Turley. Well, there's been a lot of changes. The
interesting thing is this body has shown that it can solve
problems. You did that with healthcare information. You created
added privacy protections. You've done that in creating new
limitations on secret searches. All that can be done if you
have the will do it.
What we're really talking about here is not interfering
with investigations, but to require a greater level of
transparency and proof, but also to allow greater numbers of
people to have access so they can raise it.
This is a problem that we have a lot in national security
litigation that I do, and that is the government often wants to
do ex parte, in camera presentations and I'm in court screaming
bloody murder, saying diplomatically to the judge, ``Judge, I
know you are familiar with this, but you're not familiar with
this case. You need somebody who knows what this case is about
to spot whether these documents are material.'' So, that's a
longstanding problem we have.
The problems we face in classified trials are nothing like
what is being done here. Basically, people are told they have
no ability to challenge it.
Take a look at the Gonzales case out of the Second Circuit.
In that case, The New York Times reasonably said, ``No, we're
not going to turn over our phone records to you,'' and then
called their provider and said, ``By the way, if they ask for
our phone records, please tell us so that we can go to court.''
The provider said no, no doubt because the Department of
Justice said don't tell them.
The Department of Justice's position in Gonzales was The
New York Times had no standing to be heard on this issue to
appeal this question. In what universe of due process would
that seem reasonable to you?
Ms. Fitzgerald. Mr. Burt.
Mr. Burt. I would just add that what we've seen happen over
the last two, three decades is that tools that were provided to
law enforcement to address a particular problem and a
particular concern, especially around national security, have
now been overtaken by technology and the way that people keep
and store their data.
Those tools have now not been restricted and limited in an
appropriate way to protect individual rights as technology has
moved data from, say, on premises into the cloud.
That's what we're seeking here, is a restriction on those
tools that still enable the kinds of investigations that are
truly necessary to be conducted for a brief period of time in
secret, but that in most cases enable notification to our
customers when their data is being obtained.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Professor Turley, let me get a little more specific and
down into some of the issues that had been discussed earlier by
some of my colleagues.
The 2017 report by Chair Ron Johnson on the Senate
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs found
that the Trump Administration was facing about 125 leaked
stories, about one a day. The report concluded that the leaks,
with the capacity to damage national security, which is what I
was trying to tee up earlier, flowed faster under President
Trump than during President Obama and even George W. Bush.
Why is this problematic? Why was there a difference between
Administrations? Ultimately this misleading narrative that's
been out there needs to be addressed. I'm just wondering what
comments you might have on that.
Mr. Turley. Well, frankly, I've never seen leaks like the
ones we saw in the Trump Administration. They were occurring so
frequently it was almost like you were getting leaks in real
time. You would get leaks about meetings that just happened.
That obviously can't happen. You can't have a functioning
Presidency if you think that whatever you told the world
leader, or your aides is immediately going to be heard on CNN
or FOX. The government has legitimate reason to hunt leakers.
My objection is what I call reverse engineering. Nobody can
contest that the Trump Administration, when it announced it was
going to go after leakers, had every right do that, to go try
to find out who was leaking unauthorized information.
What concerns me is that it's always tempting for
prosecutors to reverse engineer. They know who received
information. Just look at the byline on the article, that's the
person who is the recipient.
So, you can reverse engineer by just focusing the
investigation on the reporter and then working back to the
sender. That's a very dangerous approach. It's dangerous for
the Constitution.
The preferred system is to look at the suspects. In the
process of that, you're going to find out the numbers of
reporters, you have to, otherwise you're going to stop all leak
investigations. It's where you start. My suspicion is this
might be a case of reverse engineering which I'd love this
Committee to confirm.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Raskin.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks for calling this
hearing in the immediate wake of revelations that the DOJ
sought the telephone and email records not just of journalists,
but also of two of our colleagues, Mr. Swalwell and Mr. Schiff,
as well as even family and staff members apparently.
I want to thank the Witnesses for helping us examine the
threats specifically posed to the freedom of the press by these
practices. I think it's a matter of fundamental importance to
American democracy.
I'm pleased to note that tomorrow I will be introducing the
PRESS Act, the Protect Reporters from Exploitative State Spying
Act, which I've been working on with Senator Wyden for some
time, along with my colleague Mr. Lieu.
This bill is an update of the Free Flow of Information Act
that I proudly introduced in the last Congress with our
colleague, the Ranking Member, Mr. Jordan, in the 115th.
It will prevent Federal law enforcement from being able to
obtain information from covered journalists through their work
devices and accounts, as well as their personal devices and
accounts.
It will also prevent the government from conducting an end
run around these prohibitions by preventing them from seeking
third-party communications held by computing and communication
services except in narrow exceptional circumstances.
I hope that colleagues on both sides of the aisle, as
demonstrated by what appears to be broad consensus today, will
join us in cosponsoring this bill and work to defend the
freedom of the press against these practices.
Ms. Burton and Ms. Oberlander, I'd appreciate if you could
expound on the need to address the secrecy orders being used by
law enforcement to prevent targets from even being aware that
their information is being sought and what type of oversight
the court should be conducting to rein in the abuse of secrecy
orders.
Ms. Burton. Thank you, Congressman.
I would suggest that by having again a narrow procedural
bill which does that, there cannot be a secrecy order without a
compelling interest that's been identified and presented to a
judge very specifically and a judge has actually made a ruling.
That if we did that, you would see very few secrecy orders,
because before we had this back door that everyone was going
through, it wasn't a problem at the same levels that it is now.
So, I would just suggest that if we have proper and clear
requirements that there is a bilateral presentation to a court,
either through the judiciary, which would create some
opportunity to hear the other side of an argument if something
really was a national security issue, a very narrow set of
cases, that would probably resolve the secrecy issue.
Mr. Raskin. Then the secrecy order would go back to being
an exceptional case, rather than the rule now.
Ms. Burton. Exactly.
Mr. Raskin. It seems to be pretty perfunctory that they get
them now, right? Yeah.
Ms. Burton. That's right. It's having a dual process and
it's having a presumption in favor of openness that judges
respond very well to, in light of all the constitutional rules
and cases that have upheld those basic tenets.
Mr. Raskin. Okay.
Did any of the other Witnesses want to comment on that?
Ms. Oberlander. I would only add that there are a couple
other things we can do, too.
So, as we've discussed, narrow the length of time that
these secrecy orders are in effect by putting a cap on them in
the statute. Right now, in 2705(b), there's no time limit. So,
you add 45 days or 90 days, and that's it, you then have to
tell the subject, the media entity, that their materials have
been requested, that would help as well.
Then the other thing that has been presented in some of our
testimony is that, in cases where it's truly necessary to not
inform the affected media, maybe we can have an independent
third party, some sort of advocate, perhaps who doesn't
necessarily let the media know that they've been hired, but who
comes in and talks to the judge and says, these are the First
Amendment--these are the very, very important First Amendment
interests here and you should please be considering them. So,
adding, sort of, another to the process.
Mr. Raskin. Then, Ms. Oberlander let me just stick with you
for a second. You noted in your testimony some of the policies
that are being used by DOJ to limit the use of subpoenas
against journalists, but you observed that these are merely
internal policies that are subject to override at whim by
future Administrations and they don't address the end runs that
are being conducted routinely by law enforcement to obtain
third-party data from companies like Microsoft, as noted by Mr.
Burt.
I wonder, what do you think about the need for a fresh
shield law, given everything that we've learned in last few
months?
Maybe I can close just with that question to all the
Witnesses.
Ms. Oberlander. I am delighted to hear that you're
introducing the PRESS Act tomorrow. We absolutely need a shield
law, which will, frankly, protect from government overreach but
also in private cases, as well, and civil cases. So, I really
think we absolutely need it, and I'm really thrilled to see
that Congress is working towards--
Mr. Raskin. Next, just if I could go down the line there,
Professor Turley, do you agree we need one?
Mr. Turley. Oh, I do agree. The only quibble I had in my
testimony is on the--it's more than a quibble, is a
disagreement about the definition of covered persons.
I also think that it can be tweaked to increase some
issues. For example, there's a single line, ``National security
may be considered by a court,'' that's in the previous
legislation, and it really doesn't say how that should be
weighed by the court. I expect a lot of judges would look
askance at that as a standard.
Mr. Raskin. Okay.
Ms. Burton, do you agree?
Ms. Burton. I agree, but I wouldn't let that process, which
will be a longer process, stop this Committee from issuing a
bill and a law right away. I think that we cannot underestimate
the harm of privacy and the harm of a lack of process here,
which, to me, is incredibly dangerous to the American public. I
do support a shield bill. I think it's a more complex
discussion which we should be reflecting on also.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chair. Thank you for your indulgence.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Jordan.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to thank the Chair for putting this hearing together
today on this important subject. I was just thinking about, in
kind of a broad sense, how serious this situation is.
Americans have a Fourth Amendment expectation of privacy
regarding all their information, including, as we've talked
about, information stored in the cloud. Yet, government can
come to a third party, like Mr. Burt's company, and, with
something less than a warrant, get that information. When
government does that, they tell Mr. Burt that he can't tell his
customer what's going on, he can't tell his customer that, hey,
your Fourth Amendment liberties have just been violated. When
government initiates it all, the Attorney General doesn't even
sign off on it.
Now, if that's not serious--the current situation that
brought us here is the situation that has been in the press. We
have had Mr. Barr, I think it's in Mr. Turley's testimony. He
says, very first point, the authorization, ``It's notable.''
I'd said it's more than notable. I'd say it's shocking, it's
alarming, that Jeff Sessions, Bill Barr, and Merrick Garland
all deny any knowledge of what took place. Somebody had to sign
off on it.
So, you've got the fundamental issue at stake here, and you
got no one who's been Senate-confirmed--which is part of our
checks and balances on protecting our liberties--who's even
signed off on this.
So, I find this--as Mr. Gaetz led off on our side, the idea
that we can work together on this, Mr. Chair, and do something,
whether it's the shield law that I've cosponsored in the past
with Mr. Raskin or what have you. That is the situation.
I'm just curious, Mr. Burt, has it happened to the same
customer several times?
Mr. Burt. I'm sure it has happened to the same customer
several times, although I can't say that with any specificity.
I'm sure it has happened.
Mr. Jordan. So, it could even be worse than I just
described.
Mr. Burt. It could be.
I would just--one thing, Congressman, is that one of the
things we always do when we get these processes, we look to
make sure that it's adequate. We will not produce our
customers' content, our email or other content, without a
warrant. We require a warrant.
We still get subject to the secrecy order, so we can't tell
the customer that their data's been taken. Only the customer
can actually exercise their Fourth Amendment right. You can't
exercise your right if you don't know it's been violated.
Mr. Jordan. Even when you suspect it might be and they tell
you, as in the Gonzalez case, which Mr. Turley has cited, they
can specifically say, no, you can't even--they can't do it.
There's no way to go make your case and be an advocate and do
what you need to do in a court.
Mr. Burt. That's right. The court would say, we don't have
standing on the Fourth Amendment issue. We would be told we
don't have the right to tell our customer that they should go
look to see if their Fourth Amendment rights have been
violated.
Mr. Jordan. Okay.
So, Mr. Turley, what should we do? This may be the first
time this Committee, this Congress, has actually had some kind
of agreement on maybe we can work together on something. So,
tell us steps one, two, and three, what you think we should do.
Because the idea that Mr. Raskin and I, who don't agree on
a whole lot, agree and we've cosponsored this legislation is
telling. You've heard the comments from both sides.
So, give us the one, two, three that the Congress of the
United States should pass.
Mr. Turley. Well, putting aside the shield law, which we
discussed, I note there are six areas I think should look at,
but I think that you need to strengthen these standards. You
need to give courts more concrete standards, give standing to
companies, like Microsoft, like The New York Times, to be able
to contest these issues, to limit these types of agreements.
You've got to stop relying on the goodwill of Department of
Justice. Department of Justice says that these types of orders
have to be, quote, ``extraordinary measures,'' not standard
investigatory practices. If the reports are true, as to what
we've been reading about, then that and a buck will buy you a
cup of coffee. It was not worth the paper they wrote it on. You
need to establish concrete standards that can be appealed, and
that the critical parties of interest can be in that room.
Then we also need greater transparency on how many of these
things are being issued and their conditions. You have a number
of courts that have complained in writing that they're getting
nothing but boilerplate language from the Justice Department
and little ability of the court to say no.
Mr. Jordan. Great.
Thank you all.
Mr. Burt, you wanted to--
Mr. Burt. Yeah. We detail in my written testimony the steps
we think the Committee should consider, but I could just
emphasize a couple of them as really critical.
First, the restriction on us telling our customer is a
restriction on our First Amendment right. A number of courts
have recognized that, which means that the standard of a
secrecy order should be a strict scrutiny standard. That's not
being applied. So, the corrective legislation would be clear
that strict scrutiny should be applied and that there must be
findings by the court based on compelling evidence submitted to
the court showing that standard has been met.
Even then, these privacy orders should never be longer
than, we propose, 90 days without clear evidence being shown
later on as to why they should be extended.
We think just those steps would significantly reduce the
number of these privacy orders that are even sought and would
certainly reduce the number that are being granted and confine
them to those cases where they are truly necessary in the
national interest. Because they would have to show, to get that
privacy order, that they can meet one of those five statutory
bases for getting a privacy order, which are reasonable reasons
to proceed in a short-term, private, secret way.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Jeffries?
Mr. Jeffries. I thank the distinguished Chair for holding
this hearing, as well as the Witnesses for your presence here
today.
Clearly, in the constitutional construct of this country,
we've got an Article I Legislative Branch that I'm very proud
to serve in, the Article II Executive Branch, the Article III
Judiciary, all apparently constructed to make sure that there
are checks and balances.
Also, I think the Framers of the Constitution recognized
the importance of a free and fair press. It's in the First
Amendment, the first decision made to amend the Constitution,
recognizing that perhaps a fourth estate was also central to
their vision as to what the democratic Republic would look
like, were we able to keep it.
So, I just wanted to ask a few questions, and, Ms.
Oberlander, I'll start with you. Throughout your career, you've
advised media companies and journalists, I believe, on the
legal implications of reporting on matters of public concern in
national security. Is that right?
Ms. Oberlander. Yes, that is.
Mr. Jeffries. In your view, how has the government's use
of, what I would phrase, secret subpoenas and gag orders
threatened the ability of journalists to actually do their job?
Ms. Oberlander. So, journalists who are afraid that they
are being surveilled or even that they have been surveilled in
the past or that they are--it's very difficult to go and
convince or talk to or be able to fairly represent to a source
that they will try to maintain their confidentiality. It's
quite chilling.
I mean, some of it is on the source side, where they hear--
they see that the journalists have been subject to subpoenas
after the fact, and they say, ``I can't talk to you.'' It makes
it very, very challenging.
Mr. Jeffries. Is it fair to say that, in providing
information to the public, which is a great service, that the
media, the fourth estate that journalists provide, that they
often will rely on confidential sources? Is that right?
Ms. Oberlander. Yes. There's a lot of reporting, national
security reporting but also all sorts of other very important
reporting, that relies on confidential sources.
Mr. Jeffries. Can you elaborate on the importance of
maintaining confidential sources without, sort of, this
practice being chilled by an overbroad or overly aggressive
Department of Justice utilizing these secret subpoenas to try
to unroot these sources?
Ms. Oberlander. Well, yes. If you--in our papers, in the
testimony, you can look at all sorts of incredibly important
stories of, really, national importance that were based on
confidential sources. Some were, in fact, national security
stories, but others were conditions at Walter Reed, levels of
corruption in foreign governments.
In fact, frankly, as a person who has worked at Univision,
I can report that there's an awful lot of reporting about
what's happening internationally with other governments, not
the American Government, where you have very, very important
reporting coming through and where the sources are literally
afraid for their lives.
So, if you cannot maintain their confidentiality, if
there's a risk that they're going to be disclosed, then they
really are--they may be killed. They have very legitimate fears
of retaliation. That, of course--fortunately, we tend not to
have killed too many journalists or sources here that I'm aware
of in the U.S., but it's definitely a big part of our
reporting.
Similarly, there have been reports, much reporting, about
all sorts of fraud: Fraud in H-2A visa applications, things
that are relying on confidential sources, people who don't want
to be disclosed because they may be here, they may be
undocumented, but they still may be subjected to quite horrible
conditions; the Enron reporting; the BALCO reporting; and, just
now, even the reporting about the tax filings of wealthy
Americans.
Mr. Jeffries. Now, in justifying what some of us may
characterize as overly aggressive and/or inappropriate behavior
at times, Department of Justice or other governmental entities
will sometimes cite national security. That's a very broad
phrase. Certainly, all are concerned about national security.
In your experience, can you just, in the final few moments
that I've got, articulate whether that is being invoked in an
overly broad fashion? How might we think about viewing and
balancing national security as a concern but also allowing the
free and fair press, as vital to our democracy, to also be able
to thrive?
Ms. Oberlander. So--
Chair Nadler. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
Witness may answer the question.
Ms. Oberlander. So, there's a longstanding problem of
overclassification of information in the country. Because of
that, if a source discloses some information that is classified
and maybe gives the government an opportunity to argue that the
disclosure is a violation of one of the secrecy acts or the
Espionage Act, you all of a sudden have a national security
issue, when, really, much of that information is not of that
kind of importance where you would be disclosing something
truly secret and dangerous to the country.
So, one way of restricting it is to restrict the definition
of ``national security'' in any of the statutes that we pass--I
mean, in terms of what would qualify for an exception--and to
narrow it, maybe, as has been proposed, just to include
terrorists and potential terrorist acts, a really dramatic
issue, and not just a level of embarrassment to the government.
That would be one approach.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you.
Chair Nadler. Mr. Bentz?
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks all the Witnesses for their excellent testimony and
their doubly excellent testimony as it appears in my notebook
here.
We had a 25-hour, marathon discussion about Big Tech just
last week, and much of that discussion focused on eroding
thoughts about privacy.
So, Professor Turley, I think you mentioned that the
reasonable expectation of privacy perhaps isn't as reasonable
as it once was, given what we're now doing.
So, your awareness of that space leads me to ask you, what
is our new standard? What's the alternative if none of us
should expect privacy anymore in this dual life we live, one
online and one sitting here today?
Mr. Turley. Well, I think that is the danger, that we could
move towards a post-privacy world. That's something that none
of us wants to see happen.
The Katz standard is unlikely to change, but it means that
our protection from government surveillance is based on our
reasonable expectation of privacy. As that expectation falls,
the government's ability to engage in warrantless surveillance
increases, and that can make expectations fall further.
This is the ultimate example of that. People store a great
deal of their information on the cloud. As they begin to
understand that what they send in messages, in terms of
metadata, is not protected and phone numbers are not protected
and all these other areas are treated as just subject to the
standard of reasonable suspicion, which is barely a speed bump
for prosecutors, their expectations will decline further.
What worries me is--I tell my students this all the time
when I teach privacy at the law school--is that my students'
expectation of privacy is a fraction of my own, and we're
seeing this decline in generations. It has real impacts on
government ability to engage in warrantless surveillance.
That's why this is an occasion where the Congress actually
can correct the error of the courts, can come in and say, we
actually don't want to live in a post-privacy world. There is
new technology here, particularly on the cloud, and we're going
to protect it.
Because if we're really serious about Katz, that the Fourth
Amendment protects people, not places, then go protect people.
You find them in the cloud, in terms of what they are leaving
there. Then you would actually defend Katz more than the
Supreme Court has done.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Professor.
Let's move to Ms. Burton, then.
On page 11 of your written testimony, you note that there
had been a constitutional violation, I think was the way you
put it, preventing a lawyer communicating with their clients by
virtue of one of these gag orders.
Are you familiar with any other situation where such a
prohibition has occurred, where a lawyer has been told by a
judge, you can't talk with your client?
Ms. Burton. No, I'm not aware of one, Congressman. I think
it's a clear violation of prior restraint laws and the
attorney-client privilege laws. If I had been subject to that,
I would've brought a separate action in the courts to have that
vacated.
Obviously, that's not something that should--you shouldn't
need to do. It should be part of continuing legislation that
we're considering today.
Mr. Bentz. Right.
At the bottom of the paragraph, your last sentence, you
state, ``Any legislation should clarify the extraordinary
presumption against such orders and the heavy burden that
government must bear to justify one.''
Would you describe how--or tell us how you would craft the
definition of that heavy burden.
Ms. Burton. Yeah, I think there has to be a compelling
interest before any kind of a secrecy order can be imposed.
One of the things we've done is we have contractual
provisions with all our cloud providers that require them to
give us notice. So, that has actually helped, which tells me
that if we were to add some language into statutes, we would
have the same benefit of that.
The government will typically go to whoever is easiest to
get the information from. If there's a battle over a
contractual provision, I give credit to Microsoft, they've been
very good at giving us notice, but that's not the case in all
our communication providers.
Mr. Bentz. Well, thank you.
Thank all of you for your patience.
I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Swalwell?
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Chair, and thank you for holding
this hearing.
As we look at the last Administration and the abuses at the
Department of Justice, it's clear that we had a President and a
Department that rewarded the President's friends, reducing the
sentences or issuing pardons for Paul Manafort, Roger Stone,
Michael Flynn, and then punished and weaponized the Department
to go after the President's enemies.
I guess I'll start with Ms. Oberlander, if you would engage
me on this. Would you agree that Presidents set the tone for a
country, that how a President engages, whether they're a bully
or they're compassionate or they're a leader, has a real effect
on just how everyday Americans can carry themselves?
Ms. Oberlander. I would. I do think that the attacks on the
media of the last Administration have had a profound and
negative effect on how the media is perceived by all Americans.
I think the cries of, ``fake news'' and the specific attacks on
particular journalists has really undermined and worked to
really injure the standing of the press.
Mr. Swalwell. Ms. Oberlander, you're correct. We've seen at
the Trump rallies the attacks on the media. We've seen, across
the country, attacks and violence against journalists. You did
not know my questions ahead of time.
Mr. Chair, this is not an advertisement for my violence-
against-journalism bill.
Ms. Oberlander, my concern, aside from what Donald Trump
and the Department did--because I have faith that Merrick
Garland is going to get to the bottom of this and that in
Congress, we will understand exactly who was responsible.
To kind of extrapolate what you were saying, the Department
of Justice is not the only law enforcement agency in America.
Is that right?
Ms. Oberlander. I think that's correct, yes.
Mr. Swalwell. In every State, you have a State Attorney
General and, of course, county and municipal law enforcement.
Ms. Oberlander. Yes, you do.
Mr. Swalwell. Do you fear that if you have a President who
was willing--who detests accountability and was willing to
weaponize his own law enforcement agency against his enemies,
that could have the effect, just as we mentioned earlier with
the President setting the tone, of governors and mayors seeing
it as a permission slip to weaponize local law enforcement?
Ms. Oberlander. Well, I do want to say that the subpoenas
to the media have been going on across--this is not a partisan
issue. I mean, we did see that President Obama issued a number
of--there were more leak investigations than there had ever
been, and that's continuing--we've had a growth of that.
So, it's not purely a political issue, but, yes, the
attacks on the media have had an effect both Federally and at
local and State jurisdictions.
If you look at the--there's been a lot of video of how
media, who were labeled ``Media,'' ``Press,'' et cetera, were
treated and injured during some of the protests last summer. It
does feel that, in some cases, they were singled out because
they were press.
Mr. Swalwell. To distinguish--because I agree with you; it
was wrong that the Obama Administration allowed that. Would you
agree that, while that was an aggressive pursuit of leaks, the
difference between what we have seen or suspect with the Trump
Administration is that it was a punitive use of power, meaning
it was used--the motivation was to go after perceived enemies,
whereas on the Obama Administration side it seemed it was an
aggressive use of law enforcement? Wrong, but I think there is
a distinction.
Ms. Oberlander. I mean, there is absolutely a distinction
between the way the Administrations operated. I wouldn't want
to characterize one motive or the other on that front.
I will say that there has been--during the Trump
Administration, we believe that there have been twice as many
leak investigations opened up as there were in the prior
Administration.
Mr. Swalwell. Ms. Oberlander, I don't want anyone to walk
away from this hearing believing that Members of Congress think
that they are above the law. If a Member of Congress commits a
crime or if there's probable cause for a search warrant, he or
she should have their records subpoenaed or their property
searched and seized.
What can we do--aside from additional protections for
journalists, what can we do for non-journalists, as far as
additional protections?
Ms. Oberlander. So--and I completely agree. I will say that
even the shield laws that we've looked at and all the Attorney
General guidelines--I do want to point out that, if a
journalist is suspected of committing a crime not related to
news gathering, that the crime is not itself growing out of the
news gathering, then none of these protections apply. The
government can come after and look for their materials and see
if--so there has always been an exception, a carve-out, for
crimes that have nothing to do with news gathering in all of
that.
I do think that--for everyone, I do think there should be,
at the very, very least--and this applies to Members of
Congress--a duty of candor on the part of the Department that,
any time they are looking for materials from a Congressperson
or their staffs or their family and they know whose materials
they're looking for, they need to tell the third-party provider
or the service provider of whose information it is.
Apple has said that they had no way to identify--
essentially, that they didn't know that this was congressional
staff and families. So, I think there should be a legislative
obligation to disclose what they know and why they're looking
for it. Then in the limited, very limited, places where there
is no notice given, the service provider will be able to make a
determination of whether that's something that they should be
objecting to or not.
Mr. Swalwell. Great.
I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Johnson?
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I appreciate our Witnesses, but I have to use a few moments
here to address the elephant in the room. I am here at the
southern border, La Joya, Texas, participating remotely,
because we're here with President Trump, with Governor Abbott,
and about two dozen Members of Congress to highlight the crisis
here.
Mr. Chair, I have to say, our Committee, the House
Judiciary Committee, has jurisdiction, broad jurisdiction, and
this is the most pressing issue facing the country, and it's
being totally ignored by the Committee. We have to point that
out.
Last night, Mr. Chair, we were on the border until probably
1:00 or 1:30 in the morning. We watched just droves of migrants
in caravans coming across the border all night, completely
undeterred, because the border wall construction was stopped
there just south of La Joya. There's a big, gaping hole. There
are many, of course, all across the southeast Texas border.
We appreciate Vice President Harris finally making a trip
to El Paso, but that is not where the crisis is at its apex.
It's here in south Texas, many hundreds of miles south of where
the Vice President went.
The House Judiciary Committee has a responsibility to
address this crisis. We had 180,000-plus encounters at the
southern border just in May alone. It is a record increase, and
it is a crisis.
We saw small children abandoned last night at the border,
walking across unaccompanied. The Border Patrol--Customs and
the Border Patrol--Protection--the agents here are so
frustrated because they can't stop it. All they can do is work
as processing agents for the cartels who are trafficking humans
into this country. They take them to a facility. Most of them
are not COVID-tested. They give them travel arrangements, and
they're sent into the country to all points, all 50 States
apparently, with no expectation that they'll be tracked or
returned at all. This is a humanitarian crisis.
Oh, by the way, fentanyl seizures are up 934 pounds at the
southern border alone just in May, a 300-percent increase over
May of last year. This affects every State in the nation and
every American, ultimately. It is an outrage. It is a
dereliction of our duty.
I'm saying to my colleagues on both sides of the aisle, we
must address this. The Republicans on our Committee have
introduced legislation to fix this. I've got a number of bills
myself to help with the asylum reforms and all the things that
we know need to be done. But they have been ignored.
I just want to go on record and use my time this morning to
say, we will be highlighting this today on the border. We hope
that the media covers this and shows the American people what's
going on. I think, very frankly, and I say respectfully, Mr.
Chair, it is a shame the Judiciary Committee is not doing
anything about it.
I will yield back my time, because I'm about to go to the
border here. We need to talk about this, and we need to have a
hearing. I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Jayapal?
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I hope Mr. Johnson will ask Donald Trump why he separated
thousands of children from their families. I hope he asks him
why the Department of Justice under the Trump Administration
undermined the civil liberties of so many people across the
country with these secrecy orders.
I wanted to pick up on, I believe it was, Mr. Cicilline's
questions about what is needed to get these protection orders.
I think that this whole process is really quite stunning for
most Americans, who don't distinguish between what happens to
their data that's stored and what would happen if they were to
be in their home and their files were to be seized.
So, I want to just read from--this is a U.S. Department of
Justice Office of the Deputy Attorney General memo from October
19th, 2017. In the footnote, it says, when applying for a
2705(b) order to accompany a subpoena that is--to accompany a
subpoena seeking basic subscriber information in an ongoing
investigation that is not public or known to the subject of the
investigation, ``stating the reasons for protection from
disclosure under 2705(b) usually will suffice.''
It actually just puts a point on--I think every one of you,
in some way or another, has commented on this. I think, Mr.
Turley, you were speaking to this as well. It's quite stunning
to me that there really seems to be no standard at all. So, of
course, the courts are not going to get any information,
because the direction is you don't need to provide it.
So, I'm wondering, on a scale of 1-10, of one being a
rubber stamp and 10 being a real process that protects our
civil liberties, our rights, just curious where you would put
the current standard. We can just go through quickly.
Mr. Turley?
Mr. Turley. I put it at a one.
I really compliment you for highlighting that footnote,
because it is how it reads. It's basically telling prosecutors,
``Confine what you say. You don't have to give any details.''
The Department of Justice benefits from that, right? If you
can use boilerplate and use it over and over again, then
judges, when they see it, basically say, ``This is all they
have to show.'' That's how you get to these high numbers, in
terms of the use of these devices.
Ms. Jayapal. Mr. Burt?
Mr. Burt. I would agree that it's a one.
While there's that footnote, that same policy, which is the
one that emanated from our litigation against the Department,
says that they're supposed to articulate facts. Then when you
look at the template that the Department of Justice provides to
the 93 offices around the country that says, here's how to get
these secrecy orders, it says, ``Just write down this
boilerplate.''
So, the actual form template is consistent with the
footnote, and there's really no meaningful process.
Ms. Jayapal. Ms. Oberlander?
Ms. Oberlander. I mean, I don't have a lot of exposure to
these, only the ones that have been reported. Certainly, for
the ones that have been reported, one or two, which is pretty
low.
Ms. Jayapal. Yeah.
Ms. Burton?
Ms. Burton. I'd put it at a zero. I mean, this falls under
the category of a ham sandwich can be indicted.
Ms. Jayapal. Right.
Ms. Burton. This falls into the government calls the shots
and that's the end of the discussion. That goes to a zero to
me.
Mr. Turley. I object. I wasn't given that option when I
took the test.
Ms. Jayapal. You stuck to the instructions.
Now, let's say, Ms. Burton--and I'll just stick with you on
this one--let's say that the extension is obtained and then the
very next day the case is dropped because there's not enough--
there's not enough evidence, whatever.
What happens to the extension? Does the DOJ go back and
say, ``Oh, actually, we don't need that extension anymore''?
Can you give us some knowledge about that?
Ms. Burton. Yeah, we have a case where 15 years ago, very,
very beginning of cloud computing, it is still a sealed
proceeding. I mentioned it in my testimony. So, I think this is
a critical problem. You've got to have a sunset provision at
the very least.
Again, if you have Pentagon Paper-type standards before you
can even enter into this kind of a secrecy order, you aren't
going to have a big problem. I mean, national security and
secrecy orders are a very small percentage of what we're
talking about.
Ms. Jayapal. Right.
Ms. Burton. So, I think you would have a sunset and a small
problem.
Ms. Jayapal. So, Mr. Burt, I was struck by the data of
Microsoft receiving 5,500 requests just in the first half of
2020 and your company turning over basic data to 54 percent of
the requests. Compare that to The New York Times reporting that
Apple turned over basic data in 43 percent, Google turned it
over in 83 percent, Facebook turned it over in between 85-89
percent.
It seems to me that we are essentially depending on tech
companies, in this case, to negotiate the civil rights and
civil liberties of their users. Why is it that your rates--and
if Apple were here, I would ask them as well--were so much
lower? It seems to me you take this very seriously in how you
move forward with these requests.
Chair Nadler. The time of the gentlelady has expired. The
Witness may answer the question.
Mr. Burt. Yes, well, we do take it very seriously, because
we think it is our obligation to protect our customer interests
here and because we do believe this is a First Amendment
violation, a restriction on our ability to inform our customers
when the data they trust us to hold securely for them has been
taken by the government.
Somewhat in defense of some of my competitive companies,
you also have to understand that different companies have
different categories of data. So, we have a lot of what has
been referred to as ``metadata.'' Often what we get is a
subpoena for that metadata then accompanied with a privacy or a
gag order. So, our percentage about how often we provide
content versus metadata is, in part, a reflection of the volume
of accounts where we do have metadata, whereas with a social
media company, for example, that metadata might be less
interesting to the government. They might be more interested in
the content of the postings.
I don't know, because I don't represent them, and I don't
see the demands that they get. There are possible explanations
other than just how seriously we do take our obligation.
Ms. Jayapal. Well, thank you for taking it seriously.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady yields back.
Ms. Scanlon?
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you to all our Witnesses for speaking today about
these really important issues surrounding the DOJ's
extraordinary use of its investigative powers to seize
materials from members of the press, Members of Congress, and
their staff and families.
As a lawyer and someone who's proud to represent
Philadelphia, I had to note Ms. Oberlander's written testimony
where she talked about the fundamental values underpinning the
First Amendment and the uniquely American principle of valuing
a free press.
The first strong expression of that principle arose during
the John Peter Zenger trial, which occurred before the
Constitution was even written. That case stemmed from Zenger's
refusal to disclose the sources of articles critical of the
British Government that he published in his newspaper.
Of course, it was the brilliant Philadelphia lawyer Andrew
Hamilton--no relation to Alexander--who represented Zenger in
that case. Hamilton argued for the critical importance of a
free press to preserve our liberty by exposing and opposing
tyrannical power by speaking and writing truth. Those
principles were written into the Constitution.
How striking that almost 300 years later we're still
addressing the same issue. We need to preserve the ability of a
free press to protect its sources, particularly from a vengeful
or tyrannical government that's trying to prevent the press
from speaking and writing truth.
Now, Mr. Burt mentioned the problem that, when data is
obtained under a gag order from Microsoft or other platforms,
they can't raise the Fourth Amendment protections because those
belong to the individuals whose data is being seized, but then
we have this catch-22 because they also can't tell those
individuals that their data's been seized and thereby give them
the right to assert their Fourth Amendment rights.
As I understand it, the workaround here that some news
agencies have been able to implement is that they have
contractual provisions that require the tech platforms to
notify them if the government seizes the data. Then the gag
order extends to the attorneys as well, so we still have those
problems.
Do I have that wrong?
Mr. Burt, you are shaking your head.
Mr. Burt. Yes. That's not quite right--
Ms. Scanlon. Okay.
Mr. Burt. --because the media companies--we do disclose
when we can. We have customers, including some media companies,
that have very specific disclosure obligations written in by
contract. Because, as I pointed out earlier, we don't have an
obligation to tell our customers when their data has been
subpoenaed or obtained by a warrant, but we do it as a matter
of policy. So, some of customers say, ``Well, we want that in
the contract,'' and we agree to that, but it's always subject
to the secrecy order.
So, we can't inform the media companies' outside counsel,
we can't inform anyone. Even within the company itself, within
Microsoft, we're restricted as to who can know about some of
these secrecy orders.
So, it's not a workaround for this problem. For the press
to exercise its right to be a free press, they have to know
when their data is being taken by government. We can't tell
them, when we have a secrecy order.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay.
Ms. Oberlander, you discussed the fact that the construct
that is being used now creates issues with respect to attorney-
client privilege. Is that right?
Ms. Oberlander. Yes. I mean, certainly, as when you just
extend the secrecy order to the in-house counsel and you don't
let them tell their client, yeah. To their outside counsel, for
that matter.
Ms. Scanlon. So, does that impede the free press's ability
to collect data, et cetera? Who does that impact?
Ms. Oberlander. So, first, the attorney can't do what
they're hired to do, which is to give advice to their client.
In some ways, it's better than nothing, because they can, in
fact, hire, if they're permitted to, outside counsel, who can
go and try to make their position known to the government,
which is what happened with these gag orders that we've been
talking about. It's very, very limited.
It also creates--just in terms of the client relationship,
if your client doesn't think that you're telling them the truth
or that you know something about their work, then there is a
level of distrust there that can poison the entire relationship
going forward.
Ms. Scanlon. So, it sounds like these processes create a
corrosive impact upon the whole system.
Ms. Oberlander. I believe it does, yes.
Ms. Scanlon. Mr. Turley, you mentioned that the current DOJ
procedures requires senior DOJ leadership to sign off on these
secret subpoenas. Is that correct?
Mr. Turley. Yes, that's correct.
Ms. Scanlon. As you noted, the three most senior officials
at the Department of Justice during the relevant time period,
both former Attorneys General Sessions and Barr and Deputy AG
Rosenstein, all deny that they signed off on the subpoenas in
this arena. Is that right?
Mr. Turley. That's my understanding, yes.
Ms. Scanlon. So, do you think the process failed, or are
these answers from those officials disingenuous?
Mr. Turley. Well, that's the first thing I put in my
testimony for this Committee to confirm, because it doesn't
make sense to me--that standard of a high level of approval was
put in in the 1970s as part of reforms overall. Then, after the
controversy during the Obama Administration, it was ramped up
again, it was reaffirmed that you need that type of signoff.
This is one of those things that, sort of, should make the
sand balance over in the Department of Justice. I mean, if
you're coming up with a search that's hitting on journalists or
Members of Congress, you would think that would go straight to
the AG's desk. I believe these AGs; they don't have any
recollection of approving this or being informed of it. That's
the first thing that I think the Committee needs to determine,
because if that's true, something seriously went wrong here.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay. Thank you.
I see my time has expired, and I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady yields back.
Ms. Garcia?
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for putting
together this wonderful group of experts to visit with us on
this very important topic.
Like many Americans, I was alarmed to learn that,
reportedly, the Trump Administration seized records, seized
records from Apple and others, to obtain phone and email
records belonging to some of our very own colleagues, their
families, and their staffs. I mean, it was outrageous. Then
also from news reporters, which, again, is outrageous behavior.
It appears now from some of the testimony we've heard today
that, more often than not, gag orders were sought from the
providers to make sure that they could not alert anyone. To me,
this is a blatant abuse of power.
During the House impeachment investigations and trials of
Donald J. Trump, I constantly reminded my colleagues and all
Americans that democracy is a gift that each generation gives
to the next. We must protect that democracy, and we must do all
that we can to stop this kind of behavior.
Former President Trump has time and time again placed his
own personal interests above the American people, and it
appears that he did that in this case, too. My colleague Mr.
Swalwell, who looks like he was a target of these attacks,
mentioned that earlier. It is again looking at and wanting to
get some of his critics.
It's evident that our Founding Fathers vested the power in
Congress for oversight, so I am so glad they we're doing that
today. Congress and the American people deserve the right to
know whether these unauthorized disclosures of classified
information were properly predicated and approved.
I've said it before, and I'll say it again: Nadie esta por
encima de la ley. No one is above the law.
I'd like to start my questions with Ms. Burton.
Ms. Burton, you mentioned in the three or four things that
you would seek in reforms, which were--it's just very
refreshing that it appears to be true; we seem to have a
consensus even in our Committee that reforms are needed, and it
looks like we have almost unanimity among the panelists. So, it
is a rare day for us in Judiciary.
You talked about safeguards; you talked about transparency.
If you could wave the magic wand, what would due process look
like to you to safeguard the First Amendment rights and Fourth
Amendment rights?
Ms. Burton. Right. I would make them broader than the First
Amendment. I'd make them a constitutional right, where you
would give the court the obligation to look at what the
government presented, and it had to be very specific, and there
had to be a compelling reason before anything could be done in
secret. The minute that showing was not made, a series of other
protections come in, whereby counsel for the press can come in,
there's no secrecy order, there's notice, there's no judges.
I think that it's very important that we have clear,
articulated standards of what due process means in this case.
So, for example, I think cloud information should be treated
the same as file-cabinet information. There's no reason--
Ms. Garcia. I agree, those have to be separate.
Ms. Burton. I would put that into the legislation.
So, I think it's a series of waterfall things that would
follow, one from another, that would make it a very
compelling--and problematic for the government on about 95
percent of the cases that they're now proceeding in secret
with.
Ms. Garcia. Well, thank you.
Mr. Burt, you talked about judicial review, and you also
talked about limiting the gag orders to 90 days and an
extension requiring a high standard for any kind of extension.
What exactly do you have in mind? Do you feel like the
scrutiny for the extension needs to be the same or even higher
than the original gag-order application?
Mr. Burt. Well, I think it's the same standard that needs
to be applied. It's really a strict scrutiny standard, because
you're trying to confine the First Amendment rights of the
cloud provider to inform their customer about what's happening.
So, you can say, we've set aside that for a 90-day period
because we have one of these very rare special circumstances
where that kind of secrecy is required in the national
interest.
If a court is convinced of that and then puts the gag order
in place for 90 days, that should be as long it goes, unless
government can come back and establish to the same degree, with
the same degree of strict scrutiny analysis. So, you have to
come forward with compelling evidence, and you have to show
that there is no other alternative that can satisfy the
government's legitimate interest. So, you'd have to reestablish
that that is necessary for an extension of that 90 days.
There should definitely not be any lower standard just
because you got a 90-day gag order. If anything, as you're
suggesting, perhaps at least the court should be considering,
really, why do we need another 90 days?
Ms. Garcia. Thank you.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Dean?
Ms. Dean. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I thank all our talented Witnesses for your expertise and
advice to us.
Ms. Oberlander, I'd like to compare and contrast some of
the things we talked about earlier which has to do with State
standards as contrasted with Federal standards. Obviously, we
know where we stand on the Federal standards.
I come from Pennsylvania, like my friend and colleague
Representative Scanlon. Our shield law is among the nation's
strongest. In fact, our State courts have read our State
legislation to protect as an absolute privilege any information
which could expose the source's identity.
Do you believe our State law or other State shield laws
that are much more effective could be used as a template for us
here as we craft Federal policy?
Ms. Oberlander. Well, I do. Pennsylvania does have a good
shield law. New York, where I live, has a very, very strong
one, also, an absolute privilege for confidential sources and a
qualified privilege for nonconfidential material. I absolutely
think that those both could be models for a Federal shield law.
I do think that, because you have such a great experiment
across all the different States, that one of the places where
the State statutes haven't kept up is on the definition of
``journalist.''
So, it really does depend on which State you are looking
at. A lot of them are--some of them, at least, are tied to the
fact that you have to get the protections of the statute, you
have to work for a newspaper. Magazine and digital radio, they
don't necessarily permit without some challenge. Like, if
you're an independent journalist now who is running a
subscription newsletter or somebody--I work with a lot of
journalists who are professional journalists but they're not
making any money.
So, the definition of journalist within that is something
that you'd have to look at. I wouldn't necessarily say that the
State statutes are models on that.
However, in terms of setting aside an absolute privilege
for confidential sources and the qualified privilege, they are.
Ms. Dean. That's helpful.
I'm thinking of my own constituents, journalists in the
Fourth Congressional District, and I have many. They feel--and
if maybe you could detail the vulnerability. While they enjoy
the protection of a State statute, depending upon geography,
politics, and other factors, they are left vulnerable.
Can you detail some of that tension?
Ms. Oberlander. Yes. I'm going to use the example of New
York again, because that's where I practice.
If you are a journalist, you've done a terrific
investigative story, maybe it's malfeasance in New York City
government--we'll move it outside of Federal--but there is--or
it's a regular--it doesn't have anything to do with government
or it's a private malfeasance kind of investigative story, you
have sources--if you get a subpoena from the New York State
Supreme Court at 60 Centre Street and they want your
confidential source information, who's your source, you can go
in, you can wave the shield law, and you don't have to provide
your source information. It's an absolute privilege.
Across the street, in the Federal courthouse, there is a
different standard. It is a qualified privilege, to the degree
it exists. You have to go--and there is something. You do have
to go, and you show that--or the government or whoever is
looking for the information would have to show that it's highly
relevant to their lawsuit, that they've tried to get it from
other places, they haven't, and that the balance of equities
generally weighs in favor of disclosure, but, as a journalist,
you may have to disclose your source.
So, when you're talking, when you're reporting it, when
you're dealing with your sources, you can't say to them with
any real certainty, ``I am not going to have to give up your
identity.'' That creates enormous havoc.
Ms. Dean. Incredibly dangerous. Thank you for that clear
description.
Ms. Burton, it's been, I guess, more than 40 years since
Congress passed the Privacy Protection Act. Now, we see
government can go directly to third-party providers to compel
work product, as opposed to going to the journalists who were
protected under the act. The PPA is clearly insufficient.
Knowing the actions of DOJ that have been discussed today,
how should Congress specifically continue--and I know you've
offered some, but--continue to strengthen protections offered
by PPA?
Ms. Burton. Thank you for the question.
Of course, the guidelines first came because the Department
of Justice was end-running constitutional rights. Then, when
that barrier was not high enough, they went to warrants.
Warrants were easy to get stamped in a court. Then you,
Congress, passed the PPA.
Now, we come to communication providers. I think that the
legislation that's being considered here, the simpleness of it,
without a lot of other pieces, but just the simpleness of it to
put procedures in place, is what's going to be relevant not
just today, but whatever other forums and venues and technology
comes in the future. I think it's about process, not about
anything else.
So, that's why I would urge us to get this bill passed into
law quickly.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Stanton?
Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
I want to say thank you to our Witnesses for spending your
day with us and assisting this Committee in its important work.
Back in early June, I, like all Americans, was shocked to
find out the Department of Justice had secretly tried to attain
email records of multiple reporters in newsrooms like The New
York Times, The Washington Post, and CNN. It is frustrating to
me--in fact, it's infuriating, to be frank--that Department of
Justice, under Presidents of both parties, has led the hunting
expeditions into the file cabinets of news reporters.
Journalists and reporters serve a vital function in our
democracy, working relentlessly to keep our public informed.
Their work is tough, thankless. Yet, day-in and day-out, they
do their work. They investigate leads, they find out facts, and
they tell the stories that need to be told.
It is freedom of the press that allows the American people
to learn of the actions of their government, both good and bad,
to learn of actions like the DOJ secretly surveilling reporters
and our colleagues here in the halls of Congress. It is freedom
of the press that allows the American people to stay informed,
stay safe, to form their own opinions, and to be better
citizens.
So now, more than ever, we do need to safeguard the
protections of the First Amendment, and this Congress must do
more to ensure reporters can do their their jobs.
Congress has, in the past, considered a press shield law.
One issue when drafting such a law is the question that we
discussed a little bit here today of who should qualify as a
journalist and what activities deserve added protection.
We can all point to responsible news organizations and
journalists who are longstanding institutions of the press, but
what about those others who may not fit the traditional mold?
What about an online blog or even someone like Darnella
Frazier, the courageous young lady that filmed the murder of
George Floyd and won a Pulitzer Prize special citation because
of her courageous acts?
Where do you draw the line about who would be covered by
such a press shield? I'd open it up to any of the Witnesses to
answer that question.
I know, Mr. Turley, you put some of that in your prepared
testimony.
Mr. Turley. Yes, I did. My objection to the current
legislation is that it follows a rather dated definition of
journalism. It specifies that this has to be part of your
livelihood. It also notes that you should have a supervisor or
editor that is overseeing your work.
The fact is the media has changed dramatically. Today, many
bloggers perform many of the same functions as reporters. Many
reporters are looking more like bloggers. They're engaged in
the internet and social media to a degree that they didn't. So,
you have this sort of merging.
You also have what are sometimes called net-newsers. Today,
polls show that people now mix, as sources of their media,
internet and traditional sources. In fact, more people get
their news from social media today than newspapers.
So, we have to, as we talk about technology changing, we
also have to update our view of what a journalism is--a
journalist is. This is not an easy task. I'm not pretending
that this doesn't have problems. You can't make everyone a
journalist, because, if that's the case, then journalism means
nothing. You have to have some way of distinguishing between
what people do.
What I have argued is, it should be a focus on what their
function is, their writing, as opposed to how much they're
getting paid for it.
So, Ted Koppel tomorrow could resign from the network and
be writing the same columns he did today. Would that mean he's
not a journalist? Under this law, he would not be a journalist,
because he wouldn't be making any money at it.
Mr. Stanton. Yeah.
Mr. Turley. That's obviously something that we don't want
to have, an inherent flaw, in a shield law.
Mr. Stanton. I wanted to ask a question--Mr. Burt, you
raised in your opening testimony the issue of blanket requests.
This, I guess, is a relatively new phenomenon and obviously
very frustrating for you and Microsoft. Maybe some of the other
Witnesses have experienced it as well.
Can you explain in a little more detail what--talk to us
about that blanket request, what it is, and how we might be
able to help you in Congress to fix those blanket requests for
information.
Mr. Burt. Yeah. So, a blanket request, like the one we
received yesterday--and I think there was another one,
actually, I was informed, that came in today--is a secrecy gag
order that prevents us from notifying customers not just as to
a particular subpoena or a particular warrant but to all
subpoenas, warrants, and orders issued in the course of a
particular case or investigation.
What that really highlights is the lack of adequate
standard to get a secrecy order in the first place. Because
that standard has to be particular. The government should have
to show that, for any specific request for data, that they can
meet the standard, the strict scrutiny standard, necessary to
impose a gag order.
To say that you can do that for every request, in even the
most routine request for information and data, throughout an
entire investigation just shows how this process is being
abused.
Chair Nadler. The time has--
Mr. Stanton. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. McBath?
Ms. McBath. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks each and every one of you for being here this
afternoon. This is a pretty heavy discussion.
As Americans, we, the people, give our government a great
deal of power to protect our national security. These include
the authority to collect some very sensitive information and to
keep it secret. We have laws, including criminal penalties, to
make sure that secrets stay secret when lives are definitely on
the line.
What I'm describing is how it's all supposed to work.
Government actors are given significant power and tools that
they're supposed to use to keep us safe. They're given the
weighty responsibility of keeping information so secret so
nothing gets out that could actually put lives at risk.
Inevitably, there will be times when classified information
is leaked to the press. We all know that. In these moments, it
can be hard to tell a brave whistleblower from an unpatriotic
criminal. It's often only in the writing of history that we
actually will be able to say whether or not a leak was in the
public interest or a serious threat to our national security.
So, we have a complex set of tools and laws, and,
ultimately, courts are tasked with getting this careful balance
just right--the right of pursuing justice, protecting our
national security, and also protecting the free press that is
foundational to our democracy.
So, the question before us is whether that system is really
working right now, or is it in need of repair?
So, one element of this system is the shield laws, State
laws that allow reporters and editors and others to protect
their sources. At least 40 States and the District of Columbia
have some form of shield law on the books, including the State
that I represent, which is Georgia.
I'm going to direct these questions to either Ms. Burton or
Ms. Oberlander. Both of you, please, feel free to jump in.
Do these State laws vary in their approach to providing
reporters protection from compelled disclosure? Also, to the
extent that they do vary, has the State-by-State approach
adequately protected our journalists that have been engaged in
First Amendment activities?
Ms. Oberlander. Well, they do vary. As I previously
mentioned, some States have a qualified privilege for
everything, where you have to go through some sort of balancing
test before you can get it. Some States have an absolute
privilege for--most places don't have an absolute privilege for
everything--but for confidential sources, they might protect
that absolutely. There are variations. They do all provide some
level--well, most of them provide some level of protection.
The Federal circuits, as well, have different standards.
Again, it could completely depend on what circuit you're in as
to what is the standard you have to prove.
So, all of them--the fact that there are these varying
standards creates great uncertainty on the part of the
journalists and of the people who want to provide them
information.
To your point about national security, though, and to the
degree that there is an investigation into some type of leak or
some other type of national security in that search, it would
probably be under the Federal--it would probably come out of a
Federal court, if not always. Then you would be faced with the
question of which circuit you're in. Again, those standards do
vary.
Ms. McBath. Thank you.
Ms. Burton, did you want to respond?
Ms. Burton. Yeah. I wanted to respond to your first
comment, which I think is very important, regarding the
balancing of national security interests, because we haven't
really spoken about that.
The Pentagon Papers case--again, 50 years today--makes
notice of that, where you had a judge who was told that
national security would result in the killing of many troops.
He took a very strong look at all the information and then
determined that, while he couldn't be sure, that he had to
balance against other rights, which in this instance were the
press rights.
So, that balancing and courts that really look at these
things carefully, whether it is in the shield law or national
security, that's kind of the best you can get. There's lots of
fact. There is a patchwork of statutes. We have to rely on the
judiciary to do their job properly and we have to require of
them.
So, I would say, on the State shield laws, we use a Federal
privilege on that, and I think that's the way in which we'd
begin to smooth it. Every State is different and it's very much
a patchwork at this point.
Ms. McBath. Thank you so much.
I'm about out of time, but I want to thank both of you for
really giving us good, detailed answers for these questions.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady yields back.
Ms. Escobar.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Many thanks to our panelists for being here today and for
helping educate the Committee and the public about what's at
stake.
As we continue to read more information, I hope no more
information emerges that there were more Members of Congress,
more members of the public, more members of the media whose
privacy was violated.
As we may possibly hear more of that, I think it's
critically important that the public sees that we take action,
and that we're responsive to their right to privacy, and that
we are a country that honors freedom of speech and that honors,
in many ways, the press.
So, Ms. Oberlander, I'm going to have a couple of questions
for you.
I have to respond, as the only Member on this Committee
from the border, and who represents a border community, I have
to respond to one of my colleagues who has chosen not to govern
on this important issue today and has instead chosen to
participate in the Donald Trump, Greg Abbott circus that is
happening in my State, in south Texas.
For the record, and just so that my colleague know, for the
record, apprehensions--or encounters rather--of migrants are
actually down this year when compared to 2019. May 2021 versus
May 2019, numbers of encounters are actually down.
I think what we're going to see on the floor today and
tomorrow probably will be an absence of many of our Republican
colleagues, who have chosen to abandon their job here in
Washington, DC, in an effort to participate in a political
stunt.
Back to the topic at hand. Actually, Ms. Oberlander, in
some ways this conversation about the border for me speaks to
the importance of protecting the Fourth Estate.
During the last four years, during the Trump years, much of
what we learned about what was happening in the immigration
space, in terms of family separation, in terms of some of the
cruelest, most abhorrent anti-immigrant public policy of our
generation, we learned through the media.
I served in Congress, was sworn in in 2019, and much of the
information that I gained, even as a Member of Congress, came
from the media and came from courageous journalists who had
cultivated sources who were shocked by what was going on around
them and who were willing to shine a bright light on policy
that America deserved to know.
From my perspective, I've been vocal about the Biden
Administration continuing to empower the government in the same
way, although I do want to recognize that the President has
made some really important statements. Our DOJ is in some ways
still engaging in the same way.
Because you work with journalists and publications, can you
tell the public what we risk if we continue to go down this
road, their access to information, what you've seen, and what
lies ahead?
Ms. Oberlander. Thank you, Congresswoman.
Yes, I think that if there are limitations placed on
journalists or that there is a fear that their confidential
sources and their work product is going to be accessed
inappropriately, outside the rule of law, then you will see a
real diminution in the flow of information. You really will.
People will not agree to be--they will not come forward as
sources of information.
For example, around the border you had sources within the
government who were saying, ``These are the policies, this is
what I'm seeing.'' You also had sources, you also had the
individuals who were affected by these policies, who really had
the--ran the risk of retaliation, of being deported. Yet, they
were willing to come forward and say, ``Listen, I am being
placed here. I am not able to make a living wage. My children
have been separated.'' Many of them were afraid of being
identified and being deported.
So, what happens then is, if they don't come forward, the
entire public loses that information. We all miss the things
that we would like to know to make our decisions, to decide who
to elect, how to govern. It is a real diminution of the
information available to the public.
Ms. Escobar. It absolutely is. That's why we have to take
action. I'm glad to see that there's bipartisan support for
that. Look forward to working on the recommendations from this
panel.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Jones.
I'm sorry, Ms. Ross.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you to the Witnesses for your insights and for your
patience. I'm second to last, so if you were wondering when you
were going to have lunch, it's coming soon.
As a State legislator, I worked to promote transparency and
responsible governance in my State of North Carolina. As a
civil rights attorney, I've worked on both Fourth Amendment and
First Amendment issues, and done a lot of work with the Press
Association and to prevent State agencies and law enforcement
from conducting unlawful searches. So, this is a very, very
interesting topic for me.
Your testimonies highlight the abuse of prosecutorial
discretion and do pose important questions about how we can act
to fulfill our duty to preserve democracy and a robust free
press.
Unchecked prosecutorial power poses concern for all
Americans, regardless of their political perspective. It's
important that we usher in procedural and normative shifts that
will emphasize responsibility with regard to prosecutorial
discretion and secrecy orders on the part of law enforcement.
Freedom of the press and government accountability are the
bedrocks of our democracy. This Committee has the
responsibility to address and mitigate the potential for
prosecutorial abuse and its actual overreach.
My first question is about business, Mr. Burt, and it seems
like business has been unduly burdened by doing the
government's work.
So, I'd like to ask you what the incentives for service
providers like Microsoft are to challenge legal demands issued
by law enforcement agencies when they are legally deficient.
You are getting a lot of these requests. Why are you resisting
it as much as you are?
Mr. Burt. Well, my title actually is Corporate Vice
President for Customer Security and Trust. I mention that
because a lot of the work that I do with my organization is
designed specifically to try to ensure that our customers can
trust us with their data and their information and with their
transformation to a new digital world.
So, it's very important to Microsoft as a company that our
customers know that in these instances where we are subject to
gag orders and we can't even tell them that their data is being
demanded by government, that we will ensure that we only
respond when those requests are truly valid and legal, and that
even then we will challenge those, whenever we have a
sufficient basis to challenge those requests we will challenge
them if we can, and to try to limit the scope of these secrecy
orders.
What we've learned is that litigation just isn't a
sufficient tool. The volume's too high, the abuse is too great,
and we really need legislative reform.
Ms. Ross. Can you just remind the Committee about the
business burden here? How many people hours? How much money
does it cost you every year to deal with many of these
illegitimate requests?
Mr. Burt. I don't actually have those numbers. We could
provide those later to specifically address that.
We have a very large team that responds to lawful access
requests. Globally, it's more than 60,000 a year. As we
mentioned in our testimony, there are seven to ten of these
secrecy gag orders that we get every day and we have to review
those for their sufficiency.
We've litigated, eight or nine cases, and each one of those
litigations is expensive, and we have made progress through
that litigation.
It is a burden to have to manage this all because
government isn't doing its job in an appropriate way.
Ms. Ross. Thank you. I look forward to getting that follow-
up information.
This next question is a follow-up on the definition of who
the press is, if we pursue the shield laws.
Ms. Oberlander and Ms. Burton, we've heard from Mr. Turley
about this, but do you have anything to add? Because I fear
that that might be a place where it gets a little thorny for
the Committee.
Ms. Oberlander. I mean, I agree with Mr. Turley. I believe
that you should look not at who somebody works for, but at what
activities they are engaged in, and are they regularly
producing or writing or photographing or editing or involved
with those people in putting news out of local, national,
State, international importance to the public. It could be a
small public. It could be a large public. I would look at that.
Then, around the edges, whatever definition you come up
with, there will be questions. I think that then there have
always been questions. I think that will be something that a
court will have to look at the statute and say, ``Well, does
this person fall under it or do they not?''
So, I would hope that the definition of journalist doesn't
tie us up from not getting a shield law.
Chair Nadler. The time of the gentlelady has expired.
Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, for convening the
full Judiciary Committee today to examine what we can do to
prevent abuses like the Trump Administration's secret seizures
of data from the accounts of Intelligence Committee Chair
Schiff, Representative Swalwell, and numerous journalists.
Let me be clear about something: The Department must act
faster to investigate, expose, and end these abuses. It is long
past time for this Department of Justice to right the wrongs of
the last one.
I worked for the Justice Department early in the Obama
Administration, and I understand that the integrity of the
Department is important. That is exactly why this Justice
Department's reluctance to make a clean break from its
predecessors' misdeeds is so misplaced.
The way to restore the Department's integrity is to
repudiate the notion that the DOJ was Donald Trump's personal
attorney, not to continue to provide him and his policies pro
bono defense.
The Trump Administration may not have been the only
Administration in our nation's history to engage in these
abuses--in fact, that is well established--but it must be the
last.
So, I look forward to working with everyone, on a
bipartisan basis, for bipartisan legislative solutions to the
challenges that we face.
I want to focus in on something that a number of Witnesses
mentioned earlier.
From what has been reported over the last few weeks,
secrecy orders, in particular, have prevented the counsels of
the targeted media companies from sharing information with
their clients. Clearly, these orders strain the rules of
professional responsibility and attorney-client privilege.
Ms. Oberlander, you touched on this earlier in your
exchange with Ms. Scanlon, but I'd like to give you an
opportunity to elaborate. Is there anything you'd like to add
about this problem?
Ms. Oberlander. Well, I mean, I do want to say that letting
somebody at the media organization know about the attempt to
get their material is better than not letting anybody know
about it. So, the answer is not to not tell them.
It really does create a very, very difficult place for the
attorneys. I mean, it creates problems with their relationship
with their client. Corporately, if it is a corporate issue, it
creates issues with when you can't tell the CEO, or the boss,
or the chief editor.
It's really--it's just untenable, frankly. It's not a
solution to the secrecy orders to tell just one lawyer and gag
them from telling anybody else.
It also is, frankly, a prior restraint and really should be
looked at, like my colleagues have said, under the strictest
scrutiny. If you can't stop The New York Times from publishing
the Pentagon Papers, you should have the same standard before
you limit their lawyer from telling the other journalists about
the request.
Mr. Jones. Ms. Burton, what is your perspective on how
these secrecy orders directed at the attorneys who represent
journalists and media organizations can threaten or compromise
the attorney-client relationship?
Ms. Burton. Thank you for the question.
I think that a statute that you are all getting closer to
drafting here would create a separate cause of action to
immediately go into a court to vacate that proposed order
before the attorney is gagged.
I have to say that I'm not sure I agree with Ms. Oberlander
that it's better that someone in the organization knows. It is
so corrosive when that occurs.
So, I would statutorily have a separate cause of action
that would give the attorney and the business side of that
operation the opportunity to challenge it.
Mr. Jones. Thanks so much.
I just want to string together a few basic but vital
concepts from the course of this hearing.
Ms. Oberlander, there is no exception to the First
Amendment for legal organizations, right?
Ms. Oberlander. No.
Mr. Jones. Nothing in the Constitution exempts leak
investigations from the Fourth Amendment's protections against
unreasonable searches and seizures, correct?
Ms. Oberlander. That's what I believe.
Mr. Jones. That's what I learned as well.
Finally, nothing in the Constitution exempts leak
investigations from the Fifth Amendment's guarantee of due
process, correct?
Ms. Oberlander. That's right.
Mr. Jones. So, as far as our constitutional rights are
concerned, a leak investigation is like any other. Yet, from
what we have heard today, what passes for due process in these
matters is anything but.
I just want to ask a series of questions on notice.
Mr. Burt, I just want to review the notice process with
you.
When a subpoena is issued for someone's data to a third-
party email or cloud provider like Microsoft and a secrecy
order is imposed, the person whose data is seized is not
notified in way about the subpoena, correct?
Mr. Burt. That's correct.
Mr. Jones. That secrecy order might extend indefinitely,
correct?
Mr. Burt. Unfortunately, that's true.
Mr. Jones. How about when a secrecy order with a limited
span does expire? Even then, at the expiration date, the law
doesn't guarantee any notice to the person whose data the
government has seized, correct?
Mr. Burt. That's correct. There's no requirement the
government notify. We always do once the secrecy order has
expired.
Mr. Jones. Even when there was no conceivable risk at that
point that notifying the recipient could interfere with an open
investigation or delay a trial?
Mr. Burt. That's right. There is no practice--
Chair Nadler. The gentleman's time has expired. The Witness
may answer the question.
Mr. Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Chair Nadler. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Bush.
Ms. Bush. St. Louis and I thank you, Chair Nadler, for
convening this hearing.
The secrecy surrounding the issuance of the electronic
surveillance and accompanying gag orders is deeply concerning
and in many ways every actor is implicated--from the Department
of Justice, which in this case has abdicated its role to uphold
constitutional protections, to the private companies that
follow the Department's orders without any transparency, to the
legislators who have thrown their hands up and allowed the DOJ
to transgress without any accountability and transparency.
While it is shocking to hear that the DOJ was engaging in
such surveillance practices against government officials, their
staffers, and their families, it is not an anomaly. As a
protester and activist, I know firsthand how invasive law
enforcement surveillance can be.
It's for this reason that I have been vocal in my
opposition to DOJ's blanket ability to surveil all Americans,
especially Black and Brown protesters who have been sounding
the alarm on this issue.
The Department's ability to surveil Americans exercising
their First Amendment right to protest has built the
infrastructure that has now allowed the department to surveil
Members of this body.
Companies like Apple and others are then left to hand over
the records at their disposal, betraying the trust of the
people who use their products.
In this instance, Apple complied with the DOJ,
demonstrating the thorny position of tech companies balancing
their customers' private online activity with legitimate
requests from this country's chief law enforcement agency.
Mr. Burt, it has been reported that some data hosts or
providers have challenged the government's electronic
surveillance orders and the gag orders. However, the companies'
ability to challenge the orders is limited and it is not
assured.
Mr. Burt, how does the abuse of secrecy orders affect
investigations against Black and Brown communities?
Mr. Burt. Well, I think, as you point out, you always have
to be aware of the fact that government, as a majority
institution, can sometimes disproportionately affect those in
minority positions or who have less representation.
Therefore, our Constitution and the constitutional rights
on which our country is founded are designed to protect those
minority interests and those minority rights especially.
That's why, when you have a law enforcement agency that's
able to act secretly, without creating the adequate record to
be able to challenge and review those secrecy orders and
understand the basis for them and to ensure that they're only
issued when absolutely essential in the national interest,
there is almost certainly going to be disproportionate impact
of that secrecy.
Ms. Bush. Thank you.
Can you tell me, how do you decide which orders to
challenge?
Mr. Burt. Unfortunately, in most cases we don't know
enough, because we are provided so little information, we don't
know enough to even know when we have an opportunity to
challenge.
We challenge those that on their face are inadequate or
clearly not legal, and in most cases, we find prosecutors then
agree and withdraw that. That's a big percentage that we
challenge. We also challenge those that for other reasons we
think we can negotiate a different approach by the law
enforcement agency.
Then we have to look at those relatively rare instances
when we know enough, or we can discern enough to know that we
have a factual basis for litigating the scope of a secrecy
order. That, unfortunately, is too rare.
That's another reason why deferring this to the private
sector, to the cloud providers, is not a workable solution.
It's why we need to have a legislative solution that creates a
greater burden on law enforcement and imposes on the judiciary
the obligation to ensure that appropriate standards are met and
a record of that is maintained.
Ms. Bush. Okay. So, also considering the sheer volume of
orders a provider like Microsoft can see, how burdensome is it
to require providers to determine if and when each order merits
a challenge? Like, tell us about that.
Mr. Burt. Well, I was asked that question earlier and I
don't have specific data that I can provide about the nature of
that burden.
We take it very seriously. We have a very large team that's
devoted to this effort and it is constantly looking at how we
can best protect our customers' rights and interests. So, it's
a significant investment by Microsoft in doing this work.
I think the point for the Committee, though, is not about
the burden on Microsoft. No one is going to be too sympathetic
to the fact that my company has to spend money on this problem.
The problem is you should not be deferring to the private
sector that responsibility, because it could vary from company
to company how seriously they take this. We have only limited-
visibility and limited-legal rights to challenge these secrecy
orders.
We explore those rights as much as we can. You can't count
on every provider doing that to the same degree or to the same
extent. That's not where enforceability of these important
rights should rest.
Chair Nadler. The gentlelady's time has expired.
This concludes today's hearing. Thank you to our
distinguished Witnesses for participating.
Without objection, all Members will have five legislative
days to submit additional written questions for the Witnesses
or additional materials for the record.
Without objection, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:32 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
