- FROM MIRANDA TO GIDEON: A CALL FOR PRETRIAL REFORM

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FROM MIRANDA TO GIDEON: A CALL FOR
PRETRIAL REFORM

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM, AND HOMELAND SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FRIDAY, MARCH 26, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-16

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-579                      WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chair
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania, Vice-Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Ranking Member
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,      DARRELL ISSA, California
Georgia                          KEN BUCK, Colorado
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAREN BASS, California               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island     TOM McCLINTOCK, California
ERIC SWALWELL, California            W. GREG STEUBE, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          CHIP ROY, Texas
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
GREG STANTON, Arizona
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MONDAIRE JONES, New York
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CORI BUSH, Missouri

PERRY APELBAUM, Majority Staff Director
CHRIS HIXON, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM, AND HOMELAND SECURITY

SHEILA JACKSON LEE, California, Chair
CORI BUSH, Missouri, Vice-Chair

KAREN BASS, California               ANDY BIGGS, Arizona, Ranking
VAL DEMINGS, Florida                     Member
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania         LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island        TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
TED LIEU, California                 THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
LOU CORREA, California               VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               BURGESS OWENS, Utah

JOE GRAUPENSPERGER, Chief Counsel
JASON CERVENAK, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

Friday, March 26, 2021

Page
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Chair, a Member of Congress
from the State of Texas, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and
Homeland Security..............................................     1
The Honorable Andy Biggs, Ranking Member, a Member of Congress
from the State of Arizona, Subcommittee Crime, Terrorism, and
Homeland Security..............................................     3

WITNESSES

Barry Scheck, Yeshiva University Benjamin N. Cardozo School of
Law, Innocence Project
Oral Testimony.................................................    12
Prepared Statement.............................................    15
Anthony Graves, Harris County Public Defender's Office
Oral Testimony.................................................    26
Prepared Statement.............................................    28
Premal Dharia, Institute to End Mass Incarceration, Harvard
University
Oral Testimony.................................................    37
Prepared Statement.............................................    40
April Frazier Camara, Defender Legal Services Initiative,
National Legal Aid and Defender Association
Oral Testimony.................................................    60
Prepared Statement.............................................    62
Michele Hanisee, Deputy District Attorney, Major Crime Division,
Los Angeles, California
Oral Testimony.................................................    69
Prepared Statement.............................................    71
June Rodgers, Chairwoman of The Victims' Rights Reform Council,
Millville, New Jersey
Oral Testimony.................................................    74
Prepared Statement.............................................    76
Reuben Camper Cahn, Keller/Anderle LLP
Oral Testimony.................................................    78
Prepared Statement.............................................    80

STATEMENTS, LETTERS, MATERIALS, ARTICLES SUBMITTED

Statement submitted by the Honorable Cori Bush, a Member of
Congress of the State of Missouri, Vice-Chair of the
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security for the
record.........................................................     8
Letter from Bob Andrzejczak, a member of the New Jersey Assembly
representing First Legislative District, submitted by the
Honorable Andy Biggs, a Member of Congress of the State of
Arizona, and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee Crime,
Terrorism, and Homeland Security for the record................     8

APPENDIX

Statement submitted by Sakira Cook, Senior Director, Justice
Reform Program, The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human
Rights for the record..........................................   110
Letter from the Honorable Theodore E. Deutch and Senator Kamala
D. Harris submitted by the Honorable Theodore E. Deutch, a
member of the Committee on the Judiciary from the state of
Florida for the record.........................................   126
Material Indifference: How Courts Are Impeding Fair Disclosure In
Criminal Cases submitted by Katheen ``Cookie'' Ridolfi, Tiffany
M. Joslyn and Todd H. Fries for the record.....................   128
The Use of Pretrial ``Risk Assessment'' Instruments: A Shared
Statement of Civil Rights Concerns submitted by

[email protected]
for the record.................   233
What Causes People to Give False Confessions submitted by Lisa
Black and Steve Mills, Tribune reporters for the record........   243
Article--Bad-cop database really a ``remarkable'' step to
accountability submitted by the Albuquerque Journal Editorial
Board for the record...........................................   249

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS FOR THE RECORD

Questions for the record from the Honorable Cori Bush, a Member
of Congress from the State of Missouri, Vice-Chair of the
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security........   252
Response to questions for the record from Premal Dharia to the
Honorable Cori Bush, a Member of Congress from the State of
Missouri, Vice-Chair of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism,
and Homeland Security..........................................   253

FROM MIRANDA TO GIDEON: A CALL FOR PRETRIAL REFORM

----------

Friday, March 26, 2021

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:12 a.m., via
Webex, Hon. Sheila Jackson Lee [chairwoman of the subcommittee]
presiding.
Members present: Representatives Jackson Lee, Demings,
Bass, McBath, Dean, Scanlon, Cicilline, Lieu, Biggs, Chabot,
Tiffany, Massie, Spartz, Fitzgerald, and Owens.
Staff present: Moh Sharma, Member Services and Outreach
Advisor; Jordan Dashow, Professional Staff Member; Cierra
Fontenot, Staff Assistant; John Williams, Parliamentarian;
Kayla Hamedi, Staff Assistant; Ben Hernandez-Stern, Counsel;
Joe Graupen-sperger, Chief Counsel; and Veronica Eligan,
Professional Staff Member.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The hearing will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the Subcommittee at any time.
We welcome everyone to this morning's hearing which is on
the title ``From Miranda to Gideon: A Call for Pretrial
Reform.'' It is well-known that the Miranda Supreme Court case
provided the well-known Miranda warning pretrial to give any
defendant the right to counsel and to not have statements used
against them, but to be able to be forewarned of their rights.
And the Gideon case, of course, was to allow for an appointment
of a lawyer for indigent defendants who cannot pay, and to
recognize the importance of counsel, simple concept for
pretrial and the issue of justice in America.
Before we begin, I would like to remind Members that we
have established an email address and distribution list
dedicated to circulating exhibits, motions, or other written
materials that Members might want to offer as part of our
hearing today. If you would like to submit materials, please
send them to the email address that has been previously
distributed to your offices and we will circulate the materials
to Members and staff as quickly as we can.
I would also ask all Members to mute your microphone when
you are not speaking. This will help prevent feedback and other
technical issues. You may unmute yourself any time you seek
recognition.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.
As I have earlier said, good morning. I believe this is an
important hearing as a component of the justice system and, as
well, the elements of the Constitution, particularly the Bill
of Rights that govern the rights of all persons that will have
to appear before a court of law, particularly, in this
instance, in criminal proceedings.
As I indicated earlier, Gideon and Miranda cases were
significant cases to add to and enhance the justice system that
is so much admired in many instances around the world. Although
our system is not perfect, it is a system that is admired for
its outreach and balance to ensure justice for those who appear
before the court.
That means that it is our important responsibility to
ensure its near perfection and to recognize the balance between
those who acted or are alleged to have acted, and those who
have been impacted by those actions.
The Subcommittee convenes today to examine pretrial
justice, perhaps the most crucial stage of the criminal justice
process. Following arrest, interrogation, pretrial detention,
and charging decision all take place in the days immediately
following arrest. From the outset, the pretrial process
indigent defendants are at a disadvantage, often without access
to counsel. They frequently find themselves detained pending
arraignment.
Law enforcement officers and prosecutors may exert
disproportionate leverage during this period, since they have
access to the defendant and all the evidence. Each of the major
procedural steps--arrest, determining pretrial detention, and
pretrial discovery--implicate the constitutional rights of the
accused, who are presumed innocent.
We must recognize and address the fact that current
practices disproportionately disadvantage people of color. The
interrogation stage offers one of the first opportunities to
solve crime. It should be used in that capacity. Also,
currently includes practices that may imperil constitutional
rights and undercut the fair Administration of justice.
Who are we in this Nation if we cannot provide that fair
assessment and implementation of justice? In recent years, the
number of documented cases of people wrongfully convicted
because of confessions to crimes they did not commit has
steadily increased. The Innocence Project estimates that false
confessions have contributed to 28 percent of the 375 post-
conviction DNA exonerations in the United States, all of which
involved cases of murder and/or sexual assault.
In more than half of all cases in which the post-conviction
DNA analysis cleared an innocent defendant it has also
identified the actual perpetrator. Remind the Members that the
DNA usage is only a recent phenomenon, and just take note of
the fact of the many people that may have been falsely accused,
and falsely convicted, and falsely serving time, many of those
fall disproportionately in the minority communities,
particularly African Americans.
Research has shown that certain conditions and police
interrogation tactics are psychologically potent, especially
when used in excess, and that sometimes some types of suspects
are particularly vulnerable. Let me very clear, we want, too,
for our law enforcement to be able to bring those to justice
who have perpetrated horrific crimes and actions against
society. We realize that there has to be a justice system, and
a system to hold them accountable. We want to do it in a way
that allows chief and guiding force just as the word justice.
One solution I propose in legislation is that all
interviews and interrogations of felony suspects should be
videotaped in their entirety from start to finish, without
interruption, without loopholes or exception, and with a camera
angle that focuses on both the suspect and the interrogator.
Increasing transparency in this manner is essential for judges
to determine voluntariness and coercion, and for juries to
determine whether statements are reliable and the facts
attributable to the suspect.
Another issue for us to consider is the conditions under
which children should be interrogated. Very, very serious, and
very much a concern. Children are vulnerable, which is why they
are statistically over-represented in false confession cases.
Additionally, we must keep in mind the array of issues related
to pretrial detention, a subject we will review in more detail
in the future.
We must also consider the question of which defendants are
provided diversion or given a citation to appear in court. The
current system produces disparately negative results for people
of color, and on its face favors the wealthy.
Lastly, we also must review aspects of the current system
that discourages trial and favors a plea agreement. The
combination of a number of pretrial practices ends up with the
poor and people of color waiving their constitutional rights to
a trial and pleading guilty, sometimes to crimes they did not
commit.
As you can see, we have many important issues to review
today. Members, throughout our time as Members of this
particular important subcommittee, because wrapped around this
Committee is the question of justice that involves lives of
those who may have been impacted by the criminal act, or
alleged criminal act, and those who have been accused, falsely
accused in terms of incarceration or loss of life through the
justice system. Justice has to be real.
I look forward to the witness testimony and the robust
discussion that will follow.
It is now my pleasure to recognize the Ranking Member of
the subcommittee, the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Biggs, for
his opening statement.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate that.
I once again request that you schedule a hearing of the
Subcommittee to examine how the Biden Administration's crisis
along the southern border affects Homeland Security and public
safety. Last week all the Republican Members of the
subcommittee, including Ranking Member Jordan, sent you a
letter requesting that you hold such a hearing.
We haven't heard back yet. I hope that we hear back soon
because we think that this Subcommittee should hold a hearing
as soon as possible to examine how the Biden Administration's
failure to secure the southern border has allowed transnational
criminal organizations, smugglers, and drug traffickers to
engage in criminal behavior and harm public safety.
I was just down at the border yesterday, Madam Chair. While
on the Arizona border I learned of a group of 112 individuals
who had surrendered to Border Patrol agents just a couple of
days ago. The oldest person in that group was 94 years old, and
the youngest was just 4 years old. That child was not traveling
with parents, sibling, or grandparents, or in fact any other
relative or legal guardian. That child had been placed in the
hands of the dangerous cartels that traffic in human sex and
drugs. The majority of the people in that group of 112 averred
that they have come because they felt they had been invited by
President Joe Biden.
So, we have to have a hearing as soon as we possibly can.
Today's hearing is very important. The Subcommittee will
examine the pretrial stage of the criminal justice process. As
a former trial lawyer who defended hundreds of individuals, and
also engaged in prosecution activity as well, I can tell you
this is an important topic. I thank you for bringing it
forward.
According to the majority's memo in preparation for the
hearing, it will improve, one, the role coercive interrogation
practices play in eliciting false confessions; two, pretrial
detention; three, pretrial evidentiary burdens federal and
State practices place on defendants; and four, proposals for
reform.
We have already seen how the majority has proposed to
reform the pretrial stage. One member of this subcommittee, for
instance, introduced the No Money Bail Act of 2019. That bill
would completely eliminate bail in the federal system and make
states that utilize bail for pretrial release ineligible for
grants under the Byrne JAG Program. That is right, the sponsor
intends to defund the police if states won't accede to his
demands.
Also, last year on New Year's Eve of last year while no one
was looking, and without even a press release, Chair of the
Judiciary Committee introduced the Federal Bail Reform Act of
2020. His bill turns the federal pretrial release process on
its head.
With some very limited exceptions, his bill even creates a
presumption for post-conviction relief while the convicted
criminal is appealing the conviction. Chair Nadler's bill
prohibits the court from imposing any condition of release that
may impose a financial on the person released.
I suppose we should just all hope defendants show up for
their court appearances even after convicted, just as we are
hoping tens of thousands of illegal immigrants will show up to
their court hearings or report to ICE. It isn't working, which
is why we have more than one million illegal border crossers
with orders of removal wandering around the United States
today.
The Nadler bill also states that ``the judicial officer may
not order the temporary detention of any person on the ground
that may pose a generalized danger or a financial danger to any
other individual or the community.'' So even if the judge or
magistrate finds that the defendant poses a generalized danger
to our community, the judge cannot temporarily detain the
defendant who has already been convicted. I am sure that will
make everyone in the community sleep better at night.
Last year Chair Nadler also proposed bribing states to
enter their jails. In that proposal, states were to be given
grant dollars to release prisoners who did not ``pose a risk of
serious, imminent injury to a reasonably identifiable person.''
I guess it was okay to release that person if the injury might
be hours or days away, and perhaps not so serious.
Again, there was no consideration allowed for a generalized
risk to our communities in releasing these prisoners.
You don't have to take my word when it comes to these so-
called bail reforms. We will have a witness today tell her very
compelling, very tragic story.
Madam Chair, I also offer into the record a letter from New
Jersey State Assemblyman Bob Andrzejczak to California Speaker
of the House Anthony Rendon warning him about the perils of
bail reform. So, Madam Chair, I offer that letter into the
record.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

MR. BIGGS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Biggs. Thank you.
It is notable because Assemblyman Andrzejczak was once a
proponent of bail proponent. When he actually saw it in action
in his home state, he called it an absolute disaster.
We will also look at pretrial discovery issues today. We
need to ensure that discovery rules are equitable and that the
government is held accountable. None of us want to see what
happened to our late colleague Ted Stevens. We don't want to
see that happen again. That being said, we should not be
looking to change discovery rules that risk endangering
witnesses and crime victims, which is exactly what New York
State did.
Under New York's discovery rules, prosecutors will no
longer be able to assure witnesses that their identity will be
protected. You don't have to take my word for it. Manhattan
District Attorney Democrat Cy Vance said, ``I think to hand
defendants a roster of who has spoken out against them just 15
days after their first appearance, absent a protective order,
is a seismic change that undoubtedly will dissuade witnesses
who live in all neighborhoods from reporting crime.''
I hope these are not the types of reforms my colleagues on
the other side are considering.
I understand that we will also be examining the practice of
recording interrogations. I certainly support such practices.
In fact, I think not to do that is irresponsible and reckless.
However, I point out that last Congress Democrats twice
rejected Republican amendments at markup to require custodial
and non-custodial interviews be recorded by Department of
Justice law enforcement agencies. I hope that is an issue that
all of us can get together on in the spirit of bipartisanship.
I thank the chair for holding this hearing today. I thank
all the witnesses for being here. I look forward to hearing
from them and their testimony.
With that, Madam Chair, thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman yields back. I thank the
gentleman for his statement, and I thank the gentleman for his
letter.
Chair Nadler speaks his regrets for not being able to
participate this morning. So, it is my privilege to turn to Mr.
Jordan. I now recognize the distinguished Ranking Member of the
full committee, the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Jordan, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Jordan?
We will yield to Mr. Jordan as appropriate. So, we will now
proceed to welcome all our distinguished witnesses and thank
them for their participation. As I do that, let me also thank
all our Members of Congress and this Subcommittee who are here
this morning as well.
I think it is an important statement to make those Members
are working, and we have worked all through the week on
important meetings and hearings. I am very appreciative of the
Subcommittee Members who are on this hearing this morning, this
very important hearing.
So, again we welcome all our distinguished witnesses, and
we thank them for their participation. Now, it is my privilege
to begin by swearing in the witnesses.
If you would raise as I turn to you, to turn on your audio.
All witnesses turn on their audio and make sure I can see your
face. Make sure that I can see your face. We are working to see
everyone's face here.
So, I am looking for every face here. Just a moment.
Witnesses, have you unmuted? Everyone should be unmuted.
Raise your right hand in a visible way so that we can see
you in the screen.
Do you swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that the
testimony you are about to give is true and correct to the best
of your knowledge, information, and belief, so help you God?
[Chorus of ayes.]
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. Thank you so very much.
Let the record show that the witnesses answered in the
affirmative. Thank you.
We will now proceed with witness introduction.
Barry Scheck is the co-founder of the Innocence Project,
and a professor at Yeshiva University Benjamin N. Cardozo
School of Law. There he serves as a director of clinical
education for the trial advocacy program, and the Center for
the Study of Law and Ethics.
Mr. Scheck also was a staff attorney at the famous Legal
Aid Society of New York, well-known in its tenure and, of
course, its history.
Mr. Anthony Graves is a community liaison with the Harris
County Public Defender's Office. In 1992, Mr. Graves was
charged with and convicted of murder, despite of a lack of a
motive or any physical evidence connecting him to the crime
scene. He served 12 years on death row before his conviction
was overturned by a federal appeals court in 2006. He was
released in 2010.
His life since then has been a tribute to the values of
this nation, and it reemphasizes the cruciality of this hearing
and why we must insist on the assessment of the pretrial
justice that occurs to those who may be wrongly accused.
Premal Dharia is the co-director of the Institute to End
Mass Incarceration at Harvard University. Prior to her current
position, Ms. Dharia was Founding Director of the Defender
Impact Initiative.
Following law school she worked at the public defender
services in the District of Columbia, and as a federal public
defender in the District of Maryland.
April Frazier Camara is the Director of Defender Legal
Services Initiative at the National Legal Aid and Defender
Association. She previously worked as a public defender with
the Public Defender Service for Washington, DC, as a re-entry
coordinator and, more recently, as a special assistant in the
Juvenile Defender Unit at the law office of the Shelby County
Public Defender.
Michele Hanisee is a deputy district attorney for the
County of Los Angeles for 22 years. She has tried over 100 jury
trials, including 43 murders and three federal murders which
resulted in death sentences.
She spent five years in the hardcore Gang Division
prosecuting gang murders. Has worked for the past ten years in
the Major Crime Division handling high profile and complex
cases. She also trained prosecutors and police officers across
the State on gang homicide and death penalty law and is author
of the California Gang Crimes Manual.
June Rodgers is a resident of Millville, New Jersey. She is
a mother of four and a grandmother of 14. For the past ten
years she has been a direct support professional for mentally
and physically disabled. She is also the New Jersey Chair of
The Victims' Rights Reform Council, a non-profit organization.
She has advocated against bail reform throughout the United
States in honor of her son, Christian Rodgers. We offer to her
our deepest concern and also the recognition that this
Congress' House passed the Victims of Crimes Act that I was a
lead sponsor on just last week.
We thank her for her presence here today.
Reuben Cahn is a partner in Keller/Anderle LLP where he
serves as counsel to a number of individuals and corporate
clients. He has tried over 100 cases to jury verdict and has
argued twice before the Supreme Court.
Previously, he served as a public defender, first in the
State of Florida, and then in the federal courts. Prior to his
current position he was chief assistant federal public defender
of the Southern District of Florida, then the executive
director of Federal Defendants of San Diego.
Please note that each of your written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety. Accordingly, I ask
that you summarize your testimony in five minutes.
There is a timer in the WebEx view that should be visible
on your screen.
Let me as well indicate that you are doing a public service
for your nation. Congress cannot function without these
hearings and witnesses which are personal, lifetime experiences
that help us contribute to the justice system of this nation.
Again, we thank you for appearing before this important
committee, and this important larger committee, the House
Judiciary Committee.
Mr. Scheck, welcome. You may begin.
Mr. Cicilline. Barry, you're on mute.

STATEMENT OF BARRY SCHECK

Mr. Scheck. Can I get the time back?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes. Good morning.
Mr. Scheck. Okay, thank you.
Thank you, Chairwoman Lee and Ranking Member Biggs for the
invitation to come and talk about pretrial reform to promote
accurate and fair outcomes in our criminal legal system. My
colleagues at the Innocence Project, as well as innocence
organizations nationwide, examine cases where the innocent are
convicted and the guilty escape apprehension.
Each time that happens it is a tragedy for the wrongly
convicted, the persons harmed by the crime, and the families of
all involved.
Since 1989, the National Registry of Exonerations reports
there have been 2,755 wrongful convictions, including 375 cases
where exonerations resulted from post-conviction DNA testing. A
recent study by the Registry on Official Misconduct reveals
extraordinary findings:

Concealing exculpatory evidence occurred in 44
percent of exonerations;
Black exonerees in general were more likely than
White exonerees to have been victims of misconduct, but
disparities were greater in murder cases, cases
involving death sentences, and drug cases;
Police officers committed misconduct in 35 percent of
cases; prosecutors in 30 percent. However, in federal
exonerations, prosecutors committed misconduct more
than twice as often as police;
False confessions were involved in 12 percent of
exonerations; and
Twenty percent, one in five cases, involved wrongful
convictions where an innocent person pled guilty.

The root cause of these wrongful convictions lies in some
aspect of the pretrial process, which is why reform is so
urgently needed.
Congress should implement reforms in five areas, including,
one, discovery reform. You recently legislated so that federal
district courts are supposed to issue Brady orders that remind
prosecutors of their obligation to disclose exculpatory
evidence.
A more systemic reform would be open-file discovery where
data is accessible online and disputes can be resolved as to
what was disclosed and when, and the defense has an opportunity
to actually look at the files.
We know such an open-file system can be implemented and
successful because Texas has done it. It is the Michael Morton
Act. Innocence Project client Michael Morton was wrongly
convicted of killing his wife. The prosecutor in that case, who
became a judge, hid exculpatory evidence. This case had
national publicity, and it really shook the legal community in
Texas.
I must tell you that prosecutors, defense lawyers,
Democrats, and Republicans came together to pass the Michael
Morton Act. This is an open-file discovery system where
everything is disclosed online, people can get to look at the
files.
Probably the most important provision in retrospect on this
is pre-pleading discovery. At the time of a guilty plea all
parties say here is everything that has been disclosed, the
prosecutor acknowledges his or her obligation to have disclosed
all exculpatory information, and then the plea happens.
This would go a long way to eliminate that horrifying
number of one in five people pleading guilty to crimes that
they didn't commit.
False confessions. False confessions are counterintuitive,
as most people believe no one would confess to a crime if they
were in fact guilty--unless they were in fact guilty. Yet,
three of ten people proven innocent by post-conviction DNA
testing actually confessed to crimes they did not commit.
A false confession frequently creates tunnel vision for
investigators where they will ignore reliable evidence that
could have led him to actually apprehend the person who was
guilty.
Three things Congress can do that would really help:

First, codify the recordation of interrogations
policy to ensure all federal investigations are
recorded, interrogations are recorded from Miranda
forward, exactly what the chairwoman held forth here. I
was so glad to hear Ranking Member Biggs acknowledge
that this is really important.
Number two, you should add reliability as a factor in
terms of courts reviewing the admission of confessions.
Number three, law enforcement should not engage in
explicit lies and deception during interrogations. That
leads to false confessions. Legislation banning
deception during interrogations has been introduced now
in New York, Oregon, and Illinois. Congress should look
at those bills and follow suit.

The trial penalty which leads to innocents pleading guilty,
along with the problems of cash bail, I urge Congress to pursue
legislation in this area having to do as well with mandatory
minimums.
Improving access to forensic science by funding forensic
science laboratories that are independent and allowing the
defense access to real expertise. The Innocence Project client
George Rodriguez was convicted based on unreliable serology
from the Houston Police Department Crime Lab. Subsequent to
that, the largest audit of a crime lab in the history of
America was conducted.
At the end of that, what Harris County decided to do is
not--they removed the forensic science laboratory from control
by the Police Department, set up an independent governmental
entity, the Houston Forensic Science Center. It has an
independent board appointed by the mayor, and a technical
advisory board of scientists.
It is the best crime lab, forensic science lab in the
United States. People come from abroad to see it. It is
transparent. It engages in blind proficiency testing. It is
very efficient. It is the model that should be followed by
Congress, who should be funding such equities. It is exactly
what the National Academy of Sciences called for 12 years ago
in its report on strengthening forensic science.
The last thing--I know others will talk about it--I
strongly believe is focus on holistic representation.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Scheck follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you for your testimony, Mr. Scheck.
Thank you.
Thank you so very much. The gentleman's time has expired.
I will now recognize Mr. Graves for five minutes.
Mr. Graves, if you would unmute and begin your testimony.

STATEMENT OF ANTHONY GRAVES

Mr. Graves. Thank you, Congresswoman. Thank you,
Congressman Biggs. I am excited to be here.
August of 1992, one week shy of my 27th birthday, I woke up
to a knock on my mother's apartment door. It was the neighbor
coming to tell me that the police were looking for me. Why?
I decided to go outside and look for the police. An officer
pulled up in a patrol car. I stopped to wait on him to approach
me. I didn't know that this encounter with the officer would
change my life forever. I had no idea I was about to spend the
next 18 years behind bars, including 12 on Texas' death row,
totally innocent.
I cooperated with law enforcement 110 percent, so sure was
I that the whole thing was some crazy mistake. They told me
that another man had named me as his accomplice. That is it: He
said my name. There was no other evidence to support his claim.
I had four alibis. I was home with my then-girlfriend that
night long before the murders. There was no physical evidence
to connect me to it, fingerprints, footprints, blood on my
clothes, or traces of embers, no skin cells or hair follicles
from the victims, no eyewitnesses, except the man who said my
name. He had burns on his body when he showed up to the
victim's funeral.
I witnessed the nearly unchecked power of the District
Attorney's Office and how one individual can have so much
impact in our lives. I witnessed how law enforcement can get
tunnel vision once they have a murder suspect in custody. I
witnessed the role of the media in shaping opinions around
cases before trial. I also witnessed how judges give wide
leeway to prosecutors instead of heeding the actual facts or
some notion of justice for all.
All these things eventually led to my wrongful conviction.
Our criminal justice system is deeply biased and careless.
Over the next 12 years I witnessed over 400 men being
murdered at the hands of the state. I knew that I was innocent
and, therefore, I remained hopeful.
I was convicted after a sham of a trial replete with
mistakes, bias, and tunnel-vision. Whatever was said by law
enforcement was gospel. Lack of facts to support their
conclusions were tolerated. Exculpatory evidence was hidden
from me and my lawyers. I was expendable.
After my trial, I was sentenced to die and sent to death
row. My execution day was set twice. I remember the first time
I was told the State had set an execution date. I was escorted
to the major's office in handcuffs. He sat me down and told me
that the State had set an execution date.
My conviction was overturned after a wonderful journalist
worked hard to uncover all the errors in my case and the bias
that accompanied it. I hope that this Committee will find a way
to address the issues that are plaguing our criminal justice
system and fix it to make it better for us all, because every
person matters. Every effort makes a difference. Believe me. I
know.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Graves follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Graves, thank you so very much for
that contributing testimony. Thank you is not an appropriate
word for what you went through, but for you to be able to share
that with us who are fact finders, thank you for being here
this morning.
Ms. Dharia, you are recognized for five minutes. Please let
me know if I am pronouncing your name correctly.
Ms. Dharia. Thank you so much. It is Premal Dharia.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much. You are recognized
for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF PREMAL DHARIA

Ms. Dharia. Thank you for holding this hearing and for the
opportunity to testify. I have spent my entire career working
within and around the criminal legal system, and I am grateful
for this opportunity to discuss important measures that
Congress could undertake to address our country's addiction to
incarceration and punishment, and the crisis of mass
incarceration that is devastating our communities.
The United States leads the world in the rate at which it
incarcerates its people. We have 4 percent of the global
population, but 20 percent of the global prison population.
With nearly two million people in prison on any given day, the
United States incarcerates approximately the same total number
of people as the two largest countries on earth, India and
China, combined.
In 2018, more than 10.7 million people entered U.S. jails,
the equivalent of locking up every person in Portugal, Greece,
or Sweden. A larger number of people in jail on any given day
have not been convicted of any crime but are instead awaiting
trial and presumed innocent.
We cannot lose sight of the clear historical trajectory of
racism and White supremacy that plays a part. Populations of
those detained pretrial have more than doubled over 15 years,
and they are disproportionately Black and Hispanic.
This is not an accident, and it did not just happen on its
own. We make choices every day; political choices, policy
choices, and cultural choices that shape our systems. When it
comes to the criminal legal system, many of those choices have
been made in the context of a history of racial oppression, and
also in the context of political narratives that stoke fear and
ignore evidence.
Regardless of where you fall on the political spectrum, it
is, hopefully, safe to assume that there is a universal desire
to keep our communities healthy and safe, and that differences
arise when we think about how to get there. It is important to
take a step back, given those differences, to make sure we are
all using the same definition of ``public safety,'' a phrase
that has in some ways taken on a life of its own. Popular
conceptions of dangerousness, of violence, and of who commits
crimes and why are very often not based in evidence or fact.
Harm is, of course, very real, as is violence. Our communities
need to find ways to both address harm and to address the
people and the circumstances that cause it.
How we do that has to be grounded in what is real, in what
the evidence says about what actually increases harm in our
communities. We also have to recognize that our efforts to
respond to harm or prevent harm can themselves cause harm,
often to and within the very communities we are trying to
protect. It is past time we started considering the very real
human and community costs of removing people from their
families, from their jobs, and from their homes when we think
and talk of public safety.
I am encouraged that the Subcommittee is holding this
hearing because the way we treat individuals before trial
serves in many ways as a catalyst for so many other problems in
the system.
Approximately 98 percent of criminal convictions in federal
courts are produced by a guilty plea, with high rates of guilty
pleas in many states as well. Nearly every single person who is
in a prison is there because they pled guilty. They have
generally done so without adequate access to effective counsel,
without adequate discovery or information about their case,
without adequate investigation or expert consultation, and with
the specter of increased penalties and charges hanging over
their heads. Our system is not the system of adversarial trials
envisioned by its creators, it is, instead, a system of pleas,
one grounded in coercion, imbalance, and opacity.
Working to eliminate this coercion is essential to ending
our system of mass incarceration, in which people are removed
from their communities and incarcerated, subjected to onerous
conditions and surveillance, and marked with punishments they
will carry for the rest of their lives, in large part because
we choose to allow prosecutors to possess a set of tools that
they can use to extract guilty pleas.
Prosecutors can pursue pretrial detention, they can up-
charge cases, they can threaten offenses that carry mandatory
minimum sentences, they can withhold discovery material, they
can obscure police misconduct. Because they can do all of this,
not only do guilty pleas result, the transparency mechanisms
built into our criminal process, but such as suppression
hearings to examine police misconduct, evaporate.
Throughout the testimony today you will hear evidence that
the methods and policies we use are riddled with the potential
for abuse and error. They must be constantly questioned and
analyzed. We cannot sit back and assume we are doing things
right. Indeed, we are quite clear we are doing things wrong.
There are a variety of reforms that Congress could pursue
at every stage of the pretrial process that would not on their
own fix the larger crisis, but that would make inroads towards
the kind of thoughtful change we need.
These include:

Moving to cite-and-release and reducing the number of
custodial arrests;
Guaranteeing access to counsel by moving the
attachment and availability of counsel earlier in the
process to the time of arrest, and making defense
attorneys available at police stations;
Limiting the length of interrogations, requiring
reporting, eliminating police officers' ability to lie
and coerce, and ensuring the presence of counsel;
Ensuring speedy trial rights; and
Implementing discovery reform, including the adoption
of open-file discovery, earlier provisions of discovery
in Brady materials, eliminating the materiality
requirement for Brady and Giglio in the context of
pretrial disclosures, requiring disclosure prior to
plea negotiations, and eliminating the Jencks Act, or
at least requiring earlier disclosure of witness
statements, including Grand Jury material.

We need jury pool and Grand Jury pool composition reform to
include standards that ensure reflectiveness, and enfranchising
those with felony convictions to serve on juries.
Finally, indigent defense funding standardization.
Each area is described more fully in my written testimony.
Thank you again for holding this hearing and for inviting
me to present testimony.
[The statement of Ms. Dharia follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much. The gentlewoman's
time has expired. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize Ms. Frazier Camara for five minutes. You
are recognized, Ms. Frazier Camara.

STATEMENT OF APRIL FRAZIER CAMARA

Ms. Frazier Camara. First, I would like to say thank you to
Chairwoman Jackson Lee, Ranking Member Biggs, and the Members
of the Subcommittee for inviting me to testify today.
My name is April Frazier Camara, and I am Chief of Lifelong
Learning at National Legal Aid and Defender Association, and
also the co-founder and chair of the Black Public Defender
Association. Today I am going to focus my testimony on racial
inequity.
In the past year we have witnessed and awakening, a
resounding call for racial justice. As some of you may know,
the racial inequities in state-sanctioned violence against
Black people did not begin with the killing of George Floyd and
Breonna Taylor but, rather, it is a part of a long legacy of
White supremacy that started with slavery, and that currently
exists today with the incarceral system, including the criminal
legal system.
Our country is demanding some systemic changes to the
criminal legal system, and policymakers must meet the moment.
Our failure to reckon with our past and specifically confront
the legacy of slavery, Black codes, lynchings, Jim Crow,
redlining, and the war on drugs has brought us to where we are
today.
So, as Congress considers the pretrial reforms discussed
today, it is crucial to call your attention to who is being
policed, who is being criminalized, and who is being
incarcerated.
Black communities are disproportionately surveilled,
arrested, and funneled into the criminal legal system. From
arrests to incarceration, Black and Latino communities are
disproportionately impacted by the criminal legal system. They
are more likely to be arrested and, once arrested, they are
more likely to be convicted and, once convicted, more likely to
receive harsher sentences than their White counterparts.
Black women alone comprise 44 percent of the people
incarcerated in jails today. Black men are six times more
likely to be incarcerated than White men. If we do not disrupt
these systems of harm, one in every Black child born today can
expect to go to prison in his lifetime.
This is a crisis and it must end. There are two systems of
justice in America: One for those who are wealthy, who are
disproportionately White; and one for those who are low income,
who are disproportionately communities of color.
The legal theory of affording everyone equal constitutional
rights under the law does not match the reality when you walk
into courtrooms across America today. Eighty percent of people
accused of crimes in State court are represented by public
defenders. Most public defenders' offices are woefully
underfunded and under-resourced. There is no equal access to
zealous representation in America.
So, as this Committee considers the path forward for
pretrial reform, I would urge you to center your responses on
the lived experiences of directly-impacted communities of
color. When we discuss the world of public safety, very rarely
does it include the perspectives of the Black community.
Historically, public safety is defined for impacted Black
communities instead of with them, which has led to the current
reality where Black communities are being targeted rather than
protected.
We risk repeating the failures of the past if we do not
stop and intentionally center the voice of the Black community.
I will close my comments today with a call to action from
Dr. King. ``History will have'' us ``to record that the
greatest tragedy of this period of social transition was not
the strident clamor of the bad people, but'' rather ``the
appalling silence of the good people.'' As a nation, we have a
choice: Will we remain silence on issues of racism and White
supremacy, or face our painful history and present reality?
I look forward to speaking with the Committee today and
engaging you on these important issues. Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Frazier Camara follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank Ms. Frazier Camara. Thank you very
much for your testimony and thank you for being here today and
that powerful testimony.
Ms. Hanisee, you are now recognized for five minutes. Thank
you.

STATEMENT OF MICHELE HANISEE

Ms. Hanisee. Thank you. Good morning, Madam Chairperson and
Members of this committee. Thank you for inviting me to speak.
I have spent nearly 23 years as a prosecutor in the largest
local prosecutorial agency in the nation. I am proud to say it
is an extremely diverse office that has a history of hiring and
promoting women and persons of color. For the majority of that
time in the office my caseload has consisted of murders and
sexual assault. Any improvement to the criminal justice system
that decreases the possibility of wrongful conviction, while
balancing the rights of victims and witnesses, is laudable.
As a prosecutor, I have seen the impact of the justice
system not just on the accused but also on victims and
witnesses. Intimidation of victims and witnesses is, sadly, not
rare. More than one of my witnesses was murdered either before
or after their testimony. I have had witnesses whose cars were
firebombed, houses shot at, or were threatened in court as they
testified with the classic index figure stroke across the neck
gesture.
These victims and witnesses didn't volunteer to become
participants in the criminal justice system, they were drafted
against their will by the acts of the accused. So, we need a
justice system that is fair to both the accused and to victims
and witnesses.
We have learned recently in California about changes in
cash bail and what they can entail. Cash bail can
disproportionately impact the poor or, more to the point,
advantage the wealthy. Cash bail isn't necessary so long as the
accused can still be detained based on a risk assessment that
accounts for flight risk, victim safety, and public safety, and
which allows judges to make appropriate deviations to address
the particulars of individual cases.
Detention consideration can't be based simply on algorithms
but need to include the nature and particulars of the crime.
Certain crimes, due to the pathology involved, are more likely
to be repeated at great harm to the victims. Domestic violence,
child molestation, and child abuse are some examples. The abuse
can not only be repeated but can actually escalate once a
perpetrator has been publicly accused, and on many unfortunate
occasions a victim of domestic violence was murdered when the
accused was not detained pending trial.
In California, changes to pretrial detention status are
based on changes in circumstance or a triggering event like a
willful violation of the terms of release. I do want to note,
in California that people are provided counsel at the very
first court appearance.
Being found guilty at trial is a changing circumstance that
justifies a change in detention status, because prior to trial
the accused is presumed innocent. That presumption disappears
upon a finding of guilt. So, when a person is found guilty of a
serious or violent crime that is going to result in
incarceration, the presumption is that they will be put in
custody absent a significant justification for a judge to
deviate from that presumption.
Videotaped interviews of arrestees and suspects are
absolutely optimal. However, admissibility of a statement in
court should never be conditioned on the use of audio or video
recording because too many things can go wrong through no fault
of the officer involved. Exclusion of evidence should only ever
be based on the constitutional considerations enumerated by our
courts, particularly the Supreme Court of the United States.
California's discovery laws require more and earlier
disclosure than the federal system. In the absence of a
significant reason to withhold pretrial discovery, it is
provided to the defense promptly. However, promptness is
contextual and has to take into account the volume and nature
of the evidence and the necessity of processing and documenting
that evidence. In the average murder case, for example, 15 days
active justice by the New York proposed statute is not nearly
enough time.
In California, all witness statements are provided to the
defense prior to trial. As a matter of practice, many, many
months, in fact years before trial.
There are, however, valid reasons at times to delay
disclosure of evidence, such as risk of harm to victims and
witnesses, and risk of jeopardizing an ongoing investigation.
When delayed disclosure occurs, typically under the supervision
of a judge who conducts ex parte review of the evidence and can
issue appropriate orders.
Police reports often contain personal identifying
information that can be used to target victims and witnesses.
The privacy and safety concerns of victims and witnesses should
be weighed against the rights of the accused.
So, in summary, I just want to say that while pondering the
harm caused by incarceration, I implore you not to forget the
harm caused by those who commit crimes, and the rights of the
victims and witnesses to be free from threats, harassment,
intimidation, and repeated interviews and hearings that take
them away from their jobs and families. The safety and rights
of victims and witnesses must be balanced against the rights of
the accused.
Thank you so much for allowing me to testify today.
[The statement of Ms. Hanisee follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much for your testimony
and your service.
Now, I yield five minutes to Ms. Rodgers. We offer our
deepest concern and sympathy for your loss.
Ms. Rodgers, you are on for five minutes to testify.

STATEMENT OF JUNE RODGERS

Ms. Rodgers. Good morning.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Good morning.
Ms. Rodgers. I want to say good morning to everyone and all
the witnesses and everyone. I want to thank you for the
opportunity to address you today as a victim of bail reform.
I live in Millville, New Jersey, and bail reform was
implemented in my State on January 1st of 2017. My nightmare
began on April of 2017. Jules Black, a convicted felon, was
taken into custody once again for gun possession. Because of
bail reform, he was released back onto the street.
While in custody, he was given a risk assessment test which
asked him questions such as: Can you afford bail? Will you show
up for all court appearances? If you were released, do you
promise not to commit another crime?
Well, as a result, the algorithm deemed him to be of low
risk and safe for release. The presiding judge in the matter
was compelled to release him because the laws of bail reform
required him to release him by the results of the test.
Four days later, Mr. Black gunned down my son Christian
Rodgers in broad daylight. Since then, Mr. Black has
accumulated more charges in this case by using his girlfriend
to threaten the eyewitness and the lives of her children. So,
now she also lives in fear of her life.
These are the types of people who are benefitting from bail
reform. Had it not been for bail reform, it is my belief that
my son Christian would still be alive today. It is very
disturbing that the policymakers are touting the success of
cashless bail, but no one is considering the victims and their
families in all of this. I cannot express enough the pain and
the anguish that my entire family is suffering from losing such
a kind and loving person as Christian was. He was well-loved
almost by everyone who knew him.
It still pains me deeply whenever his two small sons often
ask where he is and when is he coming home. I, myself, still
have nightmares about seeing the picture of his lifeless body
laying on the ground that someone had posted on Facebook.
I was distraught when I found out that this all happened
because of bail reform. I went to my local politicians about
this issue, and one of them had the nerve to refer to Christian
as being collateral damage. This angered me to no end.
The very people who say they care about poor Black
communities are only concerned about this paid political
agenda. Politicians are telling us that cash bail is unfair to
us poor Black people, but I am here to say that not being able
to live in peace is more unfair. We are not safe to walk down
the street in the middle of the day.
As I continue my fight for the victims of bail reform, I
would like to invite the policymakers to join me in having a
further common-sense dialog about bail reform in our local
communities, not just here in our nation's capital, and to
please include the people who will be most affected by these
laws.
I thank you for inviting me to speak on this issue that
means so much to me. I look forward to answering your
questions. Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Rodgers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Rodgers, let me personally thank you
for being willing to appear before a Committee of the United
States Congress in your pain. I want you to know that your
testimony has been received. We thank you so very much for
committing yourself to be here to provide the information that
you have given us.
Thank you again.
Ms. Rodgers. Thank you so much.
Ms. Jackson Lee. It is now my pleasure to recognize Mr.
Cahn for five minutes of his testimony. Mr. Cahn, you are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF REUBEN CAMPER CAHN

Mr. Cahn. Thank you, Chair Lee, Chair Jackson Lee, Ranking
Member Biggs, and the other Members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak about these important issues
today.
Ms. Rodgers, I want to say my heart goes out to you. I
cannot even imagine the pain of losing a child in those
circumstances.
I recently returned to private practice after 30 years as a
public defender. Now, I represent not only individuals but also
corporations, wealthy corporations. I was immediately struck by
the truism that a corporation fighting for its money has far
more rights to information about the case against it than an
accused citizen fighting for his freedom or his life. I want to
try and put this in practical terms and consider what it means.
Imagine to start, Chair Lee, Members of Congress, that a
campaign manager who has violated finance laws. The prosecutors
suspect that you are involved. A Grand Jury subpoenas documents
and witnesses, your campaign manager is threatened with
charges, but offered a sweetheart deal if he testifies again
you.
The Government indicts you, offers probation if you plead
guilty, but threatens five years in prison then if you go to
trial. In your innocence, what can you do to take apart the
case against you and prove your innocence?
Well, you can't depose your accuser, or anyone else for
that matter. You can't subpoena third parties for emails or
documents that might lead to evidence that proves your
innocence. You cannot demand the prosecutors turn over all the
evidence they have against you. In many courts, even when
prosecutors possess evidence of your actual innocence, they can
withhold it unless and until you are actually in trial.
From law school on you are told that a trial is a search
for truth. If that is really to be the case, we have to fix the
system. There are a few simple fixes.
First, we need to recognize that Brady has failed. In Brady
the Supreme Court recognized that no criminal trial or
sentencing can be fair if a defendant doesn't get information
that could help the defense at trial or sentencing. The court
left it to prosecutors to turn over this evidence, and the
results are predictable.
Recent examples in New York, Judge Alison Nathan was forced
to sanction prosecutors for burying exculpatory evidence. Those
were her words.
The Ninth Circuit upheld dismissal of the Cliven Bundy
case, calling the prosecutor's repeated failures to disclose
exculpatory evidence egregious.
These are two examples. There are others.
Last fall, prompted by the disastrous Ted Stevens
prosecution, Congress passed the bipartisan Due Process
Protection Act to promote prosecutorial accountability. The
Department of Justice has resisted Congress's clear intent, and
continues to insist that a prosecutor alone should be able to
decide what information gets turned over, arguing that its
prosecutors are trained on what to disclose, to err on the side
of disclosure, and to pursue justice, not conviction.
Well, I believe that all of this is true, but I know that
it doesn't matter in the real world. That is why we still see
cases like Ted Stevens and Cliven Bundy. Prosecutors are simply
not the right people to decide what evidence the defense sees.
If the trial is really going to be a search for the truth and
not a sporting contest, both sides must have equal access to
evidence.
This means that Criminal Rule 16, the primary procedural
device for discovery, should allow discovery of any information
likely to lead to admissible evidence. Criminal defendants
should be given the same rights as civil defendants.
Second, defendants need to be able to investigate their
cases. When Congress passed the subpoena rule, Rule 17, it said
the Rule is substantially the same as its civil counterpart
which allows parties to seek documents leading to admissible
evidence. The judge made limitations to render the Rule almost
meaningless.
Again, the revision needed is simple: Criminal Rule 17
should be amended so it mirrors Civil Rule 45, as Congress
intended it to do.
Third, trial by surprise has to end. The Jencks Act allows
prosecutors to withhold witness statements until after a
witness testifies at trial. Statements need to be provided well
before trial.
Fourth, allow defendants to depose witnesses. This isn't a
radical proposal. The State where I began my practice, Florida,
allowed witness depositions, and this was way back in the
1980s. Compelling pretrial testimony is a basic power enjoyed
by every civil litigant and by prosecutors. It is absolutely
wrong that accused citizens cannot do this.
Making these simple changes will ensure that equal justice
under law becomes a reality in this country.
Thank you for the opportunity to address these issues. I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Cahn follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much for your testimony
as well, Mr. Cahn.
Let me, as I begin, indicate again how crucial the role of
each of you witnesses are in the order of justice, to provide
us with the information that we are, in fact, needing to be
able to address a myriad of issues, and particularly dealing
with the question of justice, but also the question of freedom
and the question of response to those victims, or families of
victims as well, in this criminal justice system.
Let me pause for a moment and determine whether Mr. Jordan
has joined the hearing.
Has Mr. Jordan joined? Mr. Biggs, has Mr. Jordan joined?
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, I have reached out to him. He was
on and I think he had to leave. So, I don't think he has come
back on. I am sorry. I am sorry about that. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Not at all. We wanted to extend him a
courtesy. Thank you, sir.
Please, let him know that we wanted to make sure we
extended to him a courtesy of his statement.
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, I will.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much.
We will now proceed under the five-minute Rule with
questions. I will begin by recognizing myself for five minutes.
We will then work accordingly with our Members for this
important hearing. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Scheck, according to the September 2020 report from the
National Registry of Exonerations, of the nearly 3,000
documented cases since 1989 of people exonerated of crimes they
did not commit, 44 percent involved government concealing of
exculpatory evidence. What reforms would you propose to reduce
the risk of wrongful convictions and ensure due process of
people accused of federal crimes?
Can you unmute?
Mr. Scheck. Very simple. Open file discovery on the model
of the Michael Morton Act in Texas. That is a really good
statute. It also relies on pre-plea discovery. Everybody knows
exactly what has not been disclosed, and the prosecutor's
obligation should be carefully defined, is to turn over all
information that tends to negate guilt or mitigate the offense.
Let me say I subscribe to every one of the recommendations
that Mr. Cahn put forward. They are critical if we can get them
done. Depositions, like in Florida and lots of other states,
that is crucial.
The ability to issue subpoenas. No more trial by surprise.
Everything that he put forward I subscribe to and adopt.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much.
You also mentioned the whole idea of one in five pleading
their case, and pleading a false confession. Do you have a
solution to that?
Mr. Scheck. Well, the things that lead to it I think,
number one, of course, if you don't have discovery you wind up
pleading. The cash bail situation there is no question puts
pressure on people when they see there is no way for them to
go, particularly, in misdemeanor cases.
The trial penalty is crucial. We have to look at those
mandatory minimums.
I know that lots of our friends in the Cato Foundation,
lots of different people recognize this problem. It is logical
for so many people when charged with these mandatory minimums
to plead guilty to crimes they didn't commit. So, I think that
the bail situation, the mandatory minimums, trial penalty,
those are all crucial reforms.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much.
Mr. Graves, your legal case was full of injustices up to
the very end. Step after step the prosecutor and investigators
used unreliable information to put you on trial. The prosecutor
in your case withheld exculpatory evidence from your counsel.
The injustices started at the pretrial stage of the process.
Immediately following your arrest, what were the first
unjust acts of justices that led to your imprisonment? How
should we prevent such injustices from happening to others in
the future, Mr. Graves?
Mr. Graves. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes. Thank you.
Mr. Graves. Thank you for that question.
Transparency, there was a lack of transparency at the
initial stage. When I was arrested, and didn't know why I was
being arrested, I asked the question. They wouldn't tell me.
They took me to the police station. I am cooperating 110
percent.
I am asking officers because I am sitting there, could
somebody tell me why I am here? Nobody would talk to me.
Then, finally, they came in, read me my rights. If we would
have had access to the intake video everyone would have seen
Anthony Graves knew absolutely nothing about this case. That
video never showed up until I was released.
Also, they interrogated me for over 12 hours. At one point
the White officers asked if they would just walk out of the
room and leave me with the Black officers. Right? I am, like, I
don't care. You don't have to leave because I don't have
nothing to hide.
Well, the Black officer asked me if he could record the
conversation. I told him, sure, yeah. I don't care.
We never heard that tape that we recorded. Why? Because I
was telling him that I was innocent. That never came about.
Lack of transparency is leading to wrongful convictions at
the stage, at the pretrial stage.
One thing I will say, is that when someone is in the
custody of law enforcement, I don't think law enforcement
should be able to talk to him without his attorney. Because
that guy who is innocent, all he wants to do is tell the truth.
He doesn't care about you telling him what you would be able to
use against him, because he is telling the truth, not
understanding that they are going to pick apart everything he
said and try to use it against him. Because he is bungling at
that stage.
That was me. I just wanted to tell the truth. They picked
apart what I was telling them and tried to make it seem that I
was lying.
Lack of transparency is leading to wrongful convictions.
That is what I would say.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much for that powerful
testimony.
My time has expired. I will seek another time to continue
my questioning. At this time, I want to be able to yield to Ms.
Bass. Is Ms. Bass?
Ms. Bass?
Ms. Bass. Ms. Bass is here.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Wonderful.
Ms. Bass. I would yield to you. You can take my time, and
if I need some I will come back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, thank you. Are you sure, Ms. Bass,
in relation to the five minutes? I will take a portion of it
up. Do you want to go ahead at this time?
Ms. Bass. No. You continue and I will take your last two
minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You are very kind.
Let me just continue with Ms. Camara. Ms. Bass has yielded
to me, Members, so I am not on extended time. I thank her for
her courtesy.
Prosecutorial discretion over what charges are filed and
what charges are brought in the pre-negotiation for each case
means that prosecutors hold an immense power, amount of power
in determining whose lives are defined by involvement in the
criminal legal system and who can return to normal life.
Can you just explain how an accused person's race affects
charging decisions? Ms. Frazier Camara.
Ms. Frazier Camara. Yes, Chairwoman Jackson Lee.
In the federal system, African Americans are two times more
likely to be charged with mandatory minimums compared to
Whites. In the State system we see the use of habitual offender
laws to result in a lot of racial disparity.
As a former public defender, the reality is that we see
every day in the courtroom that the charging decisions are
influenced by implicit and explicit bias.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
I am going to pause with a little bit of technical mishap
here, and ask Ms. Bass to pause on the time, and ask staff to
take note of the time remaining so that the clock can be
cleared. We have three minutes remaining.
We are going to turn to Mr. Biggs at this time.
Mr. Biggs?
Mr. Biggs. Yes, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You are not forgotten. You are recognized
for five minutes. We are paused. Thank you.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. I appreciate that, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. I appreciate the testimony of Mr.
Graves was very powerful, as well as Ms. Rodgers.
Several states, including California, Maryland, New Jersey,
and New York have modified their--
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Biggs, if you suspend. The clock needs
to be on five minutes for Mr. Biggs, please, back to five
minutes.
All right, Mr. Biggs, continue. Your clock should start at
five minutes.
Mr. Biggs. Great. Thank you.
Several states, including California, Maryland, New Jersey,
and New York have modified their bail practices to eliminate or
de-emphasize the use of monetary bail systems. Many of these
reforms have resulted in increases in property and violent
crime.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, one New Jersey
assemblyman referred to it as an ``absolute disaster,'' and
further stated that ``the public safety needs of citizens in
New Jersey have suffered far greater than could have been
imagined.''
Ms. Rodgers, your testimony was compelling. Your story was
truly moving. I am very, very sorry to hear about the loss of
your son Christian to a convicted felon who was released on
bail. I can't imagine your pain and I appreciate you being
willing to share your story today and your efforts in your
community to make policy changes.
I understand you are the New Jersey Chair for the Victims
Rights Reform Council, which is a non-profit organization. In
that role, you are a voice for crime victims, and you wish to
raise awareness. Could you please elaborate why you oppose bail
reform as implemented in the State of New Jersey and elsewhere?
Ms. Rodgers. Okay. It is because I think that when
releasing these people back onto the streets with no bail, no
supervision whatsoever, they are not considering the victims.
We have here in New Jersey about 500 Members in our
organization. A lot of their stories are pretty much the same.
The guy or the perpetrator is released with no supervision just
because the computer system says that they are not a threat.
Then they will come right back out and commit more offenses,
and a lot of them are deadly.
So, now we have people not wanting to speak up or even
report the crime because as soon as the person gets arrested
they are right back out. We have to look at these people
because they are coming right back into the same neighborhood.
We are absolutely terrified. It is not right.
Something should really be done about this. When we had the
old cash system at least we could call whoever is holding their
bond and say, hey, this guy is riding around with firearms and
shooting up our convenience stores, or whatever. Someone would
go and pick them up. It would not cost us anything.
I work very, very hard. I know that my taxes are going to
fund this cashless system with the ankle monitors and what have
you. It is a mess. You will have to excuse me because, I get a
little emotional every time I start talking about this. It is a
shame.
Then, it is like no one is listening to the victims. No one
is taking this into consideration that we are the ones that are
living this nightmare. It is just unbearable.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Ms. Rodgers, for sharing that and
explaining the situation regarding the release of the person
who murdered your son. I appreciate you, again, being here.
Ms. Hanisee, some witnesses have offered suggestions for
reforms. Of those reforms, are there some that you would
support and then are there some that would have negative
ramifications in investigation or prosecuting of defendants?
I am thinking of the open discovery that Mr. Scheck
mentioned, as well as Mr. Cahn's pretrial witness deposition
mandate. So, what do you think there, Ms. Hanisee?
Ms. Hanisee. Yeah, there are some that I agree with and
some that I don't. I want to say up front, I don't believe that
Brady has failed. Citing a handful of cases where it didn't
work is like saying seatbelts don't work because some people
wearing them died in car crashes anyway.
That said, the federal rules of discovery require far less
disclosure than California rules. We do not have a Jencks Act.
There is no specific Rule in California, and I wouldn't condone
implementing such a Rule in California. All discovery is
provided prior to trial. We don't withhold discovery pending
plea.
However, I don't think that open discovery is workable.
There is too much information that really involves a lot of
personal information about victims and witnesses that has to be
closely guarded, and internal systems like rap sheets that has
basically everything an individual would need to commit
widespread identity theft, or use the information to identify,
threaten, harass, and injure victims and witnesses.
I also really do not believe at all that victims should be
compelled to submit to depositions as in civil cases
depositions are used to harass and intimidate witnesses.
Compelling them to submit to repeated interviews against their
will is a violation of their rights and disturbs their peace of
mind, especially for child witnesses and witnesses of crimes
like sexual assault and abuse. Repeated interviews for these
victims just increase the psychological damage that they are
subject to.
This is where the rights and the needs of the victims and
witnesses really need to be balanced against misuse.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much, Mr. Biggs.
Now, I am going to yield to Ms. Bass. Are you ready, Ms.
Bass? You have three minutes remaining on the clock.
Ms. Bass. Yes, thank you. I will just ask one quick
question.
I wanted to understand the impact of this system on
juveniles, the young people that are involved in the juvenile
justice system. Any of the witnesses, please.
Ms. Frazier Camara. Representative Bass, I am happy to
answer. When we look at the juvenile justice system, we see
disproportionate minority representation in pretrial phases.
Specifically, you see 62 percent of children who are held
pretrial in juvenile adjudications are children of color.
So, similar to the adult system, despite a lot of reforms
that have taken place within the juvenile system, we still see
glaring disparities around what children are held in detention
facilities.
Ms. Bass. Yes. Given the disparities, I would certainly
like to know what kind of reform some of the other witnesses
feel should take place.
I know California is quoted a lot. Of course, I would
disagree that everything is in disarray in California or the
reforms are not working. Even before the reforms passed there
was moves to repeal them. So, and some reforms weren't even
given an opportunity to be implemented.
I do think in California what we should have done is we
could have built out the prevention side before we actually did
some of the reforms.
Anyway, maybe one of the other witnesses could explain,
especially the woman representing the D.A.s could explain what
type of reforms are needed, given the extreme disparity.
Ms. Hanisee. Well, one type of reform I would like to see
specifically to the juvenile system is just more funding, more
funding for the juvenile justice system, and more funding for
those facilities where juveniles are, unfortunately,
incarcerated. When we are talking about juveniles, sometimes we
are talking about people who are 17 years old and 6,1".
We had an unfortunate incident recently where a, I believe
it was a social worker in one of our juvenile facilities was
beaten to death by a number of the individuals being held
there. Some of them were juveniles and they have now killed
this man who was a social worker.
Ms. Bass. Excuse me. Let me reclaim my time. Yes, I am
actually aware of the case that happened in Los Angeles. The
vast many juveniles that are in the system, you can quote an
extreme case.
In California we have moved to shut down juvenile prisons,
period, and to transfer it over to Health and Human Services.
Given the science that we know now about brain development and
the responsibility of juveniles, clearly different things need
to be done instead of what is the current system.
Ms. Hanisee. Well, as I say, encourage further and more
extensive funding of the juvenile system. If you have ever been
to the Eastlake Juvenile Facility, it is terrible. It is
terrible. So, put more money into research and preventing these
individuals from entering the system, and more resources in
rehabilitating them once they are in.
Ms. Bass. I will yield back my time in a minute.
That doesn't speak to the type of reforms that need to be
done. I agree there needs to be more funding.
I yield back to you, Madam Chair. Madam Chair?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes. Thank you so very much for yielding
back, very much. You have asked a very important question.
I don't know if I can get one in in the next one minute,
but I will quickly try to do so with Mr. Camper Cahn before I
yield over.
Mr. Camper Cahn, what are the most pressing problems
involving law enforcement's use of informants in federal cases?
How can we best address them?
I basically have 53 seconds. We will come back to you, but
are you able to respond, Mr. Cahn?
Mr. Cahn. Yes. I am sorry. I need to remember to unmute.
Thank you for your question. So, I think that I should
begin by noting that no one should be particularly surprised
that informant testimony is at the heart of some of the most
egregious failures in our system. If I responded to your
question by proposing that the way to address the problem is
really to level the playing field and allow defendants to pay
for testimony and for the results of testimony we would all
think it absurd because we would all understand that it is not
the way to produce a reliable system that we can trust.
If we are going to use informants in the system, if they
are going to continue to be a part of the system, we are going
to pay people for their testimony through freedom or in other
goods, then there are two practical solutions that I could
suggest to reduce the risk of wrongful conviction and to
increase fairness.
The first of these is to mandate recording of all
interaction between informants and law enforcement from minute
one, and to turn that over to the defense. The reason is this
way juries can understand exactly what implicit promises and
assurances are given to informants, not merely the explicit
promises.
The other thing is that juries can see the small and subtle
way that informants shape their testimony to fit prosecutors'
narratives. In the cases in which--
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Cahn, my time has expired.
Mr. Cahn. Sorry to go over.
Ms. Jackson Lee. We will let you finish that at another
opportunity if we are able to take a second round. Thank you so
very much.
Let me yield now to Ms. Spartz for five minutes.
Ms. Spartz. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate this
informing conversation. I have to tell you, I agree that
alternatives as the ineffective pretrial services could be
beneficial to both the problems that are mentioned.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Are we able to hear Ms. Spartz? Ms.
Spartz?
Mr. Cicilline. I think she is frozen, Madam Chair, and
nobody can hear her.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Then, do you know, Mr. Biggs.
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, I am trying to reach out to her,
but she looks to be frozen. So, if you could go to our next,
next questioner on our side, that would be great. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right, I will do so. Do you have the
list of the next individual, Mr. Biggs? Is she back?
Mr. Biggs. I have the list. The next one would be
Representative Chabot from Ohio.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The clock will go back to five.
Mr. Chabot, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Biggs, you work with Ms. Spartz.
Mr. Biggs. I will, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chabot, you are recognized for five
minutes. Thank you, Members, for bearing with us.
Mr. Chabot? Can you unmute, Mr. Chabot? Is he present?
Mr. Cicilline. I am not sure he is still with us, Madam
Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. Mr. Biggs, do you have another
person?
Mr. Biggs. Yes, Madam Chair. I have next Mr. Tiffany.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Tiffany, you are
recognized for five minutes. Unmute.
Mr. Biggs. Is he still there?
Ms. Jackson Lee. It is on you, Mr. Biggs.
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, it looks like Mr. Massie. I am
pretty certain he was, he was there just a second ago, so let's
try that.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Massie, I am prepared to recognize you
for five minutes.
I don't see Ms. Spartz back.
Mr. Biggs, you are on again.
Mr. Biggs. Then, I will go to Mr. Owens, Madam Chair, Mr.
Owens whom I see.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Owens, can you unmute?
Mr. Owens. Yes, thank you so much. I just want to take a
couple minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Owens. Can you hear me okay? Am I coming through? Am I
coming through, okay?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes. You are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Owens. Okay. Mr. Biggs, if there is anybody who wants
to take over my last, I just want to have a couple comments I
just wanted to say here.
Earlier we were talking about the juvenile system. I think
it is very important that we recognize that this has nothing to
do with the color of a person's skin. It is policies, it is
around these young people that have put them in a position
where they have really no hope.
I am speaking from an environment which I grew up in at a
time we had 70 percent of Black men committed to their marriage
and children. We now have flipped that over upside-down based
on policies. We now have in the State of California, 2017, a
DOJ, a DOE study, 35 percent of Black boys in the State of
California in 2017 cannot pass standard reading and writing
tests.
So, what we have, you wonder why there is such a
disproportionate number of Black men, boys and men, is because
we are not giving them opportunity to work, to get instructed,
to be educated. To tie this into just the color of their skin
is not correct. We need to make sure we are tying it to the
policies that has put these Black families in the place that
they are in right now.
Also, making sure that those families are still trying to
find safety and their communities are safe. In the beginning of
the day we have bad people being released into a community of
good people, bad people will end up causing havoc and
terrorists and fear. We just cannot allow that to happen.
So, let's make sure as we go through this process of reform
that we look at the beginning, the genesis of this. It goes
back to the family unit has been turned upside-down over the
last 50 or 60 years by policies purposely put in place to make
sure that our young people do not have hope in our country, do
not believe in themselves. They are angry and they will go out,
therefore, and do things that is not going to give them the
opportunity to have the American experience, the American
dream.
Just wanted to make that real quick point because of my
experience, again, of starting a program here in Utah, Second
Chance for Youth. I am the founder. So, I have been working
with the juvenile system for the last three or four years. It
has been a dream of mine for decades. My dad and I talked about
how we can get our young people believing in our country again.
It comes down to policies, my friends. So, let's make sure we
change those policies to give our kids hope that they can
succeed and move forward.
I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman has yielded back.
I now recognize Ms. Demings for five minutes.
Ms. Demings. Good afternoon, everybody. I want to thank the
chair and the Ranking Member for this hearing, ``From Miranda
to Gideon.'' I am quite familiar with both.
I truly believe that the level of representation a person
is able to receive, or how long a person sits in jail waiting
to go before a judge, should not be determined by a person's
ability to pay. Everyone knows I spent 27 years in law
enforcement. During that time, I served in every rank,
including the rank of chief of police.
I served as a detective and as a detective sergeant. I took
my oath to the Constitution. I say that with perfect peace. I
took my oath to the Constitution very seriously. I do believe
that in any state, anyone who was treated unfairly, inhumanely,
or trapped into making a false statement deserves justice.
I am glad we are advocating on their behalf. Mr. Graves, I
cannot imagine serving 18 years on death row as an innocent
person. Hear me clearly: That is shameful.
Ms. Rodgers, my heart goes out to you and your family for
your loss.
Today, Madam Chair, I chose to advocate on behalf of
victims of crime. As we well know, victims come in all ages,
genders, cultures, and races. Too many of the victims during my
experience as law enforcement, let me make this clear, look
just like me.
It appears we seldom remember the victims, their faces,
their stories, their voices, and their rights these days. The
victims in Georgia and Colorado have a right to live, and so
many other sons and daughters who have been gunned down in a
country that we say is the greatest country in the world.
Let's remember the victims who have been raped, robbed, and
assaulted, victims of economic crimes and had their life
savings stolen from them. People who have been victims of hate
crimes--that is a familiar one these days--because of who they
are or who they love.
Today, Madam Chair, I choose to use my very limited time
advocating for the victims of crime. I will continue to use my
time, my talent, and my energy to advocate for justice, which
does include justice for the victims.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentlelady for her eloquence,
and she is well positioned on this Committee to find the kind
of balance and respect for those unjustly accused and
convicted, and as well as she so eloquently said, those who are
victims. Because isn't it interesting, those individuals seem
to fall heavily in communities of color, and particularly,
African-Americans? So, thank you for your testimony/statement
today, as a member. Thank you so very much. I appreciate it.
It is now my desire, Mr. Biggs, to call upon a member. Is
Ms. Spartz ready?
Ms. Spartz. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Biggs. Here she is. Thanks.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes, Ms. Spartz, you are recognized for 5
minutes. Thank you.
Ms. Spartz. Okay. Thank you very much.
I appreciate this hearing today. In fact, for trial
services for lower-risk crimes, low-risk offenders, it could be
very beneficial. Actually, I talked to Stephanie Ruggles. She
is Director of Pretrial Services in Hamilton County, Indiana,
in my district. They really have a gold-standard system with
involvement of stakeholders, and then, other wraparound
services, job placement, housing placement, and with safety
rates--87 percent of the people don't come back into the
criminal justice system.
It is important to have an effective mechanism. When I
discussed with her what are really some of the things that made
the system successful additional to all of the involvement of a
variety of stakeholders, she mentioned, also, very effective a
pretrial risk assessment tool which was validated with
researchers.
So, my question is for Ms. Hanisee. What other things have
you seen in the system that have been working effectively to
make sure that we have the right mechanisms/tools to
rehabilitate people that have a right framework and things that
may be a factor; make sure that we give people second chances,
but also have a proper system that addresses really harsh
crimes? So, what things could you suggest?
Ms. Hanisee. Well, I would suggest putting far more
resources and far more study into rehabilitation before
releasing individuals early, particularly violent, and serious
offenders, to make sure they are rehabilitated before you start
releasing them early. Unfortunately, the California Department
of Corrections and Rehabilitation and the Los Angeles County
Probation Department have a woefully poor rate of
rehabilitating individuals. I just don't think they put the
same resources into that. It is a government agency; they have
limited resources, as do all government agencies, including my
office.
There are groups in Los Angeles who have been successful at
very rehabilitation, including rehabilitation of violent
offenders. One, in particular, is the Anti-Recidivism Coalition
in Los Angeles, but it is a resource-intensive program. That
said, they have very low recidivism rates for their offenders.
They have what they all credible messengers who enter the
prisons and start working with individuals in prison while they
are still incarcerated. They have had very successful rates. As
I said, it is a labor- and resource-intensive process, and they
are also really strict with their people they are supervising.
They will violent someone or refer them to the court for
violation for really very minor infractions, and they are
strict. I think that the level of accountability, combined with
the credible messenger aspect, is what has made them really
successful.
Ms. Spartz. Okay. Thank you. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much, Ms. Spartz, for
your participation.
I am now delighted to yield 5 minutes to the gentlelady
from Georgia, Ms. McBath.
Ms. McBath. Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
First and foremost, I just want to say thank you. For
everyone that is here today, thank you for expertise and thank
you for sharing your stories with us as to how we are going to
be able to really promote public safety while also making sure
that our courts are seeking true justice.
I especially want to thank those of you that are here today
to share your personal stories. Mr. Graves, I am so sorry for
your incarceration, your unjust incarceration, and I am so
happy that you are free here today to be able to testify before
us.
Of course, Ms. Rodgers, I am so, so sorry for your loss,
and I can honestly say that with full empathy to my core
because I know the pain of losing a son to senseless gun
violence, and there are just absolutely no words that can bring
back your son, Christian, just as there are none that can bring
back my son, Jordan. I know that, as mothers, all we can do is
just completely speak our truth and share our stories. So, I
thank you for being here today to tell us about your son.
I think it is critical that we always continue to hear from
victims and survivors of gun violence and listen to their
needs.
Last week, we were able to pass a bipartisan bill to
support services for victims of crimes and their families. I
know how important that funding is, so that so many of our
communities and families can try to heal again. We can never
bring back a loved one, but I hope that our bipartisan bill to
fix the Victims of Crime Act funding will give meaningful
support to those who really, really need it.
Mr. Graves, I will start with you. Your testimony speaks to
the potentially enormous human toll that can come from wrongful
detentions. We know that pretrial detention can absolutely be
deadly, and unfortunately, according to the Bureau of Justice
Statistics, suicide continues to be the leading cause of death
in jails, where many people are held for pretrial detention.
Mr. Graves, during your pretrial detention, do you ever
recall if you had any access to mental health services?
Mr. Graves. Thank you so much for asking me that question.
No, I don't recall. I never had access to any mental health
treatment.
Ms. McBath. I am sorry to hear that. Yes, I am sorry.
Mr. Graves. Yes, I was in jail for two and a half years
before trial.
I just want to--bail reform is hard--I just want to address
something I heard earlier. Bail reform is hard, and my heart
goes out to Ms. Rodgers and you for losing your child. I sat in
jail for two and a half years with no bond, and I was
absolutely innocent; wasn't even in the same town that the
crime happened in; had an alibi, witnesses who knew I was home.
I was with my family. I sat in jail two and half years with no
bond. So, I understand that. Are we going to be a Nation of
laws or what? Because we are supposed to be presumed innocent
until guilty.
So, are we going to be a Nation of laws? If we are, then we
have to actually let people out that hasn't been convicted. Are
we going to massage that law, and we are going to decide based
on our emotions whether this person should stay in jail or not
because he done something to me? Our system cannot be based
around someone's personal experience, but it has to be what is
best for us and the society. I am saying, if I am innocent
until proven guilty, why am I still in jail for two and a half
years for something I didn't do?
Ms. McBath. Thank you.
Mr. Graves. So, it is very hard.
Ms. McBath. Well, thank you so much for that, Mr. Graves.
Once again, we are so, so sorry for the injustices that you
have suffered.
I like to move on. Ms. Dharia, your testimony noted that,
among those listed in the National Registry of Exonerations, 70
percent of those with a mental illness or intellectual
disability made a false confession. What can we do to enable
public defenders and mental health professionals to identify
those with mental illness and prevent false confessions?
Ms. Dharia. Thank you and thank you for the question.
I want to sort of echo condolences to those who have shared
their personal experiences as well and offer some thoughts
about how we can identify precisely the kinds of things that
you have mentioned. The vulnerabilities of people that are
impacted by the system, right, are broad. They span youth in
terms of age of people who are impacted, mental health issues,
intellectual disability, sophistication in terms of
understanding the legal system and how it works. There are a
number of pieces there in which people can be further
victimized and harmed by the process, in which we need to take
safeguards to ensure they are not.
With respect to false confessions, in particular, there are
scores of reports and studies and pieces of evidence that
support a number of reforms that can minimize the number of
false confessions. I have named some of them earlier, as have
Mr. Scheck and others. First and foremost, access to counsel,
and meaningful access to counsel. Counsel should be made
available at the time of arrest and made available at police
stations. Currently, our system allows for the invocation of
the right to counsel, but that doesn't actually mean that
counsel should--
Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Dharia, wrap up your answer.
Ms. Dharia. Okay.
Ms. Jackson Lee. If you could summarize your answer,
please?
Ms. Dharia. Sure. So, access to counsel, eliminating the
ability of police and law enforcement to lie, which is
currently fairly unfettered, and ensuring that there are time
limits on detentions as well. So, those are all measures that
could be taken immediately to address the likelihood and
prevalence of false confessions.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Ms. McBath. Thank you so much for your answers.
I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentlewoman for her important
questions as well. Thank you.
Let me now yield 5 minutes to Mr. Fitzgerald. Mr.
Fitzgerald, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Can you unmute,
please?
Mr. Fitzgerald. There we go, sorry about that, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. That is okay.
Mr. Fitzgerald. We don't have private bail bonds in
Wisconsin. We don't have it. We haven't had it since 1979, and
I think there are three other states. If I am correct, I think
Oregon is one of them. I think Kentucky. Mr. Massie might want
to talk about how they do it in Kentucky. I don't think they
are all the same. I know this is a very broad hearing we are
looking at, but there are very specific things I think that the
states are doing that could be applied. It is worth examining.
The one thing I just wanted to go back to--I think that Ms.
Hanisee had touched on this, but it might be lost, and that is
that, under federal rules on criminal procedure, the Supreme
Court precedent ensured that defendants, obviously, get a fair
trial under due process with the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments. I think what is lost sometimes is, can you walk us
through kind of why pretrial detention is really more based on
the risk of harm to the public and to the victim, and then,
flight risk as well? I mean, this isn't about the individual's
prior record or convictions. It is about a snapshot right there
in front of the bench on whether the person is a flight risk. I
am wondering if you could just address that.
Ms. Hanisee. Yes. Prior to some recent changes, bail was
based upon the crime charge, and it was presumed to be an
accurate charge. It is, in a sense, based on the person's
history, not so much criminal history, but if they have had
prior failures to appear, which are recorded on rap sheets. If
they have had a failure to appear in court, or willful failure,
that information will be in their probation reports or with
their rap sheets. That is a legitimate consideration for the
court. If they have previously been ordered to appear by a
court and willfully failed to do so, that is a significant
consideration, but, also, the crime charged, and the nature of
the crime charged. Clearly, it is a risk to the public and a
risk to the victims to allow individuals who have committed
violent offenses to be released into the public, particularly
in those crimes that target known individuals. I am talking
about domestic violence, child abuse, child molestation, rapes,
and those types of offenses where the perpetrator is fixated on
an individual.
I will also mention stalking. We have a lot of celebrities
here in California and we have some people who, unfortunately--
and probably due to some mental health issues--do stalk
celebrities here, and it can be quite frightening and
dangerous. The fact that someone suffers from mental health
issue doesn't mean that they cannot also perpetrate a violent
crime.
So, those are the kinds of offenses and the types of
circumstances that the judges should be able to evaluate and
look at in determining whether a person is appropriate for
pretrial release.
In comparison, for misdemeanor offenses and nonviolent
offenses, the detention levels are very low and minimal because
they are not an immediate risk to the public and to public
safety.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
wanted to touch on that point and appreciate the time and the
hearing this morning. I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. We thank the gentleman for his time, and
we thank the gentleman for yielding back.
It is my pleasure now to yield 5 minutes to the gentlewoman
from Pennsylvania, Ms. Scanlon. Ms. Scanlon, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you all for being here.
As we are talking about these important issues, of course,
we each bring our individual experiences to the conversation. I
am particularly concerned about how pretrial practices impact
juveniles in our criminal justice system, and particularly, how
insufficient access to counsel and manipulative investigatory
techniques can lead juvenile defendants to confess to and
accept plea bargains for crimes they didn't commit.
Before I came to Congress, I often worked at the
intersection of child advocacy and the school-to-prison
pipeline, including participating in the defense of some
children who were caught up in what became known as the ``kids-
for-cash'' scandal in Pennsylvania. For those who don't know
about it, between 2003 and 2008, hundreds of Pennsylvania teens
were sentenced to for-profit detention centers in which the
sentencing judges had a financial interest, often after they
had been pressured to waive their right to counsel or confess
to crimes that they didn't commit.
Since coming to Congress, just in the last two years, I
have seen two juvenile detention centers in my district close
after widespread abuse of the children who had been housed
there. In some of the most heartbreaking cases, it appears that
juveniles who were sent to the detention centers for allegedly
having committed misdemeanors were, then, beaten by guards, and
when they tried to fight back, they ended up charged with
aggravated assault felonies and sent to adult prison.
So, the Supreme Court has long held that juveniles lack the
maturity and mental acuity to be treated as adults in our
justice system--underdeveloped sense of responsibility; they
can be impetuous. Basically, their prefrontal cortex has not
completely developed. So, that is the angle that I am
interested in with your testimony.
Ms. Dharia, you testified about the human cost of removing
people from their homes and families. Can you speak to the
impact of the human cost on juveniles of removing them with
pretrial detention?
Ms. Dharia. Absolutely. Thank you for the question. The
human cost of removing anyone from their communities is
tremendous, and we shouldn't underestimate it in any of these
conversations. Juveniles, of course, have their lives ahead of
them. The earlier that we start exposing them to the trauma and
harm of the pretrial detention system or the carceral system at
all, the more we are setting people up to continue the cycle of
harm. It is a cycle, right? We respond to harm and trauma with
additional harm and trauma, and none of it adds up to healing
or to safety or to health.
So, acknowledging that early, when children should be in
school, when children should be supported by their communities,
and at home with their families, and learning to socially
develop--and rather than providing all of those things and
investing in that, we are exposing them to violence, to harm,
to coercion, and to trauma.
I think an important piece of this as it relates to, as you
mentioned, in particular, confessions and coercion by law
enforcement, and this is true for adults as well--that the
people at this stage of proceedings are presumed innocent, and
that the law enforcement approach currently presumes guilt,
right? A lot of these coercive tactics, a lot of these attempts
to extract confessions and to lie to get certain responses,
presume guilt, and that is not what our law demands and it is
not what law enforcement should be engaging in. So, that is an
important precursor to addressing the further harm of pretrial
detention.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you.
I would love to speak to all of you all day.
Mr. Scheck, your testimony touches on several issues that
have impacted the juvenile defendants whom I am thinking about
in these questions. Could you address how juvenile defendants
may be impacted by--we have talked a little bit about dissent,
interrogation, pressure to avoid the trial penalty, and how
holistic defense mechanisms might help them, such as through
special education, mental health supports, et cetera.
Mr. Scheck. Yes, I would be glad to. One need not say
anything more than the exonerated five in New York or Kalief
Browder, somebody that was held in on cash bail and suffered
terribly, and was there forever in terms of solitary
confinement.
The American Psychological Association has issued clear
papers about the increased risk of false confessions among
juveniles. That is why eliminating deception, in particular, by
law enforcement in terms of interrogations is extremely
important, certainly when juveniles are concerned. Of course,
the recordation, and most importantly--in some ways, people
overlook this--that there should be a requirement, a factor for
courts to consider, that the confession received, particularly
from a juvenile, is reliable. In other words, there is
corroborating evidence that shows that a juvenile's
confessions, or anyone who is confessing to a crime, with
information that only the real perpetrator and the police would
know, where they said something that led to other incriminating
information. Without that reliability requirement, which,
unfortunately, in Colorado v. Connelly, the Supreme Court has
not given us, courts cannot intelligently assess confessions to
see whether they are reliable and not false.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much for your testimony.
The gentlelady yields back.
Now, I would like to recognize Mr. Massie for 5 minutes.
Mr. Massie. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for having this
important bipartisan Committee hearing.
Ms. Dharia, you touched on speedy trials, and I would like
to relate a story for when I was county executive. Our biggest
line item in the budget next to the roads was the jails. I
noticed a pattern over there. We had overcrowding and they were
always trying to get us to build more jails. That wasn't the
problem. The problem is we had too many people awaiting trial.
There was this perverse incentive for the judges at the
State level to keep inmates in there because they would pull
them out after 16 months, and then, encourage them to plead
guilty for time served. Now, the interesting thing is the
counties paid for the time served. It went to the county
budget, and the State didn't have to pay for the incarceration.
So, in Kentucky, at least, we have got the State pushing the
burden of incarceration, the fiscal burden, onto the counties.
So, they have this incentive to get the inmates to serve time
in county jails before they come up.
This wouldn't be a problem, and unreasonable bail wouldn't
be a problem, if we actually just followed the Sixth Amendment,
I feel like. What is right now the accepted threshold for a
speedy trial in the Supreme Court or elsewhere?
Ms. Dharia. Well, as you have described, even just
describing the county and the State differential there, rules
differ by state. Our criminal justice system is a completely
piecemeal jigsaw puzzle of rules and statutes, and the
approaches to them have been different everywhere, particularly
in the pandemic when a lot of jurisdictions attempted to
address their speedy trial statutes and to expand the time that
people could be held to try to manage the pandemic. DOJ did
that for the Federal Government as well, where U.S. Attorneys
were seeking to enlarge the time that people could be held. So,
there is not clean answer to the question of how long people
are traditionally held or generally held in different places.
I do think that your question, though, touches on a bunch
of these different issues that people have been discussing
today because they all relate to each other, right? The
question of pretrial detention being part of how pleas are
coerced, and the question of whether discoveries provided
earlier in the process, so that people can make decisions and
move on--these are all interconnected and they relate to the
amount of time that people spend pretrial and to when and how
they can make informed and voluntary decisions. So, I think
they are all interrelated.
Mr. Massie. Since you mentioned discovery, that is a good
transition into my next question, which deals with facial
recognition. You sort of have this same problem when you use
canines to establish probable cause. How do you cross examine a
canine? I think you shouldn't be able to use a dog to establish
probable cause because, really, it is up to the handler to say
that the dog saw something or smelled crack instead of a
cheeseburger.
Now, I am worried that we are going to have this same
problem with facial recognition. How do you cross examine an
algorithm, and will the Brady material be available? The
algorithm identified 10 other suspects that aren't being
prosecuted. Is that made available?
So, if any of the witnesses would like to speak to that, I
would like to open that up for a brief comment.
Mr. Scheck. Yes, I can address that. You are absolutely
right in terms of facial recognitions because there is no clear
discovery of close matches. The way it comes into courts right
now is that it is viewed as a, quote, ``investigative lead,''
unquote, right? So, we don't even have to disclose it to you--
it is an investigative method.
If I could go back just one minute, because, Mr. Massie--
Mr. Massie. I will give you 30 seconds.
Mr. Scheck. You made a great point about pretrial detention
and exactly the situation you described. I don't want to leave
without calling attention to holistic representation. There is
this amazing study out of the Bronx where they compare holistic
representation to traditional defense. It found that, over a
10-year study, in terms of pretrial custodial sentences, and
custodial sentences overall, a 15 percent decrease, 1.1 million
fewer days of custodial punishment. It was a huge savings. It
is a much better way to do defense, and it really will promote
safe communities.
Mr. Massie. Thank you.
In my remaining 30 seconds, I want to point out that the
racial and economic injustice extends beyond those who are
incarcerated. Ms. Camara mentioned that African-American males
are six times more likely to be incarcerated than Caucasian
males. Well, when you go do an instant background check to
purchase a firearm, it turns out that, within races and
ethnicities, a lot of people share the similar surnames. I have
been trying to get from the DOJ and the ATF, because they
collect this data, the false-positives that occur at a higher
rate among minorities when they go to try and purchase a
firearm. There were 112,000 denials in the last year we have
data and only 12 prosecutions. Most of the denials are false,
and I am very concerned that a lot of those denials are
racially biased because of the mass incarceration of African-
American males and the fact that a lot of Latinos share
surnames among them. So, just maybe we could get that data from
the DOJ at some point.
Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Massie, your time has expired. Even
though your particular example will be challenging to some of
us who certainly want the legal purchase of a gun, but we
certainly don't want the illegal purchase--
Mr. Massie. Correct.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You are making a very good and I hope that
we will have a bipartisan opportunity to work on some of the
issues that you raise as it relates to pretrial detention and
pretrial procedures.
Mr. Massie. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much for your
questioning.
It is my pleasure now to recognize Ms. Cicilline for 5
minutes. Thank you for your presence.
Let me also acknowledge Ms. Dean as well being present at
the hearing today.
Mr. Cicilline, 5 minutes, and you are recognized. Thank
you.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you to our witnesses. It is great to see all of you,
and thanks for your testimony.
Of course, I, too, want to extend my condolences to Ms.
Rodgers for her terrible, terrible loss and to Mr. Graves for
what you experienced. Thank you both for your willingness to
share your stories.
Mr. Scheck, thank you for the great work that you do. It is
good to see you again.
It seems like the reliance on these false confessions that
are produced as a result of deception by law enforcement is a
pretty easy thing to fix by simply prohibiting that practice.
Do you agree, Mr. Scheck? I think you are on mute. I think you
are muted.
Mr. Scheck. Sorry.
I absolutely agree. I think what is fascinating now is, if
you look at experts in interrogations who deal with high-valued
detainees, one of the major companies is Wicklander-Zulawski--I
can't pronounced their name--the professional interrogators,
they don't believe in deception. They know this can produce
false confessions. It is a simple thing. The legislation is
good. They don't do it in Europe.
Mr. Cicilline. Right. I don't think it is done in any other
Western countries.
Mr. Scheck. Right.
Mr. Cicilline. I think you are right, that is an easy thing
for us fix, and I hope we will do that. I also think the
recommendations that Mr. Cahn made that you also supported are
very sensible.
It reminds me I was a public defender, and then, a criminal
defense lawyer for most of my career. I remember a colleague
telling me he was working on a case, and he has papers on the
floor, United States v. John Smith. His son said, ``What is
this?'' He said, ``That's the case.'' He said, ``The whole
country is against you?'' His dad said, ``Sort of.'' It is
really about leveling the playing field.
One of the things I am really interested in is open file
discovery that you referenced that the State of Texas does. I
think Ms. Hanisee has said, ``Oh, that is not workable.'' Would
you just speak a little bit about how well that has worked in
Texas and what it actually entails?
Mr. Scheck. I really welcome somebody to come there. It has
been unbelievable. All the prosecutors, they are my witnesses,
and Republicans, who say this has really worked. They have put
it online.
So, the case comes in and there are provisions made to make
sure that information that everybody agrees should be
redacted--because it would endanger lives or invade people's
privacy--is redacted. Then, it goes online and everybody gets
to look at it.
Because, as Mr. Cahn said, we just can't depend on
prosecutors themselves, particularly in federal cases with all
this information--no one prosecutor, or even group of them, is
going to be able to go through all that data the way that a
defense lawyer would to find out what is really relevant and
really is information that tends, many feel, to mitigate the
offense.
When you have this open file system where you can actually
see what was disclosed, when it was disclosed, no disputes, and
most importantly, you really have to look at the Texas
statute--I cited it specifically in my testimony--that at the
time of the plea, everybody is sitting there. You know exactly
what has been disclosed, the prosecutor is asserting, all
exculpatory information has been provided, and then, the plea
goes down.
Because, I must tell you, with all the innocence work we
have been doing across the country, when the Registry put out
that 20 percent of people are pleading guilty to crimes they
didn't commit--that is what the exoneration data shows and that
means something. That is why we have to have pre-pleaded
disclosure.
Mr. Cicilline. One of the other things that I know from my
own practice is, when you sit through an arraignment, you see
lots of people of color; White folks, when you go to the prison
and do your prison visit, it feels like the White folks have
all been weeded out. So, this disparity in who gets held, both
pretrial and post-conviction, is an issue, a very serious one.
I am just wondering, when you think about pretrial
detention and the impact it has on the ability of that
defendant to prepare for trial, to help locate witnesses, all
the difficulties, what kinds of reforms should we be thinking
about to ensure that people are not disadvantaged from their
ability to actually help prepare their defense because of their
economic status, their inability to post bail?
Secondly, this other question about the charging decisions
by prosecutors who can by themselves decide whether or not
someone will face the mandatory minimum or not, and then, you
run into these impossible situations in which innocent people
say, ``I want to plead guilty because I can get out to a lesser
charge, even though I didn't do it. Otherwise, I have to sit in
trial as an innocent person awaiting my trial.''
So, just in those areas, what kinds of recommendations
would you make to the committee?
Mr. Scheck. Well, personally, that the Federal Government
has to step up. We need a Marshall Plan for indigent defense.
Because it has been demonstrated--John Pfaff's book ``Locked
In''--we can show that so much more money has gone to assist
prosecutors who are benefitted in the State system because they
do have police departments to work for them, right? Nothing can
get somebody out of jail who should be out jail pretrial.
Because they can raise money for bail, if it still a cash bail
system, or they can put move forward, or they can meet
conditions for release.
A good lawyer, and a lawyer from a holistic defense system
that is rooted in the community, that is the best thing. This
study--I can't say it enough times--in the Harvard Law Review
from the Qualtrone Center, a 10-year study where they show that
holistic representation compared to traditional representation
dramatically reduced custody, particularly in the area of
pretrial release. It is far better representation. It is good
for the community. It increases community safety. It is where
you ought to put your money.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentleman for his questions,
and I thank you for raising the issue of the law enforcement
and the misrepresentation in some forms of pretrial work. I
want to make sure that everyone knows that not one single
member on this Committee ignores the impact on victims and
community/families that are impacted, but I think we can work
on those issues. Mr. Cicilline, I understand we are moving on
that legislation. As we are looking to protect our victims, we
want to make sure, as I said, that we emphasize justice. So,
thank you so very much for your questioning.
I want to check with Mr. Biggs. Mr. Biggs, do you have a
member at this time?
Mr. Biggs. It is my understanding that you have gone
through all the Republican witnesses, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Lieu, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chairwoman Jackson Lee, for holding
this important hearing.
Before I ask my questions, I want to make a statement about
the radical voter suppression law that Republicans in Georgia
enacted yesterday. Voting is one of the strongest expressions
of our voice, of our opinions, of our beliefs. When Republicans
enact voter suppression laws, they are canceling the voices of
many voters. So, if you are a Republican who supports a radical
Georgia voter suppression law, don't ever lecture anyone on
cancel culture ever again. In fact, that law is so extreme, it
criminalizes giving water to voters in line. If freedom means
anything, it means we should be able to give water to another
human being. If you are a Republican who supports the radical
Georgia voter suppression law, don't ever lecture anyone on
freedom ever again.
Now, I would like to talk about bail reform. On any given
day, hundreds of thousands of Americans are sitting in jails
not because they have been convicted of anything, but because
they can't pay the fee to leave jail. It is un-American. It has
a disproportionate effect on the poor and people of color, and
it is perverse because it ends up causing people to plead
guilty at much higher rates.
My first question goes to Mr. Scheck. Thank you, first, for
your work on Innocence Project. The people who can't pay this
fee to leave jail, it would seem like they are the same kinds
of folks that would lose their job, can't handle healthcare
expenses, have a whole cascade of rippling effects.
You had a pretty stunning statistic that showed about 20
percent of people plead guilty to crimes they did not commit.
Do you believe the cash money bail system contributes to that?
Mr. Scheck. There is no question about it, which is not to
say that there aren't things that can be done to improve the
release system to prevent some of the terrible things that we
have heard about today. The bottom line is, the cash bail
system has penalized poverty. If you are a poor person who
can't make cash bail, or you have to get out to keep your job,
it is logical that you will plead guilty. It is logical to
plead guilty to get out. It goes way, way back. ``The Process
Is the Punishment,'' Malcolm Feeley's great book about this. We
have known about this for decades. We are now becoming,
thankfully, in this era far more cognizant of the fact that
race and class has everything to do with this, and we can stop
it.
What Mr. Massie was talking about in his particular system
just illustrates it. We can't run a system where we are
inducing guilty pleas all the time to make the system work, and
the way we induce it is we keep people in jail who just can't
afford to pay bail.
There are so many good ways to change that. As I pointed
out, the holistic representation and just changing the way we
look at public safety can do so much for that.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Scheck.
I have introduced the Pretrial Integrity and Safety Act,
along with Chair Nadler. It provides grants to assist local
jurisdictions to move away from the money bail system into a
better system, such as, for example, the system that Kentucky
has or Washington, DC, and so on.
So, I have a question for Mr. Cahn. First, thank you for
your service as public defender. Do you believe that freedom
and liberty should ever be linked to how much money you have in
a bank account, so that you can pay a fee to leave jail?
Mr. Cahn. Well, thank you for that question. I think the
answer is certainly not. I think that it is important to
understand that not only is this devastating to the people who
are kept in jail and have no opportunity to return to their
lives, and how destructive that is, how they lose their jobs,
they lose their apartments, they lose their cars, and can never
reclaim their lives, even if they are innocent. It is also
devastating to the communities in which they live, and it can
be devastating in other ways.
When a cash system is in place, it is not only that the
innocent get out; it is that, oftentimes, people who are truly
dangerous, simply because they have the money, sometimes from
criminal enterprises, to pay a bail bond with a corporate bail
bondsman can be free, can be out on the street, rather than
having some real look at whether or not people need to be
detained.
I would like to point to one other aspect of the way in
which money affects people. It affects their inability to
contest their cases. We talk about innocent people pleading
guilty. I think one of the reasons that we haven't touched upon
is the sense of hopelessness that a defendant in prison,
pretrial detention, feels when they realize that their lawyer
is so overworked and underfunded that there is no possibility
of that lawyer investigating and contesting their case.
That is why Congress should act, not only to encourage
adequate funding for State defendant systems, but also should
look at an independent and adequately funded federal defender
system. The Cardone Committee of the Judicial Conference issued
a report calling for such a system in the federal system, and
Congress needs to look at that and address that and move
forward with it. That is another way to prevent innocent people
from pleading guilty in this system.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman's time has expired.
Let me now yield to Mr. Biggs?
Mr. Biggs. Yes, Madam Chair?
Ms. Jackson Lee. I have a member who is requesting 2
minutes, not myself. The two of us will conclude. I don't know
if you have another member here. Without objection, I am
prepared to yield to her, but I want to be fair and don't know
if you have another individual that, likewise, would use 2
minutes.
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, I still have a couple of Members
on. I will check with them. Feel free to go ahead and give
those two additional minutes, and I will ask my Members.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much. That excludes you.
I understand you have some information you want to share.
Mr. Biggs. Yes, thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Now, I am happy to yield to Ms. Scanlon for 2 minutes.
As I do that, I thank Mr. Lieu for his testimony. I just
want to make sure--Mr. Correa?
Ms. Scanlon, you are recognized for 2 minutes.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you. There was just one more issue I
wanted to speak to.
We talked a little bit about the fact that juveniles are at
this disadvantage, given their development, et cetera, during
pretrial. So, they are more likely to plead guilty. They are
more likely to make a false confession in many circumstances.
Then, when they are incarcerated, they are more likely to be
abused, statistically, than adults, and less likely to be able
to navigate the jurisdictional hurdles to being able to get
relief.
So, one of the things that I have been working on is a bill
called the Justice for Juveniles Act, for which we had
bipartisan sponsorship, that would exempt juveniles from the
administrative revenues portion of the Prison Reform Litigation
Act.
So, Ms. Camara, could you speak to how that might benefit
juveniles going forward?
Ms. Camara. Absolutely. I think you raise a very important
question about the susceptibility of children, because that is
who they are--they are children--to abuse when they are in
juvenile detention facilities. I would point to D.C. Public
Defender Service as a national model where you actually have
public defenders embedded within juvenile detention facilities.
PDS has an office where children can reach out confidentially
to raise issues concerning confinement, but also advocate for
the issues that arise concerning their release, whether or not
they are properly programming and receiving credit for
rehabilitation, which ultimately impacts when they are able to
return home to the community. So, I would definitely point to
the D.C. Public Defender Service Juvenile Reentry Program as a
national model that should exist in every state.
Children's rights must be protected, and we have to invest
in making sure that they are not abused when they are in those
detention facilities.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you for that, and I appreciate that, as
we move forward and try to find better models.
Thank you, and I yield back. Thank you for everyone's
courtesies.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, thank you, Congressman Scanlon, and
I want you to know this Committee is particularly interested in
juvenile justice. We thank you for that initiative, and we will
be turning our attention to juveniles in the justice system. I
think all of this will be more than appropriate. So, we thank
you for your line of questioning and for your leadership.
Your time is expired.
Let me now yield to Mr. Biggs. Mr. Biggs, is there anyone
that is requesting a moment? Mr. Biggs?
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, thank you. Of our Members who are
still on, so far as I can see, no one has requested additional
time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. Mr. Biggs, I am going to yield
to you for 5 minutes. I need to take a clarifying 5 minutes,
not to be considered a second round. I want to be able to thank
our Members and the witnesses. I am going to yield to you, for
the record, we want to clarify that Ms. Bass was kind enough to
yield to me for a moment, but we left, when we finally
concluded, 3 minutes on the clock. So, I wanted to make sure
you had the time, as we conclude this hearing. I want to be
able to make time to thank all the witnesses, but I do have two
questions that I have.
So, I am going to put 5 minutes on the clock for you, Mr.
Biggs. If you have submissions to the record, or any other
matters, please, you are yielded to at this time. Thank you
very much for your participation in the hearing. Thank you.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate that.
I do want to thank all of our witnesses. It has been very
informative. This has been a very important hearing, I think. I
thank all the Members who have also participated.
So, I want to go to Ms. Rodgers, if I can, just because I
had some questions for you that I had not been able to ask
because I ran out of time, because that happens the way that
goes. I know that, Mr. Graves, I particularly thank you for
your testimony as well. Both of you, very difficult
circumstances in coming forward and testifying today. I am
very, very appreciative.
Ms. Rodgers, I wanted to know if anyone in New Jersey had
been held accountable for the clearly faulty risk assessment
that led to your son Christian's murder.
Ms. Rodgers. Not at all. As I stated before, there was a
person, a politician, that referred to my son as being
collateral damage and it is the same all over the State with
all the victims of this bail reform. All we hear is how
successful it is, but no one is considering us and the things
that we have to go through.
Then, they are talking about, oh, bail reform is a good
thing and people are getting speedy trials and less detainment,
and everything, but it has been four years since this happened
to my son and we are still waiting on a trial. So, to me, it is
a total nightmare.
The only thing that I am asking is that they go back to the
drawing board on some of these things because it really wasn't
fair the way they implemented it, anyway, because they never
informed us of the ins and outs of this thing. They just said,
``Here, we're enacting this new law, and you all are just going
to have to swallow it.'' They did not consider us in these
neighborhoods.
There are a lot of people just saying, ``Oh, well, it's not
fair to the people that are accused of these crimes.'' I am not
saying everyone with misdemeanors and first-time offenders, or
whatever, should be held without bond and go through all of
this. I am talking about the people with the bad history, the
terrible offenders, and things of that nature.
My main objective is to have our neighborhoods be safe. I
have grandchildren that can't go to our city park because of
this mess. I am sick of going to funerals of people that I know
who have lost people because of this very thing.
This is my thing: Everybody is talking about cost and
money, and this and that. How much is too much when you are
losing lives? I don't know. My thing is, we should come
together as a people to figure out this thing, because it was
done recklessly. It is not fair to us.
Mr. Biggs. Well, Ms. Rodgers, I really appreciate your
coming in and giving testimony today. I am very appreciative. I
know it has got to be difficult, but I am grateful. I am
grateful to all the witnesses, again, for being here today.
With that, Madam Chair, thank you for the additional time,
and I will yield back to you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Biggs. I just
want to make sure; did you have documents you wanted to submit
into the record?
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, I submitted the one in my opening
statement, and hopefully, we will get that to you digitally.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I, too, wanted to utilize a brief time to
ask two more quick questions, but also to incorporate my thanks
to all the Members. I will do so by acknowledging all of them
and to give some data that is extremely important.
So, let me quickly go to Mr. Scheck and build on
Congresswoman Scanlon's line of questioning. Juvenile suspects
as well as adults with mental health problems or intellectual
disabilities and how they invoke false confessions. It is an
empirical fact, too, that they often fail to comprehend and
routinely waive their Miranda rights. What measures do federal
law enforcement agents take to protect these highly vulnerable
individuals during an interrogation and ensure that they are
not coerced, tricked, or otherwise induced into a giving a
false confession? That is for you, Mr. Scheck.
Mr. Scheck. Yes, again, special care must be taken and
training when you are dealing with an intellectually disabled
person. I mean, we at the Innocence Project, they are still
dealing with the case of Pervis Payne, who is on death row in
Tennessee, which is really one of the great travesties in terms
of an intellectually disabled person who is in exactly the
position you just discussed.
Again, the best thing is recording the interrogations. It
is very important that you put into the Federal Rules of
Evidence the idea that a confession should--the issue of
reliability should be considered when you are looking at a
confession because so many intellectually disabled people, or
anybody that is in a position where they are being coerced and
they give a confession, the only thing the Supreme Court looks
at in Colorado v. Connelly is voluntariness. It only makes
sense that you should also consider the issue of reliability.
All the experts in interrogations always agree; they look to
see, is this information that only the real perpetrator or the
police would know? Did this lead us to other incriminating
evidence?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Scheck. That is the reliability test, and that should
be put into the law.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Cahn, I could not finish with you. Quickly, would you
respond to this question? Evidence shows that lying informants
and cooperators are responsible for a sizable percentage of the
wrongful convictions in this country. The reliability of
informants poses serious systemic concerns. You started to
answer, but what are the most pressing problems involving law
enforcement's use of informants in federal cases, and how can
we best address them? I am saddened that your time is short
because I have to conclude with some other comments. Mr. Cahn,
would you please try to give me a response to that, please?
Mr. Cahn. Let me try and be very brief. First, I think that
Congress needs to look seriously at the rewards that can be
offered informants and prosecutors' unilateral power to offer
those rewards.
The other suggestion I would make, practical suggestion, is
that evidence about informers needs to be turned over early, so
that the defense can investigate. It is only when there is
adequate time to investigate these informants that there is an
opportunity to learn what their true motives are, what their
true role in the crimes are, and to expose that, when
necessary, to a jury. So, I think that is an essential element
of ensuring fairness in our system.
Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much for providing that
insight. I think that is an area that needs to be assessed. Of
course, we need to make sure that we are fair to all.
Let me start out, first, with my appreciation to all of the
witnesses.
As all the witnesses have done, I want to acknowledge Ms.
Rodgers and her pain. It has not gone ignored, and this
Committee believes in justice and we are as much concerned
about those who are victims as we are concerned about those who
are victims in the justice system.
So, again, we want to express our appreciation to the
witnesses that include, of course, Mr. Scheck, Ms. Dharia, Ms.
April Frazier Camara, and Mr. Reuben Cahn. I believe that we
have called off all our witnesses. We want to make sure that we
express our appreciation for all of you for your presence here
today.
It is also important, Ms. Hanisee, of course, and Ms.
Rodgers, it is also important to make sure that the record is
clear. There was testimony or a statement that I believe should
be adjusted, or at least there should be something in the
record. Allow me to indicate the following information very
quickly that needs to be included.
This data is somewhat listed as the most recent data, but
it is 2013. Black juveniles were more than four times as likely
to be committed as White juveniles. American Indian juveniles
were more than three times as likely, and Hispanic juveniles
were 61 percent more likely. We do know that this issue of
committing juveniles, and as well not having access in the
pretrial or the preliminary stages, can be very devastating to
young people, and it falls heavily on minority youth.
Let me say to Mr. Graves, who I have had the privilege of
knowing, as I conclude, what happened to you has happened,
tragically, to many in an unfair justice system. I think what
is most explicit in your testimony is that you are open in your
responses to all those who question you, and all you wanted to
do is press your innocence. Of course, the tape that was
utilized, in your knowledge and your understanding, was never
provided to show your innocence. Your guilt seemed to rely on
someone who called your name, whether as an informant or an
alleged co-defendant. You were unjustly prosecuted. I think
that is an important point that we need to make.
So, let me, as I conclude this hearing, again, acknowledge
all the Members that participated.
I think it is appropriate to indicate that justice requires
a response to those who are victims. In most instances, that
involves those who are falsely accused and that involves those,
Ms. Rodgers, who have suffered. Our greatest sympathy to you.
I conclude in this hearing to acknowledge the killings in
Atlanta, where eight victims' lives were taken. Six of those
were Asian-Americans. It requires this Nation to bring the
perpetrator to justice; that justice be rendered to them.
As well, to acknowledge those victims in Colorado, which
included a law enforcement officer. We mourn with their
families, and, of course, justice must be brought to them. This
Committee is a Committee that believes that justice is one that
we must fight for and we must render.
So, this concludes today's hearing. We thank all of you for
your participation, Members and witnesses alike. I thank you
for the commitment that you have made to present your facts and
your testimony to the United States Congress. You are truly
distinguished, and we thank you for your attendance and
participation.
Without objection, all Members will have five legislative
days to submit additional written questions for the witnesses
or additional materials for the record.
Ms. Jackson Lee. With that, I would call this hearing is
now adjourned. Thank you all so very, very much.
[Whereupon, at 1:42 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
