- THE RISE IN VIOLENCE AGAINST MINORITY INSTITUTIONS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE RISE IN VIOLENCE
AGAINST MINORITY INSTITUTIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM,
AND HOMELAND SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-56

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-066                  WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chair
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania, Vice-Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Ranking Member
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,      DARRELL ISSA, California
Georgia                          KEN BUCK, Colorado
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAREN BASS, California               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island     TOM McCLINTOCK, California
ERIC SWALWELL, California            W. GREG STEUBE, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          CHIP ROY, Texas
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
GREG STANTON, Arizona
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MONDAIRE JONES, New York
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CORI BUSH, Missouri

AMY RUTKIN, Majority Staff Director and Chief of Staff
CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM, AND HOMELAND SECURITY

SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas, Chair
CORI BUSH, Missouri, Vice-Chair

KAREN BASS, California               ANDY BIGGS, Arizona, Ranking
VAL DEMINGS, Florida                     Member
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania         LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island        TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
TED LIEU, California                 THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
LOU CORREA, California               VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               BURGESS OWENS, Utah

KEENAN KELLER, Chief Counsel
JASON CERVENAK, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

Thursday, February 17, 2022

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Chair of the Subcommittee on
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security from the State of Texas     2
The Honorable Burgess Owens, a Member of the Subcommittee on
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security from the State of Utah.    25
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of New York...........................    32
The Honorable Andy Biggs, Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security from the State of
Arizona........................................................    45

WITNESSES

Dr. Seth G. Jones, Senior Vice President, Harold Brown Chair and
Director of the International Security Program and
Transnational Threats Project, Center for Strategic and
International Studies
Oral Testimony.................................................    49
Prepared Statement.............................................    51
Dr. David K. Wilson, President, Morgan State University
Oral Testimony.................................................    56
Prepared Statement.............................................    58
Supplemental Material..........................................    74
Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker, Colleyville, Texas
Oral Testimony.................................................    79
Prepared Statement.............................................    82
Dr. Demetrick Pennie, Retired Police Sergeant, Dallas Police
Department
Oral Testimony.................................................    88
Prepared Statement.............................................    90
Mr. Pardeep Singh Kaleka, Executive Director, Interfaith
Conference of Greater Milwaukee
Oral Testimony.................................................    93
Prepared Statement.............................................    95
Mr. Brandon Tatum, Former Tucson Police Officer, Founder and CEO,
The Officer Tatum
Oral Testimony.................................................    98
Prepared Statement.............................................   100
Ms. Margaret Huang, President and CEO, Southern Poverty Law
Center
Oral Testimony.................................................   105
Prepared Statement.............................................   107

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Materials submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Chair of
the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security
from the State of Texas, for the record
An article entitled, ``Op-Ed: Terrorists Won't Stop Our
HBCUs,'' AFRO American Newspapers............................     8
A joint letter enitled, ``TMCF, UNCF Released Joint Statement
on Recent Terrorist Threats to HBCUs and on FBI Breifing,''
United Negro College Fund and the Thurgood Marshall College
Fund.........................................................    11
Testimony from Farah Brelvi and Asifa Quraishi-Landes, Interim
Co-Executive Directors, Muslim Advocates.....................    13
A letter from the American Council on Education................    19
A letter from the National Action Network......................    22
An article entitled, ``Black Children's Lives Matter, Too,'' Wall
Street Journal, submitted by the Honorable Burgess Owens, a
Member of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland
Security from the State of Utah, for the record................    28
Statement from Jonathan Greenblatt, CEO and National Director,
Anti-Defamation League, submitted by the Honorable Jerrold
Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the Judiciary from the State
of New York, for the record....................................    36
Materials submitted by the Honorable Andy Biggs, Ranking Member
of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security
from the State of Arizona, for the record
An article entitled, ``Years of turmoil and complaints led the
Southern Poverty Law Center to fire its founder Morris
Dees,'' Washington Post......................................   126
An article entitled, ``Why Is The Southern Poverty Law Center
Targeting Liberals?'' New York Times.........................   135
An article entitled, ``The Reckoning of Morris Dees and the
Southern Poverty Law Center,'' The New Yorker................   139
An article entitled, ``A Demogogic Bully,'' City Journal.......   151
An article entitled, ``Has a Civil Rights Stalwart Lost Its
Way?'' Politico Magazine.....................................   162
An article entitled, ``Something strange is going on at this
civil rights institution. It must be investigated,''
Washington Post..............................................   171
An article entitled, ``Arson determined for LDS church fire in
Arizona,'' Deseret News......................................   174
An article entitled, ``Cromwell PD: Bullet holes found in local
church could be connected to Southington shooting
incidents,'' WTNH............................................   176
An article entitled, ``Jefferson County church shooting: Teen
missionary playing basketball shot multiple times, suspect at
large,'' AL.com..............................................   177
An article entitled, ``Gunman opens fire at Nevada church,
killing one,'' CNN...........................................   179
An article entitled, ``Syracuse Latter-day Saint chapel
defaced, vandalized,'' Gephardt Daily........................   181
An article entitled, ``2020 Third-Highest Year on Record for
Antisemitic Incidents in Pennsylvania.'' Philadelphia Anti-
Defamation League, submitted by the Honorable Mary Gay Scanlon,
a Member of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland
Security from the State of Pennsylvania, for the record........   198
Materials submitted by the Honorable Ted Lieu, a Member of the
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security from
the State of California, for the record
A letter to Attorney General Garland and FBI Director Wray,
dated February 4, 2022.......................................   218
A letter from the American Council on Education, dated February
14, 2022.....................................................   220
Materials submitted by the Honorable Andy Biggs, Ranking Member
of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security
from the State of Arizona, for the record
An article entitled, ``Cori Bush says she won't stop saying
`defund the police'' despite pressure from other Democrats,''
The Hill.....................................................   228
An article entitled, ``Rep. Jeffries on his fight to ban police
chokeholds & activists' push to defund law enforcement,'' CNN   230
An article entitled, ``Jerry Nadler Thinks the NYPD Budget
Should Be Cut, and He's Getting Ready if Trump Disputes
Election Results,'' West Side Rag............................   231
An article entitled, ``Candidate Profile: Mondaire Jones For
Congress,'' Patch............................................   236
Materials submitted by the Honorable David Cicilline, a Member of
the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security
from the State of Rhode Island, for the record
Statement from the Sikh Coalition..............................   246
A letter from the Sikh American Legal Defense and Education
Fund.........................................................   251
Materials submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Chair of
the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security
from the State of Texas, for the record
An article entitled, ``Text messages of Ahmaud Arbery's killers
contained racist slurs, prosecutor claims,'' Associated Press   260
A letter to Attorney General Garland and Director Wray, dated
February 3, 2022.............................................   265
An article entitled, ``Two of the men convicted of killing
Ahmaud Arbery used racist slurs in messages, a witness
testifies at their federal hate crime trial,'' CNN...........   267

ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Response to questions from Seth G. Jones, Senior Vice President,
Harold Brown Chair, and Director of the International Security
Program and Transnational Threats Project, Center for Strategic
and International Studies, submitted by the Honorable Cori
Bush, Vice-Chair of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and
Homeland Security from the State of Missouri, for the record...   276
Response to questions from Margaret Huang, President and CEO,
Southern Poverty Law Center, submitted by the Honorable Cori
Bush, Vice-Chair of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and
Homeland Security from the State of Missouri, for the record...   278
Response to questions from David K. Wilson, President, Morgan
State University, submitted by the Honorable Cori Bush, Vice-
Chair of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland
Security from the State of Missouri, for the record............   279

THE RISE IN VIOLENCE

AGAINST MINORITY INSTITUTIONS

----------

Thursday, February 17, 2022

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:06 a.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Sheila Jackson Lee [Chair of the Subcommittee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Jackson Lee, Nadler, Bass,
Demings, McBath, Dean, Scanlon, Cicilline, Lieu, Cohen, Biggs,
Tiffany, Fitzgerald, and Owens.
Staff Present: John Doty, Senior Advisor and Deputy Staff
Director; Arya Hariharan, Chief Oversight Counsel; David
Greengrass, Senior Counsel; Moh Sharma, Director of Member
Services and Outreach & Policy Advisor; Jacqui Kappler,
Oversight Counsel; Cierra Fontenot, Chief Clerk; Keenan Keller,
Chief Counsel; Mauri Gray, Deputy Chief Counsel; Natalie
Knight, Counsel; Veronica Eligan, Professional Staff Member/
Legislative Aide; Jason Cervenak, Minority Chief Counsel for
Crime; Ken David, Minority Counsel; Andrea Woodard, Minority
Professional Staff Member; Kiley Bidelman, Minority Clerk; and
Carter Robertson, Minority USSS Detailee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Good morning. The Subcommittee will come
to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the Committee at any time.
Again, good morning to everyone, and welcome to today's
hearing on The Rise in Violence Against Minority Institutions.
I would like to remind Members that we have established an
email address and distribution list to circulate exhibits,
motions, or other written materials that Members might want to
offer as part of our hearing today. If you would like to submit
materials, please send them to the email address that has been
previously distributed to your offices, and we will circulate
the materials to Members and staff as quickly as we can. Your
vital information is important to the historical record of this
Committee hearing.
I would also ask all Members to please mute your
microphones when you're not speaking to the hearing's business.
This will help prevent feedback and other technical issues. You
may unmute yourself anytime you seek recognition.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today's hearing on the rise in violence against minority
institutions will continue this Subcommittee's inquiry into
domestic terrorism and investigate the rise in attacks directed
against minority institutions and places of worship across the
Nation.
For too many years now, every ethnic group in the United
States has been touched by the increase in domestic terrorism
and hate crimes, many in the tragic form of mass shootings. I
know that if I opened up this moment to Members, each of my
Members on this Committee might cite some incident in their
community.
Just recently, in Harris County, northeast Atascocita and
northwest Cypress, anti-Semitic and racist messages were posted
at the doors of homeowners. It's everywhere.
These tragedies and their circumstances are all too
familiar to each of us: The shooting spree at a Walmart in El
Paso, Texas, which left 22 dead and 24 more injured; the
rampage of Philadelphia's Tree of Life synagogue, where 11
people were killed; the racist attack on the Sikh Temple of
Wisconsin, which left six people dead; the brutal murder of
nine worshippers in the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal
Church in Charleston, South Carolina; three Muslim college
students executed in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, supposedly
over parking but tinged with hostility to the young people's
look; and the spa shooting in Atlanta that killed eight people,
including six women of Asian descent. In each instance, the
perpetrator had previously exposed--espoused racist and xeno-
phobic beliefs against minorities.
Last year, this Subcommittee held a hearing on the rise of
domestic terrorism in America to discuss the surge of White
supremacy and right-wing extremism and to discuss Federal law
enforcement's failure to address domestic terrorism and acts of
violence driven by racially motivated hate and, of course,
animus toward religious minorities.
It appears that trends have not changed and the rise in
violence continues. Once again, we watched in horror on January
15 of this year as a gunman stormed into a synagogue, this time
in Colleyville, Texas, taking four people hostage and holding
them for almost 12 hours. Miraculously and, in part, due to
training the congregation received following other anti-Semitic
attacks, those who were held hostage managed to escape,
including under the leadership of their rabbi.
Then, as Black History Month began, more than 20
historically Black colleges and universities across the country
became the targets of repeated bomb threats, even starting as
early as January, which paralyzed these vital institutions of
higher education, disrupting learning by forcing them to
suspend classes, striking fear in the hearts of young students,
faculty and staff, parents and the communities that surround
and support them, reopening wounds of these--of those who
recall the threats, bombings, burnings, and lynchings of the
not-too-distant past. We have to take these threats to young
people and institutions of learning, minority institutions,
very, very seriously. Because what is a threat can become
devastation tomorrow. What is a threat today can become
devastation tomorrow?
The threats which began in January, including at Prairie
View A&M University, not far from my district in Prairie View,
Texas, intensified in frequency in February, and the number of
schools targeted grew in number by the day. Howard University,
which sits not far from this Nation's capital, have received at
least five bomb threats in the past 2 months, the most recent
being communicated on Monday. This is unacceptable.
At least one caller claimed to be affiliated with a violent
neo-Nazi group known to have participated in the racist Unite
the Right rally in Charlottesville in 2017, which resulted in
the barbaric death of Heather Heyer. Both the FBI and ATF are
currently investigating the bomb threats, as they should, which
limits the amount of information we can receive or discuss.
However, we do know these crimes are being investigated as
racially motivated, and we look to soon having full
investigations by both the FBI and the ATF.
Threats of violence and intimidation against minority
institutions are intended to incite fear and anxiety among
diverse communities, are deeply rooted in the fabric of the
United States history. Let it be very clear that attacks on
students and institutions are attacks on communities and
families and surrounding areas.
In the turbulent years of post-civil war reconstruction, at
least 2,000 Black people were lynched, along with thousands who
were harassed, beaten, and threatened simply because they chose
to live as they should as free men and women. When
reconstruction ended, southern States regained control of their
governments and enacted Jim Crow laws that legalize
discrimination, with many elected officials being Members of
the Ku Klux Klan, making White supremacy the law of the land.
During this same period, Chinese immigrants endured hateful
acts of racism as White workers begin to see them as
competition first for gold and later for scarce jobs. Racism
and xenophobia against Chinese Americans, Asian Americans led
to the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882, which banned Chinese
laborers from entering the United States for 10 years and
prohibited Chinese immigrants already here from becoming
citizens. By 1924, the United States had taken steps to shut
down nearly all immigration from Asia and to enact a quota
system that severely restricted immigration from eastern and
southern Europe.
In the 1920s and 1930s, the Klan maintained its anti-Black
doctrines, added to its vile rhetoric anti-Jewish, anti-
Catholic tenets, all in the name of White supremacy and racial
purity. The Klan maintained a strong foothold in politics and
continued harassing and killing African Americans with
impunity. According to the Equal Justice Initiative, more than
4,084 racially motivated lynchings occurred in 12 southern
States between 1887 and 1950.
As African Americans struggled for equal rights under the
law, the Klan murdered and threatened civil rights workers,
bombed churches, and beat and spat upon nonviolent protesters,
like Congressman John Lewis and the Freedom Riders. By 1975,
Klan Members had bombed almost 70 buildings in Georgia and
Alabama, burned 30 Black churches in Mississippi, murdered 10
people in Alabama.
Sadly, the views and acts of hate committed by White
supremacists reverberate throughout American history. We still
hear their echoes today as men holding tiki torches march and
chant, ``Jews will not replace us.''
When Members of the Proud Boys, a far-right organization
identified by the Southern Poverty Law Center as a hate group
and classified by the FBI as having White nationalist ties,
burned Black Lives Matter flags in front of two historically
Black churches in the Nation's capital, we remember the burning
crosses placed in yards as warnings.
When young Black scholars are threatened with the
possibility of bombings, we remember four little girls who died
in their church, the 16th Street Baptist Church, in Birmingham
was bombed in 1963.
These racist beliefs of the past are taking hold and,
again, threatening our places of refuge and safety, such as
HBCUs, churches, synagogues, and temples, which renewed fervor
in the new age. We cannot allow this to continue.
Extremist ideology is not abstract danger. It harms
Americans from a wide swath of backgrounds, including our
frontline law enforcement officers, and we never know when or
where it will strike again. We salute their service, especially
those who made the ultimate sacrifice in keeping our
communities safe from domestic extremist terrorism, and we're
reminded of January 6th and the brave law enforcement officers
who stood the guard to protect us, to protect the United
States, and protect the citadel of democracy.
FBI Director Christopher Wray declared that 2019 was the
deadliest year for domestic extremist violence since the
Oklahoma City bombing in 1995. In 2020, the FBI Uniform Crime
Reporting Program reported 8,263 hate crimes, including 11,129
offenses. Of these incidents, 62 percent were motivated by
racial or ethnic bias, 20 percent were motivated by bias
against persons' sexual orientation, 13 percent were motivated
by victims' religion.
However, the FBI's reporting of hate crimes is thought to
be a severe undercount since it relies on local law enforcement
to voluntarily submit data. We must do better to collect the
data and Act upon it. The Federal government possesses vast
statutory authorities and resources to prevent attacks,
prosecute those who commit them, fortify targeted institutions
from further attacks, and arm citizens with the knowledge of
how to protect themselves. Yet, we are failing the American
people who do not do more to face this threat.
The bipartisan Domestic Terrorism Prevention Act, of which
I'm a cosponsor, is one measure that would strengthen the
Federal government's effort to respond to domestic terrorism.
This legislation would authorize the Department of Homeland
Security, Department of Justice, and the FBI to analyze,
investigate, monitor, and prosecute domestic terrorism jointly,
promote information sharing among Federal law enforcement
agencies, and take preventative measures focusing Federal
resources on the most significant threats.
I look forward to hearing from our distinguished guests,
Witnesses who will speak directly to the continuing violence,
threats of violence, and trauma being inflicted upon minority
communities across this country. Fear cannot be an option in
this Nation. Healing must be. We must bring people together,
and we must pass legislation here in the United States Congress
to be signed by the President that helps to heal the Nation and
protect the Nation as well from the scourge of domestic
terrorism.
I hope that our discussion today will lead us to solutions
that address the deficiencies in our domestic terrorism
strategy to keep all Americans safe. We must get to the bottom
of racial antagonisms and as well as religious antagonisms and
others that keep us separated.
Without objection, I will submit into the record the
following documents: An op-ed by our colleague, Congressman
Kweisi Mfume entitled, ``Terrorists Won't Stop Our HBCUs.''
Representative Mfume is an alumnus of Morgan State and
represents Morgan State which sits in his district. He has also
served as Chair of the Board of Regents at the university for
over a decade and has expressed to me his deep concern for the
attacks on HBCUs and has really contributed in his request to
this hearing. We thank him very much for his leadership, and we
look forward to working with him even though he's not a Member
of this Committee.
A joint letter from the United Negro College Fund and the
Thurgood Marshall College Fund; written testimony from the
Muslim Advocates; a letter from the American Council on
Education; a letter from the National Action Network.
We'll have all of these submitted into the record, without
objection.
[The information follows:]

MS. JACKSON LEE FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. I now recognize the gentleman from Utah,
Mr. Owens, for his opening statement.
Mr. Owens, welcome, and thank you very much.
Mr. Owens. Thank you, Chair Jackson Lee, Chair Nadler, and
Ranking Member Biggs. Thanks for the opportunity for me to
share my statement this morning.
I have to apologize in advance, I have to leave early, so I
want to thank the Witnesses now for their participation.
The violent crime rate in America is rising and that is
simply not acceptable. Americans of all races, class, and
social economic conditions have been affected. Too many
Americans are scared and worried about their safety and that of
their children, neighbors, and our law enforcement officers.
So, while the increase in violence against historically
Black colleges and universities, HBCUs, are concerning, and
I'll add, the increase in violence against Asian Americans,
Jewish Americans, and police officers are also concerning, it's
puzzling to me that we as a Crime Subcommittee of the Judiciary
Committee aren't doing more to examine this frightening
increase in violent crime.
My first point is that this overall rise in crime has
killed or harmed more minorities and Black Americans than the
unfortunate bomb threats at the HBCUs. According to a new study
by the University of California, Davis, the recent rise in
violent crime across the United States has been concentrated on
low-income communities of color, which have also been--
disproportionately experienced the impact of school closures
during this pandemic.
To further illustrate this point that violence in America
harms minority communities, I request unanimous consent to
submit for the record a recent Wall Street Journal article
entitled, ``Black Children's Lives Matter, Too,'' by Sylvia
Bennett-Stone. Ms. Bennett-Stone is a Black mother whose 19-
year-old daughter, Krystal, was killed by a stray bullet in
2004 as she made the fatal decision to stop and fill her car
with gas. As Ms. Bennett-Stone says, too many communities
throughout our Nation have become like war zones.
[The information follows:]

MR. OWENS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Owens. My second point, violent crimes is harming all
classes of Americans throughout our country. In the last few
years, hate and violent crimes have increased against African
Americans, Asian Americans, and Jewish Americans. I must say at
this point, something very concerning to me is that we're
finding that a majority of Asian Americans attacks have been
done by Black Americans. So, hate is hate no matter what color
the perpetrator is, and we have to figure out a way to stop
this.
Overall, FBI data for 2020 points a 25 percent increase in
murders from the previous year and the largest increase since
the FBI began keeping these records in 1960. Quite simply,
violent crime is spiking. Here are some headlines from the last
48 hours highlighting this problem: ``New York City seeing
spike in violence against Asian Americans,'' Yahoo News; ``35-
year-old woman stabbed to death in Manhattan apartment in
seemingly random act,'' ABC News. By the way, the victim in
this crime was an Asian American. ``Seattle mayor calls for
more police with violent crime hitting highest in 14
years:`Status quo is unacceptable,' '' FOX News. Again, it is
no wonder that Americans of all races, classes, and
socioeconomic situations are concerned.
My third and final point is that the solutions to our crime
problems will require input and help from across the board,
including families, communities, and institutions of faith, but
the solutions must include respect for our law enforcement
officers. Instead of showing up for our law enforcement
officers and solving recruitment and pay problems, we have
Members of this Committee who have called for defunding the
police.
Here are a few statistics about the heroic efforts of our
police officers. According to the FBI, 59 officers have been
killed in the line of duty between January 1 and September 30
of 2021. This marks a 50 percent increase in the number of
police officers killed when compared to the same period the
previous year.
Again, according to FBI reports, records, nationally 60,105
law enforcement officers have been assaulted while performing
their duties in 2020. This represents an increase in 4,000
assaults from the previous year. Just last month, January 2022,
over 30 police officers were shot and five killed in the United
States. This is a 67 percent increase from last January.
Madam Chair, I repeat, the threats of violence at HBCUs are
concerning, but we are ignoring the bigger problem. Congress
must do its part in addressing the spike in crime. I therefore
call on the Committee to hold hearings on the following topics:
The correlation between defunding the police and the spike in
violent crimes; the problems of law enforcement leaving the
profession and violent attacks on police; and, finally, the
number of children who were killed by violence in their
neighborhoods. According to NPR, over 1,000 children were
killed or injured by gunfire in 2021.
As I've mentioned numerous times before this Committee, my
dad taught at an HBCU, Florida A&M in Tallahassee, 40 years.
I'm concerned about anything that negatively impacts our
institutions of learning. This national crime spike is
impacting every institution and families of every background.
Unfortunately, poor, Black families are disproportionately
bearing the brunt of this evil.
I thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Cohen. Madam Chair, may I ask my friend, Mr. Owens, a
question--
Mr. Owens. Yes.
Mr. Cohen. --if he would yield?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Cohen, would you--
Mr. Owens. Yes, please do, uh-huh.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. --restrain so that we can allow Mr. Nadler
to give his testimony?
Mr. Cohen. I think it's pertinent that we ask this question
at this point.
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, a point of order? A point of order?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Biggs.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you. My point of
order is this, we're in the opening statement phase of this
Committee hearing. It's not appropriate for Members to then
question other Members about their opening statements. If he
wishes to--if the gentleman from Tennessee wishes to ask a
question to Mr. Owens, I respect that. I know Mr. Owens is
willing to answer that question. It would be more appropriate--
Ms. Jackson Lee. A point of order, Mr. Biggs.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. Mr. Cohen, if you would be kind
to indulge us to allow the opening statements at this time.
Mr. Cohen. I yield, but I don't--I yield.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Cohen.
The Chair now recognizes the Chair of the Full Committee,
the gentleman from New York, Mr. Nadler, for his opening
statement.
Chair Nadler. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Domestic terrorism is at its highest level since the FBI
began tracking it in 1994. Ten years ago, a domestic terrorist
killed seven Sikh Americans in Oak Creek, Wisconsin. Five years
ago, militia members bombed the mosque in Bloomington,
Minnesota. Last summer, a gunman killed six people of Asian
descent at a spa in Atlanta. Last month, a gunman took five
Jewish Americans hostage in their Texas synagogue. Just days
ago, 17 of America's prized historically Black colleges and
universities were locked down by bomb threats.
Now, when we take stock of these horrific crimes and when
we consider the impact of this violence on the survivors, it
can be tempting to give way to despair. At base, domestic
terrorism isolates us, not just by inflicting violence in our
communities, but also by defining individuals who are members
of those communities as ``other.''
Domestic terrorists want to focus--force us into that
frame, a narrative of us and them. That narrative has cost us
so much in recent years. Recent events have also taught us a
great deal. Among other lessons, when it comes to fighting back
against this sort of violence, we are all in the fight
together.
Three of our Witnesses today are leaders in the communities
I just mentioned, and I'm grateful they are here to share their
experiences. By testifying today, you help to ensure that this
Committee and the American people understand the unseen impact
of domestic terrorism, of hatred on our families and
communities. All of our panelists can speak to the strength of
communities that have stood up to this violence, as well as to
the millions of Americans affected by domestic terrorism and
hate who are not represented here.
As we examine the particular problem of violence directed
at minority institutions, we would be wrong to assume that
these incidents can be considered in a vacuum. Similarly, when
studying these incidents, we should not be taken by the
simplistic view that a crime was committed, that a culprit was
caught, and that all is well. That is not how hate crime works.
Domestic terrorism has a corrosive impact, not just on the
survivors or the local community affected, but on minority
communities across the country. Anyone who has experienced hate
understands that acts of terror or hate-based violence are
never limited to just one community or just one group of
people. Those who have experienced such hate know it is only a
matter of time until the perpetrators move on to another
target, and the next target could be your family, your house of
worship, or your neighborhood.
Domestic terrorism invades our safe spaces and makes us
feel like strangers in our own country. For communities that
have been treated unfairly by law enforcement or by the
government, the security measures designed to keep people safe
can cause even more anxiety and the greater feeling of unease
or otherness.
Too many communities in recent years have felt the pain and
fear of hate-filled violence. For many--hate-fueled violence.
For many, it has deepened existing wounds that have developed
over centuries of bigotry and hate directed at them.
For example, Jewish Americans have experienced a
generational trauma that is the legacy of thousands of years of
anti-Semitism. Every anti-Semitic Act feels part of an ongoing
story, and many other minority communities have a similar story
to tell.
Domestic terrorism is planned and carried out by groups and
individuals who recruit by sowing distrust in our public
institutions, spreading lies to divide Americans, and casting
blame on minority groups. They target the spaces we should feel
safest: Our houses of worship, our community pillars, and our
places of learning.
Though ideology and motivation differ from person to person
and group to group, in 2020, White supremacists, extremists and
militia members, and other violent far-right extremists were
responsible for 66 percent of all domestic terror plots, and
none of us should be shy about taking the fight to the worst
perpetrators of these crimes.
The threats facing minority institutions are varied and the
solutions are complex. We must begin by understanding the
challenges we face by examining a range of proposals to how
best to respond.
Last year, I was proud to join Congressman Brad Schneider
in introducing H.R. 350, the Domestic Terror Prevention Act of
2021. This legislation would require DOJ, DHS, and the FBI to
create offices that would monitor, investigate, and prosecute
cases of domestic terrorism, focusing their resources on the
most pressing threats. I hope that this bill can be part of
this solution.
I thank the Chair for holding this very important hearing.
I look forward to hearing from our Witnesses.
Before I yield back, I ask unanimous consent that a
statement from Jonathan Greenblatt, CEO and National Director
of the Anti-Defamation League, be entered into the record.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chair, without objection, so ordered.
Thank you very much for your opening statement.
[The information follows:]

CHAIR NADLER FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chair Nadler. Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, the gentleman from
Arizona, Mr. Biggs, for his opening statement.
Mr. Biggs. I thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm grateful that
you're holding this hearing today.
I want to express--I do express my gratitude to all the
Witnesses who are here. We appreciate it. I look forward to
hearing your important testimony today.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``The Rise in Violence Against
Minority Institutions.'' I think that's an important topic. I
State clearly, unequivocally that placing bombs or making bomb
threats or any threat of violence or violent Act against a
historically Black college or university or any institution is
unacceptable. It must be investigated, it must be prosecuted,
and if warranted and after due process, an appropriate
adjudication made. These things I don't think anybody on this
Committee, or hopefully not within the sound of my voice, would
disagree with this.
It is my understanding that the bomb threats that were
recently made at historically Black colleges and universities,
several of them, are actually being investigated now, and I am
hopeful that those who were responsible will be identified and
brought to justice. I think that's--if we're going to get a
handle on this, you have to create the deterrent by bringing
those folks in, and we want to deter further activity as well
as punish those who were responsible for this.
There are other issues related to violent crime, as my
colleague from Utah has mentioned, in fact, as the Chair in her
statement brought forth a very broad, contextual statement
about violent crime in America.
Just yesterday, I and my Republican colleagues sent the
Chair a letter requesting that the Subcommittee hold a hearing
to investigate the recent reports that ICE released an illegal
alien with ties to terrorism from custody for the reason that
he might catch COVID-19. Now, that's an outrageous thing, and
this Committee should immediately hold a hearing on the matter.
I call upon the chair and I look forward to working with the
Chair to schedule that hearing as soon as possible.
Now, when I turn my attention to today's hearing, we see
crime rates, particularly violent crime rates, accelerating all
over this Nation. During the last 2 years, the United States
has seen a spike in violent crime, and some may directly
attribute it to the COVID outbreak and responses to that, and I
don't discount that, but let's consider the numbers.
In 2020, the United States tallied more than 20,000
murders, the highest total since 1995 and 4,000 more than in
2019. Preliminary FBI data for 2020 points to a 25 percent
surge in murders. This would be the largest single year
increase since the agency published numbers--began publishing
numbers in 1960.
Despite the rises in crime, some on this committee, some of
my colleagues across the aisle continue to push efforts to
defund the police. Just last week a Member of this Subcommittee
doubled down on calls to defund the police, and this follows
the Chair stating in 2020 that there should be substantial cut
to the New York City Police budget.
So, when you cut police budgets, is there any surprise that
violent crime escalates? In New York City, the NYPD's data
shows that overall crime rate rose 11.2 percent in October 2021
compared to October 2020. This jump in crime continues after
New York City defunded its police department by $1 billion, and
now they're talking about restoring some of that.
In Los Angeles County, homicides increased 23 percent from
555 in 2020 to 683 in 2021. The increased homicide rate
occurred after Los Angeles defunded its police department by
$150 million.
No one should be surprised when we have prosecutors who
refuse to prosecute crimes that violent crimes goes up. Just
one example, and there are many, but this is one example, comes
from San Francisco, where District Attorney Chesa Boudin
assumed office in January 2020. Boudin announced, soon after
his election, that he was not going to seek the death penalty
in any future cases. He would not pursue three strikes cases
and he would deemphasize the prosecution of drug cases and
property offenses.
Since January 2020, gun violence and homicide have
dramatically increased in San Francisco, where homicides have
increased 31 percent during Boudin's first year in office.
According to San Francisco Police, vehicle break-ins increased
between 100 and 750 percent, depending on the neighborhood. So-
called smash-and-grabs at retail stores have become a
commonplace.
Is anyone surprised when we release dangerous criminals
awaiting trial that violent crime goes up? As we all know in
Waukesha, Wisconsin, Darrell Brooks was released on a $1,000
bond after running over a woman with a vehicle. He was released
on bail, despite having a lengthy criminal history, including a
charge for aggravated battery, an outstanding warrant in Nevada
after skipping bail for a sex-related crime as well.
On November 21, 2021, Brooks drove his car through a
Christmas parade injuring over 50 individuals and killing six,
one of whom was an 8-year-old child. Brooks now faces eight
counts of intentional homicide, six counts of hit and run
involving death, two felonies for skipping bail, two counts of
domestic abuse charges, and 61 counts of recklessly endangering
safety for each injured person at the Christmas parade.
Some of you may be asking what all of this has to do with
today's hearing about violence against minority institutions.
The answer is simple. When you defund the police and enact
policies to embolden criminals, it often is the minority
communities that pay the most egregious price. Shooting
homicides are concentrated in underserved, impoverished
minority communities, and I argue that hits hardest on the
families that have lost loved ones as a result of violent
crime. The social institution of the family remains the most
important in society, but it is damaged by violence.
I mentioned smash-and-grab stores--at retail stores. It's
not isolated to San Francisco. It is often occurring all over
the country, many times to minority owned businesses. Couple
this with the mayhem and destruction, minority owned businesses
suffered as a result of the 2020 riots, and these small
businesses continue to struggle to get by, especially nested in
the context of the COVID pandemic.
If we really want to tackle this issue, I suggest we need
to make sure that our police are adequately funded. We need to
remove dangerous policies that allow violent criminals to hurt
innocent victims. I think that we need to continue to talk
about the nature of community, the nature of family, the nature
of individual responsibility to make sure that all of us are
seeking to have strength in our communities, peace in our
communities, that each person may actually achieve and fulfill
the full measure of the creation that God gave to each one of
them.
That's my hope. I hope we come away from this hearing with
shared perspectives. I know that we won't agree on everything,
but I hope that we find the common areas that we can agree on
and work to make this country better for every person in the
country.
With that, Madam Chair, thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Ranking Member, and just a
moment for the Chair's prerogative. Let me thank both Mr. Owens
and Mr. Biggs for their presentation. Let me be very brief to
emphasize to our Members, who I welcome to this hearing, that
this hearing should not be diminished. The crisis of attacks on
institutions out of racist attitudes and anti-religious
attitudes and anti-Semitic attitudes should not be diminished.
You may be somewhat premature in your statements as it
relates to this Committee's agenda. I would also say that there
are diverse opinions on this Committee and in this Congress.
Some in this Congress believe January 6th was a tourist event,
others do not.
We know that the President and Vice President are viewers
of strong support of law enforcement, as there are Members on
this Committee who have those views, and we respect all those
views. This is a crucial and important and lifesaving effort to
protect those who have been subjected to bomb threats across
this Nation, and I for one don't think we should stand for it
and be silent about it.
We will go forward with this hearing, but we appreciate
your comments, and you should look forward to hearings that
will be addressing those questions as well.
It is now my pleasure to introduce today's Witnesses.
Dr. Seth G. Jones is a Senior Vice President at the Center
for Strategic and International Studies. He leads a bipartisan
team of over 50 resident staff and a network of nonresident
affiliates dedicated to providing independent strategic
insights and policy solutions that shape national security.
He also teaches at Johns Hopkins University's School of
Advanced International Studies and the Center for Homeland
Defense and Security at the U.S. Naval Postgraduate School. He
also served as the representative for the commander, U.S.
Special Operations Command, to the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Special Operations.
Dr. David K. Wilson, the tenth President of Morgan State
University, has more than 30 years of experience in higher
education. Dr. Wilson holds four academic degrees: A Bachelor
of Science in political science and a master of science in
education from Tuskegee University, a master of education in
educational planning and Administration from Harvard
University, and a doctor of education in Administration
planning and social policy also from Harvard. He came to Morgan
State from the University of Wisconsin, where he served as
chancellor of both the University of Wisconsin Colleges and the
University of Wisconsin-Extension.
Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker has been the rabbi at
Congregation Beth Israel in Colleyville, Texas, since 2006. He
graduated from the University of Michigan in 1998, and attended
Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion at its
Jerusalem and Cincinnati campuses, receiving his rabbinical
ordination in 2006 and a Master of Arts in Hebrew letters in
2005. He is a past President of the Southwest Association of
Reformed Rabbis and serves on the steering Committee of Peace
Together.
Dr. Demetrick ``Tre'' Pennie holds a doctor of education in
higher education from Texas Tech University. He earned a
bachelor's in criminal justice from Midwestern State University
and a master's in counseling from Prairie View A&M University
in 2006. He served 4 years in the U.S. Army, is a 22-year
retired police sergeant with the Dallas Police Department, and
currently serves as President and executive director at the
National Fallen Officer Foundation.
Mr. Pardeep Singh Kaleka is a former police officer who is
currently the Executive Director of the Interfaith Conference
of Greater Milwaukee. He is also a clinician who works as a
deradicalization interventionist to help individuals and
families to help them exist the life of violent extremism. I
think it is to resist the life of violent extremism. He
cofounded Serve2Unite following the murder of his father during
the attack at the Sikh Temple of Wisconsin. His organization
works to build positive coalitions among communities and to
address conflict and reconciliation through a public health
lens.
Brandon Tatum served 6 years at the Tucson Police
Department and is the author of ``Beaten Black and Blue: Being
a Black Cop in an America Under Siege.'' Mr. Tatum received a
Bachelor of Art from the University of Arizona, is currently
working toward a master's from Grand Canyon University. As a
police officer, he became a SWAT operator, field training
officer, general instructor, and a public information officer.
Margaret Huang has been an advocate for human rights and
racial justice for nearly 3 years--three decades, and currently
serves as the President and CEO of the Southern Poverty Law
Center. She previously served as the Executive Director of
Amnesty International USA. She received a Master of
International Affairs from Columbia University and a Bachelor
of Science in foreign service from Georgetown University. She
currently sits on the board of directors for the Progressive
Multiplier Fund.
We are delighted to have all of you as Witnesses today. We
welcome you as distinguished Witnesses and important fact
Witnesses, and we thank you for your participation.
I will begin by swearing in our Witnesses. I ask our
Witnesses to turn on your audio so that you can be loud and
clear, and make sure that I can see your face and your raised
hand while I administer the oath.
Do you swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that the
testimony you're about to give is true and correct to the best
of your knowledge, information, and belief, so help you God?
Can I hear the Witnesses, please?
Let the record show the Witnesses answered in the
affirmative, each and every one.
Thank you so very much.
Please note that your written testimony will be entered
into the record in its entirety. Accordingly, I ask you to
summarize your testimony in 5 minutes. To help you stay within
that timeframe, there is a timing light on your screen. When
the light switches from green to yellow, you have 1 minute to
conclude your testimony. When the light turns red, it signals
that your 5 minutes have expired.
I do want to acknowledge to our Members that those who will
be giving victim testimony will be given a little time to be
able to finish, I think you should know that, out of courtesy
to the victimization that they experienced. So, thank you very
much for understanding.
It is now my time to recognize Dr. Jones, again, for 5
minutes. You may begin, Dr. Jones.

TESTIMONY OF SETH G. JONES

Mr. Jones. Thank you very much, Chair Jackson Lee, Ranking
Member Biggs, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. My
opening remarks are going to be divided into three sections.
The first outlines the contours of domestic terrorism and the
database that I'll be talking a little bit about, the second
will actually focus on those trends, and the third are some
implications for consideration for Congress.
Let me begin with the first area. What I'm going to focus
on is domestic terrorism, defined by the deliberate use or
threat of violence by non-state actors to achieve political
goals and to create a broad psychological impact. Violence and
the threat of violence are critical components of the
definition we use in our CSIS database, and this definition is
largely consistent with the official U.S. Government definition
of domestic terrorism under 18 U.S. Code 2331.
In focusing on domestic terrorism, I do want to highlight
that we're not including all aspects of hate speech or hate
crimes. Those are obviously deeply concerning, but what we're
just focusing on is violence and the threat of violence. Our
data set includes, I think, all cases, the universe of cases
that we have identified since the early 1990s.
We have worked consistently over the years with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, where I served briefly several years
ago: The Department of Homeland Security, Department of
Defense, and the National Counterterrorism Center. So, we've
shared our data and had useful back and forth.
So, let me get briefly to the second area, which is trends.
The years 2020-2021, according to our data set, had the highest
numbers of domestic terrorist attacks and plots in our data
set. In 2021, there were 73 attacks and plots in the United
States. It was slightly down from 2020.
This broad recent trend in domestic terrorist activity
began around 2014, so from 2014-2021, there have been an
average of about 31 fatalities per year. The number of
fatalities in 2021 are kind of an average number. We've seen
years with much larger numbers of fatalities, including 1995,
Oklahoma City; 2001, September 11. The numbers of fatalities
certainly are concerning.
Terrorist attacks and plots spanned 18 States, including
Washington, DC. Many of these events took place in metropolitan
areas, but these cities were dispersed across the U.S. I think
it's worth highlighting some of the targets and tactics as
well.
The types of weapons we're seeing used varied somewhat by
perpetrator. For White supremacists and like-minded attackers,
we saw a primary focus on firearms; for anarchists,
antifascists, and others, we saw a primary focus on melee
weapons, so knives and blunt instruments. So, some variation in
the types of weapons that domestic terrorists are using.
In terms of targets, what's interesting is, according to
our data, government, military, and police locations and
personnel are the most frequently targeted by domestic
terrorist attacks, regardless of perpetrator orientation. We do
see very concerning attacks against minorities and minority
institutions, not just the attack this year, but also a number
of them: The Patrick Crusius murder of 22 people focused
predominantly on immigrants at a Walmart in El Paso, Texas; in
2019, the Robert Bowers attack at the Tree of Life synagogue in
Pittsburgh in 2018. So, we have seen a very concerning focus on
a range of individuals based on their racial, ethnic,
religious, political makeup, including misogynistic attacks as
well in the U.S.
So, very briefly, on implications particularly for
Congress, I continue to believe that the U.S. Government needs
to provide much more comprehensive data on terrorist attacks,
plots, and I support the FBI and other agencies providing
annual or biannual reports to a range of committees in the U.S.
Then lastly, strongly support continuing to support State,
local, and other enforcement agencies, so they're appropriately
resourced to identify and respond to attacks ``left of boom.''
So, with that, I will conclude my opening remarks, and
obviously happy to take questions later.
[The statement of Mr. Jones follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much, Dr. Jones.
Dr. Wilson is now recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DAVID K. WILSON

Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Madam Chair Lee, Ranking
Committee Member Biggs, other Members of the Subcommittee. I'm
David K. Wilson, the 10th President of Morgan. Morgan is an
8,500-student high-research university here in Baltimore,
Maryland.
Madam Chair, the purpose of this gathering today is to
address the bomb threats made to Morgan and to more than 20
other HBCUs this year alone. I have to start by saying that as
a young Black boy growing up in rural, segregated Jim Crow
Alabama on a sharecropping plantation who was not permitted to,
of course, attend school full time until I was in the seventh
grade, I have experienced firsthand this type of trauma and
this type of racial violence, if you will. This is why I have
devoted my entire career to providing educational leadership to
campuses, to enable them to nurture the intellectual growth of
Black students and not to stifle it.
It is so unfortunate that there is so much hatred in our
Nation today being held by those who are trying to simply
prevent HBCUs from educating a disproportionate number of Black
students. Yes, the vast majority of these more than 100
institutions have been around since the mid-19th century, and
from their inception they have just simply been targets of
domestic terrorism.
I have outlined in my written testimony example after
example, dating back to the destruction of Wilberforce
University in Ohio, of LeMoyne-Owen College in Tennessee, of
Wiley College in Texas, of my own alma mater, Tuskegee
University, that saw 75 Klansmen march through the campus and
through town, if you will, because they did not want Black
physicians to be at the John A. Andrew Hospital ministering to
the needs of veterans. The list goes on and on and on. Even at
my own national treasure Morgan State University, our students
had to fight, fight just to integrate shops right across the
street from us. They too were victims of domestic terrorism for
years, but they did not give up.
Members of the Subcommittee, this is not 1865, it is not
1923, it is not 1962; this is 2022, but these domestic acts of
terror persist across HBCUs. Yes, there is much too much
ignorance, much too much misunderstanding that exists today
about these historic institutions in American higher education.
Our HBCUs are not some radical terror camps which
apparently is wrapped up in the distorted imagination of
domestic terrorists. Our campuses are not places, if you will,
where our students are taught to hate this country or to engage
in activity to destroy the fabric of our democracy.
Quite the contrary, HBCUs have always had their foundation,
if you will, as one that prepares, inspires, motivates, and
encourages our students to live out the American Dream, to
become the engineers and the elected officials--many of you
attended our institutions--to become the doctors, the lawyers,
the architects, the engineers, and the judges. That's what our
institutions have been about, and we have been about that
because we too believe very strongly in the American Dream. We
believe that we contribute the talent to make this country more
competitive internationally.
So, I just humbly ask the Nation today: Is this not the
heart of what a truly functioning, inclusive democracy should
be? Well, I believe the answer is clear to all who is willing
to see it. Our HBCUs are part and parcel of America. We are
national treasures. We deserve the utmost veneration, we
deserve the utmost respect, and we deserve the utmost
protection.
So, as I bring my remarks to a close, I would simply like
to say that HBCUs have created the Black middle class in this
country. We will always be the truth tellers. We will always be
the innovators. As we come through this bitterly polarized era
of American history, our campuses are fully prepared to be the
single group of institutions, if need be, that can ultimately
keep our democracy from an untimely and unwarranted demise.
We will not let anything cloud our focus. Our students, if
you will, deserve to feel safe and be safe. We will never,
ever, ever be deterred from what our ancestors gave their blood
for, and it was to ensure that these campuses were holding high
the ideals in the U.S. Constitution and educate students to
grow the future and, indeed, lead the world.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
[The statement of Mr. Wilson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Dr. Wilson, thank you for that powerful
testimony. Your time is expired, but your message continues to
reverberate. Thank you so very much for your testimony today.
It is my privilege to now yield 5 minutes to Rabbi Cytron-
Walker. Rabbi, you're recognized for 5 minutes, and welcome.

TESTIMONY OF RABBI CHARLIE CYTRON-WALKER

Rabbi Cytron-Walker. Chair Jackson Lee, Vice-Chair Bush,
Ranking Member Biggs, I want to thank you for the opportunity
to share my thoughts with you this morning. I'm honored to have
Chair Nadler join us this morning, and I am pleased to see
Representative Demings, who was so gracious when I testified
for the first time ever just last week before her Subcommittee.
I believe and often teach that Judaism is filled with
contradictions because life is filled with contradictions, and
today I am filled with mixed and even contradictory emotions.
On the one hand, I am truly horrified that in our society today
religious leaders must devote themselves to security training.
How to harden our facilities is both a necessary conversation
and an anathema to religious ideals of hospitality and loving
the stranger.
At the same time, I'm filled with gratitude. I'm grateful
to be here. This feeling hasn't gone away. I'm grateful to be
anywhere. I'm grateful to be anywhere because a terrorist chose
a Jewish synagogue, because he thought the Jews control the
world. He thought that he could take Jews hostage, call up an
influential rabbi, and she would snap her fingers and give him
what he wanted. He truly believed the Jews control the media,
the Jews control the government, the Jews control everything.
Tragically, this is just one aspect of anti-Semitism that
has been so harmful to the Jewish people throughout history.
Over the centuries, entire Jewish communities have been
destroyed because people believe that Jews drank the blood of
non-Jewish children. Entire Jewish communities have been
destroyed because people believe that Jews wanted to torture
communion wafers. Entire Jewish communities have been destroyed
because people believe that Jews were responsible for all the
bad things in life, that we are the root of all evil.
As absurd as it sounds, every single outrageous lie about
the Jewish people has been shared in various forms by people
from all walks of life in recent years. It's sad, it is
ridiculous, and it is maddening that I was taken a hostage
because of it. Far too many Jews have died because of it. This
anti-Semitism isn't distant history. This is a month ago. This
is now. This is years of increased harassment and attacks
against my people.
The potential of an anti-Semitic incident is what led me to
attend around half a dozen security related seminars over the
past 6 years. It's a part of why we developed a security action
plan and strengthened our relationship with local law
enforcement. It motivated me to apply for and receive a grant
from the Nonprofit Security Grant Program, for which we have
such appreciation.
The chances that something could have happened were so
small. Even so, we knew it was a possibility and we wanted to
be as prepared as possible. Thankfully, we had taken so many
constructive steps, and yet I don't know if anyone could have
ever been fully prepared.
On the morning of January 15, when the gunman arrived, it
was me and one volunteer in the building. I was running late. I
was finishing my preparations, and in the midst of trying to do
a million different things, I had a stranger come to the door.
I have, of course, thought about that moment to great deal. I
welcomed a terrorist into my congregation. I live with that
responsibility.
It's important for you to understand that this was not a
matter of me opening the door just because I value hospitality.
I do value hospitality. The Torah scroll that we read from each
week was gifted to our congregation thanks to hospitality. I
strive to live that value every day. Like so many
congregations, CBI strives to be a house of prayer for all
people, and at the same time, I also value security.
In a small congregation I was rabbi and tech support and
gatekeeper. When our Member asked if I knew the person at the
door, I was distracted, but I still did a visual inspection and
after a brief word, he appeared to be who he said he was, a guy
who spent a night outside in sub 40-degree weather. After
talking with him more, his story added up.
Of course, I was wrong. I was so wrong. I share this
because despite all the plans and funding and courses, I still
opened the door. Because of all the plans and funding and
courses and literally dozens of small things that just happened
to go right, to go our way, we were able to escape.
No one, no one should fear gathering or pray--no one should
fear gathering to pray or celebrate or mourn or connect in
their spiritual home. No one should experience such hatred and
violence. No one should experience anything remotely like what
I had to.
In 1947, back in 1947, perhaps the leading rabbi of that
time, Rabbi Stephen S. Wise told the Senate Labor Committee
that equality of opportunity for Jews can be truly secured only
in a genuinely democratic society. He continued: Accordingly,
we seek to fight every manifestation of racism, to promote the
civil and political equality of all groups and persons in
America, and to support measures designed to safeguard civil
liberties to build a better America.
We regard ethnic discrimination directed against any group
as a single and indivisible problem as one of the most urgent
problems of a democratic society. Nothing more gravely
threatens American democracy today than the fact of its
incompleteness. Democracy to be secure must be complete, and
incomplete democracy is an insecure democracy.
Members of the Committee, I would add that the converse is
equally true. An insecure democracy is an incomplete democracy,
and too many communities in our democracy today feel insecure.
Tragically, we live in a world where houses of worship need
protection, where too many of all backgrounds are victims of
hate crimes. I believe that both Democrats and Republicans want
to change that reality.
Changing our reality all at once is too much to ask. That's
why Rabbi Tarfon taught that we aren't obligated to complete
the work, but we can't neglect it. I'm not here today asking
you to complete the work, but we need your help. Please hear
the diverse group of witnesses who have come before you today.
We are all struggling. We all need practical and intelligent
solutions to help all of us feel safe and secure.
It is truly an honor for me to speak with you today. I'm so
grateful for the opportunity.
[The statement of Rabbi Cytron-Walker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Rabbi, again we embrace you, we mourn with
you, and we hear your call to action. Thank you for your
testimony today, equally powerful.
It's my pleasure now to recognize Dr. Pennie for 5 minutes.
Dr. Pennie, welcome.

STATEMENT OF DR. DEMETRICK PENNIE

Mr. Pennie. Thank you, Chair Jackson Lee, Chair Nadler, and
Ranking Member Biggs, and other distinguished Members of the
Committee for allowing me to speak.
On behalf of the National Fallen Officer Foundation, I am
honored to appear before this Committee to speak on a topic
that's so near and dear to my heart, protecting our police and
our communities. As a law enforcement advocate, I speak on
behalf of the hundreds of police families across this Nation
that have lost loved ones in the line of duty when I say enough
is enough.
According to FBI statistics in 2021, 73 police officers
were shot and killed in the line of duty, the highest number of
police officers murdered in 20 years. The FBI also noted that
the rise of anti-police sentiment has led to a rash of attacks
on police. Last year alone, there were 86 premeditated ambush-
styled attacks on police officers, in which 26 of those
officers died.
These tragedies can no longer be ignored or tolerated in
our civilized society. So, why is this happening? Well, one
reason why they're happening is because of widespread online
radicalization, the indoctrination of individuals online using
negative content to incite violence and create division.
So, because of this, not only have we had America's
citizens travel abroad to join extremist groups like ISIS, some
have even been radicalized here at home and have taken up arms
against our police and the American people. On July 7th, 2016,
the world watched in horror as a lone gunman ambushed police
officers in downtown Dallas, Texas, during a Black Lives Matter
rally.
During that attack, 12 police officers were shot, and five
of them were killed. The investigation found that the shooter
was radicalized online and was obsessed with police-involved
shootings in the Black community.
In 2017, I filed a Federal lawsuit against Facebook,
Google, and Twitter for failing to manage their platforms, and
allowing domestic extremist groups to recruit, radicalize, and
incite violence against our police. That case is known as
Pennie v. Twitter.
Although the companies admitted to knowing that their
platforms were being used for nefarious activities, the courts
were reluctant to move against the immunity protections offered
under section 230 of the 1996 Communications Decency Act, and
nothing was ever done. Five years later, the problem has
worsened, and our police officers have seemingly been caught in
the middle of corporate profitability and government
limitations.
In fact, we continue to see these platforms being used in
the same manner facilitating attacks on our law enforcement and
our government itself. During the George Floyd riots of 2020,
social media was being used not only to facilitate the rise,
but also to help radical groups organize and fundraise off that
narrative.
The riots led to more than $2 billion in property damage,
several hundred police officers being injured, and 19 citizens
being killed, among them were 77-year-old St. Louis police
captain, David Dorn, whose murder was broadcast live on
Facebook. It was reported that more than 17,000 people were
arrested during the George Floyd riots, but to this date, only
very few prosecutions have been reported.
In fact, the tide was seemingly turning in the opposite
direction as progressive D.A.'s across this country are now
prosecuting police officers for responding to those same riots.
Unfortunately, today, there appears to be more advocacy in the
court system for the criminals than there are for the victims.
Last year, 27 of our Nation's largest cities have saw a
drastic increase in homicides. I'm from one of those cities,
Houston, Texas. Since 2019, Houston has seen a 73 percent
increase in homicides. In fact, over the last year, judges in
Houston-Harris County have released 113 defendants charged with
capital murder back onto our streets, and those same offenders
have contributed to more than 150 murders while out on bond.
It's no secret that America has become unsafe on the heels
of social justice movements, bail reform initiatives, and
intentional efforts to defund our police across the country.
Their policies have not reduced crime. To the contrary, they've
augmented crime, especially in our Nation's inner-city
communities.
The solution is simple to solve the crime problem. We have
to keep our violent criminals behind bars, punish bad behavior,
and hold social media companies accountable.
[The statement of Mr. Pennie follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Witness time has expired. The Witness time
has expired.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Pennie. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. --for your testimony.
Mr. Kaleka, you're recognized now for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PARDEEP SINGH KALEKA

Mr. Kaleka. Thank you so much, Chair Nadler, Chair Jackson
Lee, Ranking Member Biggs, and distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee. My name is Pardeep Singh Kaleka. I'm a former
police officer, educator, and trauma clinician. I currently
serve as the Executive Director of the Interfaith Conference of
Greater Milwaukee. Today, however, I come before you as a
member of the Sikh-American Community, whose life was forever
changed by the 2012 assault on the Gurudwara, our Sikh house of
worship, in Oak Creek, Wisconsin.
On Sunday, August 5th, 2012, my family was on our way to
the Sikh Temple of Wisconsin when my daughter confessed that
she had forgotten her notebook for Sunday school. I admit that
I was a little bit irritated, but we returned to our house,
found that notebook, and headed back out again.
When we arrived at the Gurudwara, the parking lot was
filled with police vehicles. My immediate concern was for my
mother and father who were always the first to arrive and
prepare for services. While in the parking lot, I received a
call from someone inside the building who told me that my
father had been shot. That conversation was interrupted by a
call from my mother who whispered that she was hiding with
others inside the building.
My concern turned into urgency to find out if our loved
ones were safe or not. Eventually, it was confirmed that my
father, Satwant Singh Kaleka, was among six worshippers who was
killed at that attack, along with Paramjit Kaur Saini, Sita
Singh, Ranjit Singh, Prakash Singh, and Suveg Singh Khattra. A
seventh individual, Baba Punjab Singh, passed away in 2020 due
to complications from the injuries he sustained that day. If my
daughter had not forgotten her notebook, we could have been
also killed.
Rather than turning inward in anguish and anger, we chose
to believe that this country, its ideals, and its promise are
worth fighting for. For example, not long after we began a
campaign with the Sikh Coalition to ensure that anti-Sikh
sentiment would be tracked and reported to the FBI.
Once the Bureau began cataloging anti-Sikh hate crimes,
their reports have shown what every Sikh-American already
knows, that we are among the top five most frequently targeted
faith communities in America.
When we learned that the shooter, Wade Michael Page, had
extensive ties to a White supremacist movement, I befriended
Arno Michaelis, a former White supremacist and the founder of
the Milwaukee chapter of the hate organization that Wade Page
belonged to.
Over the past 10 years, Arno and I have traveled to
countless cities, consulted with local, State, and Federal law
enforcement agencies, and spoke to thousands of people on how
to prevent hate in their own communities. I also work as a de-
radicalization clinician with Parents4Peace and as a consultant
with Not in Our Town.
These organizations are on the front lines providing
counseling and treatment plans to engage entire communities and
help individuals turn away from hate.
Despite these best efforts, hate continues to threaten too
many minority communities in our country. A Black church was
attacked in South Carolina, synagogues were assaulted in
Pennsylvania, California, and Texas. Masjids have been targeted
for vandalism, arson, and violence across the country.
Individuals from these communities and still others are
increasingly targeted in hate crimes year after year after
year.
All of this fear and hate and danger comes from a toxic mix
of racism, xenophobia, anti-Semitism, Islamophobia, and White
supremacy. As we meet this challenge, I urge you to ensure that
the policies that you implement to protect marginalized
communities cannot be turned against us.
Post-9/11 surveillance and profiling erode a trust within
law enforcement and law enforcement that harmed Black and Brown
families, all while White supremacist extremism went largely
unchecked. We must shift our framework to counter extremism
from one fixated on security and law enforcement to one rooted
in public health and community engagement.
We must further invest in our communities and empower the
advocates who are leading at the local level. We have to de-
radicalize those who are entrenched in hate and invest in
early-stage interventions that work to cure the pain that often
precedes acts of violence in our society.
Our way to do this is by ensuring that what is taught in
our schools is both accurate and represents a rich tapestry
that makes up America. Another way is to hold social media
platforms accountable for violent hate speech. There are also
bills that Congress could pass today. The Justice For Victims
of Hate Crimes Act would instantly improve how we charge hate
crimes. We can then further improve our data tracking around
these crimes. Passing the Domestic Terrorism Prevention Act
would more effectively combat White supremacist extremism.
Finally, we can do better to facilitate access to Federal
resources like the nonprofit security grant to protect sacred
places like our Gurudwara in Oak Creek.
We can do all these things and more, but only if we are
willing to work together in the pursuit of prevention and
safety through a whole-of-society approach. As a father who is
fighting to make the world a better place for my children, that
is my wish. That is why, above anything else, I am here.
Thank you so much.
[The statement of Mr. Kaleka follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you for your testimony and your
important message. It is important that we hear it.
Mr. Tatum, you're now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRANDON TATUM

Mr. Tatum. I just want to, first, say thank you Jerry
Nadler, Sheila Jackson Lee, Ranking Member Biggs for having me.
This is a true honor and a testimony in our country that we've
come a long way, and that a person of color like myself have
access to speak, and I think it speaks volumes at how far we've
come, and I think that it's time in our country that we don't
turn back to the things that many want to retain in our
history. We should keep continue to move forward.
First, things that I want to say is that it's very
important for us to be able to define acts of terrorism and be
able to investigate them thoroughly. We have to understand that
there's a lot of hoaxes that have been perpetuated over the
last several years, and I want us to, in addition to, focusing
on the hate crimes, and I think that every single person that
is here understands that it is a problem in our country and
that we need to address it vigorously. We also need to identify
the influx of people who are coming out and creating situations
and lying about hate crime and violence in certain situations
to gain traction in their particular movement.
There has been a tremendous increase--like I said, it's
written in my statement, and we have seen it happen all too
often on college campuses. Unfortunately, many of them are
perpetuated by minorities in our communities. Young ladies who
have made statements that there were writings and racial slurs
perpetuated on campus, some nooses and other things that are
associated with hate crimes, come to find out that they were
all perpetuated by the person who reported it. So, in addition
to our research, and our efforts to combat terrorism in
institutions, we also need to look at and help verify whether
these things are true or not.
I want to talk about another issue that will speak to the
very grounds of people in our country who have been
demoralized. I think that it's the lack of retaining God in our
consciousness. I really would love to see people who are in
leadership in our government continue to retain God, and not
throw God away and Act as if God wasn't the help and the
foundation of this country.
The reason that we are where we are today in our country is
because the Judeo-Christian values that we have retained. I
think that people have been demoralized in their apt to commit
these crimes and be hateful towards one another because the
absence of God.
I'll add as well, when it comes to law enforcement, many
people who are on this Zoom call right now have been
perpetuating hatred towards law enforcement officers and has
led to the police officers being dejected. They are not
engaging. They are not being proactive, and many of these
efforts, or many of these lack of efforts on behalf of police
officers who are scared to do their job, fearful of terrorist
activity against them, and also fearful a judgment--prejudgment
and being called a racist and working in a racial institution,
these officers are not able, or they are not proactively
policing, which will deter a lot of these actors from going
into synagogues, from acting out in violence.
The ones who are standing in the gap for us to protect our
citizens are the police officers. When you diminish them, they
are no longer going to be there. They're retiring, they're
quitting, and we cannot get enough officers in the field to
combat this. I want everybody on here to understand that, that
our law enforcement officers are incredibly important if we are
going to fight against this influx of terrorism and terrorist
behavior. The last thing that I will say is that we do need to
also include the institution of the family.
Many of these minority communities are falling apart and we
see a lot of degradation because of the institution of the
family that's under attack. So, in addition to the college and
universities and other Black businesses, I also think we should
focus on the Black family in inner-city minority families,
because the stronger the family becomes, the better prepared
they are, the better people are put out into society, and the
better equipped they are in not becoming victims in the society
that we live in.
I want to first end this by saying thank you. I really
appreciate the opportunity to have my voice being heard, and
I'm here to answer any questions subsequent to my testimony.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Tatum follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Ms. Huang, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARGARET HUANG

Ms. Huang. Good morning, Chair Jackson Lee, Ranking Member
Gibbs, Chair Nadler, and all the Members of the Subcommittee.
My name is Margaret Huang, and I'm President and CEO of the
Southern Poverty Law Center and the SPLC action fund.
The recent bomb threats against almost two dozen
historically Black colleges and universities, or HBCUs, over
the last 2 weeks have been deeply impactful, threatening a
collective sense of security and safety.
These hateful threats, apparently timed to coincide with
the beginning of Black History Month, are reminiscent of this
country's long history of White supremacist attacks on Black
leaders and Black churches, attacks with the explicit goal of
terrorizing Black communities to assert control.
Of the 107 HBCUs in the United States, 44 are located in
the five States of the Deep South where the Southern Poverty
Law Center has significant presence and a commitment to social
justice. These States are Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana,
and Mississippi.
These threats impact both our community and our staff. We
have staff members who are proud HBCU alum, and many others who
have children and family members who are students, faculty, or
graduates of HBCUs.
It's been almost 60 years since the Ku Klux Klan members
bombed the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama,
killing four schoolgirls, yet we are still grappling with
hateful acts targeting racial and religious minorities. At a
time when many States are passing laws restricting teaching
about racism, it is clear that more needs to be done to teach
our young people the unvarnished truth about American history,
both the good and the bad.
To help the Subcommittee understand the context for the
racist attacks on the HBCUs, my written testimony describes how
the current extremist threat is being mainstreamed, how to
prevent hate crimes, and address online radicalization, the
importance of evidence-based violence prevention initiatives,
and the need to ensure that our students have digital literacy
skills taught in an inclusive, educational environment.
When our educational and religious communities are targeted
for violence and vandalism, it is imperative that the needs of
survivors are prioritized. Our instinct is to increase physical
security for our houses of worship and community institutions,
higher walls, more cameras, more bullet-proof glass, and even
armed guards, but these steps must be coupled with a commitment
to fund, research, and prevention initiatives to address hate
and the long-term contributions to extremism.
Passage of the Domestic Terrorism Prevention Act would be a
key advance in this effort. Press reports indicate that the FBI
has focused its investigation on six radicalized tech savvy
youth suspects. One of the young offenders reportedly claimed a
connection with the Atomwaffen Division, a terroristic, Neo-
Nazi organization that we have been tracking over the past 5
years.
The possible connection to extremist groups underscores the
needs for parents, educators, and communities to be attuned to
signs of radicalization, and to help inoculate young people
against being drawn into an extreme and hateful path. We're
pleased that the DOJ, DHS, and the FBI have launched criminal
investigations into this case, but more must be done.
My testimony includes several policy recommendations for
Congress and the Administration.
First, words matter. It's impossible to overstate the
importance of elected officials and community and business
leaders using their public platforms to condemn these threats
to HBCUs and other communal institutions.
Second, oversight matters. We appreciate the attention of
this Committee, Congress, and the Biden Administration that you
have devoted to addressing White supremacy and extremism in all
forms. This must continue.
Finally, investments matter. We urge you to make
investments in countering disinformation, developing prevention
strategies, and offering antibias education. Disinformation and
conspiracy theories are galvanizing attacks on our democracy
and government institutions. Teachers must be able to teach the
full truth, including about the hard history of slavery,
racism, and White supremacy in the United States.
These investments can help secure a future in which all can
gather, worship, and live free of terrorists and extremist
threats in a Nation as good as its highest ideals. We look
forward to working with you as you continue your focus to
ensure our treasured HBCUs are safe spaces for all.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The statement of Ms. Huang follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank you so very much and all the
Witnesses for their testimony. We will now proceed under the 5-
minute rule with questions, and I begin by recognizing myself
for 5 minutes.
Again, just a brief moment of Chair's privilege to indicate
the cruciality and importance of this hearing and the Witnesses
who have come here today to speak to the dangers that they have
experienced should be the highlight of this hearing.
As indicated, hearings regarding other issues are pending,
and we will address those issues. Also, we'll make note that
the Members that I know on this Committee are not the cause of
violence against law enforcement officers, and I would take
issue with any statements to that effect.
Let me begin by saying to you, Dr. Wilson, and my time is
short, but I do want to frame the danger of bomb threats to the
psychic and the operation of a historically Black college where
there has been generational trauma. If you can concisely give
us that for the record, I want to make sure people understand
that.
Dr. Wilson, if you would, please.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Madam Chair. Indeed, the
psychological impact that the continuation of these threats is
having on our young minds cannot be understated. Our students
are here at Morgan and across the HBCU world are on the
campuses when they first saw the murder of Trayvon Martin and
they were 8 or 9 years old. Then following that, they saw a
series of other individuals whose lives were cut down who also
were in their age group, and who looked like them. Then, all of
a sudden, you had the pandemic, and then George Floyd, and they
were shutted out of these spaces for a year and a half, and we
have the largest enrollment here in Morgan ever, because the
students wanted to come to campuses where they could exhale,
where they could actually reacquaint themselves with the kind
of emotional well-being that the campus actually provides, and
then all these bomb threats.
You wouldn't believe just how taxed our counseling center
and resources have been just to minister to the incredible
needs of these students. It's off the chart. I don't mean to,
in any way, move beyond and describe this, Madam Chair, in any
way, but it actually is.
We are seeing so many students who are almost coming to the
brink, because they can't bear it anymore. As president, I have
to say to them, this is not who we are. This is not our
country. This is not our Nation. I have to really try and keep
that together.
Our faculty--I'm speaking in terms of Morgan--but it's the
same whether it's [inaudible] or Howard or Morehouse or Spelman
or North Carolina A&T.
So, I hope the Committee will not take lightly the
incredible psychological and emotional damage that these
threats are perpetrating on our young lives.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Dr. Wilson, thank you.
Dr. Jones, bomb threats can result in bombs and violence.
Is that not true?
Mr. Jones. That is true, yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So, the idea of a more stronger Federal
presence should be taken seriously, and bomb threats should not
be taken lightly based upon your collective data and statistics
about racism and anti-Semitism and other anti, Dr. Jones?
Mr. Jones. Yes. Bomb threats, particularly when they
involve an actual plot to conduct an attack or to threaten to
conduct an attack, is a serious effort, and one that we would
consider an Act of terrorism. That's the intent to terrorize a
population and should be taken extremely serious for the
reasons we just heard. That's the psychological impact.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. The Nation should not stand
ideally by when there is racism, anti-Semitism, bias against
LGBTQ, gender bias, anti-Muslim, and anti-Sikh.
Mr. Kaleka, my sympathies for the loss of your father, the
injury of your fellow members of the Sikh community. I was very
much aware of that as a member of the Homeland Security
Committee and in Congress at that time. Tell me the terrorizing
impact that comes from the hatred that was obviously generated
against the Sikh community?
Mr. Kaleka. Thank you so much, Congresswoman. Yeah, it took
all of us and 10 years to try to heal from that, and I think
that's the effect of communal trauma. We used to understand
trauma and trauma-related disorders as being individual or
something that you needed to go through by yourself.
We're very much understanding it now to be communal, and
these types of attacks, whether it's on law enforcement,
whether it's on the Jewish community, this does have a type of
communal traumatic effect, and it causes on everyone within
those communities to heal from within and help the communities
from outside to help those communities heal.
So, we were blessed to be surrounded by great communities,
great interfaith partners who helped us heal. So, we're still
in the midst of that, and we're still concerned about our
fellow Jewish brothers and sisters, our Muslim brothers and
sisters, our law enforcement community, everyone. I think the
heart of this goes to we need to prevent targeted violence
against all these communities.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me just quickly go, Rabbi, and my
fellow Texan, I welcome you again. I think the point that I
want to really focus on with you as my last question, I really
want to focus on that anti-Semitism and racism and all the isms
can result into actual, physical violence. We're holding this
hearing not for edification, but for the understanding that
threats can result in physical violence.
You lived it. You started in your testimony by saying
you're grateful to be anywhere. Can you associate the attacks
on the Jewish community and anti-Semitism, the rise of that, to
actual violence and loss of life?
Rabbi Cytron-Walker. Well, thank God, we, in our situation,
I said at our healing service afterwards that we didn't have to
say Kaddish, we didn't have to say the prayer for mourning. It
was unbelievably--we're so fortunate on so many levels.
Our words matter. We have seen this time and again, and its
words, whether they are anti-Semitic. It doesn't matter the
group that is targeted. We're in a situation that's--the more
people get exposure to that negativity; the more people can
pass it on.
Everybody's not going to go and do a violent act, but if
you have a larger pool of people, then you have a larger group
of people that are going to take the next step towards
extremism, and the next step towards extremism, and you're
going to have a larger pool of people willing to actually do
something horrible.
When it comes to that idea that our words matter and that
all of us bear responsibility, each and every one of us, from
across the political spectrum, from every group, we need to be
able to tone down the rhetoric. We need to be able to support
one another. We're not enemies here. We're one Nation that are
all trying to come together and solve our problems, and we've
got big problems to solve, but so our words do matter because
violence is not what any of us want to experience, but it
absolutely can happen.
Again, yeah. Thank you. I appreciate the question.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I thank you very much for your
answers.
Mr. Biggs, I recognize you now for 5 minutes.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to make sure
that everyone understands here. I don't think there's anybody
on this Committee testifying as a Witness or here as a Member
of Congress that is minimizing the threats to the HBCUs. I
mean, there's no one here that isn't taking that seriously.
I think we're talking about also, however, a broad context
of all issues that we must take very seriously, and, so, I hope
no one thinks that.
I appreciate, Dr. Jones, and one of the things he talked
about, because he said there's a broad range of racial,
religious, and misogynistic attacks that take place. I can't
help but remember my own--my own faith, my own denomination
driven from five States and finally from New York to Ohio to
Missouri to Illinois, and ultimately to the safety of the Rocky
Mountain interwest--Intermountain West.
I was just pondering this as we're preparing for this
hearing. So, that persecution of my own people--now that's a
long time ago. Then I look at the last three months, four
months, and actually 10 years ago in my own community in
Phoenix, one of our churches burned, vandalized. Then, I don't
know what the motivations were for any of these next attacks
I'll mention, but we need to be cognizant that this is
happening and I think that's what this hearing does.
So, in December of 2021, in Alabama at an LDS church, a
shooting takes place by--on members of the church, a shooting
in July of 2018, vandalism in Connecticut, shooting up a church
in Connecticut in 2021, end of 2021. I believe it was December.
Syracuse, Utah, 2021, vandalism of that church.
This is happening against all groups that associate with
one another, faith-based groups, religious groups, whatever it
is.
So, I think it's important for us to realize that and not
rationalize any of this away. I think it's important to get
that, but I want to ask Dr. Pennie and Mr. Tatum, in the summer
of 2020, we saw a lot of rioting in the streets, resulting
destruction, looting of small businesses in urban communities,
in urban communities.
What communities are most affected negatively by that type
of activity? Let's go with you, Dr. Pennie, first, and then Mr.
Tatum.
Mr. Pennie. Yes, sir. Thank you so much. Look, this is what
we need to make sure we clarify. When these policies are being
passed to defund the police and narrative that are destructive
to any society as a whole, you have to understand that our
majority/minority communities are suffering the most, and we
saw the same idea in the early 90s. I grew up in the 18th
congressional district, which is the Chair's district, and I
witnessed my own cousin get killed in front of me at the age of
16.
Those negative ideas create this same level of violence
that we continue to perpetuate now during this time. Twenty-
something years later, there's no reason for us to continue to
create this kind of divide, but the reality is as you have
certain congressional leaders, certain leaders in our society
that want to press this idea of defunding the police and
segregating the police from their communities, all they're
doing is making the people that live in these communities more
and more victims. That's all they're doing is victimizing us
over and over again.
I'd like to say, just please consider that this is a
reality for people that are actually in the inner-city. I'm in
these communities every day. I don't just sit up here and talk.
I'm in there every day, and I want to encourage you to come out
there and meet with some of them, because this is real life,
and these people are living it.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. Mr. Tatum.
Mr. Tatum. I share the same sentiment being former law
enforcement officer, and I've seen the rhetoric affect law
enforcement across the country, and law enforcement officers
aren't just White. So, there's minorities that work in law
enforcement that feel the brunt of rhetoric, and I agree with
the rabbi when he said that words matter.
We have to stop being divisive. We can walk and chew gum at
the same time. I believe that we can empower our law
enforcement officers, we can fund them, we can support them, we
can judge them fairly, and we will see a difference in the way
police officers are patrolling our communities and they're
keeping them safe.
I'm thankful to God that our law enforcement officers are
there when these instances of hate happen, so they can bring
these individuals to justice and protect to see them be able to
negotiate an individual out of murdering multiple people who he
had hostage and taking him into custody without harm is
impressive. I think that we want to see law enforcement
officers participate in these certain situations. Also, I would
argue that terrorism can happen within.
There is interracial terrorism that we see in our country
today, a lot of what Black violence are, what Black people see
when they experience violence are within their own community.
I grew up in Black communities and, to be honest, I was
more afraid of other people who were Black who hated me, who
wanted to kill me, who was involved in gang violence than I was
of a White supremacist or someone of that nature.
So, we do have to expand what we're saying, not diminish,
but expand what we're saying to protect young Black people who
are experiencing these same level of hate within their own
community and also extend the olive branch to support law
enforcement so that law enforcement officers are equipped to
help and we can all be better for it.
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, I see my time is expired. I would
ask the Chair to--I have 12 articles that I know you aren't
going to want me to read the titles of all 12, but I'd like to
submit them into the record, and I will have my staff provide
those to you right after the Committee hearing.
[The information follows:]

MR. BIGGS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Biggs, you know that we welcome those
articles. Without objection, so ordered.
You're very kind to have them by list, and we thank you so
very much for your questioning.
At this time, I'm pleased to recognize the Chair of the
Full Committee, Mr. Nadler for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nadler.
Chair Nadler. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Dr. Jones, are extremists used in COVID-19 anxiety and the
government's response to their strategic advantage? If they
are, is it limited just to propaganda and recruitment, or are
you also seeing it as a motivation for violent attacks?
Mr. Jones. That's a great question, Mr. Nadler, and thanks
for participating in the hearing.
The data that we have shown that COVID-19 is certainly
being used to motivate individuals to extremist beliefs. It's
particularly helpful on the radicalization process. What we
don't see a lot yet is evidence that is being used to actually
commit domestic terrorist attacks, or plots, for that matter.
So, radicalization definitely is that concerning,
absolutely. We don't see it yet manifesting itself into
actually attacks yet. The data does not yet show that.
Chair Nadler. Thank you.
Mr. Kaleka, you were very involved in your community's
recovery from the Oak Creek tragedy, and you diligently worked
on de-radicalization efforts, interfaith coordination, and law
enforcement outreach.
Given your background as a former law enforcement officer,
what changes do you think law enforcement departments should
consider so they are more responsive to domestic violent
extremist threats against minority communities?
Mr. Kaleka. Thank you, Chair Nadler. Yeah. When we think
about March 2020 and what was going on at that time and the
heightened tensions, we brought together community
stakeholders, we brought together law enforcement officers, and
the local activists to have conversations and meet one another.
We've been continuing to provide bridges of dialogue of
conversation, even if people didn't get along. Since that time
that we've been healing and going into sort of de-
radicalization work, we have to get much further upstream. If
you're waiting for somebody--and there's been numerous
incidents--I can count three right now of ones that I know that
we prevented from happening. Part of that was to get further
upstream and not wait till the gunman or the suspect shows up
to the synagogue, the Masjids, the Gurudwara, or the church.
If we don't get further upstream, it's too late at that
point. It's too late for law enforcement, unfortunately, at
that point. I speak this as respectful of the capacity of law
enforcement officers, but even law enforcement officers know
that. We need to get much further upstream and stop it at the
house. Stop it at the faith communities. Stop it with somebody
who can say something at that point.
Chair Nadler. Thank you. Rabbi Cytron-Walker, Deuteronomy
says you must love the stranger for you were strangers in the
land of Egypt. You let your attacker in because he told you he
was hungry, and he spent the night in the cold. How does the
concept of generosity to strangers shape your role as rabbi,
and do you believe the threat of domestic terrorism might erode
that identity?
Rabbi Cytron-Walker. Oh, yes. It's my hope that it's--
first, thank you for the question, Chair Nadler, and that idea
of love the stranger, care for the stranger is something that
is of value that I continue to try to live. It's a part of who
we are. I think that the threat of domestic terrorism, I think
the threat against the Jewish community is very much, for many
people, creating a sense of fear and concern and it is a real
challenge.
So, at the same time, the chances of a terrorist attack are
so remote that I pray that we don't give in to that fear. I do
believe that we have to be prepared. I think that all those
security trainings were very important, but I still teach and I
still preach love your neighbor. I still teach and I still
preach that we need to care for the stranger. We need to
embrace that value of hospitality that is so much a part of our
tradition.
Chair Nadler. Do you believe that fear of domestic terror
attacks has affected how we all treat one another and if so,
how?
Rabbi Cytron-Walker. I think that, at least in my
community, within the Peace Together community that we've
really worked hard to establish, the threat of domestic terror
has actually brought a number of us more together in the
community and, that is, on the interreligious and nonreligious
side. It is also what led us to develop really positive
relationships with the police department.
There are a number of Jews of color that, throughout our
country, that see a security officer outside their house of
worship and are a little bit concerned because of it, because
they are concerned that they might be treated with suspicion,
but overall, within our community, I can say that the
relationship, the closeness between the local police
department, the local government, and the interreligious and
nonreligious communities has been incredibly strong.
My hope, and my prayer would be that every community would
be able to have those relationships because we don't, right? We
don't. We have to acknowledge that reality. So, but that is one
of the things that really helped to sustain us and continues to
sustain us in the aftermath.
Chair Nadler. Thank you. My time is expired.
I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Biggs, you're still here. Just wanted to be assured
that you don't have another Member at this time that may have
come in. Mr. Biggs?
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, I am looking, and my staff is
looking. We had four Members on earlier, but I think they
might've all departed and so I might be a lonely, lonely
Republican on this hearing today.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, we will look out for those Members,
and we thank you for your presence.
It's my pleasure now to yield to the gentlelady from
Florida, Mrs. Demings for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. Thank you so
much to our Witnesses today.
Let me, as a former law enforcement officer, as you well
know, my Committee Members, of 27 years, I'm not quite really
sure what to think of what a lot of what I've heard so far.
Let me just get one thing out of the way. There is an
effort on this Committee to try to hijack this important
hearing about the safety of our students and the safety of the
people that we are supposed to represent and assist law
enforcement in protecting.
Let me say it for about the millionth time: We are not
going to defund the police. We're going to fund the police, and
we can have the backs of our police officers and the
communities in which we serve, too.
The communities most at risk from crime want more security,
not less. We know that when you do get out and talk to them,
that's why we're working to get police departments more
resources, not less. It's why we need to expand the nonprofit
security grant program, which I am working on in my other
Committee through Homeland Security.
From what I've heard today, from some of my colleagues on
the other side of the aisle, I am sure that I will be able to
get many more of them to sign on to that legislation.
Our number 1 priority has to be the reduction of violent
crime. I have been saying that for over three decades, but let
me be clear: That also includes escalating threats by
extremists targeting Black Americans and Jewish Americans and
Sikh Americans and others.
I have to wonder, let me say this: I have worked alongside
the brave men and women in blue that many of my colleagues talk
about. I have seen them risk their lives over and over again to
keep all, not just a few, all communities safe.
What I know from my experience is that those police
officers, those rank-and-file officers, would be extremely
concerned about the safety of students and threats against
students in their communities.
Madam Chair, I invite my colleagues to get to truly know
some of the law enforcement officers, some of the rank-and-file
officers that they talk about and claim to know.
Dr. Wilson, thank you for your leadership at Morgan, and
thank you for your powerful testimony advocating on behalf,
laser-focused on advocating on behalf of those students who are
just trying to get an education and are dependent on us to make
sure that they can.
Last week, you wrote an opinion piece for Word in Black
entitled, ``HBCU Strong: Bomb Threats Will Not Deter Us.''
Dr. Wilson, how would you say the history--because we know
the history. I mean, we know it, but let's try to get better
moving on. How would you say the history shapes the campus
environment today?
I know you talked a little bit earlier, but could you talk
a little bit more about how your students are handling these
threats, and how are you addressing the issues? Please, tell me
how having to now take away resources to respond to threat
after threat after threat has really affected what should be a
safe learning environment?
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much for the question,
Congresswoman Demings.
Let me repeat that the psychological trauma that has been
brought on by the threats is very, very severe here at Morgan
and across the HBCU campuses. I do not say that in a vacuum. I
certainly have been in conversations with the other HBCU
presidents and chancellors, and what you see at Morgan is no
different than what you will see on the other campuses where
these threats have also been made.
Our number 2 priority, of course, is a long history of
underfunding of these institutions, and there's a reason why I
said, quote, ``they are the innovators in American higher
education, because they've had to,'' unquote, take what they
had to make what they needed for the students when they walked
across the stage and they got the sheep skins to be in a
position to dance on the world stage with anyone, any place,
anytime, and anywhere.
When you add the bomb threats and you add, if you will, the
impact of the pandemic and when you add all the other things
that these students have seen in a relatively short period of
time, what these underfunded resource institutions must do is
then to take resources from other operational areas and then
shift them to the psychological, emotional well-being area and,
therefore, it limits our ability to continue to advance the
genre of institutions.
That's the way I would explain that in a relatively short
period of time, Congresswoman Demings.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Dr. Wilson.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mrs. Demings. I yield back. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much.
My pleasure to now yield to the gentlelady from California
for 5 minutes, Ms. Bass.
Ms. Bass. Thank you, Madam Chair. I do want to note as the
Ranking Member said, the Republican Members have left the
hearing, and I think that that is emblematic of the refusal to
talk about this subject. I'm saddened that in every one of
their questions, they wanted to focus on crime in general, and
I think you could walk away saying that the real problem is
actually African-Americans. That's the real problem.
Violence and racial violence really isn't an issue at all,
and the denial of what is going on in this country and what has
gone on in this country historically is certainly evident in
their performance today. I guess they don't think it's
important, which is why they're not here.
So, let me thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
hearing. I'm sad to say that this is a particularly important
topic for my home city. The liberal bastion of Los Angeles
actually saw the most hate crimes of any major U.S. city over
the past year, and the third highest of any U.S. city since the
1970s.
These crimes of hatred were most common against African-
Americans, but we also saw a large increase in hate crimes
against Latinos, Asians, the LGBTQ community, Jewish Americans,
and the hate and fear is not confined to any one community.
Even in the Beverly Hills neighborhood, we saw homes
littered with anti-Semitic flyers filled with hateful
propaganda, and we really cannot stand by while hate-filled
extremism pollutes our communities and further traumatizes our
neighborhoods.
We have seen anti-Semitic literature spread not just in
Beverly Hills, but throughout Los Angeles and many of the
surrounding cities.
I wanted to ask Mr. Kaleka, and I also wanted to thank you
for being a Witness today in spite of what you have gone
through. My district is the home to the Sikh leadership
headquarters. I wanted to know how you, when you're forced to
confront anti-immigrant sentiment, religious discrimination,
and related violence, how you deal with young Sikh Americans?
I think in the African-American community, we're used to
having those conversations with our children, but I would like
to know how it is for you and how young Sikh Americans are
handling this?
Mr. Kaleka. Thank you so much, Congresswoman. Early on,
this is going to be the 10th anniversary of the shooting, and
early on, I saw a lot of our community sort of segregate itself
because of fear of being outside. Arno Michaelis who joined me
and was the leader of the Skinhead organization a long time ago
is now working with me, and we're in Orlando together today and
going to be at the Holocaust resource center. One of the things
that I got approached with early on was, why do you keep
bringing White people into our Sikh Temple? Don't you know
we're scared, we're afraid? This was a lot of the leadership,
right?
The rabbi knows this, right? A lot of the leadership who
was a little bit older said, ``Hey, Pardeep, you know, we're
traumatized. Don't do that. Don't bring White people in here,
especially don't bring White people with skinheads.'' I said,
``listen, America--America's promise we all came here for a
better life, and we do have an obligation or responsibility to
this country, and if I let you sit in your segregation because
you're fearful, the next doctor will not happen, the next law
enforcement will not happen, the next person who's about to go
out and be the next Congressperson will not happen.''
So, I think we owed it to our debt in America to make sure
that we get out of our--we nourish the younger generation. So,
that was really my motivation. That continues to be my
motivation. I speak at a lot of Sikh Temples all over the
place, and I let them know, hey, you know what? At this point,
somebody let us know that we weren't worth being in this
country.
Ms. Bass. I want to ask you another question, but before I
do, let me just say that, Madam Chair, I do hope that you have
another hearing where we talk about community violence. I think
that is an important topic to have, but I do want to mention
that's not the topic of this hearing and if we continue the
attempts to deny that radical extremism, especially White
supremacy exists in our country, it's not going to move us
further by just acting as though it doesn't exist.
Mr. Kaleka, in your final moments, can you talk about what
Congress might learn, what support the Federal, State, and
local governments can provide to military and law enforcement
to reduce their vulnerability to extremist recruitment?
Mr. Kaleka. Thank you so much, Congresswoman. I'll make it
short. Terror affects all of us. It affects us all, and it's a
community issue [inaudible] takes seriously. It's something
that we need to fund. We need to get the right people doing the
right job and we need to work side by side, and hand in tandem
with law enforcement. So, I think we all need to work on this
together.
Ms. Bass. Thank you. I yield because I'm out of time, Madam
Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman is recognized. Mr. Fitzgerald is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Pardeep, as you know, I represent part of southeastern
Wisconsin. It was 10 years ago when that tragedy happened and
have been, I guess, monitoring the Sikh community and the
strides you've made.
I want to certainly acknowledge that you guys have done the
outreach and have done the work that I'm sure is having an
impact in the community. So, thank you for being here today.
The one point I wanted to make, I know that a lot of issues
are being raised, and this is a hearing, and that's what
Members of Congress are supposed to be doing is kind of
listening versus offering any solutions. I haven't heard any
real strong solutions today, other than, to continue to work on
these all-encompassing issues. This is not simple stuff by any
means.
I do want to address one thing and another item, and I
would ask Dr. Pennie maybe to comment on it, because it seems
to be kind of the cycle that continues, and whether it is a
hate crime or for my many years in the State legislature, we
had penalty enhancers that were related to crimes committed
with whether it be a handgun or some other very specific item
that would change the overall view of a crime.
One of the issues we continue to struggle with is--and law
enforcement sees it all the time where somebody's arrested and
then they're prosecuted and then ultimately, they're back out
on the street in a short period of time. I know--listen, I have
a father who's in law enforcement for 50 years and a son who
was in law enforcement, and this was one of the topics that was
most frustrating was just to have repeat criminals that
continue to be part of the system and rap sheets as long as
your arm in the crimes they commit.
Dr. Pennie, do you have a comment on that part of the
issues we're facing?
Mr. Pennie. Absolutely. Look, it is a revolving door when
dealing with violent offenders. Look, I don't want to negate
any other part of this discussion, right? I want people to
understand that I am educated. I was a college professor for
several years. I'm a Doctor of Education. I actually wrote my
dissertation on mitigating the outcome for shooting attacks on
college and school campuses.
So, we are acknowledging that there is a situation that
needs to be addressed in these communities, and these schooling
at college campuses as it relates to dealing with radicalized
behavior, but I say that because years ago when I approached
Congress about revising CDA 230, the platform that gives these
social media platforms the ability to recruit--to allow these
radical groups to recruit and radicalize on their platforms,
nobody wanted to revise it. Nobody wanted to appeal it.
I was talking in an echo chamber. So, here we are five
years later, and people want to acknowledge that we do have a
problem with social media.
So, we really want to get to resolving some of these
issues, we have to start there. We have to start with how our
young people are being recruited and radicalized. That's number
1.
Number 2, going back to dealing with these violent
offenders, we have to address the individuals that are
victimizing us in our communities. If we keep putting these
people out, they're going to continue to escalate crime over
and over again. These police officers are doing more work than
anybody else because they're arresting people, they're putting
them in jail, these people come out, they offend other people,
they commit new murders, and officers have to get out here and
go find these same people all over again.
We're doing double work. We have to do better. We have to
do a better job, and if we can get politicians to step out of
the way to allow us to do our job, we'll gladly do it.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Mr. Tatum, do you have a comment in
relationship to what we were just discussing?
Mr. Tatum. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question. I think
that it's invaluable for us to understand that there's not a
single person that I've heard testify that will Act as if
there's not an issue. If someone's calling and threatening the
HBCU, that is a problem. As a former law enforcement officer, I
hope that they go to jail, and they spend time in jail. The
problem is, what is the solution to the problem? How do we get
to the underlying issues?
So, it just--racism just don't happen out of thin air.
Prejudice and hatred towards people just don't occur out of
thin air. It is breed--it is bred in our society through
certain mechanisms. I believe that we do need to take a strong
stance in making sure law enforcement officers are able to
arrest people who are radicalized, who hate White people, who
hate Black people, who hate Jewish people, and put them in jail
and they stay there.
The problem is that we--in our society, we are focused more
on caring for the suspect than we do the victims.
Rehabilitation is a thing that we need to address. However,
these individuals need to go to jail, and they need to stay in
jail instead of getting out and perpetuating more and more
crimes. We need the funding for technology and innovation for
law enforcement officers to be able to catch individuals who
are causing these bomb threats.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman's time is up. The
gentleman's time is up.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much. The gentleman's
time is expired.
It is my pleasure now to recognize the gentlelady from
Georgia, Congresswoman McBath, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you, Chair Lee, and thank you so much
for holding this very critical and important issue today.
I'd also like to thank our Witnesses for joining us to
share your stories and to shed more light on this crisis.
I just have to say, it's important that we're absolutely
clear about what this hearing is about today. Domestic terror,
no matter the source, no matter the target, is inconsistent
with the principles of liberty and equality on which our great
Nation was founded. I know that our Republican colleagues who
have been talking about other problems today, both real and
imagined, and that simply just distracts from a real problem
that deserves our full attention today.
As an alumna of Virginia State University, graduating from
a historically Black university has been one of my greatest
honors of my lifetime. There, I not only earned an excellent
education, I also grew up as a woman, as a person. I found a
sisterhood in Delta Sigma Theta Sorority and took part in one
of the greatest educational opportunities afforded me in
preparation for my work as a Member of Congress.
Historically Black colleges and universities, along with
other minority institutions, have been the bedrock of higher
education for millions of Americans of color for almost 200
years, and they have offered Americans opportunities and
futures when so many other doors were shut.
These recent bomb threats to HBCUs are not just a threat to
the African-American community, they're also a threat to the
academic and economic futures of Americans, African Americans.
In my home State of Georgia, three institutions have received
bomb threats in recent weeks. These include Spelman College,
Fort Valley State University, and Albany State University.
These hate crimes are meant to disrupt the stability and
permanence of HBCUs.
These attempts to intimidate us, they're not going to
succeed. HBCU graduates like me, students, and communities, we
will continue to thrive and continue to flourish as we have
almost done for two centuries.
I thank the FBI investigators for taking these threats so
seriously. These are threats that are racially motivated,
they're violent extremism, and they're hate crimes. I call on
them to ensure that these investigations are thoroughly and
comprehensively completed.
Dr. Wilson, last week you wrote an opinion piece for Word
In Black titled, HBCU Strong: Bomb Threat Will Never (sic)
Deter Us. You wrote, and I quote, ``Those founders knew that
the journey laid before them would be a rough one, the terrain
arduous and rugged, the rivers deep and unrelenting. Moreover,
they fully recognized that they were putting their very lives
online as they marched for, fought for, and, sadly for many,
died for the right to live free and to create institutions that
would educate their sons and daughters.''
Can you put into context for us the recent series of bomb
threats against HBCUs in the broader story of racism and hate-
based violence against African Americans in this country?
Mr. Wilson. Congresswoman McBath, this is just a
continuation of that struggle that you so eloquently outlined.
Of course, what we have as a connective tissue among all the
HBCUs is the way that we were birthed. Whether it's Morehouse
or Tuskegee or Hampton or Morgan or Prairie View, it's almost
the same kind of story.
So, what I was saying for the university community, indeed
to the Nation, that if you were to look just at Morgan, one of
our visionary founders was the late Reverend Samuel Green, who
is depicted in the movie Harriet, and he was born a slave in
Dorchester County, and it was against the law to learn how to
read and write, but his owner basically taught him to read and
write.
Then there was a Fugitive Slave Act in existence that said,
okay, but if you go north of the Mason-Dixon Line and you're
caught, then you could be returned to your owner or you could
be jailed. Well, he was caught beyond the Mason-Dixon Line, and
he was sentenced to 10 years in a Baltimore City penitentiary.
He served 5 years. When he came out in 1862, he basically had
more desire to found institutions that would be about creating
literacy for those sons and daughters that were about to be
freed.
So, our students and the faculty and staff and alumni here
at Morgan and across the HBCU space, we have to understand this
resilience. We have to understand that we really are about
simply saying to our great country, we are not a truly
functioning democracy if, for example, our laws and practices
are designed to marginalize and keep everyone from fully
participating. Our ancestors knew that, and they fought so hard
to enable our Constitution to live up to those ideals. So, we
try and motivate and inspire in spite of the challenges that
are brought on by the struggle.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you so much. I'm out of time. I yield
back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Tiffany for 5 minutes. Mr. Tiffany?
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to yield
my time to Representative Biggs from Arizona.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Your time is now yielded to Mr. Biggs.
You're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Biggs? You've been yielded to by Mr. Tiffany for 5
minutes.
Mr. Biggs. Yeah, I was talking away without unmuting, Madam
Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right.
Mr. Biggs. That just happens now and then on these Zoom
issues, so I apologize for that.
I was saying that I appreciate the testimony of the
Witnesses. I appreciate that we have covered a broad spectrum
of things. I do find it interesting that some of the concerns
people have mentioned have been characterized as real and
imagined. I thought that was interesting, because I think
everybody here is sincere in attempting to try to resolve
issues that I think are important.
One of the things, Rabbi, you mentioned, and I have to say,
Mr. Kaleka, you mentioned it, Mr. Jones mentioned it, and Dr.
Wilson, President Wilson, all mentioned this notion of speaking
and communicating and trying to resolve some issues by how we
communicate with each other and get to the bottom of these
things.
I thought it was an inflammatory statement that somebody
made saying that Republicans are trying to hijack this
Committee hearing. I don't think that's the case at all. I
think what we're trying to do is same thing that I believe, in
all sincerity, that the Witnesses are trying to do and my
colleagues on the other side, and that's to move the ball
forward and try to find solutions to violence, whether it be
race-based violence at historically Black colleges and
universities, whether it be anti-Semitic violence or anti-Sikh
or any other kind of group, and I mentioned my denomination,
its period of victimization. I think this is really critical.
I hope that we're not spending our time talking past each
other. I hope that we're talking to each other and
communicating and understanding with sincere hearts what's
being said today.
So, I want to talk about one of the suggestions that was
made by Dr. Pennie and was echoed as well by Mr. Tatum, and it
goes like this: Section 230, so we talk about radicalization,
because radicalization, if we're going to resolve some of these
issues, we have to get to how are people, particularly young
people, being radicalized and why they would view themselves
inside and view others as outside and attack them for whatever
reason.
You've mentioned section 230 of the Communications Decency
Act. What do you--what role do you think that these platforms
are playing, Dr. Pennie and Mr. Tatum, in the radicalization of
people who then do things like plant bombs--or not--in this
case not plant bombs but seek to terrorize historically Black
colleges and universities because, for whatever reason? But,
maybe it's hate, I don't know. We're still investigating. I've
got to know what you think section 230, how that impacts,
something like that. Dr. Pennie.
Mr. Pennie. Absolutely. I think it's important for people
to understand what section 230 is. Basically, what it's a
policy that essentially shields these social media companies
from liability from what a third-party posts on their platform.
So, let's remember, now, this Communications Decency Act
was passed back in 1996. We're in two thousand--we're in 2022.
So, there are some real issues that need to be addressed. These
social media platforms, they understand that. They use it to
their ability to allow these radical groups--and a lot of this
content is being--whether you want--look, that's a whole other
issue, whether we want to talk about it or not, but we're being
influenced by foreign entities.
They know the difference between rubles being paid on their
platforms and United States currency. They know the difference,
but they're not saying anything. They're allowing individuals
to fund rhetoric and content in our community--in our country
that's being used to incite our people to violence.
Look, just for clarification. Guys, I went to an HBCU
university, right. I'm from the Black community. I love people.
I'm a member of a prominent Jewish organization. I'm a member
of a prominent African-American organization. The issue that
our Democrat colleagues are throwing out there, there is no
agenda here.
Guys, we're trying to get to a real solution in how we can
fix problems in this country. The bottom line is force and
intimidation that is used for the purposes of changing
governmental policy--
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman's time is expired. The
gentleman's time is expired. Thank you so very much.
It's my pleasure to now yield to the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Ms. Dean, for 5 minutes, Congresswoman Dean for 5
minutes. Thank you.
Ms. Dean. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Also, thank you to all the folks here who have offered us
your testimony, your expertise, your personal experience.
In particular, Mr. Kaleka, I offer my family's sympathy to
your family's.
Rabbi Cytron-Walker, we're so thankful that you're here,
that you are anywhere, and extraordinary the circumstances that
you and your congregation had to endure.
I've been thinking about this, and I'm a former college
professor, I taught writing and rhetoric and ethics. So, I
loved that many of you used the expression that I used too
often in my class, words matter. Our words matter.
So, let me associate myself first with the words of
Representatives Bass and Demings and McBath. Our words matter
as we ask questions, as we pull information out that we might
be able to benefit from in this important hearing.
So, I'm going to try to get to, in my limited time, two
different things.
Ms. Huang, I want to get to the ``why.'' If you don't mind,
why do you believe in--and Southern Poverty Law Center, what
does the data show us why do we have an increase in domestic
violent extremism in our country? If you could briefly give us
a little kernel about that.
Ms. Huang. Thank you, Congresswoman Dean. I think what
you've stated is really important, that the framing of talking
about crime is completely different than talking about domestic
terrorism. It's not fair to ask first responders to crime to
deal with the problems of extremism and domestic terrorism.
It's not safe for us to ask them to do that. This requires a
multiprong response.
To your question why we're seeing the rise and influence of
these extremist groups, I think there's a few reasons.
First, it is increasingly being mainstreamed into our
political discourse. We've seen references to extremist views,
we've seen calls to extremist organizations from high-profile
Members of the former Administration, as well as from Members
of Congress, and that gives supporters, advocates, believers,
adherents to these ideologies the encouragement to Act on these
beliefs.
Second, I agree with my colleagues who've cited the
importance of social media. There's no question that many
people are learning about extremist ideologies online, but we
need to do much more research to understand why being exposed
to those ideologies online is actually encouraging more and
more people to take action. Unfortunately, we don't have enough
research at this time.
Ms. Dean. Thank you for both of those answers.
In my limited time left, I want to call upon both Dr.
Wilson and Rabbi Cytron-Walker to turn to the ``how.'' How do
we get to healing? I'm certain that one of the ways is through
education. I'm reminded of the words of Eboo Patel, who said,
``it matters who gets to a young person's microphone first. Who
do they hear from first?''
So, how do we get to healing, Dr. Wilson and Rabbi Cytron-
Walker?
Mr. Wilson. I would just be very brief. I think you started
down the right path. It is through education. I would be
disingenuous if I did not say that I'm very alarmed by what I
see happening with State legislatures and school districts
across the country with regard to removing books and sanitizing
curricular. That's not the way you're going to solve this
problem, if you will.
Then I think for what I'm seeing across the campuses, I do
think that perhaps some additional resources may be coming
through Health and Human Services to enable us to minister to
the psychological and emotional well-being of our community.
Certainly, it would be welcomed as well.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. The gentlelady's time is up.
I'm pleased to recognize the gentlelady from--
Ms. Dean. Oh, I had a little time left. I was hoping to
hear from the rabbi. Maybe I don't.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You do.
Rabbi Cytron-Walker. Oh, then, sorry, my apologies.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I moved too quickly. Thank you.
Rabbi Cytron-Walker. That's okay. Thank you,
Representative. So, just briefly, I would say that with regard
to healing, healing means that something is already--something
bad has already happened and that we need to heal from, right.
So, all that love and support that we have gotten from people
from every background, it matters. It really helps.
I would hope that the HBCUs, that anyone who deals the Sikh
community, that anyone who deals with trauma and terror is able
to receive that love and support. Part of what we need to do is
to show that love and support before something bad happens,
right, to really care for, not just our own community, but
other communities as well. That's--those are key. That's key.
It's something that's hard to legislate, but that's something
that's incumbent upon each of us.
Ms. Dean. I thank you. Beautifully said.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Thank you for your
understanding. If they needed to speak a little bit longer, I
indulge you on that, but thank you so very much for your
questioning.
It's my pleasure now to yield to the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Ms. Scanlon, for 5 minutes. Thank you.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, Chair Jackson Lee, for calling this
timely and very important hearing.
The data we have shows, that incidents of domestic
terrorism and extremism and hate-based violence are all on the
rise. While some may seek to deflect attention from this hate-
fueled violence by terming it ``identity politics,'' we must
recognize that these incidents occur when extremists target
individuals based upon their identities, seeking to divide our
communities by sowing hate and chaos.
My district is a reflection of the diverse melting pot that
is America. Twenty-five percent of my constituents are Black, 7
percent are Asian, and 4 percent Hispanic. More than 12 percent
are foreign born. Unfortunately, our community has also seen
the recent rise in extremist violence targeting racial and
religious minorities.
According to the Philadelphia Anti-Defamation League, 2020
was the third highest year on record for anti-Semitic incidents
in Pennsylvania, including vandalism of a Philadelphia
synagogue and online verbal and physical harassment of Jewish
community members in my region.
There's a large Sikh population in my district, and in
visiting at the gurdwara and meeting with community members, I
know they are frequently harassed and confronted with anti-
immigrant sentiment, religious discrimination, and hate-based
violence. As bomb threats have targeted over 20 historically
Black colleges and universities in recent weeks, we've been
concerned for the students and faculty at Cheyney University,
the Nation's first HBCU here in my district. I'm really
grateful to our Witnesses for being here today and eager to
hear more about the ways in which the Federal government can
better support institutions facing threats as well as
preventing incidents of domestic terrorism in the first place.
Dr. Jones, the CSIS report from April 12, 2021, indicated
that 66 percent of terrorist plots and attacks in the United
States were committed by White supremacists, extremist militia
members, and other far-right extremists. How does that volume
when focused of right-wing extremist activity compared to prior
years?
Mr. Jones. It's actually similar in many ways to the
percentages from recent years. We continue to see the majority
of violence--of domestic terrorism that is perpetrated by White
supremacists and antigovernment militias. We do see in our data
set domestic terrorism perpetrated by antifascists and others,
but the highest percentages continue to be those perpetrated by
White supremacists. I should also add, in addition, to attacks
and plots, the highest levels of fatalities are also committed
by those on the White supremacist side.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you.
Ms. Huang, how are disinformation, false narratives, and
conspiracy theories used to recruit new members, and what can
we do about that?
Ms. Huang. Thank you, Congresswoman Scanlon. One of the
most important things we have to do is to focus on prevention
initiatives. We need to be making investments in education, and
ensuring that schools can teach inclusive history, not just the
good parts of American history but all our history. That
enables us to have conversations about the types of experiences
we've had in the past with slavery, with genocide, with other
problems of White supremacy so that it's not some kind of
hidden or opaque myth.
The other thing that's really important to do is to focus
on investing in preventative and resilient measures. Some of my
colleagues on the panel have talked about this. There are calls
for increased funding for security reasons. The Nonprofit
Security Fund, for example, is important. It has to be
complemented with efforts to educate and build resilience in
communities to stop radicali-
zation.
We've worked with the PERIL lab at American University to
put out some guidance for parents and families on how they can
look out for possible radicalization amongst young people and
take steps to stop that when it's identified. So, we'd like to
see more investments concomitant with that. Of course,
Congresswoman Lee's legislation that she's introduced, the
Domestic Terrorism Prevention Act, would be a terrific help.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you.
Mr. Kaleka, you've worked some in this field, as I
understand it, to counter hate and promote understanding.
You've worked with deradicalization, helping families respond
when loved ones become involved in extremist groups or when
they want to move away. Can you talk about what you think--what
lessons Congress can learn from your deradicalization efforts?
Mr. Kaleka. Yeah, thank you so much, Congresswoman. Yeah, I
think what we're trying to do is attempt to scale what we're
doing, and scaling it means that we need to teach people how to
create a counseling subspecialty around terrorism, what are
some of the indicators that we look at, what are ways that we
can change behavior as it goes forward. While I can't comment
on cases, I can let that we're seeing a rise in domestic
terrorism cases on our end as well.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I see my time is expired, but I would request
unanimous consent to enter into the record a report from the
Philadelphia Anti-Defamation League titled, ``2020 Third-
Highest Year on Record for Anti-Semitic Incidents in
Pennsylvania.''
Ms. Jackson Lee. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

MS. SCANLON FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady's time is expired.
We know that our rabbi has to log out of this virtual in a
short order, and I'm trying to make sure that all our remaining
Members are able to have him present when they speak. Mr.
Cicilline, you are now recognized for 5 minutes, and we have
two other Members.
Rabbi, thank you for your generous time.
Mr. Cicilline for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
really important hearing, and thank you to our Witnesses.
Domestic terrorism widely fueled by White supremacy is one
of the greatest threats to our country's safety and security.
We have seen over the past decade Black Americans senselessly
murdered at Emanuel AME Church; increased threats against
HBCUs; Jews murdered in Poway, California; the Tree of Life
synagogue in Pittsburgh; and now taken hostage in Texas;
Hispanic people targeted in El Paso in a shooting that left 23
innocent people dead; and a deranged gunman going on a killing
spree across three massage parlors targeting Asian women in
Georgia; and too many other violent hate crimes irrevocably
harming minority communities.
Yet, instead of these attacks spurring action to confront
the threat of White supremacy and hate groups and the threats
that they pose, these organizations have actually grown and so
has domestic terrorism. The year 2020 saw the highest rates of
domestic terrorism since data started being collected more than
25 years ago, and White supremacists or far-right extremist
groups were responsible for two-thirds of terror plots and
attacks in the United States that year.
Sadly, I want to join my colleagues, Congresswoman Bass,
Congresswoman Demings, and others who have made the point--
instead of focusing on this very real threat, some of our
Republican colleagues have tried to use this hearing as a
campaign forum to promote the false claim that Democrats are
against funding the police.
Of course, nothing could be further from the truth. That is
not the position of the Democratic Party. In fact, when we had
the opportunity to test that, we funded the police to the tune
of $350 billion in the American CARES Act that was eligible for
law enforcement to use, local law enforcement. Every single
Republican in Congress voted no to that funding for law
enforcement. So, let's put that nonsense aside and focus on the
hearing before us today and this very real issue.
My first question is for you, Dr. Jones. Can you just speak
to how disinformation and false narratives and conspiracy
theories really are used to recruit new members to extremist
groups and what you think is the status of the government's
efforts to disrupt online disinformation and recruitment by
extremist groups, and is what the government doing to disrupt
that working?
Mr. Jones. Yeah, thanks for the great question.
Disinformation happens in at least two major ways. One is
primarily disinformation caused by domestic organizations in
the U.S. or extremist groups operating overseas. What we see is
false information about immigrants, numbers of immigrants,
about activity being pursued by racial or ethnic communities.
The entire use of disinformation is designed to energize
individuals, to effect emotions in ways that they (a)
radicalize, and then, (b) Act on it eventually.
The second area we have seen is some activity by foreign
actors, particularly some of Russia's intelligence services,
the SVR, the Foreign Intelligence Service, as well as Russia's
GRU, the Main Intelligence Directorate, attempting to exploit
using disinformation and online platforms inside of the United
States, using disinformation to also exploit polarization,
ethnic, racial, and other divisions. So, we've seen both
domestic actors doing it as well as foreign.
As to whether Congress and the government have done enough,
I will say that there has been an uptick in my conversations
with some of the Joint Terrorism Task Forces and the FBI and
the Department of Homeland Security to pay more attention to
this. We are way behind the eight ball for where we were on the
Salafi-Jihadist side, the monitoring--
Mr. Cicilline. Yeah. I'm going to try to get in a couple
more questions, so I don't want to cut you off.
Mr. Jones. Yeah, okay.
Mr. Cicilline. We have a lot of work to do.
Mr. Jones. We're behind.
Mr. Cicilline. Yeah.
Mr. Jones. We're behind, yeah.
Mr. Cicilline. So, I'm going to ask the last two questions
and then I'm going to ask the Witnesses to answer them so I can
get them both in.
Ms. Huang, first, thank you the incredible work you do, and
your organization does. What would you like to see more done to
help people actually move away from extremism and to prevent
this violence, and how can the Federal government support these
efforts? Because it's almost like deprogramming people who have
joined gangs. Like, what do we need to do?
Rabbi, thank you for your beautiful testimony and for your
heroism and for the humanity for which you brought to this
hearing. I wondered if you'd speak a little bit about the
challenges of leading a congregation bearing the burden of
generational trauma and the residual anxiety that comes from
that and what that has meant for your congregation and for you
as a rabbi.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman has 15 seconds.
Mr. Cicilline. The Chair will not, I'm sure, interrupt the
rabbi or Ms. Huang as they answer that question.
Ms. Huang. Thank you, Congressman Cicilline.
Is it all right, Congresswoman Jackson Lee, to go ahead?
Ms. Jackson Lee. You may proceed. Thank you.
Ms. Huang. Thank you.
I just wanted to emphasize, I think it's critically
important to note that the balance of domestic extremism that
we're seeing right now really is being led by the focus on
White supremacy, and that means that some of the steps that
have to be taken address White supremacy directly.
It is not just the Southern Poverty Law Center who's noted
this. We've heard this from the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence, the FBI, and the Department of Homeland
Security in their strategic intelligence assessment, the view
of FBI Director Wray and DHS Secretary Mayorkas in their
congressional testimony last September.
All these government agencies have lifted up the importance
of focusing on White supremacy, which means that we need to
look at these underlying causes, including steps like
Congresswoman Jackson Lee's H.R. 40 bill, which would
commission a study of reparations for slavery, enabling us to
look at the underlying history in this country of White
supremacy and how has it affected different groups. It's just
one example, but I want to be mindful of time. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much.
Let me ask the rabbi to remember my dear friend Mr.
Cicilline's question, and let me allow Mr. Lieu to go forward,
and then if you can incorporate your answer. You're so
valuable, all of you, and we'd like to get Mr. Lieu and Mr.
Cohen in before you have to do your duties, Rabbi. Thank you
for your graciousness.
Mr. Lieu, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chair Sheila Jackson Lee, for holding
this very important hearing.
First, I'd like to do is to ask unanimous consent to enter
two documents for the record. The first is the Congressional
Bipartisan HBCU Caucus letter to Attorney General Garland and
FBI Director Wray, dated February 4, 2022; and the second is
the American Council on Education letter to congressional
leaders regarding the bomb threats, dated February 14, 2022.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

MR. LIEU FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Lieu. Now, I would like to read a statement from my
friend and colleague, Congresswoman Alma Adams, who's a Co-
Chair of the Congressional HBCU Caucus. She says, ``I pray for
our beloved HBCUs this past week.'' However, as a proud alum
twice of North Carolina A&T State University, as a former
professor at Bennett College, and as a founder and Co-Chair of
the Congressional Bipartisan HBCU Caucus, I know for a fact
HBCUs can overcome any challenge. However, HBCUs shouldn't have
to face the violence and terror my generation experienced
during segregation. Terrorism and racism have no place in
college campuses or anywhere else.
Congresswoman Adams continues, ``I also want to take this
opportunity to address the perpetrators of these crimes. Just
as I have prayed for our HBCUs, I am praying for you. I am
praying that you learn from the pain you've caused. I am
praying that the hate that inspired these acts leaves your
heart forever. Like many others around the world, I owe our
HBCUs a debt that can never be repaid. That is why I continue
to pray for our institutions and the souls of those who cannot
or will not honor them.''
Congresswoman Adams concludes, ``In the wake of more
threats levied against Spelman College, Howard University, and
Winston-Salem State University in the past weeks, our Nation is
being forced to once again recon with our history of racism and
discrimination. Now, is the time to respond as a Nation, as a
Congress, and as individuals. Such threats of violence must be
stopped.''
At this point, I have some questions for President Wilson.
President Wilson, has the FBI updated you about their
investigation of these bomb threats?
Mr. Wilson. As much as I can say in this format, we are in
communication with the FBI and with the Department of Homeland
Security. Our Chief of Police is in continuous conversation
with them.
Mr. Lieu. Has the FBI or local law enforcement advised you
on what HBCUs are supposed to do when you get future bomb
threats?
Mr. Wilson. Resources have been made available to us from
the FBI in terms of possible training opportunities which, of
course, we welcome. We have a law enforcement and armed law
enforcement contingent here of pretty close to 60 members,
that's the authorization. So, certainly any training
opportunities that can come our way, we would welcome them,
Congressman.
Of course, we just don't want any more bomb threats. I
mean, that's the bottom line that the fragility of our campus
is quite alarming. I hate to even talk about just preparing the
university for more threats and who knows what else, but that's
the sad reality.
Mr. Lieu. All right. Thank you.
Rabbi Cytron-Walker, I'm going give you an opportunity to
answer the question from my colleague, David Cicilline. I also
have a question for you as well. I've been working with
Congressman Colin Allred on their nonprofit security grants
that you mentioned earlier. We're trying to increase funding.
My question to you is: Are there things for which you would
like that grant to apply to you for which it currently does
not? In other words, are there places you think we should
expand the applicability of these grants?
With that, I'll yield and let you answer those two
questions, one from David Cicilline and one from me.
Rabbi Cytron-Walker. Regarding the grants, yes, to expand
it. I don't know the details enough or the specifics. I'm not
that policy expert. I do know that there was testimony given by
the--Eric Fingerhut of--Congressman Fingerhut of Jewish
Federations and Michael Masters from SCN, the Secure
Communities Network, that I believe would help address how it
can be expanded, not just in terms of funding.
We certainly want support for smaller congregations. That
is one thing I can certainly speak to. Smaller congregations
don't have the resources to write out the grants and do that
work, so we need support as far as that goes.
Regarding the Representative's question about generational
trauma, if I believe that is correct and just how do we heal, I
will say that the way that I've been taking it is one day at a
time. We need to address our security concerns. We also need to
be able to move past this incident.
We are trying to celebrate as a community and rejoice as a
community, and when people need those hugs, when fewer people
are seeing me and bursting into tears, fewer people are hearing
my voice for the first time and choking up, which is a good
thing.
I'm a huge fan and I've been preaching a lot about taking
advantage of mental health resources. We need to have that
sense of support, and we need to be able to celebrate and--so I
don't know how much more I could offer there, but our
therapists are telling us that as soon as we can get back to
normal, that's a positive thing.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Thank you so very much and
thank you for those questions. Thank you.
Very quickly, Rabbi, let me yield to our dear friend from
Tennessee, Mr. Cohen, for 5 minutes. Mr. Cohen, you're
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Madam Chair. It's been rather hectic
here. I've got a tax townhall in a few minutes, but I did want
to address a few things that I wanted to speak earlier, and I
think you more or less addressed them, and I think all of our
Members have the same problem. This is a serious issue, and
it's great that you had this hearing, and the Witnesses have
been marvelous. They've all been marvelous.
Rabbi, you're a hero. You spent that time--didn't know,
with your other members of the congregation, whether you were
going to live or not, and you all did great, and you are
heroic, and I thank you. I don't know if you know Rabbi
Greenstein, but if you do, you're a Rabbi Greenstein. You'll
know that's an honor.
The Republicans all talked about some people on this
Committee, it's what Biggs said and what Mr. Burgess said, was
that Members of this Committee, plural, have talked about
defund the police. I know of only one Member on this Committee
who might have talked about defunding the police, and I wanted
to ask them to name the Members they're talking about, so the
Members could tell them, yes, you're right, or, no, you're not.
They're not with us. So, I can say, with the exception of one
person, the Democrats have not called on defund the police.
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, I am here if he wishes to ask me a
question.
Mr. Cohen. Who were you mentioning? You said some Members
have said defund the police on this Committee. Who were you
addressing, sir?
Mr. Biggs. Yeah. First, Chair Nadler agreed the New York
Police Department budget should be cut, stating, quote, there
should be substantial cuts to the--
Mr. Cohen. Sir, the only question I have for you is, who
said defund the police?
Mr. Biggs. I'm reading to you what he said exactly.
Mr. Cohen. He didn't say defund the police, did he?
Mr. Biggs. Is that your best defense, Mr. Cohen? Okay. All
right. I could go forward. I can give you--okay. I'll just go
Chair Nadler, Representative Bush, Representative Mondaire
Jones, Representative Hakeem Jeffries, I'll give you Hakeem
Jeffries because he was more equivocal, and Representative
Jayapal. I've got their statements. I've got their references
to those statements. I'm happy to submit those to the record,
Madam Chair, and I appreciate the gentleman's question.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Biggs.
Mr. Biggs. I'll yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Madam Chair, how many of those Members are on
the Subcommittee? Just is Ms. Bush on the Subcommittee and Mr.
Nadler?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Are you posing a question? Those are
Members of the Subcommittee. Mr. Nadler is a Member of all
Subcommittees.
Mr. Cohen. Yeah. Other than that, Ms. Bush is the only one
he mentioned that was on the Subcommittee?
Ms. Jackson Lee. That is my understanding.
Mr. Cohen. So, Ms. Bush isn't here to say, and I think she
probably has said defund the police. I don't think Mr. Nadler
has. The other people, I can't speak to them, but they weren't
on the Subcommittee. Bottom line is, most, if not 90 percent of
the Democrats, 95 percent have never talked about defund the
police.
I'm a former Memphis Police legal adviser. I've advocated
for strong policing. We had in our American Recovery Act $350
billion that could be used by police. No Republican voted for
it. $350 billion that only Democrats voted for giving police,
local governments the opportunity to hire more policemen, to
fund policemen, and to improve their systems. We are for common
defense for police protection and have funded it with--so we've
walked the walk not just talked the talk.
There are problems, but there are problems indeed on the
hearing matter that's been called. The hate in this country,
the terrorism, mostly from the radical White supremacists is
horrific. It's un-American. It's in inhuman. It's wrong. It's
been synagogues, it's been churches, it's been NAACP
headquarters.
When I was a child, I remember the Atlanta synagogue being
bombed. I'll never forget such. In Birmingham, it was the
church--I think it was the 16th Street Church bombed. African
Americans and Jews have suffered the most hate in this country.
Sikhs are suffering it now, Muslims and Arabs too. It must
stop.
Now, indeed, in Tennessee, a man just pled guilty to
bombing four White Protestant churches. So, the right wing
sometimes goes off and they even destroy or deface religious
institutions that are akin to their own, if they have a
religion. These people might just be worshipping Satan.
Thank you for our Witnesses. Thank you for our Chair. The
truth will win out, and we need to shine a light on it. That's
what Ida B. Wells told us and shared with us that the best
disinfectant is the truth, and we should speak the truth.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentleman from Memphis and
thank him for his intensity. His time has been yielded and now
expired.
Let me yield to Mr. Biggs, if he has any additional
comments that he chooses to make at this time, the Ranking
Member.
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, thank you. I, again, thank you. I
thank the Witnesses for being here. This has been actually a
very--in my mind, a very productive and very enlightening
hearing, and I appreciate your leadership on this issue. I
appreciate all the Witnesses that have testified.
I've got to comment just a little bit to the gentleman from
Tennessee and also the gentleman from Rhode Island who said
that it was the Republicans are defunding the police. I'll just
tell you that I'm going to submit for the record, Madam Chair,
an article of July 7, 2021, that debunks what the gentleman
from Rhode Island said. In fact, that claim that he made got
three Pinocchios in The Washington Post. So, I'll submit that
to you.
Then I'll also submit, Madam Chair, if possible, without
objection, the citations for the individuals on our Committee,
not our Subcommittee, I didn't say our Subcommittee, I said our
Committee, which is the Judiciary Committee. I'll submit those
to you as well, the statement, so we can all see the statements
that they made.
Now, I want to talk--
Ms. Jackson Lee. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

MR. BIGGS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate that.
I want to get to really what I think has been just some
remarkable testimony that we have to get to, and I appreciate
the--well, I'm sorry. I've got to clarify one other thing. We
had--most of our Members were on this Committee--who are on the
Subcommittee were in attendance at one time or another. Some of
them actually have conflicting Subcommittees or Committee
hearings while we speak, so they weren't all able to be with us
the entire time.
I thought Dr. Jones' testimony was particularly insightful
because it substantiated a lot of what Dr. Pennie had said
about addition--not just domestic actors participating in
indoctrination and radicalization of American actors, but there
were also foreign actors participating there. That's a terrible
thing, and we need to do better.
Section 230, in my opinion, is just part of the way we get
that. I've been working on that for the last 2 years, just so
everyone can know. I think my friend from Rhode Island is
actually working on big tech issues as well, and I think those
would deal with radicalization as much as the additional
censorship, and I appreciate his efforts on some of that--in
that area as well.
I wanted to tell Dr. Wilson, I really appreciate his
testimony. I thought it was very clarifying and very important
and very substantive as well, and I appreciate that testimony.
I also want to thank Brandon Tatum who testified. As an
alumni myself of the University of Arizona Law School and a
native of Arizona, I remember Brandon playing--Mr. Tatum
playing on the University of Arizona Wildcat football team,
which was enjoying better times when he played than it is
enjoying today. So, I appreciate you being here and testifying
today.
I express to the rabbi and also to Mr. Kaleka heartfelt
condolences and sympathy to what you've endured, and I
appreciate it.
Madam Chair, I could go on because I do think this is a
very important topic. I've written it down, additional notes to
go from, and I will take much having learned much today. I
thank you, and I yield back to you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Cicilline. Madam Chair, I have a unanimous consent
request.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Cicilline, you're recognized for a
unanimous consent request.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Madam Chair, I'd ask that a
statement from the Sikh Coalition regarding increased violence
against their community made a part of the record.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

MR. CICILLINE FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me, first, thank Ranking Member Biggs
for putting on the record the importance of this hearing, and I
prayerfully hope that he has gained additional insight. I am
very grateful that he has acknowledged his own faith. He is
right.
I would say to you, Mr. Biggs, many of my friends are in
your faith, and I have known the discrimination historically
and even present that has impacted your community. So, I think
your acceptance and insight of the importance of this is
crucial because that's the only way we can move forward in a
bipartisan way.
So, I want to restate, just for a few minutes, this
hearing's topic was a rise in violence against minority
institutions, but we are grateful that we have heard what words
can do. We see with Mr. Kaleka, he tragically lost friends,
fellow worshippers, and most, his loving father. Someone died,
persons died. I've known the Sikh community. They are very
strong in Houston. We are close. People died. So, I appreciate
your presence here today.
Dr. Jones, your statistics are going to be very helpful in
moving forward on a domestic terrorism legislation, because it
is shocking to many of us that the Federal government does not
have a greater presence in data collection, prosecution because
people die. I think that is what this hearing should suggest.
Out of these words and actions, out of the tiki torches in
Charlottesville, Virginia, someone died. Out of the anti-
Semitic remarks, synagogues across the Nation have had people
die. How grateful we are that in Colleyville, lives were saved
even though the perpetrator said Jews control the world, a
greatly anti-Semitic statement. People died.
Thank you, Dr. Wilson, for digging into the deep
generational trauma that our young Black students face. I'll
have a question for you very briefly and a question for Ms.
Huang.
Again, we hug and honor, we mourn, hug, and honor. We honor
and hug the rabbi because he lived, and those in that synagogue
lived that were under threat. The tragedy, of course, that out
of threats some violence comes and people die.
That is the cruciality of this hearing. That is the topic
that should not be diminished. People die. The pain that I have
and that my Members have, this Congress should have and the
nation should have, is that across the nation of HBCUs
presidents are charged with academic responsibility, but they
are not FBI. They are not law enforcement. They are not
national security experts. We are telling our presidents of
Black universities and other universities of color that they
now have to take on another responsibility because children
could die. I cannot leave this hearing without making that
point.
So, let me first go to Ms. Huang for the storied history of
the Southern Poverty Leadership Conference and to thank you for
now your new leadership, which I am so proud of. Can you
respond to my point--and, again, you are right, H.R. 40 that is
now ready to pass this Congress or to become law is that very
important response to stopping for a moment to discern racism
and its deeply embedded core as relates to African Americans,
the descendants of enslaved Africans. We are ready for that
bill.
Could you in your history of the Southern Poverty
Leadership tie words to ultimate killings and violence? That
seems to be missed, and I want that to be clear on the record.
Ms. Huang?
Ms. Huang. Thank you so much, Congresswoman Jackson Lee. I
believe you know that every year, the Southern Poverty Law
Center issues a Year in Hate report, and in that report, we
track the activities of more than 1,200 hate and extremist
groups across the country, many of whom--and increasingly many
of whom embrace White supremacy as their leading ideology.
There's no question that we cannot successfully tackle
domestic terrorism without dealing with the problem of White
supremacy in this country. The efforts right now that we're
seeing to discourage teachers and schools from talking about
our honest history are contributing to this narrative that
White supremacy is not the problem, and it is. We've seen that
time and time again from the data that is collected by the
government and from the activities of the groups that we track
and monitor.
I would just add, what's most important is that over the
long term, we have to focus on anti-bias, anti-hate prevention,
and civic engagement initiatives. This is how we're going to
counter domestic terrorism. It is the fourth pillar of the
National Strategy for Countering Domestic Terrorism that was
put out by the White House and this Biden Administration. We
hope that this Committee and Congress will take those
recommendations very seriously and prioritize addressing White
supremacy as the key to addressing all these problems.
Thank you, Congresswoman.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Just out of those words, have
you documented that people die, words and actions that you've
just evidenced?
Ms. Huang. We have seen time and time again that people die
because of White supremacy, because of hate and extremism in
this country, and it's why we have spent so much of our time
and energy trying to document these ideologies and to give
warning and support to communities who want to stand up and
protect themselves.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank you very much.
Dr. Morgan (sic), as an academician and the President of
the university representing the world of HBCUs and Thurgood
Marshall schools, coming from your historic history, which in
this day and time is important for people to know that there is
that history, in your leadership and your ability to give
strength to your students, but do you have as your trepidation
your history that when anger and hateful comments were made
people died?
Mr. Wilson. Unfortunately, that is a part of the great
history of the formation and survival of HBCUs. I have
documented in my testimony, going back to 1865, how acts of
racism have destroyed buildings on the campuses, have led to
deaths of students and deaths of professors.
Madam Chair, based on what you just heard from Margaret
Huang of the Southern Poverty Law Center, it is really that
connected with your comment that keeps me up at night and keeps
other HBCU presidents and chancellors up at night. We are in a
period where we don't know if one of these threats will no
longer just simply be a threat, and that is a very, very
frightening place to be.
Our students who come to Morgan and to other HBCUs, they
come to get an education. They come to prepare themselves for
the future of work and the work of the future. They just want
to have an education in an environment that their very lives
are not being threatened every day.
There is no other genre of institutions that I'm aware of,
as I have raised my hand in this hearing today, that is
receiving the bomb threats with the kind of regularity that we
see across HBCUs. I hope the Nation wakes up and responds in a
way that will bring this to an end. I appreciate the
opportunity, Madam Chair, for having presented before this
Subcommittee today.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Dr. Wilson, thank you.
Thank you to, as well, I don't think I mentioned Dr. Pennie
and Dr. Tatum.
Thank you to all the other Witnesses, which I did express
my appreciation.
Dr. Wilson, let it be clear that this Committee, this
Congress, and this Nation will be standing with you.
I wish to introduce into the record a series of texts that
are now appearing in the trial of the Mike Michaels, one to
read, referring to Black people: ``They ruin everything. That's
why I love what I do now. Not a n-i-g-g-e-r in sight,'' Mike
Michaels said in the message. There's a series of these that
are prevalent in the testimony. I want to add--ask unanimous
consent to include these in the record, which I will do without
objection.
Then, I want to introduce into the record a letter that was
sent by Chair Nadler, Chair Jackson Lee, Chair Beatty to the
FBI, in sync Dr. Wilson, and with all of the Witnesses for
there to be a full briefing of this Committee and, of course,
the Congressional Black Caucus, on the question of the attacks
on historically Black colleges and, of course, the rise in
racism and anti-Semitism among many other groups.
We're insisting--let me put that on the record. I want to
ensure Director Wray to know that we will be in touch and want
this to be immediate and not later, because for Congress to
act, we must have these kinds of serious briefings. So, that
letter will be put into the record as well.
[The information follows:]

MS. JACKSON LEE FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. As I conclude, let me say to my own city
of Houston, we are in this fight together. Let me thank Chief
Finner, Mayor Sylvester Turner for the hard work that is going
on, that I am joining them in, and the many neighbors that are
standing up against crime, but the many victims who have been
victimized by crime. We do not take it lightly, and we are
equal to cities across the Nation.
We're coming into a period that mixes the toxicity of the
pandemic and the toxicity of the divisive language that was
evidenced on January 6th and in the past years. We now have to
overcome that with healing and coming together and, yes,
legislation like H.R. 40.
I think this hearing has emphasized the importance of the
work that the Committee is doing, and we will look forward to
hearings addressing the question of violence forthcoming,
because that's what we do in Judiciary Committee. We take up
the issues of concern.
I want to finally say that Members on this Committee have
the right to have differing opinions and characterize their own
words, and I'm sure that all Members appreciate the good work
of our law enforcement officers that are protecting us across
the Nation.
With that, this concludes today's hearing. I thank all of
you and our distinguished Witnesses for attending. We mourn
those who have lost loved ones, and we commit ourselves to
finding solutions.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional written questions for the Witnesses or
additional materials for the record.
The hearing is now adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 1:08 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
