- THE IMPORTANCE OF A DIVERSE FEDERAL JUDICIARY

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE IMPORTANCE OF A DIVERSE FEDERAL
JUDICIARY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COURTS, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, AND THE INTERNET

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, MARCH 25, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-15

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-904                     WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chair
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania, Vice-Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Ranking Member
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,      DARRELL ISSA, California
Georgia                          KEN BUCK, Colorado
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAREN BASS, California               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island     TOM McCLINTOCK, California
ERIC SWALWELL, California            W. GREG STEUBE, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          CHIP ROY, Texas
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
GREG STANTON, Arizona
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MONDAIRE JONES, New York
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CORI BUSH, Missouri

PERRY APELBAUM, Majority Staff Director & Chief Counsel
CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COURTS, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, AND
THE INTERNET

HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr., Georgia, Chair
MONDAIRE JONES, New York, Vice-Chair

THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          DARRELL ISSA, California, Ranking
HAKEEM JEFFRIES, New York                Member
TED LIEU, California                 STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
GREG STANTON, Arizona                LOUIS GOHMERT, Texas
ZOE LOFGREN, California              MATT GAETZ, Florida
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
KAREN BASS, California               TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
ERIC SWALWELL, California            THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
MONDAIRE JONES, New York             DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Michigan
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon

JAMIE SIMPSON, Chief Counsel
BETSY FERGUSON, Senior Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

Thursday, March 25, 2021

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr., Chair of the
Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet
from the State of Georgia......................................     1
The Honorable Darrell Issa, Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet from the State
of California..................................................   101
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of New York...........................   102

WITNESSES
Panel One

The Honorable Carlton W. Reeves, District Judge, United States
District Court, Southern District of Mississippi
Oral Testimony.................................................   104
Prepared Statement.............................................   107
The Honorable Frank J. Bailey, Bankruptcy Judge, United States
Bankruptcy Court, District of Massachusetts
Oral Testimony.................................................   110
Prepared Statement.............................................   112
The Honorable James C. Ho, Circuit Judge, United States Court of
Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
Oral Testimony.................................................   116
Prepared Statement.............................................   118
The Honorable Edward M. Chen, District Judge, United States
District Court, Northern District of California
Oral Testimony.................................................   121
Prepared Statement.............................................   124

Panel Two

The Honorable Bernice B. Donald, Circuit Judge, United States
Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
Oral Testimony.................................................   132
Prepared Statement.............................................   135
Ms. Maya Sen, Professor of Public Policy, Harvard Kennedy School
Oral Testimony.................................................   157
Prepared Statement.............................................   159
Mr. Peter N. Kirsanow, Partner, Benesch, Friedlander, Coplan &
Aronoff, LLP and Commissioner, U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
Oral Testimony.................................................   168
Prepared Statement.............................................   170
Ms. Stacy Hawkins, Professor of Law, Rutgers Law School
Oral Testimony.................................................   173
Prepared Statement.............................................   175

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Materials submitted by the Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson,
Jr., Chair of the Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual
Property, and the Internet from the State of Georgia for the
record
A letter from Clark M. Neily, III, Senior Vice President, Cato
Institute....................................................     6
A report entitled, ``Pipelines to Power: Encouraging
Professional Diversity on the Federal Appellate Bench,''
Center for American Progress.................................    17
A report entitled, ``Building a More Inclusive Federal
Judiciary,'' Center for American Progress....................    45
A letter from the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human
Rights.......................................................    97
An essay entitled, ``How Blind Should Lady Justice Be?'' Law &
Liberty, submitted by the Honorable Darrell Issa, Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property,
and the Internet from the State of California for the record...   192

APPENDIX

Materials submitted by the Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson,
Jr., Chair of the Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual
Property, and the Internet from the State of Georgia for the
record
A letter from the Alliance for Justice.........................   214
A chart from the National Asian Pacific American Bar
Association of APA judges by federal judicial district.......   217
A letter from Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law....   218
A letter from 22 organizations in support of the hearing.......   220
A letter from Tricia (CK) Hoffler, President, National Bar
Association..................................................   222
A letter from the Honorable Frank J. Bailey, President,
National Conference of Bankruptcy Judges.....................   223
An article entitled, ``The Federal Bench Must Reflect the
Racial, Ethnic, and Gender Diversity of the United States,''
Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights..........................   227

THE IMPORTANCE OF A DIVERSE FEDERAL JUDICIARY

----------

Thursday, March 25, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property,

and the Internet

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:09 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Henry Johnson [Chair of the Subcommittee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Johnson of Georgia, Nadler,
Deutch, Lieu, Stanton, Lofgren, Cohen, Jones, Ross, Neguse,
Issa, Jordan, Chabot, Gaetz, Johnson of Louisiana, Tiffany,
Massie, Bishop, Fischbach, Fitzgerald, and Bentz.
Staff Present: Madeline Strasser, Chief Clerk; Moh Sharma,
Member Services and Outreach Advisor; Jordan Dashow
Professional Staff Member; Cierra Fontenot, Staff Assistant;
John Williams, Parliamentarian; Jamie Simpson, Chief Counsel;
Danielle Johnson, Counsel; Matt Robinson, Counsel; Rosalind
Jackson, Professional Staff Member; Betsy Ferguson, Minority
Senior Counsel; Ken David, Minority Counsel; Andrea Woodard,
Minority Professional Staff Member; Darius Namazi, Minority
Research Assistant; and Kiley Bidelman, Minority Clerk.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. The Subcommittee will come to
order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the Subcommittee at any time.
Welcome to this afternoon's hearing on ``The Importance of
a Diverse Federal Judiciary.''
Before we begin, I would like to remind Members that we
have established an email address and distribution list
dedicated to circulating exhibits, motions, or other written
materials that Members might want to offer as part of today's
hearing. If you would like to submit materials, please send
them to the email address that has been previously distributed
to your offices and we will circulate the materials to Members
and staff as quickly as we can.
I would also ask all Members to mute your microphones when
you are not speaking. This will help prevent feedback and other
technical issues. You may unmute yourself anytime you seek
recognition. I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
I often underscore the judiciary's vital role in our great
democracy. The courts are tasked with the sacred duty of
administering justice and upholding the rule of law, and they
must do so fairly and impartially. Yet these duties are only
part of the equation that ensures that the judicial system runs
smoothly. The public must also be confident that the system is
as fair, impartial, and just as it pledges to be. Today we
explore an important part of ensuring the public's confidence
in the courts and creating an equitable judiciary, and that is
the diversity of the Federal bench.
By many metrics, today's judiciary is notably nondiverse
and fails to reflect the communities it serves. Approximately
\3/4\ of Article III judges identify as White, while about \2/
3\ of Article III judges are men, leaving women and people of
color largely underrepresented on the bench.
Some circuit-level examples highlight this striking
dispropor-tionality. The Eleventh Circuit, for example, which
encompasses Georgia, Alabama, and Florida, States that have
been historically rich with diverse population and that today
include a population that is roughly half people of color, 80
percent of the Eleventh Circuit's active judges are people--80
percent of the Eighth Circuit's active judges are White. Just
two circuit judges are people of color.
Today we will hear from the Honorable Bernice Donald of the
Sixth Circuit which includes Tennessee, Kentucky, Ohio, and
Michigan, States that also have a rich and diverse history.
Somehow in 2021, Judge Donald remains the first and only Black
woman to serve on that circuit.
Other circuits tell a similar story. It is staggering that
in today's age there are so few opportunities for
underrepresented communities to see themselves reflected on the
bench. We are, of course, in a better place than we were
decades ago. Courts were even more overwhelmingly White and
even more overwhelmingly male, but the incremental progress we
have since made is not a success story. Efforts to further
diversify the bench have even regressed in recent years. As
today's numbers show on their face, there is a lot more work to
be done.
Diversity beyond demographic metrics also matters.
Currently, judges' backgrounds tilt toward those with
prosecutorial experience, with educational credentials that
lean toward a limited set of law schools. We are left without
the value of wide-ranging professional and educational
experiences that would enhance our Nation's courtrooms.
Now, why does this matter? A diverse judiciary is vital to
maintaining the public's confidence in the courts. The public
perceives a judiciary that reflects a cross-section of its
community as fairer with the potential to be better
understand--or excuse me--with the potential to better
understand their realities.
Judicial decision-making is also enhanced when the bench is
diverse. A variety of narratives and perspectives must be
considered and weighed, and no one set of values can dominate.
As one judge once put it, quote, ``I think everybody is
applying the same law but you may be able to see more angles.
The more angles, the better the decision,'' end quote.
This is the first time at least in recent history that the
Committee has focused squarely on the issue of a diverse
Federal judiciary. Today's esteemed witnesses bring important
perspectives on the vital role diversity plays, and I look
forward to having a productive dialogue.
Without objection, I would like to enter into the record a
statement from the Cato Institute, two reports from the Center
for American Progress, and a letter from the Leadership
Conference on Civil and Human Rights.
[The information follows:]

MR. JOHNSON OF GEORGIA FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. It is now my pleasure to recognize
the Ranking Member of the subcommittee, the gentleman from
California, Mr. Issa for his opening statement.
Mr. Issa, you may begin.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for holding
this hearing.
The subject of the hearing was no surprise to me and, as we
seek to expand the court in the months to come, perhaps as many
as 75 or 80 new Members, it is certainly my hope and I join
with you in believing that the new entrants to the court will
represent the best and the brightest of those who have prepared
and are able to assume one of the most difficult jobs there is
and that is to fairly execute the Constitution from a position,
lifetime position, of great power.
I will find some differences and I believe our witnesses
will show some differences not in the goal and not in the
benefit but, in fact, in some preferences that I think people
sometimes miss. Without a doubt, when we have community
policing, we want to make sure that they represent the
community they live and work in. I specifically remind us that
police and fire and others who live and work in a community
tend to be extremely vested and, of course, familiar both with
the people and the neighborhoods.
When we seek a jury, as everyone on both sides of the dais
know, the jury is often selected by an adversarial relationship
of a plaintiff and defendant, that, in fact, each is trying to
find a jury that most closely understands their view that they
will argue for.
What is different and I believe unique and we will see
today is the role that the impartial individual who sits on the
dais, sometimes with a background in as a prosecutor, sometimes
in defense, sometimes in civil litigation, very seldom, quite
frankly, with specifics of what they will have before them,
whether it is labor law, patent, or other criminal or civil
prosecutions and they have to be able to look to the law but,
more importantly, they need to be able to look at both sides,
listen to both arguments, and compare it with the law on the
Constitution.
I believe that we will show today, although the goal of
more women and more broadly diversity, that we also recognize
that we want to select, going forward, the best and the
brightest and most qualified and that there is no history at
the Federal bench of people making different decisions based on
their economic position in life or their distinctions at birth,
whether it is color or gender.
So, I am looking forward to us and I really believe the
Chair has picked an appropriate subject for us to look at when
we are preparing to expand the court but I also believe that we
are going to find that, properly chosen, these justices and
judges will, in fact, execute in a way that cannot be predicted
based on any part of their birthrights, if you will, of
citizenship, of color, or of gender.
Lastly, I would like to put one piece of levity into this.
I for one would like to see at some point more diversity on the
Supreme Court. It appears as though you must go to Harvard or
Yale to be considered in many cases and, as someone who
graduated from an Ohio State University, I certainly would hope
that we reach out and find justices that have gone beyond just
a handful of Ivy League colleges.
With that, I appreciate the opportunity to attend this
hearing and to participate.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I thank the gentleman from
California.
I am now pleased to recognize the Chair of the Full
Committee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Nadler, for his
opening statement.
Chair Nadler. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, I will begin my remarks by quoting from the
confirmation hearing of a current Supreme Court Justice.
``When I get a case about discrimination, I have to think
about people in my own family who suffered discrimination
because of their ethnic background or because of religion or
because of gender,'' the Justice said, ``and I do take that
into account.''
This statement was a frank acknowledgment that our Federal
judges bring their life experiences with them to the bench and
that those experiences inevitably inform their work, and it
goes to the heart of why this hearing is so important.
The Justice also explained that, ``I am who I am in the
first place because of my parents,'' telling the Senate
Judiciary Committee that, ``My father was brought into this
country as an infant, grew up in poverty, and could not find a
job as a teacher because of the discriminatory hiring practices
prevalent at the time.''
Our Federal courts are made better by having Justices whose
family experiences with poverty and immigration and
discrimination are so powerful that they not only made that
experience part of the record of their confirmation hearing,
but they also declared that they have to take that experience
into account when deciding cases.
These words were spoken by Justice Samuel Alito at his
confirm hearing in 2006. I think most Americans would agree
with what Justice Alito said and they would be glad to have
judges who understand that their own and their colleagues' very
backgrounds, perspectives, and life experiences make our
judiciary stronger.
I also think most Americans, especially most young people,
would take for granted the idea that our courts should reflect
the incredible diversity of our country. Unfortunately, we have
a lot of work to do when it comes to judicial diversity. There
are ways in which the Federal judiciary of 2021 looks
uncomfortably similar to the Federal judiciary of 1921, just a
few years after Justice Brandeis became a target of anti-
Semitic opposition to becoming the first Jewish Supreme Court
Justice.
Somehow, despite all our progress, today's Federal judges
remain, for instance, overwhelmingly male, White, former
prosecutors or corporate lawyers who went to a handful of law
schools as Mr. Issa mentioned.
There is only one female judge among the eight circuits' 15
active Members, and she is the only the second woman ever to
serve on that court. There had been no Black judges in the
Seventh Circuit at all which encompasses Illinois, Wisconsin,
and Indiana since 2018, after the first person of color ever to
serve on that circuit retired. There is just one Hispanic judge
on the 10th Circuit which includes Colorado, New Mexico,
Kansas, Oklahoma, Utah, and Wyoming. There has never been a
Native American judge on any court of appeals.
We need to come to terms with why our Federal courts remain
so strikingly nondiverse in so many ways. I am not just
referring to characteristics like race, gender, ethnicity,
religion, or disability. Why, for example, are there so few
judges who are public defenders, civil rights lawyers,
plaintiffs' attorneys, legal aid attorneys, or small business
attorneys? Our judiciary would be enriched if we had more
judges with a broader range of legal experiences and education.
We must also consider the consequences this lack of
diversity has on the broader judicial system. For example,
Americans are many times more likely to appear in bankruptcy
court than in any other Federal court, but bankruptcy judges
are the least racially and ethnically diverse judges in the
entire Federal judiciary and they are not even proper Article
III judges.
That is especially concerning, because bankruptcy judges
are appointed by a majority vote of the Court of Appeals judges
in their circuit. As I just mentioned, they are not even
Article III judges.
Since this is an area in which the Federal judiciary can
address its diversity problem without help from Congress or the
President, I hope we will make improving diversity among
bankruptcy judges a priority.
Ultimately, we need to remind ourselves of what most
Americans understand, that a diverse Federal judiciary enhances
public faith in the courts and improves the judicial process.
I want to thank Mr. Johnson for holding this hearing. I
look forward to hearing from our witnesses about this important
topic.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I thank the gentleman from New
York.
I now recognize the distinguished Ranking Member of the
Full Committee, the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Jordan.
Mr. Issa. Mr. Chair, the Ranking Member will pass at this
time. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. All right. Thank you, Congressman
Issa.
We will now begin with the introduction to Panel One, the
Honorable Carlton W. Reeves is a District Judge for the
Southern District of Mississippi. After law school, Judge
Reeves clerked for the Honorable Reuben V. Anderson of the
Mississippi Supreme Court. He subsequently worked as a staff
attorney for the Supreme Court of Mississippi and in private
practice.
From 1995 to 2001, Judge Reeves served as Chief of the
Civil Division of the Office of the United States Attorney for
the Southern District of Mississippi. In 2001, he opened his
own firm, Pigott Reeves Johnson, in Jackson, Mississippi.
During this time Judge Reeves served on the board of
several civic organizations including the ACLU of Mississippi,
the Mississippi Center for Justice, and the Magnolia Bar
Association. Judge Reeves earned his B.A. from Jackson State
University and his J.D. from the University of Virginia.
Welcome, Judge.
The Honorable Frank J. Bailey is a Bankruptcy Judge on the
bankruptcy court for the District of Massachusetts. He was
appointed in 2009 and served as chief judge from 2010 to 2015.
Judge Bailey also sits on the Bankruptcy Appellate Panel for
the First Circuit. He has served as the First Circuit Governor
and Chair of the Education Committee for the National
Conference of Bankruptcy Judges.
Before his appointment, Judge Bailey was a partner at a law
firm where he served as the Chair of the litigation department.
He has taught as an Associate Professor at Boston University,
Suffolk University, and the New England School of Law. He
earned his undergraduate degree at Georgetown University's
School of Foreign Service and his J.D. from the Suffolk
University Law School. Welcome, Judge Bailey.
The Honorable James C. Ho is a Circuit Judge for the Fifth
Circuit Court of Appeals. Judge Ho clerked for Judge Jerry
Edwin Smith of the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals and then
entered private practice. He served in the Civil Rights
Division of the Office of Legal Counsel in the Department of
Justice.
From 2003 to 2005, he was Chief Counsel for the Senate
Judiciary Committee under Senator John Cornyn. He then clerked
for Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas from 2005 to 2006.
From 2008 to 2010, Judge Ho was the Solicitor General of Texas.
Judge Ho earned his B.A. from Stanford University and his J.D.
from the University of Chicago Law School. Welcome, Judge Ho.
The Honorable Edward M. Chen is a District Judge for the
Northern District of California. After law school, Judge Chen
clerked for Judge Charles Byron Renfrew of the Northern
District of California and for Judge James R. Browning of the
Ninth Circuit. After time working in private practice, Judge
Chen worked as a staff attorney for the American Civil
Liberties Union. He then served as a United States Magistrate
Judge in the Northern District of California. Judge Chen earned
his B.A. and his J.D. from the University of California at
Berkeley.
Now, before proceeding with testimony, I remind the
witnesses that all of your written and oral statements made to
the Subcommittee in connection with this hearing are subject to
penalties of perjury pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 1001, which may
result in the imposition of a fine or imprisonment of up to 5
years or both. Please note that your written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety.
Accordingly, I ask that you summarize your testimony in 5
minutes. There is a timer in the WebEx view that should be
visible on your screen that should help you stay within that
time limit. For this panel we will not have any questions after
the witness testifies.
Judge Reeves, you may now begin.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE CARLTON W. REEVES

Judge Reeves. To Chair Johnson, Ranking Member Issa, and
Members of the subcommittee, I am honored to testify alongside
my esteemed colleagues, Judge Chen, Judge Donald, Judge Bailey,
and Judge Ho. Their brilliance is proof that diversity makes
our justice system strong. Between their words and the
testimony of renowned academics like Professors Stacy Hawkins
and Maya Sen and attorney Peter Kirsanow, I am sure you will
have all the evidence you need to know that we must diversify
our Federal courts.
As I prepared my comments, I thought about the only other
time that I have had the honor and privilege of appearing
before this august body nearly 11 years ago at my confirmation
hearing. On that day I was joined by Judge Mary Murguia, Denise
Casper, Edmund Chang, and Judge Leslie Kobayashi. The room
looked like America, a country populated by persons of various
races, colors, sexes, genders, religions, and sexual
orientations, a representation of the tapestry that has been
woven to make our more perfect union.
At the hearing, Senator Durbin asked me the following
question. Can you talk to us about the importance of racial
diversity on the Federal bench in Mississippi, given your
personal experience growing up in Mississippi and your
knowledge of how far your State has come? My response, in part,
was that judges serve several functions, role models to other
lawyers, role models to students, role models to the people who
come before the court.
People need to see that they have a chance, that they, too,
can one day come to the great hall of the Senate and be
nominated by a President to be a judge. My answer to that
question today would be the same, as I am reminded every day
how others perceived my role and purpose through their
telephone calls, text message, emails, notes, conversations,
and in-court reactions and statements.
All I can add to this remarkable panel is a simple plea. Go
big. Aim high. Be bold. Simply be committed to diversity in the
third branch of our government. It is a time for boldness
because our present trajectory risks a crisis of legitimacy.
More than \2/3\ of Federal judges appointed over the last 4
years were White men, a group that represents less than \1/3\
of all Americans. Thirty percent of Americans in the Seventh
Circuit are persons of color, but the Seventh Circuit doesn't
have a single Black jurist. The Fifth Circuit has an enormous
Latino population. Yet, none of its judges are Latino.
I am reminded of the raw emotion that a friend and mentor,
Geraldine Sumpter from Charlotte, North Carolina, experienced
ten years ago when she stepped to the podium to argue in the
Fourth Circuit and across from her for the first time in her
nearly 30 years of practice was a panel of three African-
American judges.
At this moment, having such a panel is still an illusive
dream in many of our circuit courts but especially piercing the
Fifth and Eleventh Circuits, the home of so many of America's
African-American citizens. I am ashamed to say that my own
court didn't have a single female Article III judge until 3
months ago. I appreciate our Senators for fixing that 200-year-
old mistake.
These are countless and other comparisons reveal a
disturbing fact. As our country becomes more diverse, our
courts are becoming more homogenous. In the judicial oath of
office, we promise to administer justice. An extreme imbalance
in our courts is a threat to justice. If I have learned one
thing in my years as a judge, it is this. The diversity
matters. When our courts are diverse, they better understand
the complexity of the American experience embedded in every
case that comes before them. When our courts are diverse, they
reinforce public trust in our system of government. America
contains multitudes. So, must this court.
Righting the ship will take more than a return to past
practices. While the Obama Administration appointed female
judges at an unprecedented rate, nearly 60 percent of all
judicial appointees under the Administration were men. While
recent decades have seen periodic efforts to spring racial--to
bring racial and gender diversity to the bench, appointees have
increasingly shared educational and professional backgrounds.
Former prosecutors, partners in national law firms, and
graduates of our Nation's top law schools are overrepresented
on the bench. We also need insights from other public servants,
those in the academy, those in small firms, and those who have
represented the hopeless and dispossessed, the public
defenders, the immigration lawyers, and the rural legal aid
lawyers.
If you go big, aim high, and be bold, you will shape not
just the next generation of judges, you will encourage change
of the entire ecosystem of the legal profession, as my friend,
Melissa Murray points out. In that ecosystem, district judges
influence the hiring of their own clerks, magistrate judges,
special masters, receivers, MDL Steering Committees, and the
clerks of our courts and all those hired into that public
offices.
Circuit judges are responsible for their own clerks,
bankruptcy judges, public defenders, and the clerks of their
courts. Judges and the lawyers they appoint serve on
commissions, councils, committees, and other bodies to make
sure our judicial system fulfils its core missions. Your
leadership on the courts will have a ripple effect through this
powerful profession.
The very fact that I am here before you today is a
testament to Brown versus Board of Education. After that
decision was implemented in my Mississippi, I joined the first
fully integrated class of Mississippi school children. For 12
years we were fortunate to be in the same classroom with each
other, developing lifelong friendships and receiving an
education that prepared us for the world.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Judge?
Judge Reeves. Yes, sir.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. If you could sum up now, you are
past your 5 minutes.
Judge Reeves. Okay. I am so very sorry. That decision, its
bravery and its courage and its moral clarity, I hope you will
be similarly courageous in shaping the next generations of this
country. Diversity matters.
Thank you.
[The statement of Judge Reeves follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Judge Reeves.
Judge Bailey, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE FRANK J. BAILEY

Judge Bailey. Thank you to Chair Johnson, Ranking Member
Issa, and to Members of the Committee for inviting me to
testify this afternoon on this very important subject. I have
submitted a more extensive statement, but I would like to focus
on just five points.
My first point is that perceptions of equal treatment may
matter just as much as the reality of equal treatment when you
are talking about court appearances. My view on this was formed
by a personal experience. I was in court early in my judicial
career, and an unrepresented African American man came to a
hearing on a motion that he had to lose. There was no chance of
him winning it. The law wouldn't have allowed it.
I patiently explained that to him, because he was
unrepresented, and I gave him the reasons. I explained to him
that his motion was just premature, that he would later have a
chance to give us his basis and preserve his rights, and at the
end of the hearing he looked up at me and he said something I
hope no other judge ever has to hear but I know we have. He
said, ``A Black man cannot get a fair hearing in this court.''
Well, that statement took my breath away. I maintained my
judicial composure. I calmly asked him to tell me all the
reasons why he felt that was the case. I explained to him that
he was wrong in that view, and he had little to say and later
on, by the way, he won his motion.
I left the bench and later I thought, of course, he feels
that way. He walked into a courtroom, and the judge is White.
All the courtroom staff were White. All the court security that
he encountered coming in and in the courtroom were also White
and, if he went to our clerk's office, he would see the
photographs of our judges on the wall and they were all White.
So, I realized, it is perceptions that matter. Of course, he
felt that way.
My second point, perceptions of equal treatment in my
court, the bankruptcy court, matter enormously. First, as Chair
Nadler pointed out earlier, most Americans that encounter a
Federal judge will encounter a Federal bankruptcy judge. That
is because of the numbers.
Second, access to a so-called fresh start through the
bankruptcy system is preserved by the Constitution, Article I,
Section 8. So, that right is assured to all Americans and my
fear is that, unless the court, the judges on the court and our
staffs, reflect the communities that we serve, it may be that
people in those communities may not feel that they are welcome
in our courts and so diversity on the court and the court
family is enormously important.
My third point. Diversity on the bench--on the bankruptcy
bench starts with diversity on the Article III bench. Again,
Chair Nadler saw this coming when he said that--and I am the
only Article I judge who is testifying today--Bankruptcy judges
are appointed by Circuit judges. Circuit judges, where there
are diverse circuit judges who are Article III, making the
decision on who gets the appointment to serve as a bankruptcy
judge, more diverse lawyers will feel comfortable applying.
My fourth point. Virtually, all my colleagues on the
bankruptcy bench agree with me that a diverse bankruptcy bench
is essential to equity and fairness and inclusion in our
country. I know that because I am serving as the President of
the National Conference of Bankruptcy Judges, a 100-year-old
organization that almost all our judges and retired judges are
Members of and because my fellow judges work tirelessly on
diversity initiatives every day to increase the participation
of diverse individuals in our bankruptcy system.
For example, I will give one, one of many that I could
give. We have the Blackshear Fellowship Program that we started
some years ago that offers a diverse--offers diverse lawyers a
scholarship to attend our annual conference. That brings them
into contact with 1,500 bankruptcy professionals. Has that
initiative worked? Well, you could ask Judge Charles Walker
from Nashville. You could ask Judge Tiiara Patton of
Youngstown, Ohio. They were both Blackshear fellows. They are
both now serving on our bench. It worked.
My fifth and final point is that the need to address
diversity on our bench is not only critical, but it may be
urgent. The bankruptcy bench is the least diverse Federal bench
by far. In its last report on numbers in 2019, the AO's Fair
Employment Practices office reported that our bench, the
bankruptcy bench, was under 3 percent African American, 2
percent Hispanic, 2 percent Asian American, and there were no
Native American or Pacific Islander judges on our bench.
In conclusion, Bankruptcy judges deliver bad news to people
every day. Sometimes it is that you will have to lose your
home. Other times, it is not you who is going to collect on
that claim that you were counting on. So, perceptions of
fairness and equity matter enormously on the bankruptcy bench.
So, thank you so much, Chair Johnson, Ranking Member Issa,
and Members of the Subcommittee for taking the time to have
these very important hearings. Thank you.
[The statement of Judge Bailey follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Judge Bailey.
We will now hear from Judge Ho. Judge Ho, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JAMES C. HO

Judge Ho. Thank you.
Chair Nadler, Chair Johnson, Ranking Members Jordan and
Issa, thank you for inviting me to testify. I am honored to
join my distinguished colleagues from the judiciary.
My remarks today are akin to what we judges sometimes call
``concurring in the judgments.'' We agree on certain core
principles, but I would like to offer my own reasoning.
Equality of opportunity is fundamental to who we are and to
who we aspire to be as a Nation, and to my mind that means two
things. It means that we must do everything we can to ensure
that everyone truly has the opportunity to succeed, and it
means we must never bend the rules to favor anyone. Dr. King
had it right. ``Choose people based on who they are, not what
they look like.''
Let me begin by explaining how I began. I came to America
from Taiwan at a very young age. So, most kids grow up learning
English from their parents. I grew up learning English from a
bunch of puppets from a place called Sesame Street. My
classmates brought a kid's lunchbox to school. I brought a
bento box to school. My food seemed normal to me but it smelled
funny to my classmates or so they would tell me, and I remember
racial slurs and jokes on the playground and on the football
field. I also learned that if you work hard and prove yourself,
you can find your place in America.
Equality of opportunity is not something to be passive
about. It is something we should be passionate about. We must
make sure that everyone has the opportunity to learn and to
succeed so that win, lose, or draw, at least you got a chance,
no matter who you are. This is not just a talking point to me.
It is why I was honored to serve as Co-Chair of the Judiciary
Committee of the National Asian Pacific American Bar
Association. It is why I love talking to young lawyers and law
students of every race and idealogical stripe. It is why always
say that if anyone is willing to forego other opportunities in
their careers to enter public service, call me. I will take
them to lunch and share what I know.
Here is the kicker. Once everyone has had full and fair
opportunity to be considered, you pick on the merits. Both the
Constitution and the Civil Rights Act make clear that it is
wrong to hire people based on race. That is the law for a wide
range of jobs. It would be especially wrong, I would submit, to
select judges based on race.
It is true I am the only Asian American on my court. I am
also the only immigrant on my court. I would never suggest that
a wise Asian would more often than not reach a better
conclusion than a White judge. That would be antithetical to
our legal system and poisonous to civil society. No one should
ever assume that I am more likely to favor Asians, or
immigrants, or anyone else, or that my colleagues are less
likely to. Everyone should lose or win based on the law.
Period. That is why Lady Justice wears a blindfold. That is why
judges wear Black robes.
I don't say this because I think race is no longer an issue
in our country. I have received racist hate mail and racially
disparaging remarks because of positions I have taken in my
legal career. I have been treated differently because of the
race of the person I am married to. I also remember back in
high school my college admissions advisor tell on me that my
grades, SAT scores, and activities were all strong enough to
get me into my top choice of schools if I wasn't Asian.
Now, I am not saying anything of this here to complain.
Whatever negative experiences I have had, they pale in
comparison to the many blessings I have had living in this
great country. I was not born an American, but I thank God
every day that I will die an American.
My point is just that I don't come to my views because I
think racism is behind us. Rather I come to my views precisely
because racism is not behind us, because the last thing we
should do is divide people by race. The last thing we should do
is to suggest that the racists are right. We don't achieve
equality of opportunity by denying it to anyone. We achieve it
by securing it for everyone.
So, make no mistake. It would be profoundly offensive and
un-American to tell the world that you are restricting a
judgeship to Members of only one race. It is offensive to
people of other races, and it is offensive to people of that
race, because you are suggesting that the only way they will
get the job is if you rig the rules in their favor.
As a judge, I have the profound honor of presiding over a
naturalization ceremony every year. I do this to celebrate my
own naturalization now 39 years ago. People from all around the
world come together in one room for one purpose, to become an
American. It reminds me that what binds our Nation is not a
common race or religion or philosophical point of view. What
unites us is not a common past but a common hope for the
future, a shared love of freedom, and a mutual commitment to
the Constitution and to the principle of equality, of
opportunity.
Thank you.
[The statement of Judge Ho follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Judge Ho.
Ms. Chen, you may begin.
Judge Chen, you may need to unmute.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE EDWARD M. CHEN

Judge Chen. I apologize for that. I hope that doesn't count
against my time.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. No. We will start your time now.
Judge Chen. Okay. Thank you.
Chair Johnson, Ranking Member Issa and Members of the
subcommittee, I am honored to have the opportunity to address
you today on this very important topic. I would like to
highlight three points from my more extensive written
submission.
Diversity in the judiciary is valuable for three reasons.
One, it promotes trust and confidence of the public. Two, it
enhances interrelationships within the bench. Three, it
improves the quality of decision-making.
Public trust. To put Chair's remarks about the importance
of public trust in the courts, I would like to tell you a
simple story. My colleague, Judge Edward Davila, sits in San
Jose. He presides over a diverse docket. He is the first Latinx
judge to sit on our court in 20 years. In a case involving a
limited English-speaking Latino litigant, Judge Davila
discussed some procedural matters and then asked the litigant
if he had any questions. Appearing nervous, the litigant looked
at Judge Davila and asked, ``Will you be my judge?'' Those
simple words, freighted with anxiety, bespoke the sense of
intimidation and alienation too often felt by Members of
underserved communities. In Judge Davila, that litigant found
an island of hope in a sea of isolation, hope that he would at
least be heard and understood.
This seemingly small, insignificant courtroom moment
underscores a larger point, that the bench that is reflective
of the community it serves can be instrumental in securing the
trust and confidence of the public.
A word about interpersonal relationships on the bench. A
diverse bench affords a unique and personal opportunity for
judges to learn from each other, thereby enriching
interpersonal relationships. That point was eloquently made by
Justice O'Connor in her tribute in 1992 to Justice Thurgood
Marshall. She recounted Justice Marshall's fondness of sharing
personal stories with other Justices in conference to emphasize
legal points including stories about the Ku Klux Klan violence,
jury bias, defending an innocent African American wrongly
convicted of rape and sentenced to death.
Judge O'Connor spoke about the impact those stories had on
her own understanding of the issues confronting the court. As
she put it, no one could help but be moved by Justice Thurgood
Marshall's spirit. ``Occasionally in conference meetings I
still catch myself looking expectantly for his raised brow and
his twinkling eye, hoping to hear just one more story that
would perhaps change the way I see the world.''
As a local example, former chief judge of our district,
Marilyn Hall Patel, speaks of her experience as the first and
for many years the only woman on our bench. She describes how
shh would hear laughter and loud chatter in the judge's
lunchroom which came to a sudden halt when the sounds of her
approaching heels reached her male colleagues. One day a
raucous rally was heard outside the courthouse. One of her
colleagues asked what is going on. Judge Patel explained it was
a rally for the International Women's Day. Her colleague then
jabbed, well, maybe they should have an international men's
day, to which she replied, that is the other 364 days of the
year. Judge Patel stood her ground and over time moved the
needle.
Finally, about decision-making, the diversity on the bench
enhances the quality of the decision-making. Take for instance
credibility determinations. A witness' testimony may seem more
credible if it is consistent with the judge's experience and,
conversely, less credible if it remains outside that judge's
experience. The first African-American chief judge of our
court, Thelton Henderson, recalled an instance in which a White
colleague was presiding over a racial harassment trial. That
judge noted that the plaintiff was generally credible. However,
the judge still found it hard to believe the plaintiff's
testimony about racist graffiti found on a locker and a drawing
of a hangman's noose around a baboon left on his desk.
While his colleague found that testimony implausible, Judge
Henderson recounted to him how Members of his own family had
experienced the very same kind of harassment described by the
plaintiff and that he found nothing inherently implausible
about that testimony.
Diversity also ensures a fuller discussion of legal
analysis. Take for instance the case of Redding v. Safford
Unified School District which involved the question of whether
a strip search of a middle school female student suspected of
drugs violated the Fourth Amendment. The Supreme Court had to
determine whether the search was excessively intrusive and less
than reasonable. During oral argument, one male Justice
remarked how it wasn't unusual when he was 12 to take off his
clothes when he had to change for gym. In a later interview,
Justice Ginsburg explained she needed to facilitate her fellow
Justices' understanding of what a strip search might mean to a
teenage girl. As she put it, ``They had never been a 13-year-
old girl. It is a very sensitive age for a girl, and I don't
think my colleagues, at least some of them, quite understood.''
The court ultimately found the search unconstitutional.
As another example, Virginia v. Black where the court had
to address the constitutionality of lawmaking in a crime to
burn a cross. According to press accounts, the initial
questioning by the court indicated that Members of the court
seemed inclined to strike the law down as violative of the
First amendment until Justice Clarence Thomas spoke. Recounting
the reign of terror visited upon Black communities by the Ku
Klux Klan, Justice Thomas said that a burning cross is unlike
any symbol in our society and had no purpose other than to
cause fear and to terrorize a population.
According to press accounts, his fellow Justices were rapt,
and the tenor of the argument turned. The court went on to
uphold the statute, making it illegal to burn a cross with the
intent to intimidate others.
In 1943 and 1944, the Supreme Court upheld the imposition
of race-based curfews and interment of 120,000 Japanese
Americans in Hirabayashi and Korematsu. In justifying why
Japanese Americans could be singled out for mass treatment,
whereas Americans of German and Italian descent would not, the
court opined that Japanese Americans were more prone to
disloyalty and presented a military risk. The court based its
assumption on its observation that the Japanese have, quote,
``intensified their solidarity and have in large measure
prevented their assimilation as an integral part of the White
population.''
I ask the question: What if there had been a Japanese
American Justice on the court? That Justice would likely have
challenged the false assumption made by his fellow Justices,
reminding them that \2/3\ of those who were interned were full
United States citizens, most by birthright, and that,
therefore, before they were ripped from their homes by the
internment order, Japanese Americans were inextricably
integrated into the economy.
That Justice might have related how they had a nephew who
had just been elected class President of an integrated high
school and describe how Japanese-American children were active
in the YMCA, in the Boy Scouts, that many excelled in all-
American sports like basketball, tennis, bowling, and golf and
followed baseball as closely as any other American.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Judge Chen, you are now beyond your
5 minutes. If you would sum up, we would greatly appreciate it.
Judge Chen. Okay. I just need 30 seconds, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Yes sir.
Judge Chen. That Justice would have told his colleagues
about their son, nephew, brother who enlisted in the Army,
along with thousands of other Japanese Americans, to join the
famed 442nd Regimental Combat Team, the most decorated unit for
its size in U.S. military history, a regiment that ironically
was among the first to liberate the concentration camp at
Dachau.
So, in closing, I feel there is a cost when voices are
missing from the room. That cost is not theoretical. It is
real. Diversity makes for a better judiciary and that, in turn,
helps fulfill our promise of justice for all.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
[The statement of Judge Chen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Judge Chen.
That concludes the panel of today's hearing, and I would
like to thank the witnesses for their participation and for
their testimony. Thank you very much.
At this time, we will transition to the second panel of
witnesses, and we will give that just a couple of seconds.
All right. Staff, are we ready? Okay. I have been given the
okay to begin now with our second panel.
To introduce our first witness, I will turn to the
gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Cohen, for his introduction.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It is my honor to introduce one of the most distinguished
jurists in the United States of America, the Honorable Judge
Bernice Donald.
Judge Donald was born just south of Memphis in Southaven,
Mississippi. She went to Memphis State University for
undergraduate school and for law school. She became an attorney
and started out with Legal Services. When she was with legal
services, she appeared before me in 1980 when I had a brief
interim General Sessions courtship.
Fortunately, we both left those positions. She became a
public defender after she was a Legal Services attorney and
eventually, she was General Sessions judge herself and then she
became a United States Bankruptcy judge for about 6 years or 7
years. Then through President Clinton's appointment she became
a Federal District Court judge, recommended by my predecessors,
Harold Ford, Sr.
She served about 16 years in Memphis as an outstanding
member of our local bench in the Western District of Tennessee
and then was elevated to the Sixth Circuit about 10 years ago
by President Barack Obama. She has been an outstanding judge
and shows how opportunities given can be shown to make justice
better, to serve with distinction, and to be a very great
representative and honorable representative of the city of
Memphis.
Judge Bernice Donald.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Congressman Cohen.
Welcome, Judge Donald.
Next, I will introduce Maya Sen who is a Professor of
Public Policy at John F. Kennedy School of Government at
Harvard University. Her research covers law, political economy,
race, and ethnic politics and statistical methods.
Professor Sen currently serves as the Director of the
Harvard Multidisciplinary Program in Inequality and Social
Policy. She is also an affiliate for the Institute for
Quantitative Social Science, the Taubman Center for State and
Local Government, and the Ash Center for Democratic Governance
and Innovation.
She earned her J.D. from Stanford Law School and a Ph.D. in
political science from Harvard. She was also a clerk for Judge
Ron Gilman of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit.
Welcome, Professor Sen.
Peter N. Kirsanow is a commissioner on the U.S. Commission
on Civil Rights. He was appointed in 2001 and is currently
serving his fourth term and is the longest serving member of
the commission.
Mr. Kirsanow is also a partner in the Cleveland office of
the law firm Benesch, Friedlander, Coplan & Aronoff and works
within its labor and employment practice group. Previously, he
served as a Member of the National Labor Relations Board from
2006 to 2008, and he earned his B.A. from Cornell University
and his J.D. from Cleveland State University.
Welcome, Commissioner Kirsanow.
Stacy Hawkins is a professor of law at Rutgers Law School.
She teaches classes on constitutional law, employment law, and
diversity and the law. Her research focuses on the intersection
of law and diversity. Prior to teaching, Professor Hawkins
spent over a decade in private practice, advising clients in
both the public and private sector on the development and
implementation of legal, defensible diversity policies and
programs.
Professor Hawkins earned her B.A. from the University of
Virginia and her J.D. from Georgetown University Law Center.
Welcome, Professor Hawkins.
Before proceeding with your testimony, I remind everyone
that all your written and oral statements made to the
Subcommittee in connection with this hearing are subject to 18
U.S.C. 1001. Please note that your written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety and, accordingly, I ask
that you summarize your testimony in 5 minutes. There is a
timer in the WebEx view that should be visible on your screen,
and that should help you stay within your time limit.
So, Judge Donald, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE BERNICE B. DONALD

Judge Donald. Thank you, Chair Johnson.
Chair Johnson, Ranking Member Issa, House Judiciary Chair
Nadler, and my Congressman, Steve Cohen, I am Judge Bernice B.
Donald, a member of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth
Circuit. Our circuit covers Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky, and
Tennessee.
Diversity in every sense of the word is critical to the
proper functioning of a Federal court. A one-dimensional court
cannot fully grasp the many dimension of American life. Federal
courts should be as diverse as the communities that they serve.
Justice Kagan put it this way. People look at an institution
and they see people who are like them, who share their
experiences, who they imagine, rather, share their values.
To truly deliver justice, we are tasked with administering,
we must not only understand the arguments being made by the
parties but also the perspectives through which those arguments
are made. It is difficult to describe in 5 minutes all the
benefits that a diverse Federal bench confers, but there are at
least two reasons why maintaining diversity in the Federal
courts is essential.
First, a diverse bench has a diversity of viewpoints and
lived experiences that inform what justice look like in cases.
Second, a diverse bench reinforces the legitimacy of our
judicial institutions and promotes respect for the rule of law.
First, diversity of viewpoint. For every case, the law
should govern always without question but there is no escaping
the truth that we are all shaped by our lived experiences and
those lived experiences help round out the law, the Black
letter law, that we all learn. This goes beyond the usual
categories of identity, race, age, gender, sexual orientation,
gender expression, religion, and national origin. It means the
collection of every event fortune and misfortune that we may
have embraced throughout our lives.
As my friend, U.S. District Court Judge Ed Chen, whom you
heard from, recently wrote, ``Although a judge's duty is to
recognize those predilections and control them, it is simply
unrealistic to pretend that life experiences do not affect
one's perceptions in the process of judging.''
A judge who grows up, for example, on a farm in America's
heartland will have a different perspective on a rural
agricultural program than a judge who spends his or her life in
New York City. A judge who has a hearing disability would have
a different perspective on the Americans with Disabilities Act
than a judge who does not.
To be clear, we as judges will always follow the law but
justice is often about more than simply the Black letter law.
Justice is informed by our perspectives, and diversity does not
mean that individual decisions are driven by our life
experiences. Rather they add different angles from which to
look at an issue or a question.
If our judiciary were homogenous in thought and
perspectives, Justice Harlan, who penned the dissent in the
Plessy case which 50 years later became the majority, would not
have perhaps had that perspective.
Judge Wallace Tashima of the Ninth Circuit, reflecting on
his own experience in the Japanese internment camp, once
remarked, ``Because we are all creatures of our past, I have no
doubt that my life experiences including the evacuation and
interment, have shaped the way I view my job as a Federal judge
and the skepticism that I sometimes bring to the
representations and motives of other branches of government.''
As judges, our role is not to shed those experiences but to
embrace and apply them.
Second, diversity adds confidence in our institutions of
law, and you heard that from Judge Frank Bailey. A nondiverse
bench may be viewed as a biased bench. A vital aspect of
eliminating that perception is ensuring that the Federal bench
looks like the people that it serves. When cases are decided by
judges who do not respect or understand the needs of particular
communities, especially communities of color or
socioeconomically depressed communities, Members of those
communities are less likely to trust the decisions that are
rendered by those judges. That is borne out by a 60-year old
study done by an organization known as the National Conference
of Christians and Jews.
I know that my time is about up but let me say this. The
value of diversity is not just in presence alone. Behind those
closed doors, when we as circuit judges conference,
perspectives and lived experiences matters. So, there is a rich
benefit that comes from that. I have a story that is just the
opposite of the one Judge Bailey told which I hope to have an
opportunity to share with you during the question-and-answer
period.
As I close, a diverse bench is increasingly critical to our
concept of justice. At a certain point a Federal judiciary that
looks nothing like the makeup of the rest of the country will
lose the people's confidence. On the other hand, a Federal
bench that looks like our more perfect union will move us
closer to delivering a more perfect justice. Thank you.
[The statement of Judge Donald follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Judge Donald.
Next, we will hear from Professor Sen. Professor Sen, you
may begin.

STATEMENT OF MAYA SEN

Ms. Sen. Chair Johnson, Ranking Member Issa, Members of the
subcommittee, thank you so much for allowing me to speak with
you today.
Judicial diversity is an important topic. Our Nation's
courts are out of step with our country's demographics, and in
other ways, fail to reflect the rich variety of educational and
professional experiences that our legal profession has to
offer. There is evidence, as many have noted, that greater
diversity would strengthen the public's trust in the judiciary.
So, let me illustrate some of this. To give you one
example, according to the U.S. Census, about 19 percent of all
Americans identify as Hispanic, but only about 6 percent of our
Court of Appeals judges and 10 percent of our District judges
identify as Hispanic. 1.3 percent of Americans are Native
American, but only two, not 2 percent, two of our judges out of
about 800 Court of Appeals or District judges are Native
American, and both actually were pretty recently appointed. Of
course, half of Americans are women, and about 40 percent of
lawyers are women, yet women comprise only about a third of
Federal judges.
Now, I really do believe that diversity extends to a
variety of life experiences, but we could also be doing better
in this regard. So, for example, close to one in six Court of
Appeals judges attended just one law school, and that was
Harvard Law School, and one in four attended one of two law
schools, Harvard or Yale Law School. Even more staggering, a
whopping two out of three Court of Appeals judges attended one
of the highly elite top 14 law schools, the most elite of the
Nation's law schools.
Now, this is the effect of largely shutting out exceptional
candidates from law schools considered less elite, and
therefore, effectively penalizes those who, for whatever
reason, choose to attend a less expensive school or actually
who don't want to attend a law school clustered in a handful of
cities.
The lack of diversity extends also to professional
experiences, as others have noted. So, another large share of
our Nation's judges, about one in three Court of Appeals
judges, at least, have some sort of prosecutorial experience
but only one in 45, so about 2 percent, list equivalent public
defender experience.
Another example I like here is close to one in three Court
of Appeals judges are professors of some sort. I like
professors very much, some of my best friends are professors,
but this is in no way reflective of the U.S. population or even
reflective of graduates of elite law programs.
So, why are these discrepancies important? So, I will turn
again and again to the research here. So, we have a lot of
peer-reviewed studies showing that judges of different
backgrounds decide cases in different ways. So, for example, a
number of studies have shown that Black and White judges often
differ towards criminal sentencing with White judges being
harsher than Black judges against Black defendants.
Other studies have shown that White judges are less likely
to vote in favor of claimants in voting rights cases or in
affirmative action cases, although this is not always the case,
and that some of these differences attenuate when White and
Black judges sit together. It is an interesting finding.
We have some more evidence on gender. Male judges are more
likely to side against plaintiffs in sexual discrimination
cases, though not always, but differences also tend to
attenuate when women sit alongside men, and there are actually
dozens of peer-reviewed studies on these points. There is also
lots of evidence, quantitative, scientific, and peer-reviewed
journals, some of it from outside the courts, that diversity
broadly supports healthy group decision-making, leading to the
vigorous discussion of a variety of perspectives and something
that is absolutely essential for something like the Court of
Appeals.
So, one of the most relevant studies on this point showed
that White decisionmakers engage more deeply in factual
inquiries, they make fewer factual errors, and they are more
amenable to the discussion of racism when they are in mixed
race groups as opposed to all White groups. We would expect
similar things to happen in our Federal Courts of Appeals and
in our Federal District Courts.
I want to conclude by pointing out what several studies
have shown which is that more diverse institutions do tend to
garner stronger and more robust public support, and for the
courts, which we know have no enforcement power, having strong
public trust is incredibly important. Here the evidence does
suggest that many people would have stronger beliefs in the
institutional legitimacy of the courts with greater diversity.
So, again, thank you for your time, and I am honored to be
here. Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Sen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I am sorry. I was on mute. Thank
you, Professor Sen.
Commissioner Kirsanow, you may now begin. Commissioner
Kirsanow, if you will unmute yourself.

STATEMENT OF PETER N. KIRSANOW

Mr. Kirsanow. Apologies. I thought I was unmuted.
Thank you, Chair Johnson, Ranking Member Issa, and Members
of the committee. I am a partner in the labor employment
practice of Benesch, Friedlander, and a member of the U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights. I am appearing in my personal
capacity.
The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights was established
pursuant to the Civil Rights Act of 1957 to, among other
things, investigate denials of equal protection on the basis of
race and other protected characteristics. Today's hearing is
about the importance of diversity in Federal judiciary.
It is a conclusory statement, though it is not one that I
necessarily disagree with. As a matter of preliminary inquiry,
there may have been a colorable argument that it would be
salutary to increase the number of, say, Black State court
judges in 1957 when the commission was created and when racial
discrimination was both legal and rampant.
It is at least defensible that the presence of, say, Black
judges might have assured litigants that their matters would be
fairly and impartially adjudicated, but even then, any
inclination towards expanding judicial diversity should always
have been consistent with the overriding principle of non-
discrimination. Today, some urge that we should diversify the
Federal judiciary to improve the, quote, ``legitimacy of the
courts among the public.''
Taken to its logical conclusion, however, this might
actually undermine public confidence in the judiciary. It
suggests, whether subtly or overtly, that unless someone
appears before a judge who shares your pigmentation or ethnic
background, you cannot trust that your case will be fairly
adjudicated.
Perpetuating that notion itself derogates public faith in
the judicial system. Indeed, just yesterday, two U.S. Senators
announced that they will not vote to confirm any diverse--non-
diverse nominees. As Chief Justice John Roberts stated in
Parents Involved v. Seattle Schools, the way to stop
discrimination on the basis of race is to stop discriminating
on the basis of race.
I am aware of the studies that note that there are
differences in decision-making based on race and sex. I am
unaware, however, of any credible studies that show that a more
diverse judiciary would yield, quote, ``better decisions.'' It
is unclear how one would even measure something like that. One
could compare recent reversals, I suppose, but that won't
particularly be helpful.
For example, according to the Center for American Progress,
the Ninth Circuit is the most reversed appellate circuit that
has neither the greatest disparity between percentages of White
judges compared to the general population in the circuit nor
the smallest disparity. It also seems somewhat unlikely that
diversifying the Federal judiciary would lead to appreciably
different outcomes even if one believes the judges' decisions
may be influenced by explicit or implicit bias.
The decisions of Federal court judges in a particular tend
to pertain to fairly technical issues. For example, do White
judges and Black judges have different interpretations of
standing requirements, section 1 of the Sherman Act, section
8(B)3 of the National Labor Relations Act. There is a
possibility that White judges and Black judges could, on
average, come to different decisions in some cases. That may
not be because of their race, but perhaps because Black judges
may be more likely to have been appointed by Democrats or to
have, say, progressive political views.
Perhaps some Black judges are more disposed toward Black
plaintiffs in discrimination cases, but they might be more
likely to be inclined toward any plaintiffs in discrimination
cases. In other words, the judges' race is simply an imperfect
proxy for etiology. Race may also be an imperfect proxy for
class.
Well-intended but misguided policies have contributed to
the dearth of diverse judges in another way. The academic
achievement gap between Black and Hispanic students on one hand
and White and Asian students on the other is profound. This gap
begins early in students' academic careers, and it is because
of this gap that universities and law schools give significant
admissions preferences to Black and Hispanic students. Those
preferences actually end up harming many of the supposed
beneficiaries who are then mismatched with respect to their
peers.
Some struggle in law school which then makes it more
difficult for them to obtain the clerkships, Law Review
Memberships, other prestigious positions in law firms and
government. They are often predicates to becoming a Federal
judge.
Increasing the diversity of the Federal bench should not
override equal treatment under the law, nor should it trump
proficiency and excellence. Casting a wide net in the
application process to ensure as many diverse candidates as
possible are vetted is consistent with the imperative
nondiscrimination while increasing the probability of selecting
more diverse candidates.
Lady Justice is blindfolded. The Administration of justice
should be colorblind. No race, ethnicity, or sex has a lock on
judicial excellence. It is respectfully submitted that Members
of the Federal judiciary should be selected on reliable indices
of legal acumen, judicial temperament, and the content of their
character rather than the color of their skin.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
[The statement of Mr. Kirsanow follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I thank you, Mr. Kirsanow.
Last but not least, we will hear from Professor Hawkins.
Professor Hawkins, you may now begin.

STATEMENT OF STACY HAWKINS

Ms. Hawkins. Thank you so much to Chair Nadler, Chair
Johnson, Ranking Member Issa, and the other distinguished
Members of this subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify here today.
As has been said, I am a Professor of Law at Rutgers Law
School, and after more than a decade in private practice, I
have spent the last decade at Rutgers writing and teaching
about the intersection of law and diversity. I have authored
numerous articles on the subject and several about judicial
diversities, specifically. So, I would like to say that I am
delighted that the House is taking up this issue, and I am
honored to offer this testimony here today.
I want to begin with some data about the diversity, or lack
thereof, on the Federal bench. From 1789 until 1960, there were
only two White women and another two men of color appointed to
the Federal bench. Perhaps not surprising to anyone here, the
civil rights era seemed to mark a key turning point when we
began to acknowledge, albeit tacitly, that the judiciary must
begin to reflect the diversity of our citizens to be viewed as
legitimate.
Then in 1977, this acknowledgment was made explicit by
President Jimmy Carter who announced his commitment to
diversifying the Federal bench. Carter went on to appoint more
than twice the number of women and minority judges to the bench
than had been appointed during the previous four
Administrations combined. It was a watershed moment.
In 1981, Ronald Reagan broke another historic barrier when
he appointed Sandra Day O'Connor as the first female justice to
the Supreme Court. Then following Reagan, each of the next four
successive Presidents across both parties built on their
political predecessors' progress in diversifying the Federal
bench.
However, after nearly 3 decades, that trend receded for the
first-time during Donald Trump's presidency. Perhaps most
notably, none of the 54 Circuit Court judges appointed by Trump
were Black despite representing the largest share of sitting
minority judges on the bench, and only one was Hispanic, the
second largest minority group among sitting judges.
This reversal of modern presidential practice is troubling
for two reasons. First, as many have said, diverse judges
secure the trust necessary to enhance judicial legitimacy.
Second, diverse judges ensure judicial accountability to our
increasingly diverse Nation.
Opinion polls measuring public trust in our Federal
Government reveal that while the judiciary remains the most
well regarded of the three branches, this trust is not equally
distributed. One study found that only a quarter of White
respondents but more than three-quarters of Black respondents
believe the justice system treats Blacks unfairly. This concern
for fairness threatens the effective functioning of our
judiciary which relies on people's trust in order to legitimize
the rule of law.
Now, many people point to increases in politically
polarized decision-making as the source of citizens' eroding
trust in the judicial branch. Research, however, instead
demonstrates that it is the appearance of fairness in the
judicial process itself more than substantive outcomes that
fosters trust in our judicial system. One way to promote this
sense of fairness is to ensure that judicial decisionmakers
reflect the diverse communities they serve. As one judge
observed about the judicial process, quote, ``you want for this
thing to not only be fair, to look fair,'' unquote.
Research shows that when judicial decisionmakers are
diverse, not only do they engender trust in the judicial
process, but they also enhance accountability to minority
communities, particularly on issues of high racial salience has
been mentioned in cases like voting rights or discrimination.
One study found that plaintiffs in racial harassment cases had
higher success rates when their cases were decided by a Black
judge than when their case was decided by either a White or a
Hispanic judge. Contrary to what has been stated, these
findings held even after controlling for the judge's political
affiliation.
The last point that I want to make before concluding my
remarks is that the judiciary lacking in diversity is
inconsistent with our ideals of representative democracy. More
importantly, perhaps, today it is increasingly out of step with
broad public support for a government more representative of
our diverse Nation. Diversity on the Federal bench is not just
about curing a crisis of judicial legitimacy. It is also about
preserving the promise of government of the people, by the
people, and for the people.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The statement of Ms. Hawkins follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Professor Hawkins, thank you for
your testimony.
We will now proceed under the 5-minute rule, and I will
begin by recognizing myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Judge Donald, you have often held the title of the first;
the first Black woman to serve on the Sixth Circuit, the first
Black woman District judge for the Western District of
Tennessee. What impact do you think your many firsts have--what
impact have those firsts had on the public that your courts
have served, both on the bench and off the bench?
Judge Donald. Thank you, Chair Johnson. I have been
privileged in my community to be able to serve in those
important positions. For me, what has happened by the honor of
being a first is I have had an opportunity to demonstrate that
people who look like me in gender and race can do an effective
job, can uphold the law, can apply themselves, can meet all the
requisite qualifications to compete with others who sit in
those positions. More than that, I think it has served to
inspire others who may not have believed that they could do
this to see that someone like them can achieve those positions
and do that job.
I think one of the things that has been said and bears some
truth, Professor Hawkins talked about the Federal courts. For
the first 139 years of the court's existence, the court was
completely White and male. People of color did not all of a
sudden begin to be qualified in 1967 when Justice Thurgood
Marshall was appointed to the Supreme Court, the same as women
did not just suddenly become qualified when Judge Florence
Allen or Justice Sandra Day O'Connor were appointed, nor did
Latinx people suddenly become magically qualified with the
appointment of Justice O'Connor.
I think those who are in authority have to see and
understand that we are a country that is rich in diversity,
rich in talent, and rich in skill. I want to take this
opportunity to say no one on these panels, I believe, are
arguing that people ought to be appointed to positions or have
an opportunity to achieve just because of their gender or their
appearance.
What we are saying that all people who are talented, have
something to contribute, and if they have an opportunity, and
they have something to contribute that they should be able to
compete without barrier of race or gender or socioeconomic
status. In those positions of firsts, that is what I think I
have been able to demonstrate.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Judge Donald.
Professor Hawkins, one recurring theme we have heard is
that when the judicial bench is diverse, judicial decision-
making is better. What does it mean for decision-making to be
better in this context?
Ms. Hawkins. Chair Johnson, I certainly did not represent
that it is better, but it is different, and it is improved, and
it has improved along a number of dimensions.
First, as many people have said, diverse people have
different experiences, and those experiences shape our
perspectives on various issues. I think that all the anecdotes
that have been shared today about how people from different
walks of life have contributed their experiences and their
different perspectives to their decision-making from the bench
is proof of that benefit.
The second is that there is a deliberative benefit so that
particularly on appellate panels, but also simply in the
interactions that District Court judges have with their
colleagues, will improve their ability to deliberate around
issues when they are exposed to different points of view. So,
it does improve decision-making both because people with
different experiences bring different things to bear, and it
enhances deliberation.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
Professor Sen, your testimony describes diversity as
leading to, quote, ``healthy decision-making.'' Can you explain
why research suggests that this is the case?
Ms. Sen. Yes. Well, we have a couple strands of research
that really form that view. So, first, we have research from
outside the court, so looking at business organizations,
corporate leaderships, corporate boards, other kinds of
governmental decision-making units, and all of those point to
the direction that more diverse groups of people will, as was
just said, discuss, uncover, leave no stone unturned in terms
of, you know, the different viewpoints in forming the decision-
making. So, there is the evidence that more diverse group
decision-making is more robust and takes into account different
positions.
Then we also have evidence from within the courts that
panels like judicial panels on the Court of Appeals that have
different composition in terms of race and gender actually do
reach different kinds of decisions as opposed to panels that
are more homogenous, for example, all White or all male panels.
So, we have evidence from within the courts that actually
really engages the view that more diversity actually,
strengthens the group decision-making and kind of contributes
to healthy decision-making.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you. My time has expired.
We will next have 5 minutes of questions from the gentleman
from California, Mr. Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am going to start off by
asking a couple of questions of Mr. Kirsanow.
You have been part of a group, a commission that helped
select Federal judges in Ohio. Is that correct?
Mr. Kirsanow. That is correct.
Mr. Issa. When you are looking at the applications, do some
of those prejudices--regardless of which President and what
Senate, do some of those prejudice of Ivy League schools, of
party based on who is suggesting that individual and experience
based on, sort of that stereotype of a prosecutor and a certain
resume is more likely to get you confirmed, are all of those
preloaded into the applicants?
Mr. Kirsanow. Well, I should say that I am restricted from
discussing these things because of our bylaws. All our
deliberations are confidential.
Mr. Issa. I am only talking about the broad nature of the
applicants.
Mr. Kirsanow. Generally speaking, there are a host of
factors that are employed, and there are a host of factors that
are pertinent to whether or not somebody is qualified or deemed
to be qualified to at least be presented for nomination to the
Federal judiciary. Among those are academic qualifications,
social work, time served on the bench, experience as possibly a
clerk, maybe some type of other experience with respect to
governmental positions.
One thing that we must all keep in mind is I don't think
anybody who has testified thus far today, at least what I have
heard it, is opposed to a diverse Federal Judiciary. I don't
think that is the case. The question is how do you get there
consistent with 1964 Civil Rights Act, 14th Amendment,
everything, right, because we are talking about a compelling
State interest.
In other words, if you are making a decision even a
balancing decision based on race, you must be serving a
compelling State interest. That is a high bar. It can't be
something minor. It has usually been reserved to matters of
national security, something of extreme importance. So, all the
factors--
Mr. Issa. Sure. I don't want to interrupt you unfairly, but
the question that I wanted to get to isn't there, from your
experience, a bit of a bias towards Ivy League schools, towards
people who had the opportunity to do more extracurricular
activity?
In other words, socioeconomic advantage does play a part in
whether or not you are likely to be able to come to the Federal
bench simply because the nature of being qualified is a
combination of intelligence and drive and opportunity, and that
third one often makes a difference on whether you can go to
Harvard, or you have to go to the school that you can afford.
Mr. Kirsanow. Yeah. I will say that there is clearly a real
disparity in terms of where the educational kind of template
skews, and that is it is, as other people have testified,
skewed toward the Ivy League, just dramatically so. That
doesn't necessarily mean that the Ivy League is better or that
Harvard or Yale are better, but that happens to be the case,
and I think that is true throughout the districts and
throughout the circuits.
Mr. Issa. Along that same line, and I will get off of your
selection process, but the inherent question is if you have a
single judge who will leave the Supreme Court and appellate
judges, if you have a single judge sitting on the bench, do you
believe, as some of the other witnesses said, that you can
predict how they are going to be behave based on their gender
or race.
Mr. Kirsanow. I wish. I mean, I have only been doing this
for 42 years. Maybe somebody has a different perspective. I
have been before several judges a number of times. Even though
I have been in front of a number of times, sometimes spanning
decades, very often I am surprised, but the least able--and I
am not disputing any of the studies, but the least reliable
indices for me to predict which way a judge is going to go.
If I am telling a client when I am in a trial, I think we
are going to go this way if it is a bench trial, it really has
to do with perceived etiology. That is the one. It has nothing
to do with race, sex, age, any of those things. If you can get
a pretty good handle on what is the etiology of this particular
judge, and not that etiology is controlling. I am saying that
it is clearly a greater demarcation factor than the others, in
my experience. Again, that is my experience.
Mr. Issa. Let me ask you one question, and one closing
question. Are we potentially conflating or confusing in some
parts of our discussion today the diversity that is essential
in a judge, perhaps what we are really looking at is what you
do as a trial lawyer when you are selecting a jury, and you
have some skill, capability of predicting a better potential
outcome based on one or all 12 of the jurors?
Is there really a difference between selecting juries which
obviously there is a whole profession within your profession to
help you select juries that are more likely to give you a
certain outcome versus judges? Would you contrast that delta,
if there is one?
Mr. Kirsanow. Yeah. There is a slight delta. Let me just
say there are numerous factors that go into selecting jurors.
For me, because I normally do discrimination law and labor and
employment law, the one discrete factor that is most important,
probably, that separates the kind of juror I want from another
juror is occupation and the experiences that go along with that
occupation.
The least important, and one that is prohibited, of course,
is race because what we find, I have jurors of every race on
that pool or in the array, and we find that they have a broad
range of viewpoints, beliefs.
I have had jury foremen who are Black who, my goodness,
these guys are--the stereotype would be that they are more
inclined to decide in favor of a plaintiff in a race
discrimination case, and just the opposite is true. I find that
race is among the least important qualities when it comes to
selecting a juror.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, I would only ask unanimous consent that
the article written by John McGinnis be placed in the record.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

MR. ISSA FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Issa. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
We will now hear from the gentleman from New York, the
Chair of the Full Committee, Chair Nadler, for 5 minutes.
Chair Nadler. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Judge Donald, we heard Judge Reeves call on Congress to be
courageous in our commitment to diversity in the Federal
courts. What would courage for Congress look like to you when
it comes to diversity in the courts? I think you are muted.
Judge Donald. Okay. Thank you, Chair Nadler, for that
question. Congress being courageous to me would mean looking at
people, diverse people, recognizing the pluralism of our
Nation, and making certain that all voices are heard and that
they are at the table.
I believe that no one is advocating that we choose people
based on race or gender, but what we are saying is people
should not be excluded. They should not be denied the
opportunity based on race and gender. Just as Congress was
courageous in appointing or confirming the first woman, the
first African American, the first Latinx, be courageous right
now and look at the diversity that is this country and give all
of those quadrants an opportunity to participate if they meet
the other criteria.
Chair Nadler. Thank you.
Professor Sen, we heard Judge Chen recount story after
story of how our judges' life experiences help their colleagues
understand crucial elements of a case in ways they might
otherwise have missed. Justice Ginsburg helped her colleagues
to see how a strip search might feel to a teenage girl. Judge
Henderson explained that the shockingly racist graffiti a
plaintiff described was far more common than his colleague
apparently thought. Justice Thomas, during the history of the
Ku Klux Klan, explained the meaning of a burning cross. Does
your research support Judge Chen's message that, as he put it,
there is a cost when voices are missing from the room?
Ms. Sen. Not just my research, I would say, but a wide
swath of research across political science and sociology and
economics, I think, supports that view. So, I could just kind
of go through, like, a litany of studies on this point, but we
do have a number of studies. For example, let's talk about
gender. We have a number of examples, kind of chilling that
across employment discrimination cases or sexual harassment
cases that women judges tend to vote differently from their
male counterparts.
So, for example, male judges are more likely to vote
against a plaintiff in a sexual discrimination case or that all
male panels are most likely to vote against a plaintiff in a
sexual discrimination case. The inclusion of a woman on the
panel would actually bring the two groups closer together and
actually eliminate some of those differences.
Now, when I talk about the studies, I am talking about
quantitative analyses of thousands of votes across the Court of
Appeals, to take one example. We do see reflected in the data
the nuances and the nuggets of those stories that were
highlighted by people like Judge Chen. We do see that in the
large quantitative studies.
Now, does that apply to everyone? No. These are the kind of
statistics that we are working with, so it is not going to
explain the individual--it is not going to explain or predict
any one individual judge, but we do see kind of these broad
patterns, these voices reflected in the numbers, actually, so
yes.
Chair Nadler. Thank you. Thank you.
Professor Hawkins, Judge Chen also compared the need for a
diverse Federal bench to the Constitutional requirement that
juries represent a fair cross-section of the community. How do
the considerations that animate the fair cross-section
requirement for juries support the importance of a diverse
Federal judiciary?
Ms. Hawkins. Thank you for that question, Chair Nadler,
especially because I have written about this, and I have
compared the considerations that we use and apply pretty
uncontested in the jury context to the bench.
Juries serve as judicial decisionmakers, not unlike judges.
One adjudicates facts; the other adjudicates the law. Yet, we
have this very explicit commitment to having jurors represent a
fair cross-section of the community. We have lots of courts
that make very deliberate efforts to ensure that not only that
jury pools are diverse, but that jury panels are sufficiently
diverse to reflect the communities that they serve.
I think that because we understand that the appearance of
fairness in the process is what engenders the trust, we need to
legitimize the rule of law that those appearances matter as we
have an increasingly diverse Nation. So, just as we acknowledge
expressly and engage in active efforts to ensure diversity
among jurors, we should do the same for judges.
Chair Nadler. Thank you.
Judge Donald, Judge Chen, Judge Bailey, and Judge Reeves
all discuss how diversity on the bench affects the wider
judicial system from the selection of bankruptcy and magistrate
judges as well as key court personnel like clerks of the court
or chief probation officers to local rules and programs. Do you
agree with their assessment?
Judge Donald. I agree with that. I also think it affects
clerks. Chair Nadler, when I became a bankruptcy judge in June
of 1988, I became the first African American woman to be a
bankruptcy judge in the history of the United States. There
were only nine nationwide. I was the only one in the south. I
firmly believe that had it not been for the presence of Judges
Nate Jones and Damon J. Keith on the Sixth circuit that I would
have never had that opportunity.
Yes, it matters. Also, those of us who are in those
positions are more likely to higher diverse clerks. I, for one,
I don't want to be surrounded by everyone who looks like me or
thinks like me because I think if that happens, there is no one
to help me guard against my own blind spots, and all of us have
those blind spots.
Chair Nadler. Thank you. My time has expired. Mr. Chair, I
yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
If the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr. Jordan, is
not here, then next up will be Mr. Bishop, the gentleman from
North Carolina. You may begin, Representative Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Judge Donald, I was interested in your written comments.
There is this one paragraph that sort of got me thinking about
what we are talking about, and it says, you say, I am sad to
report today that despite significant recent progress in
diversifying the legal profession, the Federal judiciary is not
yet visibly open to talented and qualified individuals from
every corner of this great Nation. As of exactly 1 year ago in
March 2020, women accounted for only one-third, 34 percent of
Article III judgeships despite amounting to more than half of
the U.S. population. Similarly, African Americans, Latinx
Americans, and Asian Americans combined accounting for only 26
percent of Federal jurists, while 40 percent of the country
identifies as non-White.
I guess, Judge Donald, it prompts me to ask. What is the
objective? Is it to have a quota so that you are not really or
not there until the numbers match the background population?
Judge Donald. I don't think that we necessarily have to
have the numbers correlating, but I do think that we ought to
have the presence of all those groups.
One of the professors here today talked about, for example,
the Seventh Circuit which today, we know that that circuit
includes cities like Chicago, Illinois, Gary, Indiana,
Indianapolis, Indiana, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and those are
cities with high populations of people of color, and there is
not an African American on that court.
We are not going--it is not necessary that we have those
mirror images, but I do believe we ought to have influences on
those courts. We have to have that presence and those ideas and
those lived experiences, Representative Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Comparing those--if comparisons were made to
the background population, of course, we have to draw the
judges from among the lawyers who are admitted to bars, so
isn't that really the more relevant comparison?
Judge Donald. I am so pleased that you acknowledge and
mention that, sir, because we are working mightily right now to
work on pipelines. We need to make certain that we have
opportunities to enter the practice of law afforded to many
more students, and there are organizations and individuals who
are doing that.
In my own community, as Congressman Cohen will note, when I
came on the bench, there were many students who were in
impoverished communities and others who had never met a lawyer.
They had never seen a lawyer. I do my job as judge, but I also
feel I have a responsibility to my communities to make certain
that people's dreams are enlarged. People cannot often exceed
their dreams. They ought to have the ability to aspire to every
position in this country. When we go out and help to infuse
diversity, we have to enlarge and inspire dreams, and those
dreams can one day become a reality.
Mr. Bishop. Yes, ma'am. To that point, I am concerned about
how we make the pipeline better. Asian Americans, despite
having increased their numbers and outscoring other applicants,
have been disproportionately denied admission to Ivy League
schools, particularly Harvard, and I think that was sustained
nonetheless by the First Circuit as an appropriate first--
appropriate affirmative action thing to do. The Administration
recently dropped its support for Asian Americans discrimination
contentions against Yale. Is it possible to discriminate
against Asian Americans in Ivy League schools, and yet, improve
the pipeline for Asian Americans getting access to judicial
positions?
Judge Donald. Okay. So, Congressman Bishop, I am going to
let one of the professors respond more narrowly to that. When I
talk about the pipeline, I am talking about going as deep as
conditions in elementary schools and high schools, and exposing
people to the law. It would be improper for me to comment on an
issue that might come before my court, but I do understand the
issue you are talking about. I am going to let those who are
professors and those who sometimes live in the real as well as
the theoretical world respond to that.
Mr. Bishop. All right. Very well.
Professor Hawkins, I might take a quick--I have only got 30
seconds. Maybe you want to comment on that, and also, I have
noticed that there--well, I will leave it and try to not make
it a compound question. Do you have a quick comment on that
before my time expires?
Ms. Hawkins. Yes. Thank you. First, I want to say that the
underrepresentation of Asian Pacific Americans in the Federal
courts is definitely a concern. However, that concern does not
stem from the underrepresentation of Asian Pacific Americans in
college or in law school. They are actually overrepresented
among college students, and they are one of the fastest-growing
demographics among law school students as well. So, it is not a
pipeline program, but I do agree that the underrepresentation
on the bench is problematic.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I thank the gentleman.
The next up is the gentlelady from California,
Congresswoman Lofgren, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you very much. I wonder if I could
ask Judge Donald--She said she had a story to tell if she got a
chance to tell it.
So, could you take just part of my 5 minutes and tell that
story?
Judge Donald. I will abbreviate it. Thank you,
Congresswoman Lofgren. I grew up in the segregated south, so I
have been in lots of situations where I was the only person who
looked like me in the room. So, when I became a judge in Shelby
County, the Clerk of Court, a middle-aged White male, a friend
of mine--a former friend of mine, he is deceased now, and of
Congressman Cohen's was Gene Goalsby. He staffed my courtroom.
I was the first African-American woman to become a judge in
Tennessee's history. Mr. Goalsby was my friend. He was invested
in my success. He wanted me to be comfortable. So, he staffed
my courtroom with all African American personnel.
So, when I opened court the first day in that September of
1982, the first person on my docket to walk through the room
was a young White male. He looked around the room,
Congresswoman. His eyes grew as wide as half dollar bills, as
he saw no one who looked like him. Because of my own
experiences of being the only person of a particular race in a
space, I knew he must have been feeling anxious. He asked me
for a continuance. I granted it. He came back 30 days later
with an African American defense attorney. Based upon my belief
that he was concerned that he could not get justice in a place
where no one looked like him, I went to Mr. Goalsby and thanked
him, but I told him we need to change out some personnel and
create a diverse environment, and that is what we did.
So, that story is directly opposite to Mr. Bailey's, but it
means that diversity is not just to people of color, but it is
also important to people in the majority race. It is just that
most people in the majority have never been in a situation
where they were the minority unless they were in some foreign
country.
Ms. Lofgren. That is a fascinating and a really beautiful
story. I know we have a long hearing, and there are others
behind me, so I will just say this has been a very enlightening
panel for me. One of the things that in addition to having
diversity in terms of ethnicity and gender, we just touched
upon the need for diversity geographically and educationally.
You just can't tell me that the only qualified people in
America to be judges are White people who went to Harvard or
Yale. I mean, that just can't be true, and historically it has
not been true. When you take a look at Justice Earl Warren, he
wasn't even a judge when he was appointed. He went to
Bakersfield High School, and he went to the University of
California Berkeley Law School, and yet he made a profound
change in America on the court.
I worry that the court has become more like a priesthood
than it used to be. We used to reach out to talented lawyers
who had life experiences not only on the bench as working their
way up, but also in business and in life and in politics
broadly. I mean, Justice Douglas and others. We have lost that.
So, I think we need a diverse bench, a talented bench, and I
think we all understand that that doesn't just mean men, and it
doesn't just mean White men, although I love White men. My
husband and my son are White men. We need to have a bench that
really reflects the full talent of America.
I really appreciate the witnesses here today, and Judge, it
was a treat to hear your story, and I am glad I got a chance to
ask you about it.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. The gentlelady yields back.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Tiffany, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for the time today.
Before we start, I just want to mention in regards to the
technical difficulties that we had at the start of this, it is
really time for us to get back to hearings in the United States
Capitol. I had the same thing happen with another Committee
that I sit on repeatedly. This is not any of your fault, Mr.
Chair, as the Subcommittee Chair here, but it is time for us to
get back to having these hearings in the United States Capitol
where we will have a Congress, a Congress where people get
together.
I would just like to share my comments. Dr. Martin Luther
King once said, ``I have a dream that my four little children
will one day live in a Nation where they will not be judged by
the color of their skin, but by the content of their
character.'' Today this committee's message is we will judge
you by the color of your skin, race, gender, and politics, not
by your character or qualifications.
Let's begin with the basic premise that exceptional
qualifications, not race, skin, color, gender, or religion
should be the most important factor when evaluating a judicial
nominee. Over the last few years, we have seen well qualified
and diverse nominations to the courts. However, because they
were Republican nominations, the Democrats didn't think they
were diverse enough. I would urge people to take a look at the
list of the Trump nominees which came from all different types
of ethnicities and stations in society that were put on the
courts. It is a good record.
Senator Whitehouse in 2019 referred to Judge Neomi Rao, the
first Asian Pacific American woman to sit on the D.C. circuit,
as a cartoon of a fake judge despite her well qualified rating
by the American Bar Association. She did not receive one single
Democrat vote.
When Judge Janice Brown, an exceptionally qualified African
American woman was nominated to the Federal bench. Senator
Schumer called her the least worthy pick despite her
qualification as a judge coming from the California Supreme
Court. Even then, Senator Biden voted against her nomination.
The truth is simple. The only times my Democratic
colleagues believe someone meets their diversity test is when
they are ideologically aligned. The same is true when gender
issues are involved. One may not look further than the
nomination of an exceptionally qualified woman, Justice
Barrett. She was openly attacked for her religion, and no one
on the left said a word. The message that day, she was not
diverse enough because she was nominated by former President
Trump. This is less about diversity and more about furthering
radical progressive agendas.
As I understand it, the composition of are Article III
judges roughly represents the racial diversity of our Nation.
Nomination to the bench should not be decided by identity
politics but instead by qualifications. These men and women
administer our laws. Lady Justice is blindfolded for a reason
because justice is blind.
I would just go on to say, Mr. Chair, I thought you did a
good job of acknowledging the improvements that have been done.
A couple of our judges that spoke earlier spoke very eloquently
consequently about their numerous success stories. We are
moving in the right direction, and that is really a good thing.
If you look at the list of President Trump's judges, that
continuation happened over the last 4 years. If you take--we
can cherry pick data, all of us, but you can take a look at the
Wisconsin State Supreme Court. Six of the seven judges are
women which I would say people see as progress in our State and
a good thing to point out.
I do agree with you and our Ranking Member, Mr. Issa, in
regards to there are some places that are overrepresented.
Let's talk about the elephant in the room that we are talking
about the Ivy League, and that is not just the courts, but all
our Federal government. We could use more people that are from
throughout our country.
So, if I can take--I don't have the timer in front of me,
Mr. Chair, but I want to put one quick question out to Mr.
Kirsanow.
Mr. Kirsanow, you referred to two Senators, United States
Senators yesterday, Duckworth and Hirono, that came out and
said that they will not vote for non-diverse candidates. Do you
think that it is wise to extend that to judicial nominations?
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Mr. Kirsanow, you need to unmute.
Mr. Kirsanow. Apologies once again.
In 2 decades on the Civil Rights Commission, one of the
things I have observed is the decline in public trust of
institutions, and it is correlated to some extent with the
perception that we are counting by impermissible qualities. The
most impermissible of all is race, but that is not the defining
thing that has eroded trust, but it is one of those things.
Someone is going to say, very overtly, I am not voting for
somebody because of their race. That is something that is so
anathema to our civic ethos as to be astonishing.
I think we have been talking a lot about having a diverse
judiciary which I think a lot--everybody here agrees with as
somehow engendering trust in the public. One of the
uncontroverted ways of eroding that trust is giving the public
perception that you are counting on the basis of race, or
people are getting onto the judiciary because of race.
For those who are saying that, and I am not saying anyone
here is doing that, but for those broadly who say, no, we are
not doing that, we saw the same dynamic pertain in Grutter and
Gratz versus Bollinger where the courts said race is just one
of many factors, a feather on the scale in the admissions
process. When you look at the data, it is not a feather on the
scale, it is an anvil. At some schools, Black and Hispanic
students are up to 500 times more likely to be admitted over
the White and Asian comparatives. What we must not do under any
circumstances, in my estimation, is erode the trust that some
people have talked about very eloquently as being engendered by
a diverse judiciary by making it appear as if race is a factor
in the process of selecting candidates.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Chair, I really--
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Tiffany. Okay. Mr. Chair, I thought you did a really
good job of laying this out today. We all seek a perfect union
as it is said in the founding. We have so much work to do. We
continue to move towards that more perfect union, and I really
appreciate having this hearing today to talk about this
important issue. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I thank the gentleman.
Our next questioner will be the gentleman from California,
Mr. Lieu, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chair Johnson, for holding this
important hearing. I previously served on active duty in the
United States military because I believe America is an
exceptional country. We are not perfect, but we are moving
towards that more perfect union, and one of the areas we have
to look at is the Federal judiciary.
Let me simply start by noting that the highest Federal
court in the land, the United States Supreme Court, does not
have a single Asian American on their court. Not only that, but
not a single Asian American was even seriously considered to be
on that court in both Democratic and Republican
Administrations. The message sent is that lawyers and judges
and law professors that look like me are somehow not qualified
to be on the U.S. Supreme Court, and that is just wrong.
When we looked at district courts, for example, Asian
Americans are 3.5 percent in terms of Federal District Court
judges, well below our population in the United States. Again,
the message that sends is that lawyers and State court judges
and law professors that look like me are somehow not qualified
to be Federal District Court judges.
I want people to understand that when you have a Federal
judiciary that is 73 percent White and male, far above that
actual population of White males, and then you say the reason
is because of merit, you are sending the message that
minorities are less qualified, more stupid, less good to be
judges to be on the Federal judiciary. That is what is so
corrosive about not diversifying the Federal judiciary.
It is not about a specific Federal judge. I listened to
Judge Ho very closely. I admire he is the only Asian American
on that Circuit Court, but it is not about him. He is not there
just because of merit because there are dozens, likely hundreds
of other people who could be in his exact same position and be
just as qualified. Because there are so few Federal judiciary
positions, there are literally thousands of people that could
fill these positions that are not White and male. To somehow
suggest that the only reason it is White and male is because
those people are the most exceptionally qualified is a lie.
There is discrimination happening because if you took the most
qualified people and sorted them out, it wouldn't like look
this, and that is what we need to address.
Now, Commissioner Kirsanow, you also had a similar line of
testimony that somehow the way it looks like this is because of
merit. You also made a false fact about the Ninth Circuit Court
of Appeals. It is not the most reversed circuit. PolitiFact
checked this; other people have. In fact, the Sixth Circuit is
the most reversed circuit.
So, setting that aside because I did mention you and your
testimony, I am going to give you a chance to respond. Where I
am coming from is not the individual judges or the Federal
judiciary. It is the message that is being sent to America that
somehow minorities are not qualified to be on the Federal
judiciary because somehow, we are not exceptionally qualified.
Mr. Kirsanow. Thank you, Congressman, for the opportunity
to respond. I agree with you entirely that if there is
discrimination, it is against Asian Americans. In fact, just
yesterday or the day before yesterday, I filed a brief in the
Students for Fair Admissions against Harvard case in the
Supreme Court.
Mr. Lieu. Stop bringing in irrelevant issues. There are
more Asian Americans at these Ivy Leagues. That are
underrepresented. These are different issues happening. Just
answer my question about Asian Americans in the Federal
judiciary or minorities in the Federal judiciary because it is
underrepresented.
Mr. Kirsanow. It is underrepresented.
Mr. Lieu. These college issues are not what the hearing is
about.
Mr. Kirsanow. Underrepresented, definitely.
Underrepresented based on the fact that there has been
discrimination in the pipeline that we have talking about,
profound discrimination against Asian Americans. Without
question, profound discrimination. It is one of the reasons why
I indicated before we have an erosion in confidence in the
institutions because the perception by the public is we are
making determinations on the basis of race, one of the most
baleful and anathema considerations we have in the United
States of America because of history.
It is precisely why I said we must avoid at all costs the
perception that decisions are being made on the basis of race.
When you look at the correlative with how decision-making is
being through the admissions process, it appears as if
decisions, in large part, are being--
Mr. Lieu. We are not talking about the admissions process.
We are talking about the Federal judiciary. The fact that it is
73 percent White and male means decisions were being made on
the race of applicant, and that is simply a fact because it is
not--statistically, it would not have come out as 73 percent
White and male.
The reason that you can't talk about the Federal judiciary
and you keep going to the college issue is because you have no
basis on the issue of the Federal judiciary. It just needs to
be more diverse. It is corrosive to America to have an entire
third branch of government in which people were selected on the
basis of them being White. That is the only way to explain
these statistics.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I thank the gentleman for his
impassioned argument.
We will next turn to the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Fitzgerald, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I appreciate Judge Donald being with us today. It is an
honor. I think my frustration kind of with not just the
discussion today but overall, this back and forth that has been
going on. Diversity, I am not sure who would not be for that.
I was in the State Legislature for many years before I was
elected to Congress. What we experienced in Wisconsin, and
Judge Donald, you talked a little bit about Milwaukee earlier,
but the frustration we had was that oftentimes, the legislature
in Wisconsin would pass a bill, and the governor would sign it
into law, and immediately it would end up in the Western
District or the Eastern District. We would get into a situation
where we would know where we were headed and how the judge was
going to handle something. It clearly was based on - that they
had developed an ideology.
If there was kind of this gambit of which judge you might
be before, I think most of us could accept that. There seemed
to be--I am going to call it dysfunction, and maybe that is
close to being accurate, maybe it isn't, but it was about the
back and forth between what was going on in the Eastern or
Western District and the Seventh Circuit in Chicago where there
was just a delay in action or a delay in ruling.
For me, it seems more about longevity of judges, Federal
judges, and how long they are there which can be a long time.
Oftentimes, people get entrenched, and they start understanding
this is the profile of this judge, and they are not going to
vary from that.
So, from my perspective as a Republican Congressman, we
need more conservative judges. We need more judges that are
going to Rule based on the merits of the case instead of taking
one ideology or other. Obviously, the criticism that comes from
a lot of Members of my party is just the idea that, there are
too many Federal judges that are legislating from the bench
versus really taking kind of a fair look at it.
So, I just want to take that a different look at it, but
there still seems to be a back and forth between what is going
on in the States and in the circuit, the Federal circuit courts
that seems to be resolved, and I don't know how we are going to
do that or how we could tackle that, and I would just be
interested to hear your take on that.
Mr. Fitzgerald. I think you are muted, Judge.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. That question is directed to whom,
sir?
Mr. Fitzgerald. To Judge Donald.
Judge Donald. Okay. So, Congressman Fitzgerald, I can
appreciate your expressed frustration with the sometimes I
guess the friction or whatever between the various branches. I
think that is the genius of the Founders to have these separate
branches. I know that sometimes the courts are frustrated with
legislative matters and legislators are frustrated with things
that happen in the court.
I believe, though, and I believe this firmly to the core,
because of the oath that I took, that judges come to these
issues with a view to determining the law based on the facts. I
think we try to look at the laws and sometimes if there is an
ambiguity and we have to try to decide what Congress meant by a
particular law, I think that we use the appropriate tools of a
statutory and other interpretation to do the best we can to
find that and then apply that law.
I can appreciate that there are perhaps some ideological
differences in the way judges come to these things and I can't
speak to those individual differences in any court, but I do
believe that the courts and judges generally come to this job
seeking to honor and uphold the oath that they take with
respect to applying the law. I also believe that we try to make
certain that we give fidelity to the framework that the
Founders set up with these separate and coequal branches and
the respective obligations of each.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you very much.
A fascinating day and a fascinating hearing. I yield back,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Congressman Fitzgerald.
Next up is the Congressman from Tennessee, Mr. Cohen, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Chair. First, I would like to--
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Before you start, Mr. Cohen, let me
ask that all Members mute their phones. We are hearing
commentary from sounds like Fox News. Whoever there needs to--
okay. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Cohen, you may begin.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
First, I would like to agree with my colleague from
Wisconsin that we should be having in-person hearings. We can't
do that, as Speaker Pelosi has made clear, until enough of the
Congress Members have taken shots, vaccinations to make us be
safe in our committees. I believe it is about half of the
Members on the other side who have not taken their tests, and
that is why we can't go back to our hearings like we would
like. So, if they would just roll up their sleeves and allow a
little needle to be put in their oral to protect them from this
pandemic, we could all be back together again. I look forward
to that.
Secondly, as far as the people that criticized Harvard and
Yale, yeah, Judge Barrett went to Rhodes College, a Rhodes
scholar from Memphis. We are proud of that.
Judge Donald, you have seen the fact that the Federal
judiciary is never as diverse as it should be. Over the past 4
years which direction have we gone in? We have gone the wrong
direction. Out of 226 judges appointed by Donald Trump, only 24
percent were women and only 16 percent were non-White and when
you look at the appeals court where you sit, Judge Donald, the
statistics are just astonishingly worse. Zero Black appeals
court judges were appointed by Trump, zero out of about 65. He
couldn't find one Black judge out of 65 who would qualify
based--because he does everything, according to some of these
people, based on qualifications. Not a single qualified Black
person. Unbelievable. No Hispanic appeals court either. None.
This is important because, as we look at our life
experiences, judges are no different and Trump basically put
White people in control because it was all about changing the
balance of power.
Judge Donald, you have had a seat at the district and the
Circuit Court levels. You have had that. You have heard appeals
court cases with panels and judges that interact with each
other, deciding cases. How do judges' life experiences play
into the deliberative process and how, if at all, was it
different at the trial court level versus the appellate court
level?
Judge Donald. Well, obviously thank you, Congressman Cohen.
At the trial court level, I sat as the sole decision-maker.
In trials, of course, with juries, I had a jury there to be the
decider of fact, but it did not rely on any kind of
collaborative or deliberative process between judges. I was the
sole decision-maker. At the appellate court I sit with panels.
I sit in panels of three or sometimes with an en banc court.
All of us, whether we acknowledge it or not, we to some degree
rely on lived experiences. We all study the same Black letter
law.
Then in interpreting and applying that law, those lived
experiences are brought to bear and for people who say, well,
that is wrong, but how else could it be if all of us, if the
Black letter law was all that we relied on, then we would not
have minority and majority opinions on an issue because we
would all see everything the same way. We would look at the law
the same way. So, those lived experiences help us to round out
and factor in all the considerations of the law that we are
sitting and looking.
So, it is important because we have a back and forth and we
put all of those views about cases and come to hopefully a
richer experience and sometimes, I would say this, most of the
decisions on our court are unanimous. Most of our decisions are
unanimous and I think it is probably that way on most courts
but there are times when we look at those issues and, based on
our reading of the law and our shared lived experiences, we
come to different results as all courts do.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Judge. You have a rare background for
a Federal judge and one that people should be envious of. You
got your degrees from the University of Memphis, my alma mater
as well for law school. You worked at Memphis Area Legal
Services to provide legal assistance for those who couldn't
otherwise afford it. As a public defender, you did the same
thing. Do you find that background useful in your deliberative
process? How do you think having a more diverse judiciary
particularly with respect to education or professional
experiences would affect judicial decision-making?
Judge Donald. I think those experiences, Congressman Cohen,
were and are enormously important.
We have not talked about one dimension of diversity and
that is socioeconomic diversity. I represented people, poor
people, who otherwise had no voice. I went into the criminal
courts and stood as the voice and the advocate for people
accused with the government against them and only an advocate
representing them.
It is important that we have not only the prosecutorial
perspective that the judges experience, but also the defense
perspective and to be a public interest lawyer is a component
that we don't often find in judges but it is an important and
critical component. I think it also helps lend legitimacy, and
it also helps with the perception of justice by the people that
we seek to serve.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Judge Donald.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
We will next hear from the gentleman from Oregon, Mr.
Bentz. Mr. Bentz, if you would turn your camera on, you will be
recognized.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, for this most
interesting discussion.
I would like to start with Judge Donald. I was part of a
commission to vet applicants to the Federal District Courts in
the Northwest and the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. I asked
that the applicants, that the doorway to apply for
consideration be opened again because I felt we had too few
applicants. As a result, the number doubled. I won't go into
detail, other than to say I was disturbed by the lack of
minority participation in that application process.
I know that when I went to law school many years ago, the
number of women in my class was perhaps 20 percent. Today I
understand that about 54.9 percent of law students are female.
You mentioned in your discussion the focus on the pipeline, and
I would like you to go back to that for just a moment and share
with us what you think needs to be done so that we can advance
the interests of minorities, as well as successfully as has
been the case with female applicants.
Judge Donald. Absolutely. Thank you for this opportunity.
Well, first, I want to speak specifically to the point you
mentioned about the selection process there. Often when people
look in an area and they don't see that there is a history of
people who look like them being considered, they simply won't
apply and go through the process. It is a daunting process, and
why go through all of that if there is no opportunity that you
might get selected.
On the pipeline issue, it starts early on. There are many
places where people don't know a lawyer. Let me give you an
example of what is going on in Memphis. We have a program where
law firms and corporations will support this position where
they will allow high school students to go through a work
training program and then have a summer internship in the law
department either at the corporation or in the law firm. They
are paid a modest stipend, but it gives them exposure and
experience not only to lawyers but also to the area of law. We
have had a number of people who have gone through that program
express interest.
At the American Bar Association, we have the legal
opportunity minority--legal opportunity minority scholarship
for first-generation lawyers. You would not believe the number
of individuals in this country who have never had a lawyer in
their family. So, we provide scholarships for people to help
front the costs of the expense of law school and also to
provide mentors.
We judges have a judicial intern opportunity program to
help students get placed as internships. Judges from across the
country band together to do a program where we help law
students understand the importance of clerkships and train them
in that.
Those are some of the pipelines. We have got to do more at
the base, at those elementary schools when students are first
getting started, to help them understand and envision a future
that might include the law.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you.
Professor Hawkins, there has been much discussed about
where people want to go, but not too much about how to get
there. Perhaps this--and my question about the pipeline is one
focus. Perhaps you could share with us what changes in law you
would recommend to address the issues we have been discussing
today?
Ms. Hawkins. Do you mean the rule of law, Congressman?
Mr. Bentz. Yes. I mean the rule of law or any--we know that
much of that which has been discussed is challenging to achieve
by virtue of rules we have heard, laws that apply that we have
heard from many discussing the issues. They say we can't
discuss race. So, what would you do to help address these
issues? Would you do anything on the law side, or is this all
about encouraging as opposed to passing laws?
Ms. Hawkins. Well, I appreciate the question, because I
think that one of the important things that we have to do is
preserve existing law. So, currently the Supreme Court
precedent is
Grutter
v.
Bollinger
, and that
precedent acknowledges the compelling interest in diversity.
Now that is in respect to higher education but, nevertheless,
it is reasonable to assume, and certainly lower courts have
found, applying that precedent--that diversity is a compelling
interest across a wide range of government context including in
the employment context.
So, certainly there are people who think that the rule of
law in Grutter is threatened by the current Supreme Court and I
think what is really important is not just to preserve the
existing recognition that diversity is, in fact, a compelling
interest and can be pursued in ways that are legally defensible
and that are narrowly tailored but to extend that explicitly
outside of the context of higher education to employment
practices and other domains.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you for the clarity of your answer.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
We will next hear from the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Mondaire Jones, for 5 minutes.
Congressman Jones.
Mr. Jones. Thank you, Chair Johnson, for your leadership as
always and for holding this important hearing today and thank
to you all our witnesses on both of our distinguished panels.
As Judge Reeves stated in his written testimony, our
judiciary may soon face, quote, ``a crisis of legitimacy.'' As
he wrote, one reason is that quote, ``as our country becomes
more diverse, our courts are becoming more homogeneous.''
As an openly gay, Black attorney who grew up in section 8
housing and on food stamps, I know how important it is that the
judges who serve the American people truly represent the
American people.
When I entered law school in 2010, I hardly ever saw myself
represented in the legal profession, let alone on the Federal
bench. At that time there was only one openly gay Article III
judge. When I graduated law school, there still was not a
single openly gay Black man on the bench nor before this
Congress had there been one in this body.
It is for that reason that growing up I never imagined
someone like me could even run for Congress, let alone get
elected. Make no mistake, descriptive representation drives
substantive representation. Who serves in our Government shapes
who our Government serves. When decisions about us are made
without us, underrepresented communities pay the price. There
is a reason for that. Whether we want to admit it or not, we
are all shaped by our life experiences.
That, of course, does not by any stretch of the imagination
mean that we can presume how a judge will vote simply because
of their race, gender, or sexual orientation. I understand that
and I agree with those individuals who have expressed concerns
about that presumption, but we are dishonest with ourselves if
we think that the lack of judicial diversity in this country
does not impact judicial decision-making.
As Professor Sen and Professor Hawkins have shown us today,
it does look no further than the Supreme Court's cases on LGBTQ
rights. I think the court's slow progress with respect to LGBTQ
rights is because not enough people on the court have seen the
humanity in Members of the LGBTQ community. As a decade of
research on what is called contact theory shows, personal
relationships with LGBTQ people increase support for LGBTQ
rights.
Does anyone really think that if they were openly LGBTQ
Justices on the Supreme Court, LGBTQ people like me would have
to spend every June anxiously awaiting to see if the Supreme
Court will vote to take away our civil rights? If there were
openly LGBTQ Justices on the Supreme Court, does anyone really
think it would have taken them until June 2015 for the Court to
recognize my constitutional right to marry who I love or until
June of 2020 for the Court to Rule that Federal law prohibits
employers from firing someone for being gay or trans?
Does anyone really think that if there were even one openly
LGBTQ justice, Justice Scalia would have compared LGBTQ people
to child abusers in an address a few months after his dissent
in Obergefell? Justice Scalia once wrote that one of his votes
against LGBTQ rights was not of immense personal importance to
him. Well, that might explain why he was so comfortable voting
to oppose statutes criminalizing gay intimacy and prohibiting
marriage equality.
We need more judges who see the humanity in all people, who
understand the human stakes of their decisions. We need more
judges for whom the law is personal.
With my time left, Professor Hawkins, can you highlight for
us how descriptive representation improves the judicial
decisions that most directly affect underrepresented
communities?
Ms. Hawkins. Absolutely. Thank you, Congressman Jones.
Your description was quite excellent, but you are right.
There is research that shows across a wide range of
bureaucratic context including the bench that when there is
racial congruence between constituents and Representatives that
there are more responsive outcomes. This is what we call
accountability. This is why I said that it improves judicial
accountability to minority communities when we have a diverse
bench.
We know that not because, as so many people have said
already, race, gender, ethnicity, LGBTQ status, or any other
dimension of identity necessarily dictates outcomes. It is
because they influence experience and perspectives, and they
make people more able to relate to people who come before the
Court and before the government to plead their case or to seek
some sort of redress. So that is what makes descriptive
representation translate into substantive representation and
what I would call political accountability.
Mr. Jones. Thank you, Professor.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Congressman Jones.
Last but not least, the gentlelady from North Carolina,
Congresswoman Ross, is recognized for 5 minutes and she will be
the end, unless another member appears.
Congresswoman Ross, you may proceed.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and I think this
has been a fantastic hearing and coupled with the hearing that
we had a couple of weeks ago about expanding the Federal
judiciary, that it might be just a sweet spot in time for
taking care of two issues that are crucial to the better
Administration of justice in this country.
My question is for both of our professors who have done a
lot of research and so I am curious about whether--I understand
and it is clear that we have a disproportionate number of men
and White men who are on the Federal bench.
My question is: Are they retiring or how long do they stay
around? I think because these are lifetime appointments, we
have fewer opportunities coming up for anybody else and I want
to think about when will these opportunities come up and how
age diversity is affected?
Ms. Sen. These are really important questions.
So, generally for the Court of Appeals the average age at
investiture is around 50 years old and for District Court
judges it has been closer to 40, but I think that has actually
flipped downward over time so that we are appointing younger
judges who then serve longer terms.
So, to kind of concretely answer your question, these
opportunities aren't going to come around all that often, given
that judges are serving longer and longer terms. There are some
papers on looking at judges' age and that is another
characteristic that kind of factors into here. You might think
that younger judges are actually, like more well-connected to
kind of social developments and more sensitive to components of
diversity, for example, LGBTQ status, than older judges, as
younger generations are more embracing of the LGBTQ community.
So, that is something that people have looked at and have
found.
Ms. Ross. Ms. Hawkins, yeah.
Ms. Hawkins. Thank you.
I would add to that the fact that what we really have is
this artificial scarcity in terms of the seats available to be
filled, and we have really an abundance of qualified
candidates. I think it was Congressman Lieu who said this is
not really about having an inadequate supply. This is about
having the deliberate and conscious commitment to improving the
diversity on the bench, because, as you said, there are so few
seats that come available, given life tenure. As Professor Sen
said, the age of judges at investiture is actually going down.
I believe research shows that President Trump had the lowest
average age at the time of appointment.
So, we know that these opportunities are few and far
between. Because of that, there are usually robust candidate
pools that are available, rich with not only well-qualified
candidates but very diverse candidates. So, this is not really
a pipeline problem. This is an appointment problem. We really
just have to be deliberate and conscious about the commitment,
just like Jimmy Carter did when he said, ``I am going to do
this.'' It happened.
Ms. Ross. To follow up, this Committee had a hearing on the
need to expand the Federal bench, particularly at the District
Court level, because of the caseloads and because of population
increases. If we did that, would that be something that would
provide the opportunity for all these qualified candidates to
be considered so that it wouldn't be such a small number, that
we could then have much more of a balance, because we would
have so many more opportunities to fill those positions?
Ms. Sen. I think the answer is yes, and I think we could
make a huge impact here with a small number. So, for example,
going to the number of Native American judges which is just
two, we could add one more and that would actually increase the
percentage of Native Americans on the Federal bench by 50
percent. Right? So, small numbers could have a huge impact
here, and I think that speaks to your point. This is a great
opportunity to do that.
Ms. Ross. Okay.
Ms. Hawkins. I echo that. Again, scarcity is really the
problem. It is the scarcity of opportunities that prevents us,
in addition to the will, the political will to do this. Once we
have the political will, the scarcity of opportunity is another
impediment. So, expanding the Federal court system is certainly
a way to expand those opportunities and reduce that artificial
scarcity.
Ms. Ross. Well, wonderful. Maybe, we will get around to
doing that for the first time in 30 years.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I thank the gentlelady.
I also thank the witnesses for their appearance, for their
testimony, and for their time. I deeply thank you.
Mr. Kirsanow. Mr. Chair.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. This concludes today hearing.
Mr. Kirsanow. Mr. Chair, a point of personal privilege.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Yes.
Mr. Kirsanow. I think the claim was made I lied to the
Committee about the reversal rates of the Sixth--of the Ninth
Circuit. I want to reemphasize that the Ninth Circuit over the
last 25 years is the most reversed circuit by the Supreme
Court.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Well, I think that the figures
speak for themselves and it is a matter of ideology that the
Ninth Circuit has been so overruled over the years more than
any other circuit. So, that is a matter of ideology as opposed
to competence. There is no question about that.
So, without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative
days to submit additional written questions for the witnesses
or additional materials for the record.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:38 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
