- JUVENILE JUSTICE PIPELINE AND THE ROAD BACK TO INTEGRATION

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

JUVENILE JUSTICE PIPELINE AND THE ROAD BACK TO INTEGRATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM,
AND HOMELAND SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, MAY 13, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-21

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-140              WASHINGTON : 2021

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chair
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania, Vice-Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Ranking Member
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,      DARRELL ISSA, California
Georgia                          KEN BUCK, Colorado
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAREN BASS, California               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island     TOM McCLINTOCK, California
ERIC SWALWELL, California            W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          CHIP ROY, Texas
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
GREG STANTON, Arizona
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MONDAIRE JONES, New York
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CORI BUSH, Missouri

PERRY APELBAUM, Majority Staff Director
CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM, AND HOMELAND SECURITY

SHEILA JACKSON LEE, California, Chair
CORI BUSH, Missouri, Vice-Chair

KAREN BASS, California               ANDY BIGGS, Arizona, Ranking
VAL DEMINGS, Florida                     Member
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania         LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island        TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
TED LIEU, California                 THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
LOU CORREA, California               VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               BURGESS OWENS, Utah

JOE GRAUPENSPERGER, Chief Counsel
JASON CERVENAK, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

Thursday, May 13, 2021

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Chair of the Subcommittee on
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security from the State of Texas     2
The Honorable Andy Biggs, Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security from the State of
Arizona........................................................     3
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of New York...........................     5

WITNESSES

Bryan Stevenson, Esq., Founder and Executive Director, Equal
Justice Initiative
Oral Testimony.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    12
Marsha Levick, Esq., Co-Founder and Chief Legal Officer, Juvenile
Law Center
Oral Testimony.................................................    33
Prepared Statement.............................................    36
Brett Peterson, Director, Utah Division of Juvenile Justice
Services
Oral Testimony.................................................    40
Prepared Statement.............................................    42
Aaron Toleafoa, Chair, Emerging Leaders Committee, Coalition for
Juvenile Justice
Oral Testimony.................................................    47
Prepared Statement.............................................    49
Jessica Vaughan, Director of Policy Studies, Center for
Immigration Studies
Oral Testimony.................................................    51
Prepared Statement.............................................    53

STATEMENTS, LETTERS, MATERIALS, ARTICLES SUBMITTED

A picture of a juvenile brain submitted by the Honorable Sheila
Jackson Lee, Chair of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and
Homeland Security for the record...............................    66
Articles submitted by the Honorable Thomas Massie, a Member of
the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security
from the State of Kentucky for the record
An article entitled ``Kyle Rittenhouse Deserves the Kind of
Mercy My Son Did Not Receive,'' The Atlantic.................    82
An article entitled ``Not Even Rittenhouse Should be Tried as
an Adult,'' Marcy Mistrett...................................    86
Materials from WA State Court of Appeals Division III,
UNPUBLISHED OPINION, submitted by the Honorable W. Gregory
Steube, a Member of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and
Homeland Security from the State of Florida for the record.....   106

APPENDIX

Statement from an individual inside prison walls ``system does
not work,'' submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee,
Chair of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland
Security from the State of Texas for the record................   124
Materials from WA State Court of Appeals Division III,
UNPUBLISHED OPINION, submitted by Aaron Toleafoa, Chair,
Emerging Leaders Committee, Coalition for Juvenile Justice for
the record.....................................................   126
Articles submitted by the Juvenile Law Center for the record
An article entitled ``Broken Bridges, How Juvenile Placements
Cut off Youth From Communities and Successful Futures''......   130
An article entitled ``Debtors' Prison for Kids? The High Cost
of Fines and Fees in the Juvenile Justice System''...........   161
An article entitled ``Unlocking Youth--Legal Strategies to End
Solitary Confinement in Juvenile Facilities''................   200
An article entitled ``Transforming Justice--Bringing
Pennsylvania's Young People Safely Home From Juvenile Justice
Placements''.................................................   240
An article entitled ``Racial Inequality in US youth detention
wider than ever, experts say,'' The Guardian.................   283
An article entitled ``National Trends in Sentencing Children to
Life Without Parole,'' Death Penalty Incorporation Center
(DPIC).......................................................   287
An article entitled ``Debtors' Prison for Kids? High Cost of
Fines and Fees in the Juvenile Justice System,'' Executive
Summary, Jessica Feierman and Naomi Goldstein, Emily Haney-
Caron, and Jaymes Fairfax Columbo............................   297

JUVENILE JUSTICE PIPELINE AND THE ROAD BACK TO INTEGRATION

----------

Thursday, May 13, 2021

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism,

and Homeland Security

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:10 a.m., in
Room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Sheila Jackson
Lee [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Nadler, Jackson Lee,
Demings, Bass, McBath, Dean, Scanlon, Bush, Cicilline, Correa,
Escobar, Biggs, Chabot, Gohmert, Steube, Tiffany, Massie,
Spartz, Fitzgerald, and Owens.
Staff present: David Greengrass, Senior Counsel; Moh
Sharma, Member Services and Outreach Advisor; Cierra Fontenot,
Chief Clerk; John Williams, Parliamentarian; Monalisa Dugue,
Deputy Chief Counsel; Veronica Eligan, Professional Staff
Member; Jason Cervenak, Minority Chief Counsel for Crime; Ken
David, Minority Counsel; and Kiley Bidelman, Minority Clerk.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The Subcommittee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess
of the Subcommittee at any time.
We welcome everyone to this morning's hearing on Juvenile
Justice Pipeline and the Road Back to Integration. I must say
how excited I am about the many witnesses and their
perspectives on talking about fixing, helping, overhauling a
system that protects our children.
Before we begin, I would like to remind Members that we
have established an email address and distribution list
dedicated to circulating exhibits, motions, or other written
materials that Members might want to offer as part of our
hearing today. If you would like to submit materials, please
send them to the email address that has been previously
distributed to your offices and we will circulate the materials
to Members and staff as quickly as we can.
I would also remind all Members that guidance from the
Office of Attending Physicians states that face coverings are
required for all meetings in an enclosed space such as
Committee hearings. You may remove your mask only when
recognized to speak.
I would also ask Members to mute your microphone when you
are not speaking. This will help prevent feedback and other
technical issues. You may unmute yourself any time you seek
recognition.
Now, I will yield myself time for an opening statement.
Today, this subcommittee, and I must say with a great deal
of excitement because this is an area of great love and
affection for me and the work that we have done in years past
in this committee, but this is an exciting time that this
Subcommittee will discuss several issues that impact youth and
the juvenile justice system. It will examine recent trends in
law and policy and their impact on the prosecution,
incarceration, and treatment of juveniles. It will also explore
effective methods by which we can reform our juvenile justice
system.
Historically, reform has been a monumental challenge
particularly when addressing our justice system, for reform
always requires those whose hands are free, whose hearts are in
the works, and who care for the results. As Abraham Lincoln
once put it in his speech, a house divided against itself
cannot stand. United we need to stand on behalf of our
children.
When a series of litigation challenges across the Nation
demonstrated the lack of due process and protection for youth
in a justice system, we came together as a Congress to pass the
preliminary juvenile justice Act and that is the Juvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act (JJDPA). With JJDPA as
their guide, many states have taken up the task of reforming
their juvenile justice system and are doing well in places like
Utah, California, Massachusetts, Illinois, the District of
Columbia, Connecticut, and Washington State. Thank them for
their vision, but there is so much more work to do.
They recognized that an investment in our children and
their future is an investment in America. As we make this
investment, we must take into consideration childhood trauma
and its impact on an already undeveloped brain when
prosecuting, punishing, and incarcerating our youth.
Scientific-based research has shown that adolescence is a
distinct development stage that lasts from the mid-teens years
into the mid-20s. In essence, the brain doesn't fully mature
until at least 25-years old. Does that tell us about high
school students, middle schoolers, and yes, young people who
may make rash or irreverent or spontaneous decisions? Should
that be their life? Should we have a way of addressing these
young people?
It tells us that during that time, brains continue to
mature and develop throughout childhood and adolescence and
well into early adulthood. As such, adolescents do engage in
behaviors that are risky and sometimes dangerous. It is our
responsibility as guardians of the future to be able to help to
steer those individuals that have made such decisions to a
brighter future.
Even the Supreme Court recognizes this fact as demonstrated
in its line of landmark cases from Roper v. Simmons, to Graham
v. Florida, to J.D.B. v. North Carolina, Miller v. Alabama, and
Stevenson and Montgomery v. Louisiana when determining the
legal culpability of juveniles facing life without parole
sentences.
Although the conservative majority in the Supreme Court
stated in Jones v. Mississippi that it does not overrule
Miller, this deviation from precedent is a clear reminder that
we must remain committed to enacting legislation that addresses
juvenile life without parole more effectively. It is
unacceptable. The United States stands alone as the only Nation
that sentences people to life without parole for crimes
committed before turning 18. Twenty-five states and the
District of Columbia banned life sentences without the
possibility of parole for juveniles, while several others have
no one serving this sentence.
Congress has much work to do to make this policy
consistent, meaning that it is irrational and may be inhumane
to sentence young people to life without parole for acts they
committed before the age of 18. This work must be done in
addressing this and other issues like juveniles in adult
facilities, age appropriate prosecutions, reentry fines and
fees, probation, status offenses, and solitary confinement.
According to the ACLU, research has shown that solitary
confinement can cause extreme psychological, physical, and
developmental harm resulting in persistent mental health
problems or even suicide.
Kalief Browder, whose family I met, whose brother I met,
was a tragedy and a prime example of the psychological harm
that may result from excessive isolation when he took his young
life in 2015 after remaining in solitary confinement in Rikers
Island even to the point of being in his own feces for simple
allegations of taking a backpack. I might add that it was
determined that the owner of the backpack wasn't in the country
and it wasn't an offense in the first place, but he couldn't
get a lawyer. He couldn't get representation and remained there
for a very long time.
We are at an inflection point where we can no longer sit on
the sidelines and hope and pray things get better. We are
summoned by our better angels to take up this task to do what
we are sent here Congress to do to act. I paid tribute to
Kalief with legislation named after him, but we must do more.
I look forward to hearing your testimony on how we can help
the states in addressing these pivotal issues and thereby
saving our children.
It is my privilege now to recognize the Ranking Member's
opening statement for five minutes.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to all the
witnesses for being here, both in person and remotely.
At today's hearing, the Subcommittee will examine the issue
of juvenile justice. We should be discussing President Biden's
inhumane border crisis. I was at the border again last week and
what I saw was maddening.
The Biden Administration is not acting to resolve the
crisis. The solutions are not difficult, but it requires the
Administration to admit that there is a crisis and they created
it.
I think we should explore some simple statistics at the
beginning of this hearing today. Over the past 2 months, 35,000
unaccompanied minor children have been apprehended by border
patrol. You should see the conditions that most of them are in.
I have visited those facilities. I have been in virtually every
sector in the last eight weeks. There isn't a single one of
those children who hasn't been trafficked or transported by the
transnational criminal organizations called cartels. These
children have been placed into hands of very dangerous and
inhumane coyotes who abuse and victimize many, if not most, of
these children.
There is evidence of an additional pernicious problem
affecting children crossing our southern border. They are being
rented and recycled.
Testimony before Congress asserted that children as young
as five-years old are used by dozens of adults to cross our
border and obtain release into the interior of the United
States. In one case, a 51-years-old man bought a 6-month-old
child for $80.
On the other hand, there are exactly zero juveniles being
held in the United States Bureau of Prison facilities; zero.
Those are federal prisons. According to the Bureau of Prisons'
website, there are 15 juveniles being held in three contract
facilities. We are here today talking about those 15 ostensibly
instead of the 35,000.
Police Executive Research Forum tracks crime trends and
recently found that ``Juveniles seem to be''--this is a quote,
``increasingly involved in shootings and other violence in part
because they are not in school and school resource officers
have been reassigned.''
Don't forget an emerging policy objective from some of the
Democrats on the left to defund police or even elimination of
police departments altogether. The concomitant spike in crime,
including juvenile crime, has already demonstrated the danger
in this rather facile and wrong-headed idea.
Issues surrounding juvenile justice are State issues and
should be left to the states. The only nexus the Federal
Government has to the juvenile system in America is when
Congress inserts itself into the process through the
Administration of grant programs. There are myriad issues that
this Subcommittee could be looking that are relevant to the
jurisdiction of this Committee and the role of the Federal
Government, issues that are of great importance to the American
people.
As I mentioned previously, the Biden Administration has
refused to address the humanitarian and security crisis at the
southern border that continues to worsen every day. It has been
50 days since President Biden appointed Vice President Harris
to solve the crisis and she still has not even visited the
border. I invited her and any member of this Committee to join
me at the border to see and hear first-hand what is happening.
It is hard to solve a crisis when you refuse to acknowledge
that there is a crisis.
Over two months ago, I and other Members of this
subcommittee, sent a letter to the chair requesting a hearing
to examine how the Biden Administration's crisis along the
southern border affects homeland security and public safety. Of
course, we have not had such a hearing and we renew our request
to hold such a hearing in the near future.
The President needs to reinstate successful Trump
Administration policies such as the Migrant Protection
Protocols that were working. We need to update our asylum laws
and address loopholes in our immigration laws that serve as
magnets for UAC, unaccompanied children, and families in our
country illegally because they know that once they get here
they will most likely never be removed.
Specifically, we need to amend the Trafficking Victims
Protection Reauthorization Act so that UAC from noncontiguous
countries are treated the same as UAC from contiguous
countries. When you address the impacts of the Florida
Settlement Agreement that require UAC to be released from
custody even if they are with their parents, even the Obama and
Biden Administration advocated for those fixes. That is why I
introduced the Stopping Border Surges Act to make these
changes.
The Biden Administration's border crisis also raises
serious concerns about violent, criminal gang activity.
According to a 2018 Congressional Research Service report,
there are also concerns that MS-13 may exploit the U.S.
southwest border by bringing young gang Members from Central
America to the United States as unaccompanied alien children or
may recruit some of the vulnerable UACs to join the gang once
in the United States. This is exactly where we see the
intersection of the Biden Administration's border crisis and
the topic before us today. These policies have very real and
sometimes very deadly consequences.
Not too long ago, four juveniles were charged with murder
in West Palm Beach, Florida. They were Members of the violent
MS-13 gang, in the country illegally, and suspected of being
unaccompanied children. This was not an isolated incident. MS-
13 is taking advantage of our open southern border and bringing
in unaccompanied children who actively participate in criminal
gang activities. When these unaccompanied children enter our
juvenile justice system, they divert resources that could be
used to help serve those who are not in this country illegally.
So, we see yet another disastrous consequence of the Biden
Administration's lack of border security policy.
I again thank each of the witnesses for being here today. I
look forward to your testimony and hearing what you have to add
to this important topic. I thank the chair and I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Ranking Member and was
delighted to yield to him, thank him for his passion, and to
remind him of the great work of the Biden-Harris
Administration, particularly the humanitarian response that
they have offered and the intensity of their work on the issues
of the border and unaccompanied children. So, I thank you, Mr.
Biggs, very much.
I now recognize the distinguished Chair of the Full
Committee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Nadler, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Nadler.
Chair Nadler. Thank you, Chair Jackson Lee for holding this
importing hearing on juvenile justice, not, by the way, on
immigration.
It is particularly important to hold this hearing on
juvenile justice in the aftermath of the Supreme Court's recent
decision in Jones v. Mississippi. That decision which makes it
easier for courts to sentence children to life in prison
without the possibility of parole, marks a significant break
from the court's prior precedent.
Previously, the court had issued a string of decisions
restricting the imposition of these harsh sentences, based in
large part on the significant and growing scientific consensus
regarding the differences between children and adults and the
recognition that we should view, treat, and rehabilitate
children in our justice system accordingly.
Prior to the progressive era, the period of widespread
activism and social reform spanning years from the 1890s to the
1920s, child offenders over the age of 7 were punished and
confined with adults in harsh and overcrowded penal
institutions. Early reformers and psychologists opposed
incarcerating youth with adults and urged the creation of new
institutions for youth that focused on rehabilitation. This
work led to the creation of the New York House of Refuge in
1824, the first juvenile reformatory in the United States and
the pioneer in the treatment of children.
By 1899, other states had followed suit and recognized that
children who commit crimes are different from adults. By the
1920s, our juvenile justice system had emerged, but over time a
system originally focused on rehabilitation and the differences
between children and adults shifted to one fueled by tough-on-
crime laws in response to an exaggerated rise of juvenile crime
and delinquency. These laws resulted in disparate sentences,
especially for African American children, deplorable conditions
of confinement for sentenced youth, and the depravation of
constitutional rights.
According to the Death Penalty Information Center and the
Equal Justice Initiative, at least 366 people have been
executed for juvenile offenses by 2005. Thousands more,
including children as young as 13, were sentenced to life in
prison without the possibility of parole.
The Supreme Court slowly recognized that children are
different. In 2005, it held in Roper v. Simmons that ``that the
death penalty cannot be imposed upon juvenile offenders.'' In
doing so, the court acknowledged ``the overwhelming weight of
international opinion against the juvenile death penalty
resting in large part on the understanding of the instability
and emotional imbalance of young people may often be a factor
in the crime.''
In 2010, the court held in Graham v. Florida, that the 8th
amendment forbids life without parole sentences for juveniles
convicted of non-homicide offenses. In 2012, it held in Miller
v. Alabama, a case argued by Bryan Stevenson, one of our
witnesses, that mandatory life without parole sentences for
juveniles violate the 8th Amendment.
The court's 2016 decision Montgomery v. Louisiana, applied
Miller retroactively, finding that children are
constitutionally different from adults in their culpability and
that the severest punishments should be reserved for ``the
rarest of juvenile offenders, those whose crimes reflect
permanent incorrigibility.''
The recent Jones decision, however, guts this precedent and
it sadly reaffirms our standing as the only country in the
world that sentences children to life imprisonment without the
possibility of parole for offenses committed before they turned
18-years old.
As we examine the impact of this decision and possible
solutions, it is important that we also explore the full range
of issues affecting justice-involved youth. This includes early
intervention strategies for at-risk youth, particularly those
who experience childhood trauma; developing appropriate
confinement settings and rehabilitation programs that will ease
reentry when sentences are over.
Some states have led the way on juvenile justice reform. I
hope these efforts, these reform efforts, will mitigate some of
the harm caused by the Jones decision, retroactively and
prospectively. Our treatment of justice-involved youth should
not be based on geography. Congress must be an equal partner in
these reform efforts which includes examining the way our
federal laws treat youth in our justice system.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses as we continue
to explore these important issues. Thank you. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman yields back. It is now my
privilege to recognize the distinguished Ranking Member of the
Full Committee, the gentleman from Ohio. We thank Mr. Jordan
for this hearing and happens to have stepped away for another
hearing. We thank him very much. The Ranking Member will submit
his written statement and we appreciate that (no statement
provided).
We will now proceed with witness introductions. We have
heard the stories presented in our opening statements, mine and
Mr. Nadler's, where we are in this issue. A quintessential
leader, visionary in this effort, along with our other
witnesses, is Mr. Bryan Stevenson.
Mr. Bryan Stevenson is the founder and executive director
of the Equal Justice Initiative, a human rights organization in
Montgomery, Alabama. Under his leadership, EJI has won major
legal challenges eliminating excessive and unfair sentencing,
exonerating innocent death row prisoners, confronting abuse of
the incarcerated and the mentally ill, and aiding children
prosecuted as adults.
Stevenson has argued and won multiple cases at the U.S.
Supreme Court and he and his staff have won reversals, relief,
or release from prison for over 135 wrongly condemned prisoners
on death row and won relief for hundreds of others wrongly
convicted or unfairly sentenced.
We are seeking a journey to reform and we thank Mr.
Stevenson for being willing to be part of that journey and that
victory.
Ms. Marsha Levick is a legal chief counsel and co-founder
of the Juvenile Law Center since 1975, and is a nationally-
recognized expert in juvenile law. Levick oversees Juvenile Law
Center's litigation and appellate docket and has successfully
litigated challenges to unlawful and harmful laws, policies and
practices on behalf of children in both the juvenile justice
and child welfare systems.
Ms. Levick has authored or co-authored numerous appellate
and amicus briefs in State and federal appeals courts
throughout the country, including many before the U.S. Supreme
Court and has argued both State and federal appellate courts in
Pennsylvania and numerous other jurisdictions. She realizes the
wrongness of the Jones case and we are glad to have here to
help us reform the system.
Mr. Brett Peterson, he is one who is working in the
vineyards. Brett is the director of the Utah Department of
Juvenile Services. He is responsible for the operation and
management of Utah's Division of Juvenile Justice Services.
Brett also oversees the continuum of care in juvenile justice
including early intervention, shelter, detention, and long term
secure settings. He is committed to reducing the need for out-
of-home placements, correlating the services provided with the
leading research related to the adolescent brain development.
He oversees the ongoing implementation of significant juvenile
justice reforms in Utah. He is working in the fields and the
vineyards and he sees our children and what can be done on
their behalf. Thank you so very much.
Let me thank Mr. Aaron Toleafoa. He is reality check for
all us, a young man who we should listen to. Aaron is the chair
of the Emerging Leaders Committee with the Coalition of
Juvenile Justice and has been a long term advocate for youth
justice reform. Aaron's advocacy efforts have led to the
passage of numerous legislative reforms in Washington State,
including Senate Bill 6160 which would allow minors convicted
in the adult court to stay in the juvenile correction system
until they turn 25 rather than being transferred to prison when
they turn 21-years old.
Aaron was given 21 years for felonies he committed when he
was 15-years old. He was sentenced to Green Hill School, a
Washington State juvenile correctional facility that focused on
juvenile rehabilitation, treatment with education and
vocational training. He is there now.
There he has become a leader in the community and joined in
lobbying efforts for felon incarcerated youths to promote
juvenile justice reform. His voice is one that should not be
ignored.
Ms. Jessica Vaughan, Jessica is the Director of Policy
Studies at the Center for Immigration Studies, a Washington,
DC, based research institute that examines the impact of
immigration on American society and educates policymakers and
opinion leaders on immigration issues. She has been with the
Center since 1992. Her area of expertise is immigration policy
and operations covering topics such as visa programs,
immigration benefits, and immigration law enforcement. Thank
you for being here.
I want to take just a moment to do something somewhat
unusual and that is to thank my Members for being here because
this is important work and we have experienced a pandemic and a
COVID-19. We know that time is of the essence as we move to
make change. So, I want to thank Karen Bass, Val Demings, Lucy
McBath, Madeleine Dean, Mary Gay Scanlon, Cori Bush, David
Cicilline, Ted Lieu, Luis Correa, Veronica Escobar, and Steve
Cohen for their presence here along with Chair of the Full
Committee, Mr. Nadler.
I thank my Members of the minority, Mr. Jordan, Mr. Biggs,
Mr. Chabot, Louie Gohmert, W. Gregory Steube, Tom Tiffany,
Thomas Massie, Victoria Spartz, Scott Fitzgerald, and Burgess
Owens. I know that we will work together for what is good for
young people.
It is now my obligation as I welcome all our distinguished
witnesses to thank them for their participation. I will begin
by swearing in our witnesses. I ask that our witnesses in
person please rise and raise your right hand. I ask that our
remote witnesses please rise and raise your right hand. The
witnesses who are in the room please rise and raise your right
hand. I ask that our remote witnesses please turn on their
audio and make sure that I can see your face and your raised
right hand while I administer the oath. May I see a raised
right hand while I administer the oath. Witnesses unmute and
raise your right hands in a way that is visible in the screen.
Do you swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that the
testimony you are about to give is true and correct to the best
of your knowledge, information, and belief, so help you God.
Let the record show the witnesses have all answered in the
affirmative. Thank you all very much.
Please note that each of your written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety. Accordingly, I ask
that you summarize your testimony in five minutes. To help you
stay within the time, there is a timing light on the witness
table. When the light switches from green to yellow, you have
one minute to conclude your testimony. When the light turns
red, it signals your five minutes have expired.
For our witnesses appearing virtually, there is a timer on
your screen to help you keep track of time.
To my fellow Members on this committee, I want to indicate
how much the witnesses are part of the process of democracy, so
we are very grateful.
As I yield to Mr. Stevenson, it should be known as Ms.
Levick that they have just recently been engaged in a Supreme
Court case. Mr. Stevenson has a graduation speech, but he was
willing to be with us because we must make change.
Mr. Stevenson, you are now recognized for five minutes.
Thank you so very much.

STATEMENT OF BRYAN STEVENSON

Mr. Stevenson. Thank you, Madam Chair, and it's my great
honor to be with all of you this morning.
I want to begin by just emphasizing the childhood trauma
epidemic that we are seeing across this country. I don't think
we have talked enough about the fact that there are hundreds of
thousands of children in this country who are born into violent
families, that live in violent neighborhoods, that are being
shouted at, abused, and mistreated, in their early years.
What happens when children are treated in this way is that
they develop trauma disorders just like our combat veterans
coming back from combat.
When someone is constantly being threatened their brain
begins to produce these chemicals, cortisol and adrenalin, and
they become hyperreactive and these trauma disorders have
lifelong consequences if we do not intervene, and we have the
power and the knowledge to intervene and to deal with this
trauma epidemic and I believe it would not only lower crime and
improve public safety but it would save lives.
Instead of doing that, when these children get to schools
we do the opposite. We don't make them feel safe. We threaten
them. We have too many schools where teachers react to these
children like the teachers are correctional officers and the
children are prisoners.
We have too many principals that Act like wardens. We say,
do this and we'll suspend you. Do that we'll expel you. That
threat mindset aggravates the trauma, and by the time some of
these kids are 9- and 10-years old and someone gives them a
drug and for the first time in their life they feel three hours
of release and peace from the trauma and the stress, what do
they want?
They want more drugs, and some of these kids get to 11 and
12 someone says, join my gang, we'll help you fight the forces
that make you feel threatened, and what do they do? They join
that gang, and we have to understand that dealing with trauma
is at the heart of how we improve the lives of so many of our
children.
We haven't done it, in part because we have had too many
people preaching a false narrative about children. Some have
said that some children aren't children. Some kids look like
kids, but they're not kids.
Super predator myths and other distorted notions of child
development have dominated our policymaking. Today is a day, I
hope, we will recognize the error of that and change things.
I believe that all children are children. I don't believe
we show our commitment to children by looking at how well we
treat talented kids, gifted kids, and privileged kids. Our
commitment to children must be expressed by how we treat poor
kids, abused kids, and marginalized kids. That's the context
and we haven't done very well. There are these things that I
believe we must do.
Last month, Maryland became the 25th State that banned life
without parole sentences for children. I believe the Federal
Government has a critical role to play in leading this country.
The United States Congress should end and ban life without
parole sentences for children. Not just because the Supreme
Court has recognized that that's important, but because this
country has an obligation to lead in rebutting the false
narratives that have shaped these policies.
There is a critical need for us to do something about the
fact that we still have children in adult jails and prisons.
In 2003, a bipartisan Congress passed something called the
Prison Rape Elimination Act. One of the critical provisions of
that Act was a prohibition on putting children in adult jails
in prisons.
Notwithstanding that act, today there are thousands of kids
in adult jails and prisons where they're threatened, where
they're sexually assaulted, where the risk of suicide is
dramatically higher, and that abuse continues and I believe we
have to create an enforceable ban on placing children in adult
jails and prisons, a ban that applies both at the State and the
federal level.
The bill was introduced in 2003 by Senator Sessions in the
Senate, Bobby Scott in the House. It passed unanimously. I have
to believe that this Congress recognizes the importance of
ending the shameful practice of putting children in adult jails
and prisons.
Finally, I think we have to reckon with the distortions
that have been created by lowering the minimum age of trying
children as adults. We have 13 states in this country that have
no minimum age of trying a child as an adult. I've represented
9- and 10-years-old kids facing 40- and 50-years prison
sentences in adult jails and prisons.
Last week, I was in California. I was celebrating a book
release by one of my clients, a 13-years-old boy named Ian
Manuel who was arrested and convicted in Tampa, Florida. He was
born into violence. His mother was put in prison for a violent
act.
He was abused. He was homeless. He tried to join a gang at
13-years old and he ended up attempting a robbery where he shot
someone. For that crime, he pled guilty and the judge sentenced
him to life imprisonment without parole at the age of 13-years
old.
They sent him to an adult prison, and even though he was
14-years old, they couldn't put him in the population so they
put him in solitary confinement. He spent 18 years in solitary
confinement where he cut himself, where he was abused.
We won his release after the Supreme Court banned life
without parole sentences for children. He spent five years in
our re-entry program and today, he is a published author. He
issues poetry.
He is very, very acclaimed. He is an example of the problem
and the solution. He represents the challenges but also the
hope of what happens when we commit to recognizing that all
children are children.
That's what I hope this Congress will do today in changing
this narrative and lifting up the children who are most
vulnerable in American society.
[The statement of Mr. Stevenson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank you very much for your
testimony, Mr. Stevenson, and the passion in which you have
given it.
I now yield to Ms. Levick for five minutes.
[Pause.]
Ms. Jackson Lee. I think you need to turn on your mic.
Thank you.
Ms. Levick. Happy to do that.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes, thank you.

STATEMENT OF MARSHA LEVICK

Ms. Levick. I'll start over.
Madam Chair Jackson Lee, Chair Nadler, Ranking Member
Biggs, and distinguished Members of this subcommittee, thank
you for welcoming me today.
At a press conference this past Saturday to address the
civil rights charges recently filed by the Justice Department
against convicted Officer Derek Chauvin and three other
officers charged in George Floyd's death at which Chair Jackson
Lee was also present, Congressman Al Green from Houston
proclaimed, ``The winds of change are blowing.''
The winds of change are, indeed, blowing. I've been
advocating for youth in the justice system since 1975. I co-
founded Juvenile Law Center one year after Congress passed
JJDPA and just eight years after the United States Supreme
Court first declared that children are people too under our
Constitution.
The cries for transformation have never been louder or more
urgent. Since 1975, I have seen the highest levels of youth
arrests and incarceration, and I have also seen the lowest.
In 2019 the lowest number of youth arrests in more than 40
years and youth incarceration has dropped by 70 percent since
1996. Even in the face of such steep drops, youth incarceration
remains too high and our youth are still suffering Children are
still experiencing physical, emotional, and sexual abuse in
custody.
We remain the last country in the United Nations to
sentence children to die in prison and racial disparities have
only worsened in the youth justice system.
Federal leadership can make a difference. Several bills
have now been introduced that will set standards and provide
guidance on how to establish a more humane justice system for
our children.
I will briefly highlight a few of these opportunities.
Costs and fees--over 10-years ago, I litigated the Kids for
Cash case in Pennsylvania, an international scandal in which
two judges were alleged to have taken nearly $3 million in
kickbacks from the developer and owner of private for-profit
youth detention centers. The greed and corruption were
unprecedented.
The case also exposed the largely hidden system of fines
and fees charged directly to kids and their families that kept
them embroiled in the legal system even after their cases were
essentially resolved.
Just in the past three years, seven states have passed
legislation to abolish or substantially limit fees. Nine have
legislation pending this term.
We're just at the beginning of this transformation. Federal
level incentives to reduce fines and fees would further spur
these reforms.
Conditions--even one day of incarceration harms children's
future outcomes. We still lock too many children up, and while
these youth are often portrayed as dangerous, here's some
important data.
The majority of youth are detained--62 percent of them are
detained for property, public order, or drug offenses, not
offenses against persons. The pandemic actually underscored our
propensity to over incarcerate. Custody levels dropped by about
24 percent at the beginning of the pandemic last spring and
these numbers have remained low.
Too many children are still placed in isolation, pepper
sprayed, and assaulted by staff and others while in custody
with little recourse available unless they can jump through
very complicated administrative hoops required by PLRA.
Research has shown us that rehabilitation and programming
are much more effective and economical when delivered to
children and their families in their communities rather than in
out-of-home placements.
While the number of state-run facilities has dropped by
more than half since 2000, federal investments to continue this
trend and support a continuum of care from prevention to
intervention is essential and it costs much less.
Extreme sentencing--when Juvenile Law Center opened in
1975, children could still be executed. After the Federal Crime
Bill in 1994, nearly a quarter of a million children were sent
into the adult criminal justice system every year.
Today, children as young as six and seven can be arrested
in half the states across the country. The emergence of
developmental and neuroscientific research in the last 15 years
has changed or eliminated some of these practices.
I served as co-counsel in Montgomery v. Louisiana and on
leading amicus briefs in the earlier U.S. Supreme Court
decisions that struck certain extreme sentencing practices for
youth based on their developmental immaturity.
The United States still remains alone in its harsh
treatment of children. That children are different from their
adult counterparts is now established both in science and in
the law. This principle must inform every aspect of our youth
justice system.
We must keep the youngest children out and provide those
who remain the care and treatment and rehabilitation the system
was designed to provide. The states have made good progress
here.
Nearly all states set 18 as the age of criminal
responsibility. More than half have eliminated life without
parole and half the states have eliminated the automatic
transfer of children to adult court.
Yet, our federal statute has no such boundaries. These
aren't radical ideas. Reforms in the states, like at the
federal level, are bipartisan. Conservative groups as diverse
as Freedom Action Network, Americans for Prosperity, Our
Streets Strategies, and Right on Crime support these efforts
locally and nationally.
Let me close with two final points. In 1985, Nelson Mandela
famously observed, ``There can be no keener revelation of a
society's soul than the way in which it treats its children.''
More recently, Justice Sotomayor wrote in her dissent from
the Supreme Court's denial of cert in a case in which
incarcerated individuals in Texas sought greater health and
safety protections in the face of COVID-19, she wrote, ``It has
long been said that a society's worth can be judged by taking
stock of its prisons. May we hope that our country's facilities
serve as models rather than cautionary tales.''
I urge the Members of this Committee to keep these two
truths close. Change and transformation are indeed possible in
our youth justice system, but only if that system mirrors the
core values of human dignity, racial equity, and true justice
for all.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Levick follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much, Ms. Levick. Time has
expired.
Now, we recognize Mr. Peterson.
Mr. Peterson, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRETT PETERSON

Mr. Peterson. Thank you. Chair Nadler, Chair Lee, Ranking
Member Biggs, and esteemed Members of the subcommittee, my name
is Brett Peterson and I am the director for the Division of
Juvenile Justice Services within the Utah Department of Human
Services.
It is an honor to be here today. Our division operates
early intervention, detention, community-based placements,
long-term secure care, transition, and parole for youth up to
25-years old.
We align within Utah's system of care model to change young
lives while holding them accountable and keeping communities
safe.
System transformation does not happen overnight. It
requires philosophical, policy, and practice change, and it
will not occur without an unrelenting commitment to
partnership.
With this focus, Utah pivoted our treatment approach with
public input and Pew Research-based legislation in 2017. The
fundamentals of reform include actively challenging the
relativist system that wrongly believed the best response to
low-risk behavior was to incarcerate and institutionalize.
We do not criminalize adolescent behavior, especially when
overwhelming research shows treating children as adults only
puts them on a path to worse behaviors and worse public safety
outcomes.
Buy in involves consistent education about adolescent brain
science, that children are different from adults. Not to
mention, we know our youth are more likely to have challenges
stemming from socioeconomic and racial bias, to be victims of
trauma, and to be involved in other areas of human services,
including mental health, behavioral health, disability
services, and child welfare.
Systemically we promote and engage in policy decisions that
support prevention, research models, equitable treatment, and
the best public outcomes.
In Utah, transformative policy change includes the
following: Strict limits on when a youth can be tried as an
adult, the elimination of life without parole and death penalty
for anyone under 18, the entitlement to free and effective
legal counsel for every youth, the requirement of parental
consent or legal counsel for a youth to waive Miranda,
limitations on when and how school-based offenses can be
referred to juvenile court, strict limits on lengths of stay
and the use of contempt, assurances that youth may only be
detained if they pose a public safety risk, mandates that
programming must be evidence based, the elimination of
incarceration or court for youth younger than the age of 12
except for aggravated offenses, and the elimination of
isolation, indiscriminate shackling, and limits on room
confinement.
A critical element of our pivot is to flow resources and
savings to a no-wrong-door early intervention model. We deliver
trauma-informed care and ensure youth receive the right amount
of treatment in the right settings.
We establish free and voluntary services in the community
to help youth improve risk behaviors, avoid any involvement or
deepening in juvenile justice or child welfare system. We are
pioneering new models and partnerships for vocational,
employment, and higher education for every incarcerated youth.
Data indicates our endeavor to transform a system is
working. Since 2018, I can report the following: A 46 percent
reduction in detention admissions, a 26 percent reduction in
risk to reoffend, over 130 locked rooms taken offline, over $9
million in savings captured from a reduction in out-of-home
placements, a 19 percent increase in early intervention
programs, especially in our rural communities. Nearly 100 full
time employees have been reassigned from locked settings like
detention to early intervention.
Reform is a journey. It is not a destination. I recall
speaking to a small child of 11, shaking as they sat in a
detention center. I have come to know a youth who grew up in
our facility, seeing them leave at 21 for prison for an offense
committed when they were 15. We still witness heartbreak,
tragedy, and loss every day. Our data shows disproportionate
system involvement for youth of color.
We do not have all the answers. However, we believe we will
continue to see positive results through our proven philosophy,
policy changes, and practice change.
Youth today and generations to come will benefit from our
nation's commitment to changing young lives when they need us
most.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Peterson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Peterson, for
acknowledging that this is a journey. Thank you for your work.
Mr. Toleafoa, and it's Aaron, and you can let me know
whether I pronounced that last name right, sir. Good to have
you here.
We recognize you now for five minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF AARON TOLEAFOA

Mr. Toleafoa. Good morning, Madam Chair, to the Committee
as well. I thank you all for this opportunity to speak with you
today.
My name is Aaron Toleafoa. I'll be speaking to you from the
State of Washington, where I am incarcerated.
Since the age of 15-years old and going through the system,
I've learned that the system was created for us, but the
thought of us being involved in the creation itself had not
occurred.
In other words, the system wasn't built by us and therefore
it makes sense that the system doesn't work for us. I say us
directed at people of color and people from poor communities
who are disproportionately impacted by the system.
Many people who I've worked with and as well as myself have
tried to stress the importance of bringing individuals who were
and are currently incarcerated to the table when making
decisions that may impact them or decisions that would make
sense to have their input.
Without authenticity, real change doesn't exist. So,
including those with lived experience alongside community
outreach programs and organizations is the most effective way
to ensure that our youth are properly provided the tools and
are equipped with the skills to succeed wherever they are.
For example, here in Washington State, for Asian and
Pacific Islander youth like myself, we have an organization
from my community called Tough Love that meets with the youth
in the facility and in our group meetings we--that we have we
learn about our culture and where we come from. We learn the
values and morals and ways of our culture that we have been so
out of touch with.
We learn from someone who comes from a similar background
as us, and when you find out more about yourself you get a
sense that you belong, and how many times do youth try to
belong but find themselves looking in the wrong places.
For instance, when suspended or expelled from school, youth
aren't receiving education at that time. Now, with this idle
time often find others who give them a sense of belonging,
which is where we see youth engaging in criminal activity,
hence the school to prison pipeline.
Now, with our youth who enter the system, we speak about
rehabilitation. We need to ask ourselves how exactly we expect
our youth to find rehabilitation in a prison setting.
Since the beginning of COVID, those inside the system have
experienced isolation even more. Knowing the impact isolation
has on brain development, you can assume right that
incarcerated youth are experiencing a greater amount of stress
and anxiety because of the many outlets and ways of coping that
were closed off due to the pandemic.
We're essentially helping the at times hopeless and for the
most part helpless youth to find hope and help within the
environment they're thrown into. It's almost as if we're
helping a flower to bloom in a dark room.
We have to become the light for our youth to grow and not
the dark room that prevents growth. How this can happen is
through understanding things like generational trauma,
understanding what rehabilitates as much as what dehabilitates,
understanding that a duty to the individual doesn't end upon
release, this as well as introducing love and care into the
lives of youth who have been deprived of those essentials
growing up.
What I feel is very important is actually talking to the
youth who are incarcerated. Our youth who enter the system may
often leave the system as legal adults. Not knowing how to
function as an adult in society is a big factor in why they
experience recidivism.
If we are to stop our youth who become young adults from
reoffending upon release, we need to offer them real help. For
youth with no money, we need to get them help financially.
This means financial literacy programs and jobs where they
can actually earn money and learn how to manage it.
For youth with no housing, we need to offer them housing or
they are literally just being thrown out into the streets. So,
we see that our system does a good job at holding those inside
accountable for their actions, but what about the
rehabilitation and re-entry parts, which are just as important
for not only our communities but the youth themselves.
For the youth who are sentenced as adults, one message from
the system is very clear, that the system doesn't care about
you. I believe in keeping our youth from the adult system.
Being a part of passing legislation in my state, I've seen
the positive impacts of extending the age a youth is able to
spend in the juvenile system.
Instead of being shipped off to DOC before their 21st
birthday, they're able to make the best of the opportunities
that are offered in the juvenile institution until their 25th.
Opportunities like going to a community placement program
instead of an adult prison where recidivism rates are tripled
once you walk through the doors.
So, by keeping youth out of the adult system, we offer them
better outcomes in their future. When it comes to passing--when
it comes to changing how the system operates and what it looks
like by passing bills into law instead of talking about why it
shouldn't work, we should ask how it will work.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Toleafoa follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much for your testimony,
for your life story, and for your commitment. We hear you very
loudly.
I now recognize Ms. Vaughan for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JESSICA VAUGHAN

Ms. Vaughan. Thank you. My testimony will focus on a
specific serious problem that is imposing an enormous burden on
American communities and which will have lasting effects,
including making it more difficult to resolve the justice
pipeline issues under discussion today, but which this Congress
so far has failed to address, and that is the crisis at the
border.
We are experiencing a border policy disaster. The number of
apprehensions in April were the highest monthly total in 20
years, and Border Patrol agents say that the number who are
successfully evading capture is higher now too, potentially
double or triple that.
Mr. Biggs went through the statistics and they're very
concerning. In addition to the huge numbers of families and
kids arriving illegally and being released into the country,
Border Patrol has seen a huge increase in opioids, fentanyl,
and other lethal drugs that are coming in that is fueling the
spike in overdoses in many communities today that we're seeing.
The cause is obvious. The migrants call it la invitacion
from President Biden. The invitation they're referring to is
the loudly and clearly proclaimed reversal of the Trump
enforcement policies that had successfully worked around
loopholes in the law, and the Biden Administration's move to
essentially abolishing interior immigration enforcement through
executive action plus the promise to enact a mass amnesty for
all those living here illegally and even many were deported in
the past.
The resulting new surge of illegal arrivals is a major
burden on American communities, so much so that two days ago
the governors of 20 states sent a letter to President Biden
imploring him to end this crisis.
The governors wrote, quote, ``At a time when our country is
trying to recover from once in a generation pandemic, the last
thing we need is a self-created crisis that exploits families,
undermines public safety, and threatens our national
security.''
The border crisis is a giant unfunded mandate for State and
local governments. It severely strains schools, foster care
programs, health care, and other support systems, the very same
systems that are critical to shutting down the juvenile justice
pipelines like the foster care system. Kids in foster care are
facing a disproportionate risk of incarceration and any of them
are Blacks, Latinos, and other minorities.
Piling on huge new caseloads of unaccompanied minors will
not help solve this problem. That is why four states so far
have refused to participate in the Biden Administration's
Unaccompanied Minor Resettlement Program.
It's not just the numbers. The policies on placements of
unaccompanied minors with sponsors are inadequate to prevent
kids from being put in inappropriate and even dangerous
environments.
There is no meaningful screening of home placements or the
people who come forward to take custody. Most of them are here
illegally, and no meaningful monitoring of their welfare or
activities after release from government custody.
They are here to stay. Our dysfunctional immigration system
offers several pathways to permanent legal status for these
minors, which they access with legal services provided by
taxpayers, and those pathways include the Special Immigrant
Juvenile program and asylum.
Another problem is the lenient policies at the border are
deliberately exploited by transnational street gangs,
especially MS-13, enabling them to significantly boost their
activity here both by sending gang Members across our border to
join cliques here and also by providing the opportunity to
recruit other vulnerable newly arrived youths.
There is a clear nexus between the border crisis and the
resurgence of MS-13 violence and crime, and especially juvenile
crime.
My analysis of 500 recent MS-13 arrests revealed that 43
percent of the MS-13 Members that were arrested for murder in
the last five years were under the age of 21 and many of their
victims were young, too. Twenty-three percent of these murder
suspects had apparently originally entered this country
illegally as unaccompanied minors.
Obviously, Congress cannot fix all of the social and
economic problems that set the stage for juvenile delinquency,
but Congress can Act to fix our immigration laws that are
making it so hard to resolve these problems.
What Congress can do is update the TVPRA to clarify how
arriving minors should be handled, with emphasis on swiftly
returning them to their families in their own countries,
override the unreasonable Flores settlement agreement, require
meaningful consultation and coordination with State and local
governments on resettlement programs, end or rewrite the
Special Immigrant Juvenile program, reform the dysfunctional
asylum laws, establish a baseline for mandatory minimum level
of interior immigration enforcement, and especially Act to
preserve job opportunities for marginalized Americans,
including young offenders, by boosting worksite enforcement and
reducing issuance of certain temporary work visa programs.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Vaughan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank you, Ms. Vaughan, and
continue to emphasize the respect for the humanitarian approach
that the Biden-Harris Administration has now taken with
unaccompanied minors. Thank you.
We will now proceed under the five-minute Rule with
questions. I will begin by recognizing myself for five minutes.
Mr. Stevenson, even Supreme Court Justice Kennedy, Senator
Rand Paul, and others spoke against solitary confinement. I'm
reminded of meeting Kalief and his family, as I indicated, a
15-year-old who questionably took a backpack, who was
incarcerated for three years, served two years in Rikers
Island.
That generates for me the pathway that we should we
proceed, and that is the emphasis, if you will, on barring
juvenile from having life without parole, eliminating of
juveniles in adult facilities, changing the age at which
juveniles are prosecuted as adults.
Going back to this point of Justice Kennedy and Rand Paul,
when discussing the adverse and inhumane elements of solitary
confinement generally, as you well know, we have introduced
Kalief's Law and intend to expand with the elements of banning
the life without parole, eliminating of juvenile in adult
facilities, and changing the age.
I want you to collectively assess the cost analysis to
these forms of treatment of juveniles. As I do so, let me, if I
may subject it to the record, Mr. Stevenson, science. Remember
we kept saying during the pandemic science, science.
So, I want to introduce into the record the brain, and
emphasize the prefrontal cortex as of unanimous consent, and I
submit it without objection. Which indicates in young brains
you have delay and reflect, inability to delay and reflect,
inability to take all options into account, inability to
contemplate risk and consequences, and inability to have social
intelligence. Science.
[The information follows:]

MS. JACKSON LEE FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. All these that I've asked you about, Mr.
Stevenson, would you please respond. Thank you so very much for
being here, and your leadership.
Mr. Stevenson. Yes. Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, I think this is one of the issues where there is
pretty wide consensus. Most wardens, most jailers, most
institutional providers recognize the challenges that are
created when we put children in adult jails and prisons. I
don't know any that favor that policy.
Yet, we have thousands of kids in these facilities. The
dilemma for these facility providers is that when you put young
children in population, these children are at risk of assault,
they're at greater risk of sexual violence, they're at greater
risk of abuse. So, banning the placement of children in adult
jails and prisons seems to me to be the obvious and urgent next
step.
I just want to reinforce what I said earlier. It's already
been the expression of this congress to prevent--the Prison
Rape Elimination Act makes very clear that children should
never be placed in adult jails and prisons without sight and
sound separation. Yet, because there is no enforcement
mechanism, other than what the Justice Department can do, that
continues to be a problem.
That's why we believe that if this is adopted in law that
provided a private right of enforcement, we could eliminate
this problem very quickly. A year from now, we could come
together and see that there are no children in adult jails and
prisons. That would reduce the risk and the challenges that are
created by putting kids in solitary confinement.
Kalief Browder. my client, Ian Manuel, spent 18 years in
solitary confinement, where he was tear-gassed, where he was
abused, and where he cut himself. When he was traumatized.
That's happening more and more. Our prisons are very violent
right now, as Ms. Levick indicated. We are really having hard
times helping these kids because of these legal restrictions.
That's why I absolutely agree that a ban on placing
children in adult jails and prisons that's enforceable would be
an immediate response. I also agree that ending life without
parole for children would be a very, very logical and important
next step. And twenty-five states have already done this. In 31
states there are no children serving life without parole.
We would commit to doing things that the court was
indicating when they issued the decisions in Graham and Roper
and Miller and Montgomery. Those interventions, Madam Chair, I
just have to believe could be advanced. As I said, the PREA was
passed unanimously just 18-years ago.
We just haven't failed to implement--we have failed to
implement it. We need to do something about that now for the
Kalief Browders and Ian Manuels. More than that, for the
thousands of children that are at risk right now in adult jails
and prisons across this country.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Quickly to Mr. Peterson and to
Mr. Toleafoa, your quick response to the impact of children put
in solitary confinement and being incarcerated without the
ability for parole. Mr. Peterson.
Mr. Peterson. Yes. So thank you. When we look in our
system--working with our partners at Department of Corrections,
when they have a young person--and it's incredibly rare in Utah
when that occurs. We've taken steps from a policy perspective
to make sure that youth are housed in developmentally
appropriate settings in the juvenile justice system.
However, there are circumstances where they are still
transferred to the Department of Corrections. When that occurs,
they do have to be essentially in 24, 23 in one type lockdown
situations, because they can't be in general population for
their own risks.
So developmentally, it's really a step in the wrong
direction to have them introduced in that environment.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right, time has expired.
Mr. Toleafoa, the harm to young people in solitary
confinement that you might perceive.
Mr. Toleafoa. Yeah, from my experience, just entering a
prison and seeing what I used to see on TV, knowing that I'm
going to be here really was just like a shocking, because
really it's like, man, this is what I'm going to be--this is
where I'm going to be staying.
So, for me mentally, it just wasn't healthy for me to, at
that time when I was 17-years old, to experience that. So, I'm
with Mr. Peterson and disagree with just youth entering adult
prison, period.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much. I yield now to Mr.
Owens. I yield for five minutes to Mr. Owens.
Mr. Owens. Thank you, Chair Jackson Lee and Chair Nadler
and Ranking Member Biggs for holding this hearing today.
I'm pleased to welcome all the witnesses this morning, but
especially wanted to thank my friend, Brett Peterson, Director
of the Utah Division of Juvenile Justice Services, for joining
us today.
I had the opportunity several years ago to move to Utah,
where I fulfilled a three-decades-old dream to work with at-
risk youth. I started a nonprofit helping young boys and girls
successfully transition from juvenile detention.
It was Brett's JJS team that gave us the opportunity and
framework to combine collaborative support from the state,
educational institutions including curriculum support from Utah
Valley University, small businesses, Utah Homebuilders
Association, other respected corporations, and our greatest
resource, community volunteerism.
Second Chance for Youth now services as three facilities.
We've had men transition, young men transition to higher
education, including University of Utah and Salt Lake City
Community College, begin careers, and most importantly gain
access to lifelong leadership.
I received a call last week from a young man who was part
of our very first class. He now has a career, he's raising his
family. He called me to follow up on my promise to introduce
him to a specialist in the financial field to help him
understand how to plan, save, and invest.
I want to take this opportunity to publically thank Brett,
his JJS team, and my fellow Utahans for the remarkable hearts
that they have for our youth.
Before I begin my questioning for Mr. Peterson about the
success of Utah's juvenile system, let me State that we need to
be seeking state-centric solutions. Let best-practice models
coming from states like Utah and others drive this process, and
our youth will win big time.
By the way, from personal experience, all these curriculum
and intervention activities were all based on--were all
evidence-based. I also want to take a few minutes just to thank
Aaron. Your voice, young man, is invaluable. You're going to
give hope to so many youth that need to hear that if I can do
it, you can do it. So, thank you very much.
Mr. Peterson, when we talk about early intervention, what
does that specifically look like in Utah, and can you give me
some examples of effective early intervention?
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Congressman Owens. I think in any
justice reform effort, there's often this question of now what.
In other words, we used to have in Utah, for example, we had a
very broad filter--or funnel.
Everything from very low risk offenses to high risk
offenses were coming through the same doorways. They were
coming through detention centers and courtrooms. Recognizing
that we intentionally had to shrink that doorway, which we did.
Now, we have to say how are we now going to flow resources
towards the community. How are we going to serve people in
their homes, schools, and communities to help them thrive?
So for us, what we stood up is our JJS Youth Services
Model. Truly, what this is, is a no-wrong-door approach to
early intervention. So, it doesn't matter who refers to us,
whether it's child welfare, a school, a parent, a youth walking
in themselves, or whether it's law enforcement.
Regardless of how a youth comes to our door on this very
front end, they can be sure that they're going to have a
dedicated case manager, a plan manager. They're going to be
allowed and afforded evidence-based screening tools and
evidence-based assessments.
Then the real game-changer, because of reform, we're able
to provide services on the very front end for youth and
families. That was a tragedy of the juvenile justice system and
the child welfare system.
Before you could actually get to sometimes the more formal
approaches of treatment, you had to be in the system. We're
trying to flip that, and we're having and making success.
So today, I want to highlight just a couple things. Our
court referrals are down. Our non-judicial diversions are up.
Our detention admissions are down significantly.
I have less than 50 youth, about 50 youth in locked
detention today, statewide. Our graduation rate is up.
Certainly that's not all attributed to JJS. It's a system
effort, Department of Human Services and collaborative with our
partners in the courts and the schools.
What this corresponded with on a federal level of the
Family First Prevention Services Act, which unlocked and gave
us the ability to now access federal dollars for prevention
work. That was a game-changer, and it continues to be a game-
changer. So, thank you for that question.
Mr. Owens. The last few seconds we have, you mentioned 26%
reduction in risk level for incarcerated youth. What was
responsible for that reduction in Utah?
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Representative Owens. First, it
really does start with reform. We have to make sure we weren't
locking up low-risk youth. So, in Utah before reform about half
of the youth in my populations, incarcerated populations, were
there, they were relatively low risk.
They were there for contempt, maybe even some types of
misdemeanors, or property crimes. So, we had to stop that, we
had to stop that pathway into the system. We had to really be
looking at what's going to actually improve public safety.
So, we've done that. Today, when I look at my long-term
incarcerated population, actually, not today, but Friday May 7,
I had 72 youth total statewide in those sets, those settings.
So, that's step one.
After we did that, we had to re-gear and reinvent our
entire operations, focused on we knew from the literature and
the research the amount of treatment we had to deliver for
youth. We knew what would impact various criminogenic risks. We
had to reinvent our entire operation subject to that linchpin,
that point.
So, making sure every youth has is getting the right amount
of treatment, every youth is getting the right amount of dosage
in the right way. We set out with this ambitious goal of 25%
reduction in the risk to re-offend by 2021.
I am excited to be able to report that that's actually 26%.
So, we beat our goal, just barely. So, thank you for that
question.
Mr. Owens. I will yield up my time. Let me just say thank
you for your work, and this is the way we should look at best
practices. All our states can benefit from this. So, thank you
again, Mr. Peterson, I appreciate it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize the Chair of the Full Committee, Mr. Nadler.
Chair Nadler. Thank you. Mr. Stevenson, the Supreme Court
has ruled several times in the past 15 years or so that
children are constitutionally different from adults and must be
treated differently for the purposes of sentencing.
Can you tell us what these decisions mean for us as
policymakers and how they should inform our work in reforming
the way the criminal justice system treats children?
Mr. Stevenson. Yes. I think it's been really important that
we have the courts intervene in this way. As was indicated
earlier, in 2005 the Court recognized that we could no longer
execute children. They rooted that decision based on an
analysis of what we've learned about child development.
We know that children are biologically different. Children
change, it's the hallmark of being a child. What was
interesting, Chair, is that we get this. That's the reason why
we don't let children drink, we don't let children smoke, and
we don't let children vote. We have all these restrictions,
every State in the country recognizes that children are
different than adults.
The area where we have failed to make that recognition is
in the criminal justice system. When we began prosecuting
children 13-years old, putting them in the adult prisons, 9-
years old, when we started doing that, that's when we created
the crisis that we are talking about today. There's a long line
of cases.
In Graham, the Court recognized that imposing life without
parole sentences on children makes no sense because children
would change. The argument essentially was that it's cruel to
say to any child of 13-years old that you are beyond hope,
beyond redemption. That you are fit only to die in prison.
That's what states are still doing. That's what the federal law
still does.
That's why believe it is so urgent that the legislatures
catch up with this understanding that has been articulated.
Mental health professionals have been preaching this for a very
long time. We now have a critical need on the legislative side,
given where the Court seems to have drifted in the last year.
Chair Nadler. Well, thank you. We must give all children a
second chance to live up to their full potential as adults. An
investment in the future of our children is an investment in
the future of America.
April was Second-Chance Month, and the Administration spoke
and called for automatic juvenile expungement and sealing of
juvenile records to allow a successful path forward in their
education and gainful employment.
Ms. Levick, as the Biden Administration has aptly stated
and states across the country, protections for individual--for
juvenile records are inadequate. What should a concerted effort
between the Federal Government and the states look like to
allow kids a viable second chance?
Ms. Levick. I think that there are three critical issues
that are raised in thinking about Second-Chances Month, and
thank you for that question. There are three issues. One
certainly is providing for automatic expungement of juvenile
records and sealing of records. The Federal Government can
certainly incentivize those practices.
We know that even juvenile records can significantly
adversely impact education opportunities, employment
opportunities, and housing opportunities for our youth. So,
thinking about automatic expungement is a critical way to avoid
those kinds of challenges that our youth don't need to face.
It's also true that extreme sentencing--abolishing life
without parole as we've already heard about in this hearing is
critical to thinking about second chances. The whole premise of
the Supreme Court decisions in recognizing that youth not only
should have hope, but that they also are entitled to second
chances because of their capacity for change. Eliminating life
without parole for children is critical to thinking about
second chances.
The final suggestion that I would make is with reference to
fines and fees. Fines and fees can have extraordinarily
devastating impacts on both children and on their families. Why
should families and kids have to make choices between paying
those fines and buying groceries?
Those fines and fees can also follow children after their
juvenile delinquency experience. It can manifest itself in
civil judgments that follow them, and again can inhibit those
opportunities that these youth should have for employment and
housing and schooling.
I think these are three critical areas where the
traditional role of the Federal Government incentivizing states
to adopt best practices can be undertaken here.
Chair Nadler. Thank you very much. Mr. Toleafoa, what are
some of the measures your organization are reviewing that would
address this problem to provide a second chance to juveniles?
Mr. Toleafoa. So, the organization I work with, CJJ,
obviously we work just around the JJDPA. Also, really getting
youth involved, I think that's really one of the main things is
when we're giving--when we're thinking about giving them the
second change, not really just thinking okay, yeah, here's a
good idea. I think, this would work for them.
Actually, getting them involved, and asking youth, hey,
what would work for you, instead of coming up with an idea of
our own and thinking that it's going to work for them. So
that's, I think would be one of the most important things is
really just getting youth involved.
Chair Nadler. Thank you very much. My time is expired, I
yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The Chair yields back. I now recognize Mr.
Chabot for five minutes.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Juvenile justice is predominantly a State and local issue,
not federal. Over 800,000 juveniles a year are referred to the
State or local courts. Of those, there's usually around 60,000
that are incarcerated.
As of this morning, there are 20, 20 out of 60,000 that are
on federal issues. Those are not housed in federal facilities;
they're housed in State or local facilities.
Now, where there is a federal issue is immigration. The
Biden border crisis, their failure to resolve this. This
Administration's refusal to enforce our immigration laws.
Its policies that incentivize the drug cartels, who exploit
children and juveniles and put the public at risk. That's what
we ought to be talking about, that's what we ought to be doing
something about, and that's what I intend to devote my time
here this morning to.
Ms. Vaughan, it's your testimony, is it not, that the
current Administration, the Biden Administration, reversed
policies implemented by the previous Administration, and that's
resulted in a huge influx in illegal entries into this country,
many of those unaccompanied minors. Is that correct?
Ms. Vaughan. Yes, it is correct. There are a number of
policies that have been reversed. First, the construction of
the border wall was suspended. The title 42 public health-based
expulsions of everyone arriving illegally have been eased now
so that unaccompanied minors and most families arriving with
kids are allowed to come in and then released into the country.
It's basically the reestablishment of catch and release.
The cooperative agreements with some of the countries in
the region to share the responsibility of offering safe haven
to asylum seekers, those are all in limbo now.
Also, importantly, basically what amounts to a freeze on
interior immigration enforcement also--and it has helped send
the message that if you can get to this country illegally, you
will be allowed to enter, and you will not face a threat of
immigration enforcement for the foreseeable future.
So, all of this--and this sends a very powerful message
that they actually call, as I mentioned, la invitacion, that's
it's an invitation for people to pay criminal smuggling
organizations to come here because they know they will be
successful.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Those criminal drug organizations,
the cartels and the gangs, they're profiting immensely from
this, aren't they?
Ms. Vaughan. Yes. I've seen estimates that it's a
multibillion dollar industry every year. The more that they can
make off of smuggling families and kids and others here, the
stronger they become and the more difficult it is for law
enforcement to deal with them. The more money they have for
bribes, the more resilient they are and the less likely they
are to give up this illegal trade.
Mr. Chabot. According to your statement, you indicated that
the border patrol agents estimate that for every one illegal
crosser that they actually apprehend, there's another one, two,
or three who's able to evade their capture and gain entry into
the U.S.
So, it's the numbers that we hear on TV, etc., the numbers
are actually far more than we hear about, isn't that true?
Ms. Vaughan. That's right, because of the number who are
getting through successfully because the Border Patrol is
distracted by dealing with the arriving families and kids, and
because there are not enough barriers along the border, there
are not enough Border Patrol agents, they don't have enough
support from the National Guard. Only Texas has invested some
of its resources into assisting the Border Patrol in
controlling this.
We're concerned about those so-called gotaways especially
because that's where most of the criminals and prior deportees
and others that we really need to worry about--
Mr. Chabot. Well, let me stop--
Ms. Vaughan. They're in that group.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, let me stop you there because I've
only got a short period of time. So, the gotaways that you
talked about, so they're not in the system at all. So, we
therefore have no information about who they are. We don't know
the purpose of their entry. We don't know whether they have a
criminal record. You mentioned MS-13.
We don't know if these folks are connected with MS-13,
although, we know an awful lot of them are. We don't know
whether they have COVID, we don't know if they have
tuberculosis or hepatitis. We also don't know in whose
neighborhood these people are going to ultimately end up in, is
that correct?
Ms. Vaughan. That's exactly right. They're spreading out
across the country. We don't even know where they came from,
and we know that people are coming from all over the world.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. My time's expired, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you very much. I just want to remind Members that we're here
for the juvenile justice pipeline and the road back to
integration.
Also, that children arriving unaccompanied from Central
America are fleeing gang violence, not bringing it, and the
increased levels of domestic, gender, and gang-based violence
in these countries leave young people with no choice but to
flee or face gang recruitment.
Mr. Chabot. Madam Chair, point of order.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Face atrocities--
Mr. Chabot. Point of order, point of order.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So, let me yield now to the gentleman from
California.
Mr. Chabot. Point of order, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I understand.
Mr. Chabot. I would just note, I would ask that the--
Ms. Jackson Lee. You'll be next. I'm going to recognize
you, just a moment. Just a moment. You'll be next, thank you.
The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Chabot. I would just ask if it's appropriate for the
Chair to basically comment and get additional time over and
above her 15, excuse me, her five minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes, it is.
Mr. Chabot. To comment on virtually every person on this
side and to disagree with the witnesses and us.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chair, Mr. Chabot. Mr. Chabot, it is
the prerogative of the Chair to clarify the title of the
hearing, and that's what we did. Thank you.
Mr. Chabot. Well, I disagree, but you're in the majority.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chabot.
Ms. Bass. So Madam Chair, Mr. Chair--
Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Bass from California is recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. Bass. Why, thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Ms. Bass. Mr. Chair Nadler, and Ranking Member. Thank you
so much for having this hearing, because my view of this
hearing is that it's an opportunity to really look at a system
that I believe is profoundly out of date and needs to be
changed fundamentally to be consistent with the science that we
know today.
So, I want raise some of those fundamental questions. One
of them, similar to my colleague Mr. Owens. Mr. Owens started
an at-risk youth project that I'd like to know more about. I
did the same in South Central Los Angeles.
I found that working with some of the most challenging
teens that if they have an opportunity at a future and a life,
they will go for that and they will not go toward a life of
crime. That's not a normal way to go.
So, I wanted to raise a question, and I wanted to ask Mr.
Stevenson, who I think should get a Nobel Prize, and Ms.
Levick, why do we arrest kids for status offenses? Why do have
status offenses?
What I found in South Central is that that was the gateway
to a long life of interacting with the criminal justice system,
whose families could not afford to take them off the escalator
into prison.
I want to compliment my colleague, Steve Chabot, he, I see
he left, but I invited him to come to my district and meet some
of the youth and see some of the programs. He did that. I
appreciated that, because we cannot just say you can throw the
life of a kid away. Kids don't come in isolation, they come
with families.
So, can you please tell me why do we have status offenses?
Why don't we just eliminate that?
Ms. Levick. Well, we certainly should not be prosecuting
and arresting children who are effectively charged with status
offenses at all. Your points are all well-taken. We're
essentially trying to punish children for acting like children.
We are singling them out for conduct that is not remotely
criminal, that does not require the attention of law
enforcement or other stakeholders in the justice system. We
harm them greatly.
What we know from our experience, and certainly Mr.
Peterson's experience in running the system in Utah, children
don't benefit really from their engagement with the juvenile
justice system. When we put them into that system, we always
risk harm, every day there's a potential to risk harm to those
children, and certainly sometimes to their families.
Ms. Bass. Thank you. Let me, before I run out of time--
Ms. Levick. Okay.
Ms. Bass. Let me ask Mr. Stevenson to comment on that as
well.
Mr. Stevenson. Yes, Representative, I think it's a really
important question. We didn't always do it. That's why I think
it's so necessary that we recognize that we don't not have to
stay on this path. It's in the 70s and the 80s that we began
criminalizing people for things that really weren't crimes.
We said that people who are drug-addicted and drug-
dependent are criminals. We could have said that people have a
health problem and need a healthcare response. Making status
offenses crimes and treating children like criminals was the
consequence of what I call the politics of fear and anger.
That's why these interventions that you're hearing about in
Utah that you've talked about in Los Angeles are so important.
I absolutely believe that when we framed best interest of the
child as the dominant, controlling principle for how we dealt
with children, we didn't put children in custody for status
offenses.
Ms. Bass. Well--
Mr. Stevenson. We need to return to that frame.
Ms. Bass. Well, I would argue that we still don't put
certain children in prison. So status offenses, as I'm aware
of, really are only problematic with children who are low
income or kids of color.
I don't know, because in my district part of my district is
very affluent, does not look like me. I just never heard of a
kid being ticketed or arrested for truancy or a status offense.
So, I do want to ask a question about Utah, because I know Utah
has wonderful examples. Does your agency deal with the for-
profit part, the Sequel Youth and Family Services, Lava Heights
Academy, and Falcon Ridge? How do you interact with the profit?
Because, I also think, that's one of the fundamental things
that needs to be transformed.
Mr. Peterson. Yeah, thank you for that question. So, we
operate ourselves all of our detentions, shelters, and early
intervention programs. We do contract with providers for a lot
of our community placements. We don't currently contract with
Sequel, for example.
What we do is, so most of our youth, actually, they are
ordered into state's custody are actually served in the
community, so in a residential treatment.
Ms. Bass. So, if you don't contract with Sequel, which
MSNBC, there was a special done on them, I'm sure you're aware
of that.
Mr. Peterson. Mm hm.
Ms. Bass. Do you have any ability to supervise them? Do you
have any authority over them?
Mr. Peterson. Well, I don't directly, but our, in our
state, our Department of Human Services Office of Licensing
does have regulatory authority over any license providers in
the state.
Ms. Bass. So, I don't think our kids should be subjected to
a for-profit industry. I also don't think that only some kids--
well, I don't think status offenses should exist, period,
because it is a pathway to prison.
I yield, I'm done.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady yields back. I now yield
time to Mr. Tiffany for five minutes.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Madam Chair.
First, Mr. Stevenson, I really appreciate the comment you
made in regards to children are different. We don't have them
drink and smoke and vote.
I would just urge you to contact some of my colleagues who
want children to vote and put bills forward suggesting that
they should vote. I would suggest that you may want to contact
some of them and share that with them.
Also, I just want to comment, Ms. Levick, I really do agree
what you were saying in regards to fines and fees can be a real
anchor for, especially when somebody comes out of
incarceration.
I saw it when I was in the State legislature, some of the
really heavy fines and fees, that it is a real burden once you
get out of incarceration to be able to handle that. So, I
really appreciate that you mentioned that.
I just wanted to ask a question of Mr. Peterson. You cited,
I believe it was the Pew model that you guys used. Did you do
some things differently than what the Pew model was or what
some other states that perhaps led in this direction before
you? Did you do a few things differently than some other states
kind of adapted to your situation?
Mr. Peterson. I don't think significantly, no. I think that
we primarily followed the Pew model and engaged with a pretty
comprehensive working group to first establish--in looking at
our own data.
So, there's always going to be different data points in
every system that might control the situation. No, I think in
general that is what we implemented.
Mr. Tiffany. Okay, and your working group, was it just
within the state, or did you work across State lines?
Mr. Peterson. No, just within the state.
Mr. Tiffany. Yeah. Because I think it's really important, I
mean, it's great to have a hearing like this at the federal
level, but it really seems that if we want to see innovation
and creativity being used here, it's once again, go to the
states, the laboratory of the states, allow them to create the
models.
We use this cookie cutter approach, which really is a
continual theme that is going on here, at least in the two
committees I sit in, Judiciary and Natural Resources, where we
just look to the Federal Government to try to solve problems,
we're going to create more problems that we can't handle.
So, Ms. Vaughan, you're saying there's a connection, there
could be a connection between the border crisis and the number
of youth offenders that are out there?
Ms. Vaughan. Well, there's no doubt that there's a
connection between the border crisis and the influx of
unaccompanied minors and families with kids with the resurgence
of certain transnational street gangs, especially MS-13. This
is well known at state, local, and federal law--by state,
local, and federal law enforcement agencies.
This gang, MS-13, is based in El Salvador and specifically
sent out a directive a few years ago to its cliques in the
United States to take advantage of the lenient border policies
on unaccompanied minors to grow their ranks to import new foot
soldiers, essentially, for these cliques to increase the gang's
revenue.
They also set about recruiting among the newly arrived
youth in the communities where they were located. For example,
there was a DACA recipient who was a member of MS-13 who was
working at middle school in Maryland who had contact with other
kids and was able to use that to benefit the gang.
There have been numerous other cases where the gang
benefitted by being able to bring in new recruits. They're
going to benefit now by this new influx and also the lack of
interior immigration enforcement that will be directed against
them.
Mr. Tiffany. So, you're saying in all likelihood that we're
going to see with UACs coming in as they have been over the
years and unprecedented numbers now coming in, and by the way,
unprecedented is the term that the Border Patrol uses, that
some of them are going to end up in the juvenile justice
system. Is that correct?
Ms. Vaughan. It's inevitable. Obviously most of the kids
who are coming here are not potential offenders or gang Members
or going to end up in the justice system. The problem is that
many of those who arrived as unaccompanied minors who are in
the justice system are going to contribute to the problems.
They have taken advantage of these lenient offenses.
So, not all newly arrived kids are going to be criminals or
gang Members. Of the new criminals and gang Members that we're
encountering, and that law enforcement is encountering, many of
those entered as unaccompanied minors.
Mr. Tiffany. I'll conclude, Madam Chair, but first I want
to thank everybody for their testimony. I think it was really
some interesting testimony. To say that there is not a
connection, as the Chair did, between illegal immigration and
the juvenile justice system is simply inaccurate.
We are seeing--when you have unprecedented numbers that are
facilitated by gangs, gangs that are on the other side of the
border as well as in the United States of America, there is
going to be an impact on the juvenile justice system.
I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentleman and will clarify
that in going forward. It's my pleasure now to yield five
minutes to the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Demings.
Ms. Demings. Well, thank you so much, Madam Chair, and
thank you to our witnesses for joining us today. I also want to
thank the Chair for this very important discussion.
I've worked as a social worker working with foster care
youth, and I'm sure everybody in this hearing can imagine their
stories. I've also, I've spent time as a law enforcement
officer and worked as a detective sergeant and a detective in
the crimes against children unit. As a police chief, I started
a youth program specifically designed to help at-risk youth.
I clearly believe that every child deserves to have an
opportunity. I think it's incumbent upon us as leaders, whether
local, state, or federal, to design programs that give children
every opportunity to succeed.
I think we fail as a system when we fail to address those
quality-of-life issues that plague children in the first place
when we leave those quality-of-life issues to the juvenile
justice system to solve.
I do believe this is an appropriate forum, as Members of
Congress, to look at states who may have programs that provide
best practices that we certainly can adopt. As we have a
discussion about many other issues and we are looking at what
states are doing, some of those states were trying to prevent
those things. Other states that are doing it correct regardless
of what the issue is.
I think we're smart when we try to adopt best practices,
especially I see investments in children's lives as a major
investment in our future.
So, Mr. Peterson, if you could just talk again about the
importance of intervention, and how if we're going to give
children an alternative to incarceration, how important
intervention is into doing that.
Mr. Peterson. Yeah, thank you, Representative. It is
absolutely critical. Like you said, we can't address all when
you start talking about the social determinants of health
economic instability and housing instability and healthcare
instability, we're not that well-positioned to do that in
juvenile justice.
We're going to do our best, and we're going to do
everything we can to focus on reducing criminogenic risk
factors. Fundamentally what we have to do and the whole vision
of reform is to be able to reinvest, to flow resources into
communities so that youth can stay there, and they can thrive.
So, this takes a lot of innovation. It takes an endless
amount of partnership. Finding ways to listen, to hear.
So, our schools, for example, what's the challenge you're
seeing? We recognize and we have a shared philosophy that we
don't want to send a kid in front of a judge for truancy. I
shouldn't say it's completely shared, but it's a journey. Then
like you said, how do we then help, how do we then help?
So, we partner. I have staff in some school districts where
they actually go, and they're staffing cases with the social
workers in the school and recognizing, okay, maybe this family
needs some more intensive treatment.
We the ability to actually fund, it can by youth or family,
therapy, counseling, skill-building, and family group. It kind
of goes a whole range. We have that ability because of reform.
Ms. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Peterson, for that.
Specifically talking about schools, Ms. Levick, thank you as
well for mentioning that we've come a long way. We still
obviously have a long way to go. How we've seen the reductions
in the number of arrests leading to the reductions in
incarcerations.
I want to talk to you too about how can schools play kind
of a greater role in fostering those reductions that we see. If
we know that the overwhelming majority of people in our prisons
around the United States are Black and brown and that they did
not graduate high school, how can we continue to see those
reductions in arrests and incarcerations by the school playing
a better role in the process?
Ms. Levick. Yes, thank you, Congresswoman Demings, such an
important question. I think it's important to start out by
saying that roughly 39% of youth in the juvenile justice system
don't graduate from high school. So, that's precisely the
problem that you've identified.
I think that schools play a critical role, first, by not
sending children into the juvenile justice system. So, we need
to really be rethinking about I think we lost our way in the
last 20 years or so in pushing school resource officers into
the schools, seeing schools really--
Ms. Demings. Who were placed in the school, by the way,
initially for drug, you know--
Ms. Levick. Exactly.
Ms. Demings. Addiction prevention.
Ms. Levick. Now, they've become--
Ms. Demings. For prevention purposes.
Ms. Levick. Now, they've become feeders--
Ms. Demings. That's right.
Ms. Levick. Into our youth justice system. That's exactly
what we saw in the Kids for Cash case. All of those kids were
coming from the school system. These were kids who committed
really trivial misconduct, not even offenses.
So, I think that we need to start by focusing on schools as
places of education. We need to recognize that we spend more
money on incarceration than education. We need to change to
that funding balance. We need to invest in schools, and we need
to invest in communities.
I think your opening comments--the juvenile justice system
can't solve the ills that plague our communities and that
plague our families and our kids. It's not going to fix those
problems. So, by investing in smart services and really
investing in education that's how we're going to find our way
out of this.
Ms. Demings. Again, thank you to all our witnesses, and
thank you much for the important work that you are doing, all
in this space. Madam Chair, thank you for being such a
visionary and for this hearing. I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady's time has expired. Thank
you very much. Let me now yield to Mr. Massie for five minutes.
Mr. Massie. Thank you--
Ms. Jackson Lee. You're welcome, thank you.
Mr. Massie. Thank you, Madam Chair. Instead of asking one
witness five questions, I'm going to ask all five witnesses the
same question. Before I do that, I'd like to introduce into the
record two articles, and this will give you an idea of the
question I'm going to be asking you all.
The first article appeared in The Atlantic, and it's by
Elder G. Yusef Qualls, retired pastor and criminal justice
advocate. The article is titled ``Kyle Rittenhouse Deserves the
Kind of Mercy My Son Did Not Receive''. It appeared in The
Atlantic.
The second article is by Marcy Mistrett. She's the CEO of
the national advocacy organization called the Campaign for
Youth Justice. This appeared in LA Progressive, and the title
of this article is ``Not Even Kyle Rittenhouse Should Be Tried
as an Adult.''
So, I ask unanimous consent to introduce these two articles
into the record.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

MR. MASSIE FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Massie. Thank you, Madam Chair. So, that should give
you an idea what my question is going to be. No surprises or
gotchas here. I know you're not going to be jurists and you
won't be judges and you can't know, possibly know all of the
circumstances of this situation.
What we do know is he was, Kyle Rittenhouse was 17, and
he's been accused of felonies and he's being tried as an adult
in Wisconsin.
I'll start with you, Mr. Peterson. Please be brief, I want
to give everybody a chance to answer the question. Should Kyle
Rittenhouse be tried as an adult?
Mr. Peterson. No, I don't believe so.
Mr. Massie. Thank you very much. Ms. Levick.
Ms. Levick. I support that. I think that the science has
taught us what we need to know about children. Kids are
different, and we should treat them differently.
Mr. Massie. Thank you, Ms. Levick. Let's see, Mr.
Stevenson.
Mr. Stevenson. No, I agree with the panelists. I will note
that there's a 14-years old named Omar Ninham in Wisconsin who
has been tried as an adult and sentenced to life without
parole. What I want to do for Kyle Rittenhouse I want to do for
the hundreds of other children in Wisconsin.
Mr. Massie. Understood. Then finally I want to ask Aaron
Toleafoa what your opinion is.
Mr. Toleafoa. No, I don't think he should be tried as an
adult.
Mr. Massie. Then Ms. Vaughan, should Kyle Rittenhouse be
tried as an adult?
Ms. Vaughan. I don't know. I don't have an opinion on that.
I do know that the border crisis and other problems with our
immigration system are making it much more difficult to resolve
this pipeline problem into the juvenile justice system. I think
that is an appropriate thing for Congress to be focusing on
right now during this crisis.
Mr. Massie. Well, I thank you all for answering the
question to the best of your ability. I'll give you my opinion.
I think it--but let me condition it. You were nice enough to
give a short answer and I'll give the longer answer myself.
I think it should be left up to the states. In Wisconsin,
unfortunately, Mr. Tiffany isn't here and I'm talking about
Wisconsin, but in Wisconsin, 17-years olds are regularly tried
as adults. I do believe it should be left up to the states. I
believe he acted in self-defense, that's just an opinion, I'm
not a jurist or a judge.
If he's going to be tried, I think he should be tried as a
juvenile. He was 17, he should not be tried as an adult. I
agree with the four witnesses here who gave me a straight
answer, I thank you for doing that. He shouldn't be tried as an
adult.
Adding to the absurdity of this case, he's also being tried
for a misdemeanor crime of being a minor in possession of a
firearm. So, he's being tried for a crime that only applies to
minors while simultaneously being tried as an adult.
The only thing that would be more ridiculous, if they tried
him for the crime of being a minor in possession of a firearm
as an adult. That's almost how ridiculous this case is.
I thank you for not having a double standard. I thank you
for standing up for the rights of all juveniles. I hope that
Kyle Rittenhouse sees justice. I yield back the remainder of my
time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman yields back, and I now
recognize Ms. McBath for five minutes. Thank you.
Ms. McBath. Thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to thank
each and every one of you that are here this morning, those
that are physically present and those that are virtually here
with us today. Thank you so much for really talking about this
extremely critical and important subject today.
I know that it is critical that we recognize the challenges
facing our nation's children and that we give them an
opportunity to grow and learn from their mistakes. We have long
recognized that basic principle in our justice system, creating
different pathways in the justice system for youth and for
adults.
That distinction exists for a reason. When we erode that
distinction, suddenly our children can end up in a system that
wasn't designed for their needs and their circumstances.
This is especially troubling for those youth who have
committed the so-called status offenses that we have just
talked about, actions or circumstances that are a violation of
a law only when they are committed by a minor, such as skipping
school or simply running away from home.
When kids skip school, we need solutions that put our
students back in the classroom, not in the courtroom. I
represent Georgia, and I'm thankful that Georgia took a good,
deep look at how we were serving our youth in 2013. We decided
that there was room for change.
A council led by Republican Governor Nathan Deal found that
we were spending over $90,000 per year to incarcerate our
youth. That expenditure wasn't solving anything. More than half
of our youth ended up back in the justice system within three
years of their release.
Thankfully, Georgia redirected our taxpayer dollars toward
evidence-based programs and policies. We put an emphasis on
data and to keep evaluating our successes as well as our
failures. Because when we get this right, everyone benefits.
Our kids get back on that path towards success, our taxpayer
dollars are used far more efficiently, and our communities are
much safer.
We have to keep working on these very goals, keep these
very goals in mind. So, I thank those of you that are doing
this work every single day. We must work together on a
bipartisan basis to make sure that we're achieving a more
humane environment for our incarcerated children.
Mr. Peterson, I just want to thank you so much for the work
that you've been doing in Utah. Like Georgia, Utah implemented
a number of reforms, including different responses to low-risk
behavior and also reducing the involvement of teens in our
courts and jails.
Do you have a sense of which of these reforms was the most
important?
Mr. Peterson. Yeah. I think that when I look at Utah, that
we've definitely been on a journey. We've had good bones in the
system for a long time, if I can use that phrase. Having a
dedicated juvenile court bench, having a dedicated probation, a
dedicated agency. The right type of philosophy.
I do think that the most impactful was creating policies,
those hard-line guardrails on keeping low-risk youth out of the
system. I do think that has been the most significant.
When you start looking at our building out to reinvest and
to actually serve youth in their home schools and communities
and not in a jail cell and a courtroom, that's been the most
significant step in our policy changes.
Ms. McBath. Thank you for that. Mr. Stevenson, it's so good
to see you again. I'm so glad to have you with us this morning,
and thank you so much for your commitment to justice, and
especially your work to tell the stories of Black Americans
through our history.
We have to make sure that people understand our country's
history of racial injustice. That's the only way we're going to
be able to achieve equality for all Americans. How can juvenile
justice reform reduce socioeconomic and racial inequality?
Mr. Stevenson. Well, I do think it's a really important
issue, and thank you for that question. Because there are huge
racial disparities. When we were looking at children sentenced
to die in prison, all of the 13- and 14-year-old children
sentenced to die in prison in this country for nonhomicide
offenses were Black. There are huge disparities.
Even in the schools, the suspension rate for Black children
and Brown children is much higher than non-Black children. So,
the disparities are key. I think the most critical thing is
recognizing that we have to be remedial, we have to be
affirmative.
We have to understand that bias, conscious and unconscious,
is implementing and manifesting itself in the way we treat
children of color differently than children who are White. That
has to shape our policymaking.
Some states have done this effective work. They're being
proactive, being intentional and eliminating racial disparities
in education policy and sentencing policy. I think that has to
be a goal.
Ms. McBath. Thank you so much. I'm out of time, but Madam
Chair, may I ask that I submit a question to Ms. Levick and
have it answered in the future.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Absolutely, all Members are allowed to
submit questions into the record and the witnesses will
subsequently provide answers. Thank you so very much.
Ms. McBath. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Congresswoman, for your line of
questioning. I'm now happy to yield five minutes to the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gohmert. Unmute, Mr. Gohmert.
Mr. Gohmert. Yes, I did, thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you to the witnesses and thank you for
this hearing. I'm very much interested in ensuring juvenile
justice in our nation. I'm so glad that we all agree on that.
Appreciate the witnesses very much.
I find myself again perplexed that the majority would have
this hearing and not address or even acknowledge the obvious
elephant in the room, as Ms. Vaughan, you testified that
February to March we had 49,000 unaccompanied minors that were
gathered in on our border.
There's a lot of disturbing scenes at the border, whether
its little children being dropped over the fence, as we saw
down in Del Rio, little bitty children, even a one-year-old.
They didn't get to the border unaccompanied, they got there
through the drug cartels.
I wanted to ask you based on your study and what's going on
that's controlled by the drug cartels, what will the drug
cartels likely do to the children whose parents owe money for
bringing the children into the United States?
Ms. Vaughan. Well, the cartels and smuggling organizations
will use any tactics or means that they have at their disposal,
including extortion, violence, kidnapping, and other ways to
try to extract payment from the parents or others who pay them
to bring the kids into this country. So, it's horrifying, some
of the things that have happened to kids.
There are all kinds of abuses that occur because these are
criminals who are doing a criminal business and they're making
so much money on it that they want to continue.
That's why we should not have policies that encourage
people to contract and pay criminal smuggling organizations who
are brutal and violent. It's our policies that are encouraging
people to put themselves in these situations where they can be
exploited, abused, hurt, or taken advantage of.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you. It is staggering, and it's scary
what's happening to those children. It seems that the cages
that were constructed during the Obama Administration are not
the worst things that are happening to those children as
they're transported into sex trafficking and human trafficking,
drug trafficking to make the money to pay back the cartels for
bringing unaccompanied to this country.
Quickly want to point to another problem that has arisen,
terrible injustice involving young people. One in particular,
Bruno Joseph Cua. He was from Georgia, lived on a three-acre
farm with his parents.
He was arrested February 5 by a bunch of FBI agents in
Atlanta. He was indicted as a high schooler in his senior year,
including assaulting a police officer, possessing a dangerous
or deadly weapon, which was a little baton that wasn't used.
We hadn't even--there's not even evidence he assaulted
anybody at this point. He was whisked away, held in jail. The
Justice Department under--is before Judge Moss. They're arguing
that this 18-year-old high schooler should be kept in jail.
He shouldn't be released, and I'm quoting, ``I don't
believe that home incarceration would work because he's an 18-
year-old who's being home-schooled.'' That's Assistant U.S.
Attorney Ryan Buchanan.
So, this case did not arise at him traveling or going
different places. It actually is the case of many dozens of
cases of people who committed a crime that many Democrats did
of questioning the outcome of the federal election.
They're being punished. He's being held in jail. He's a
high schooler. There's no evidence that he's some terrible
criminal.
So, we need to address all of this injustice for young
people. I appreciate, again, the opportunity. I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman's time has expired. Now, my
pleasure to yield five minutes to the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Congresswoman Dean.
Ms. Dean. I thank the chairwoman, and I thank you for
assembling this important group of testifiers and experts. I
thank you for your focus on our children and on the juvenile
justice the pipeline.
Mr. Stevenson, it is good to be with you again. Thank you
for your extraordinary leadership in so many areas of justice.
I wanted to pull a line from your testimony. You said, on
page 1, this Congress should adopt new laws that increase the
age at which children can be prosecuted as adults for any crime
in the federal system. As you well know, the United States
Supreme Court in Miller v. Alabama recognized that adolescents
as a class lack the maturity, autonomy, and self-governing
capacity of adults. Could you give us in a more granular way,
based, obviously, on the research and what we understand about
children's development into adulthood, what Congress should do?
What policies and new laws should we adopt?
Mr. Stevenson. Yes. Well, thank you for that question,
Congresswoman Dean.
First, consistent with those Supreme Court decisions in
Graham and Miller, Congress should pass a law banning life
without parole for anyone in the federal system who is a child.
Twenty-five states have done that. I think that it would send
an important signal, not just to the states, but even
internationally, that practice has been prohibited for some
time now.
Second, I do believe we need to create an enforceable ban
on placing children in adult prisons. This is an area where
Congress was really controlling and trying to respond to prison
violence at the State level. The Prison Rape Elimination Act
was passed in 2003. It was about controlling a problem in the
states. I think this Congress should fulfill that promise of
eliminating that by having an enforceable ban. Create a private
right of action, so that lawyers can challenge the placement of
children in adult jails and prisons.
The third thing I believe the Congress should do is to
raise the minimum age. The gentleman was talking about
Wisconsin. I don't believe any child should be prosecuted as an
adult. I don't think we risk public safety when we do not
prosecute children as adults. I think we could do more for
children and the larger society by making that commitment.
Ms. Dean. Thank you very much.
I would like to follow up with you, also, on the other side
of the juveniles' experience. Researchers found that juvenile
experiences in correctional facilities can have a critical
impact on whether adolescents successfully navigate the
transition to adulthood, productive adulthood. What are some of
the hallmarks of that experience that either determine they
will be more successful or they will not be successful?
Mr. Stevenson. Yeah, this is where the evidence about
trauma is so important. When you tell children at 5 and 6, at 7
and 8, that if they make a mistake, they will be suspended,
they will be failed, you actually aggregate their fear, their
sense of being targeted and menaced. That is why this kind of
zero-tolerance policy that we have seen in the education space
has been so disastrous. We now put children, 6- and 7-year-
olds, in handcuffs, and children never forget that. We put them
in police cars. We send them to jails. We treat them like
criminals. That is what I believe we need to prohibit. There
are states--you heard about that in Utah--that don't permit
those kinds of practices. I think we need to see that in more
states.
The ultimate thing, I do think we have to influence
educational policy, Congresswoman. The Department of Education,
when they evaluate schools, when they judge schools, when they
grade schools, they don't look at suspension rates; they don't
look at expulsion rates. Many schools have used suspension and
expulsion as tactics to improve performance. That has been a
recipe for increasing the criminalization and the traumatizing
of young children that I just think no one should embrace. That
is an area where education policy could intersect with juvenile
policy. We could help a lot of children be healthy.
Ms. Dean. Great. Thank you so much. Sorry, my time is so
limited.
Ms. Levick, if I could go to you, you were instrumental in
seeking justice in the Kids for Cash case that took place in my
home State of Pennsylvania, where some 3,000 children were
placed in prison in exchange for financial kickbacks. That
judge now is behind bars himself.
What safeguards were established in Pennsylvania to ensure
corruption, like the Kids for Cash case, does not happen again?
What reforms should we be looking at here?
Ms. Levick. Well, I think one of the critical reforms, of
course, was ensuring the children had a right to counsel. We
had too many children who passed through the courtrooms in the
Kids for Cash scandal that really had no access to lawyers. We
found that, without lawyers, they were likely to be placed and
more likely to be adjudicated. So, that is one critical reform
that has been made.
We have also required that judges actually State the
reasons for why they are placing children out of their homes,
because we know that every placement outside the home places
children at risk for greater harms and abuse within facilities.
I am not sure if I should continue.
Ms. Dean. I thank you for that. I see my time has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You can finish your sentence.
Ms. Dean. Oh, go right ahead.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Finish your sentence.
Ms. Levick. I can continue?
Ms. Jackson Lee. Finish your sentence.
Ms. Levick. Oh, I am sorry.
Yes, and I think that what we have seen is that, by really
forcing I think exposure of what is happening behind the closed
doors of the juvenile justice system, has made a significant
change in really holding that system accountable.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Your time has expired.
I now want to recognize Mr. Fitzgerald for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Madam Chair.
My state, the State of Wisconsin, is currently going
through a reform of juvenile justice, more based on as much
changes to the physical construct of the entire state. There
were some issues in a juvenile facility located in central
Wisconsin, but the legislature I think is trying to wrap their
arms around what those reforms and changes would be. Antiquated
facilities are one of the issues that certainly needed to be
addressed.
I wanted to go back some of the earlier discussion. I know
Mr. Tiffany talked a little bit about it. It is kind of this
transfer that has been happening throughout the nation. We
talked about a pipeline of juvenile incarceration and issues
related to that. There really is kind of this operation, this
nationwide operation, where children are being exploited. I
think many of us have certainly dealt with the issues or talked
about the issues related to human smuggling and trafficking and
the drug-related crimes there as well.
I wanted to ask Ms. Vaughan, along those lines, as we
continue to see kind of that exploitation, and then, the end
result of those children that are incarcerated, it all goes
back to these cartels. We have actually had federal charges
that have been levied against some of these individuals coming
out of the Milwaukee districts as of late.
If we don't stop or hold back the tide of these crimes
related to those issues, how do we address kind of the whole
juvenile justice system? We cannot forecast or predict the
amount of juveniles that are coming into the system right now,
and I think that is just as important as anything we could do
kind of on the back end, as these children are incarcerated.
Ms. Vaughan. That is right. We had started to see some
lower numbers in terms of juvenile offenders, but this influx
of minors, many of whom do end up becoming involved in gangs or
crimes, either to pay off their smuggling debts or the
smuggling debts of their parents that they paid to bring them
here, or because they are vulnerable and exposed to gangs in
the schools or in the neighborhoods, all of that is going to
complicate and undermine efforts to improve outcomes for youth.
I have to add, one of the most important things to
interrupt this so-called pipeline is to provide job
opportunities for youth. Right now, we are seeing a very, very
low employment participation among America's teenagers
especially. Teenagers are one of the groups that are most
affected by our country's failure to control illegal
immigration. Illegal employment displaces Americans, especially
young people, especially people who lack a high school
education for whatever reason. It displaces them from job
opportunities and depresses their wages. Access to employment
is one of the things that could keep our youth and others who
are vulnerable out of the justice system altogether because
they are gainfully employed. That is another reason why we want
to stem this flow of uncontrolled illegal immigration.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you very much.
The one other comment I just wanted to make, because it
came up a couple of times and I know there are different titles
for them, but school safety officers. The comment was made that
somehow that is an adverse or a negative force on schools. I
have found that, whenever you talk to a high school principal
or a counselor, the relationships that are built and the
understanding that is gained by these individual officers being
within the schools certainly outweighs any negativity, you
might say, that would be on the back end of this. I always
thought that it was probably the best way for law enforcement,
also, to establish kind of a different profile than what youth
may experience if they end up in a situation with direct
contact with an officer on the street. So, I just wanted to
make that comment.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman yields back.
Now, I yield to Mary Gay Scanlon from Pennsylvania for 5
minutes.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, Chair Jackson Lee, for holding this
important hearing.
Thank you to our witnesses for testifying here today. I
want to particularly recognize my fellow Philadelphia lawyer,
Marsha Levick, whose decades of work with the Juvenile Law
Center has been so instrumental in ensuring that the phrase
access to justice also applies to children.
Some of my colleagues have expressed concern about whether
the Federal Government has an appropriate role to play with
respect to juvenile justice. My view is less circumscribed, but
I want to focus on a particular federal issue, and that is the
Prison Litigation Reform Act, which governs the circumstances
under which an incarcerated person can bring a civil rights
suit in the federal courts. The PLRA applies not only to adult
prisons, but also to the thousands of children confined in
prisons, jails, and juvenile detention facilities.
My district is home to the now shuttered Glen Mills School,
the oldest school for delinquent boys in the country, founded
in 1826. For years, its bucolic campus masked serious daily
violence inflicted upon the children placed there. An explosive
2019 report by the Philadelphia Inquirer revealed years of
physical, sexual, and psychological abuse of the young
residents, including broken bones, threats, and sustained
physical assault at the hands of staff Members.
Although the stories from Glen Mills were heartbreaking,
they are not unique. Physical and sexual violence, harmful
restraints, and solitary confinement have been documented in
juvenile facilities in almost every state. Unfortunately,
states have not adequately protected children. Despite the
recent example of the Glen Mills School in my district, this
past March, children were removed from another facility, the
Delaware County Juvenile Detention Center in Lima after
horrifying reports of abuse.
The purpose of our juvenile justice system is supposed to
be rehabilitative, not punitive. When juveniles in detention
are subject to physical and psychological trauma, it causes
disproportionate harm. From Roper to Graham, Miller, and
beyond, the Supreme Court has long held that juveniles lack the
maturity and mental acuity to be treated as adults in our
justice system.
So, Ms. Levick, the testimony we have before us today
speaks to how youth are at particular risk of harm in juvenile
and criminal justice facilities due to their youth and
developmental immaturity. Can you talk about the Prison
Litigation Reform Act, or PLRA, and how it creates obstacles to
young people facing abuse to seek relief in the courts when the
detention system fails to protect them?
Ms. Levick. Yes, and thank you for that question.
So, the same folly that I think the U.S. Supreme Court has
recognized in treating children like adults for sentencing
purposes is reflected in the inclusion of children in the
Prison Litigation Reform Act as it was originally drafted. The
assumption that children can jump through the administrative
hoops that PLRA requires, can file grievances, can figure out
how to file grievances--often youth who are in these facilities
don't even have access to counsel. In many jurisdictions across
the country, lawyers are simply not a part of that post-
adjudication experience.
So, I think the leadership that you have shown in really
asking Congress to change a provision that really makes no
sense--it is not reflective of the difficulties that children
face in these facilities. What it does, of course, is that it
places children at great risk.
I have been involved in litigation, of course, in the Glen
Mills litigation. I was involved in the litigation in
Wisconsin. So, we know that kids face extraordinary forms of
abuse and trauma in these facilities. If we don't give them the
ability to challenge and to address and to fix those kinds of
abuses, then we are doing more harm to our children even than
by bringing them into the system.
So, I really think that the bill that you have introduced,
it is designed to really spare children these extreme
administrative hurdles to be able to file litigation. It is
critically important to redress the harms that they suffer
inside these facilities. I thank you for that.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, and thank you for mentioning the
Justice for Juveniles Act. We did pass it unanimously on the
House Floor last term, and I would invite Members of the
Committee to join me again in supporting the bill.
I mean, just to sum up, would it be fair to say that
juveniles are both more likely to be abused while in detention
and less likely to be able to pursue relief?
Ms. Levick. I would say that is an excellent summing up of
their dilemma.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you. With that, I would yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady yields back. Thank you for
that insightful proposal.
I would now like to yield to the gentleman, Mr. Steube for
5 minutes.
Mr. Steube. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Steube. Thank you.
We have heard testimony today about violent crimes
committed by juveniles associated with MS-13 and other Central
American gangs, including murder and rape. We have also seen
violent juvenile crime right here in Washington, DC. This
March, in Southwest DC, 13- and 15-years-old girls murdered a
food delivery driver in an attempt to steal his car. He was
just trying to do his job, and they killed him in broad
daylight a little over a mile from where we sit right now.
Violence like this occurs all over the country. For
instance, in 2014, in Tacoma, Washington, a 15-years old shot a
man at close range with a rifle during a carjacking. According
to a letter by the victim's family to the sentencing court, the
victim lost use of his arm for a period and was left not fully
able to work or care for his daughter. The victim is lucky to
be alive after he was shot. The teenager convicted of these
crimes would go on to be charged with a felony count of rioting
in prison just two years ago. The convict I am referring to is
Mr. Toleafoa, and he is here today testifying by invitation of
the chair about how he needs more opportunities in prison.
Despite the horrific nature of these crimes, we continue to
hear calls to not fully prosecute the criminals that are
responsible for these crimes. It is all part of the defund the
police agenda. For example, a prominent spokeswoman for the
Black Lives Matter movement recently said that teenagers have
been fighting, and I quote, ``with knives for eons, and we
don't need police to address these situations by showing up to
the scene and using a weapon.'' So, I guess police are just
supposed to let people stab each other. This is a dangerous
ideology, and combined with the flow of criminals at the
southern border, it is made even more dangerous.
Ms. Vaughan, I have a couple of questions. In your
testimony, you describe MS-13 and the 18th Street Gang as, I
quote, ``extremely vicious and unusually degenerate.'' Can you
provide some further examples of the crimes they commit and how
juveniles are involved in those crimes?
Ms. Vaughan. Well, there are numerous examples of this. We
have examined about 500 cases of MS-13 arrests nationwide in
the last 15 years. There is sometimes unspeakable violence
associated with these crimes, whether it is hacking off
people's limbs or luring people to parks to dismember them and
bury the bodies. Some of the victims have not been fellow gang
Members, or sometimes they are youth who they thought might
have been involved with a rival gang, or simply people who were
killed because these kids are trying to prove their value to
the gang and are expected to carry out random senseless
violence to be accepted into the gang, and they are eager to do
that. So, they will pick out random victims to do that. These
gangs lure kids in a very predatory and frightening way that
also makes it difficult for them to escape from the gangs.
My research of both State databases and other federal
crimes has found that these transnational gangs, and MS-13 in
particular, are especially prone to violence, that many of
these Members are violent by the time they get here, and are
less afraid of the consequences from law enforcement, which
makes them bolder, less wary of committing violence against a
police officer, for example, or a teacher or a kid who is not
involved in the gang.
It is a problem that is exacerbated by our failure to
control the entry of these individuals over our border. It is
one that is making it hard for kids who are in the same schools
to get meaningful education, to avoid entanglement with these
gangs, and it is ruining the quality of life in some
neighborhoods.
Mr. Steube. Well, and you just hit on the challenges that
we are seeing at the border and how this is causing an
increased amount of crime, especially with juveniles. Under
Biden's border policies, violent criminal gang Members under
the age of 16 are not subject to removal. Can you explain the
consequences of this and how MS-13 will exploit this?
Ms. Vaughan. Well, the gangs are well aware of the
policies. They know more about our border policies than most
Americans do. They know that a kid who arrives and claims to be
under the age of 18 will likely be lightly screened. If we
happen to have their fingerprints, they might be interrupted,
and the Border Patrol is catching more gang Members than ever
before at the border. Usually, they are sent to a residential
facility with other kids where they also have the opportunity
to recruit and eventually released to sponsors who are very
lightly vetted, often not fingerprinted or submitted to
rigorous background checks. They are free in the community to
work for the gang, to work on other jobs and live here
indefinitely, and often even receive permanent residency here.
Mr. Steube. Thank you for your testimony here today.
My time is expired. I yield back to the chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Steube, for your testimony,
the gentleman from Florida. We appreciate your testimony. You
were not here, and I seek a clarification again. I just want to
clarify that this hearing is entitled, Juvenile Justice
Pipeline and the Road Back to Integration. The gentleman from
Florida was not here when Mr. Massie made a very eloquent point
about a juvenile that killed two individuals in Wisconsin. He
raised the point of that individual being tried as a juvenile,
and I imagine he made the same point about that juvenile
possibly not being incarcerated with adults.
Now, let me say that, when we invite witnesses here, we
expect courtesies to be extended to the witnesses. We don't
have any quarrel with witnesses, in essence, being questioned,
but Mr. Toleafoa is a young man who has made a seismic
contribution to this nation. I will not allow him to be
disparaged. His advocacy has saved lives because he has led the
passage of numerous legislative reforms in Washington State,
and he has been the leader of disallowing minors who are
convicted to be in an adult court, to stay in a juvenile
correction system until they turn 25. In essence, those minors
convicted in an adult court are able to stay in a juvenile
correction system until they turn 25. He is a credible
contributor to this process, and I wish that that would be
noted by our Members in a respectful manner.
Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, I have a parliamentary inquiry.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman can State your parliamentary
inquiry.
Mr. Biggs. My inquiry is this: When a member of the
Committee makes a comment or makes a statement that is not
violative of our rules of decorum, is the Chair entitled to
rebut the statement of that member of the Committee? How long
will this go on?
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentleman for his question. As
Chair, I have discretion to run the Committee hearing as I
believe is appropriate. In this instance, the challenges to a
witness in terms of that witness' credibility, that was not in
the form of a question to the witness. I wanted to make sure
the record was clear.
I will move now to the next speaker. I thank you, Mr.
Biggs.
Mr. Steube. Well, there is nothing that I did to
challenge--
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me yield to--
Mr. Steube. I presented the facts to this Committee and to
the American people.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me yield to the gentlewoman from
Missouri, Ms. Bush, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bush. St. Louis and I thank you, Madam Chair, for
convening this hearing.
In my home State of Missouri, Black youth account for 15
percent of our youth population; yet, receive 27 percent of
referrals to juvenile court. In the St. Louis region, Black
girls are 11 times and Black boys are 18 times more likely than
their White peers to be suspended from school. These zero-
tolerance policies regularly do not take into account the
social conditions in which children may live, unsafe and
unstable housing; lead exposure, which is no fault of their
own; cyclical violence and trauma in their community, no fault
of their own. Instead, they force our children out of school
for acting out and fueling the school-to-prison pipeline. It is
this fear of Black and Brown youth, long labeled super-
predators, that has made jailing and sentencing them to life
without parole too easy and too common.
The stereotype that Black and Brown boys and girls are
dangerous or threatening has normalized systems of trauma. The
cradle-to-prison pipeline, foster care, youth detention, and
being tried and sentenced as adults--we treat trauma with more
trauma. We treat Black and Brown kids who can't vote yet, join
the military, rent a car, or even buy a lottery ticket, like
adults in our criminal legal system.
We deprive them of their joy and their youth--children who
deserve to live rich and abundant lives; children who should be
allowed to make mistakes, to learn from their mistakes, because
we did; to grow up and live productive and loving lives,
children like all other children. These children are young.
These are children. They are young people who need love and
support, love and support that our communities should give and
our government.
Mr. Toleafoa, thank you for being here with us today and
for sharing your story and your incredible work with all of us.
Thank you for that, as we strive to build a more just America.
Can you please tell us about the trauma and lasting harm
that incarceration can have on young people?
Mr. Toleafoa. Yeah. So, speaking of trauma and harm, a
couple of weeks ago, I had a call from one of my friends who
was sent to prison, and we were on a three-way call. I was
asking him, how are you doing? I asked, what was it like when
you first got there?
He said, well, the first thing that he did was go and take
a shower. Once he walked into that shower, he seen a dead body
lying on the floor. Mind you, he is 18-years old, first going
into prison.
Thinking about that was his first experience when going
into that shower; he just seen a dead body. Thinking about how
young he was and how he experienced that, I personally don't
think that he is ever going to forget something like that. He
is going to carry that onto when he grows up to take on adult
responsibilities. So, when we think about just trauma and harm
that being in an institution can cause, I feel like that just
experience right then and there kind of expresses the totality
of it.
Ms. Bush. Absolutely. Thank you for sharing that. Thank you
for sharing that. That is the truth of what is happening to our
youth. That is why trying to reform care also, that care and
support needs to be prioritized in this space. Thank you.
Mr. Peterson, what holistic alternatives to incarceration
exist for young people?
Mr. Peterson. I am sorry, can you repeat the question?
Ms. Bush. Sure. What holistic alternatives to incarceration
exist for young people?
Mr. Peterson. Sorry, the list of questions, you broke up
just a little bit.
Ms. Bush. Holistic alternatives to incarceration.
Mr. Peterson. Oh, holistic alternatives? Thank you.
Someone said earlier how it is so important that we can't
view youth out of context. So, we can't have a youth enter the
system and, all of a sudden, not recognize the community or
family that they are from.
So, this could include things that are very informal. So,
for example, during COVID, when we looked at our youth and our
families, we recognized they couldn't have visits the way they
used to have. So, we had to switch to like a virtual platform.
Well, there is a big digital divide in a lot of communities.
So, we had to think of ways--maybe the family needs something
as simple as a smartphone, things like that, that are these
kinds of holistic approaches. Or maybe they do need something
more intentional and more focused, like some type of evidence-
based treatment with the youth and the family.
For us, also, holistic, when we are talking about holistic,
we have to look at educational opportunities.
Ms. Bush. I only have a few more seconds. If you could--
yeah, I am sorry.
Mr. Peterson. That is okay.
Ms. Bush. I am sorry, I have one more question that I need
to get in but, thank you.
Mr. Stevenson, your work has always been rooted in a deep
commitment to justice and a belief in redemption. Can you tell
us why it is important to extend mercy and compassion to
children and young people--mercy?
Mr. Stevenson. Thank you, Congressman Bush.
I think mercy is at the heart of a just system. We have
been governed by this idea that we can put crimes in jails and
prisons. If you look at some of these sentences and you look at
some of these policies, it is as if we think we can punish the
crime. The truth is we can't put a crime in prison; we put
people in prison. We put children in prison. I don't believe
that people are crimes. I don't believe that children are
crimes. The difference between a crime and a child is what
dictates that we think more compassionately, that we embrace
mercy, when we think about these policies.
Ms. Bush. Thank you.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Steube. Madam Chair, I ask unanimous consent to--
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentlelady.
The gentleman is not recognized. The gentleman has an
inquiry or?
Mr. Steube. I am asking for unanimous consent.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. The gentleman is recognized for
unanimous consent.
Mr. Steube. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I ask for unanimous consent to enter into the record the
unpublished opinion filed July 9, 2020, in the Office of the
Clerk of the Court, Washington State Court of Appeals, Division
III, State of Washington v. Aaron Ata Toleafoa, which states in
facts, in 2014, Aaron Toleafoa engaged in a crime spree that
ended with a near fatal shooting. He was 15-years old at the
time. Mr. Toleafoa was charged with eight felonies and two
misdemeanors. The Juvenile Court declined jurisdiction, and Mr.
Toleafoa eventually pleaded guilty to a reduced set of charges,
including attempted second degree murder.
[Chair uses gavel.]
Ms. Jackson Lee. Without objection. Again, I have never
heard of Members trying to disparage witnesses in the way that
this is. Without objection, your document is submitted into the
record. It doesn't have any reflection on the gentleman who is
here before us today. We thank him for his presence.
[The information follows:]

MR. STEUBE FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. With that, allow me to yield to Ms.
Spartz. Ms. Spartz, are you present?
[No response.]
All right. Then, we will be able to yield, I believe, to
Mr. Biggs, the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee. Thank you
very much.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate that.
I know that we have been reminded repeatedly from the
majority that this is about juvenile incarceration and how we
treat juveniles.
I was looking at Arizona's--and we have been focusing on
the inhumanity of the treatment of juveniles in the Biden
border crisis, but here is the thing--I was looking at the
Arizona juvenile information, and there is a relationship to
those who are illegally in the country in the Arizona juvenile
system. We see the discharge of some to ICE, et cetera. It does
impact virtually every community. It impacts Utah, Arizona. It
impacts New Mexico, Texas, and California for certain. To deny
that, and that it doesn't have some role in the pipeline that
we have been discussing today, just, frankly, boggles my mind.
You would probably be surprised how much of what I have
heard that I agree with, because there is a substantial amount
of that. The reality is, however, this is a state-centric
issue. Not one of our witnesses has talked about the very few
individuals who are in the federal juvenile system. I was
surprised by that, and yet, not surprised.
I have been reminded repeatedly about the humanitarian
response by the Biden-Harris Administration. I have walked
recently in detention facilities of unaccompanied minors and
putative family units that there isn't anybody in this room
that could say that was humane or humanitarian. I have talked
to Border Patrol agents and I have talked with individuals who
have come across our border illegally. The treatment they
receive as juveniles is in no way humanitarian.
In the district that I live in, akin to, next to,
contiguous to the Tucson sector, which has the most getaways by
far, more than twice the amount of any other sector on the
border, those are mostly 14-25-year-old young males dressed in
camouflage, wearing carpet boots, and carrying methamphetamine,
fentanyl, and bringing it forward. The cartels are exploiting
our system. That is why we have raised this over and over
today. To ignore that has an impact on how we deal with citizen
juveniles is to ignore reality.
Ms. Vaughan, how does the TVPRA loophole incentivize non-
Mexican parents to send their parents to the United States?
Ms. Vaughan. The TVPRA incentivizes sending unaccompanied
minors here because it says that any arriving minor from a
country other than Mexico and Canada is going to be taken
from--instead of being removed swiftly, as citizens of
contiguous countries are, they are taken from Border Patrol
custody and put with the Office of Refugee Resettlement into a
network of shelters, and that they should be released to a
sponsor; that the mission of ORR is to find a placement for
these minors, either with a family member or a friend or some
other unrelated sponsor, often in the foster care system. So,
what happens is that the U.S. government essentially completes
the smuggling Act by moving these kids who get caught crossing
illegally into a placement in the community, essentially, to
stay.
Mr. Biggs. So, Ms. Vaughan, does the Federal Government do
anything to track or follow these children, as they are placed
sometimes with relatives, sometimes not, sometimes with
putative relatives, to make sure that those children are safe,
okay? Anything else?
Ms. Vaughan. After release, there is almost no monitoring
that occurs by the government on these placements and what
happens to these kids. The sponsors can refuse contact with the
government to give an update on the child's welfare.
Essentially, the government loses track of them. The kids can
move to other households. Many of them don't show up for their
immigration proceedings, and we definitely lose track of them.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you. My time is up. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman's time is up. The
gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from Rhode Island. The
gentleman is Congressman Cicilline, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cicilline. I want to thank you, Chair, for holding this
hearing today.
We cannot effectively approach desperately needed criminal
justice reform in this country unless we address how the
current system is affecting our youth. I feel particularly
connected to today's hearing since my first job as an attorney
was a public defender right here in the District of Columbia in
the juvenile division. It was my job to defend young people
caught up in the system who very often had been failed by the
system. It was my experience that very often the effort was
really made to just sort of shove these kids away, so they
wouldn't have to deal with them, rather than really
rehabilitate them. It was, actually, what caused me ultimately
to enter politics, because I thought we have got to figure out
a better way to take care of our kids.
Sadly, as I listened to some of the discussion today, you
wouldn't think it is our responsibility. I think we have no
greater responsibility than the care and well-being of our
children in this country.
So, I want to, first, say to Brian Stevenson and Marsha
Levick, thank you for your inspiring and heroic work on behalf
of America's children. Words cannot describe how grateful I am
for all that you have done.
I know there has been a lot of discussion about costs and
fees and extreme sentences and excessive punishments and
conditions of confinement. All of that is convincing to me. I
agree with every single thing that has been said.
What I want to focus on instead is, how do we prevent young
people and children from getting into the system in the first
place? Because when we are dealing with costs and fees and
extreme conditions of confinement, we have already failed them.
They are already in the system. So, all that is fine and we
have got to fix it, but what I would like to focus on is, what
kinds of models are there that actually identify some of the
trauma that you have described, Mr. Stevenson, or factors that
would indicate the level of trauma that kids are experiencing
today is just unbelievable? The fact that we don't have more
children in the juvenile justice system is kind of remarkable.
So, are there any states that have a model that we should
look at that actually intervenes early before kids get into
either the criminal justice system or the juvenile justice
system that can provide support services at a moment to prevent
their entry into a system which is going to gobble them up and
very often not do much good for them? So, Mr. Stevenson first,
and then Ms. Levick.
Mr. Stevenson. Yeah, I think that is a really important
question. I began my comments about the trauma crisis, because
I agree with you that we do better work at interacting with
young kids, with dealing with trauma, at the very early stages.
I actually think we need trauma-informed care at Pre-K and
first grade, and we can do it. There are great models.
Bruce Perry at Northwestern has done some exciting work
improving outcomes for children dealing with trauma. There are
a host of programs. Purpose Built Communities that was
organized in Atlanta, and spread around the country, what they
do is they focus on care and treatment to try to help kids feel
safe, and then they provide environments that help them deal
with that. Even when they can't isolate these children from the
trauma they face at home, they see remarkably better outcomes
for those kids.
So, we do have models that are out there that are very
effective at disrupting the consequences of unaddressed trauma.
If we embrace those, we will see the kinds of consequences that
you are talking about.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Ms. Levick. Yes. Of course, I echo Mr. Stevenson's
sentiments. I would also add, there are innovative programs in
Georgia; there are innovative programs in Philadelphia that are
really pulling kids back into their communities rather than
pushing them into the justice system for school-related
conduct.
I think that, as we think about, unquestionably, the
importance of investing in communities and investing in
families and in young people, one of the other ways that I
think we are addressing this issue through this hearing today,
it is also about shrinking the youth justice system. So, when
we talk about raising the age of criminal responsibility,
raising the age of juvenile court jurisdiction, I think the
role that the Federal Government can play in incentivizing the
closing of youth prisons, all of that can shrink the system and
I think get at some of the very harms that you have identified.
Mr. Cicilline. Yeah, thank you so much.
Mr. Toleafoa, I hope I pronounced that correctly. I want to
thank you for being here and for the courage you have shown and
the work that you have done, and to come before this committee.
When I was listening to you, it was like listening to a
professor. You had so much wisdom. So, thank you for being
here.
I just wonder if you might comment on whether or not the
kinds of interventions that I am speaking about might have made
a difference in your life and the conditions that you find
yourself in. Finally, how important it is for the voices of
young people to be heard throughout this process. We don't
listen enough. We speak a lot to young people and I think don't
listen enough to them.
Mr. Toleafoa. Yeah, I think really any intervention is
great for youth. Then, also, for youth here, I think really
what I just echo every time, I get the opportunity to speak in
front of people is just being able to do what a lot of people
out here in Washington are doing, which is coming into the
system and finding ways to interact with the youth, get to know
them. Give them a space, a headspace, to really let them
mentally escape the confinement that they are in. So, thinking
about just ways to let them be themselves, and things like that
I feel are really key when we speak about these.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you so much.
My time has expired. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman yields back. Thank you for
your inquiry.
I am now delighted to yield to the gentlelady from Texas,
Congresswoman Escobar, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Escobar. Madam Chair, thank you so much for this
important hearing today.
I want to thank the colleagues and witnesses who have
chosen to engage on this issue in a serious and thoughtful
manner.
I also, Madam Chair, want to register my objection to the
continued selection by the minority party of witnesses who
belong to an anti-immigrant hate group whose sole purpose it is
to spread misinformation and poisonous xenophobia. I represent
a district that, unfortunately, knows only too well that
poisonous xenophobia has deadly consequences. This kind of
behavior in our Committee hearings is disrespectful of our
serious panelists. It is disrespectful of other Members and
disrespectful of the Americans watching our hearings remotely,
because they are looking to us to lead on the topics that we
have announced will be the focus of our hearings.
I am going to focus on our hearing, which is the topic is
children in our country and the juvenile justice system. I come
from local government. I served in local government for almost
a dozen years. In county government, we did some really
remarkable things when it came to juvenile justice. I am very
proud of the emphasis that we placed on rehabilitation and on
ensuring that we offered what we called wrap-around services
with the young people in our custody.
Our panelists who have given us so much wisdom, I want to
thank you all so much for what you have shared with us.
Aaron, I want to turn to you because I would love for
viewers and colleagues to listen to your thoughts on how we can
best wrap our arms around young people from the time of birth
on forward. Some of my colleagues have stated that the Federal
Government doesn't have a role in juvenile justice. We have a
role in creating a country that offers access to health care,
mental health care, education, housing, quality child care, and
so many other things. Aaron, can you share with us and with
those folks watching this hearing, where in your life do you
think we could have, as a community, as a society, done better
to help you have more opportunity or a better chance, a
different path, so to speak?
Mr. Toleafoa. So, just reflecting on back when I was out, I
think I started going, so to speak, downhill when I was in
school and I wasn't doing so good. I think, right then and
there, I could have been identified as at risk, and someone
could have come and helped me and said, what's going on?
Just the school system, how it was, I wasn't really able to
just sit there. I am more energetic, and I like to be hands-on
and do things. I think a lot of guys that I'm here with, they
would say that their favorite class in school was PE. You're
able to actually do what you're learning. So, just thinking
about the different styles of learning.
Also, one thing that is funny, when we talk about learning,
some people don't know how to learn, or which way of learning
is best for them. So, teaching someone how to learn, which
sounds funny, but it's a thing to teach young people what they
are best at, how to learn as effective as possible.
So, this prevention period really in many ways I feel like
I could have been helped. Thinking about being where I am from,
how I was raised and brought up, and seeing the things that I
have seen, and really thinking like this is what it is for me.
So, I am going to repeat what my cousins and older siblings
were doing. So, thinking about giving youth a different
environment or a different person to look up to, and seeing
different outlets of their situation.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Aaron. I really appreciate you
sharing that with all of us.
Mr. Stevenson, I am running out of time, but I really do
appreciate--I wanted to ask you about what you mentioned with
regard to bias. What we continue to see in our country,
unfortunately, is a poisoning of the public against certain
groups and certain individuals. We are seeing that in this
hearing with a desire to create an image that immigrants are
criminals, associated with criminals, this desire to link
certain groups in the most negative way, but we will get into
that another time.
I thank all of you so much for sharing your wisdom, your
brilliance, and your compassion.
I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady yields back.
I have some clarifying questions, but I am going to yield
to the Ranking Member for his time, and I will be very brief on
two or three witnesses for the record to clarify.
Thank you.
Mr. Biggs, you are recognized.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate that, and I
appreciate the opportunity because what I just heard from a
member of our Committee accusing the minority's witness as
being racist and xenophobic, that is such a canard in today's
world. If you oppose illegal immigration, somehow that makes
you a racist or a xenophobe. That is outrageous.
This country is very welcoming. There isn't anybody I know
that doesn't support at least some form of legal migration.
What we have seen last year even during COVID, 1.7 million
people legally were brought into this country; the year before,
2.2 million. That is the way this works.
I appreciate the Chair because what she is trying to get at
is to show deference and respect to the witnesses who appear
here, who come, make efforts to come, and put themselves out.
It cannot be easy to sit in front of so many Members of
Congress, who we all have our egos; we have our political
ambitions or political motivations that drive us. It can't be
easy. It is not easy for anybody here who has come and
testified today. I am very appreciative for everybody. I am
trying to find what I agree with out of everyone, but, this
kind of denigration right after our own Chair has, essentially,
I won't say reprimanded, but made comment about one of my own
Members, to have the very next member of this Committee make
those outrageous and inflammatory statements about our witness,
I think is ridiculous and absurd, and it is unfortunate.
The reality is many of us on the minority side, we looked
at this as what I have characterized before, is this notion
that it is a State issue. Most of what this is having is a
State issue. We have seen Utah has done great. I could go
through reforms Arizona has made. I could go through the
Arizona data. I have pulled it up and looked at it. I mean, we
could talk about that, but that really belongs to the states.
Trying to find the unique things that belong within our
jurisdiction, that is what I would be more willing to do. At
the same time, what is in our jurisdiction, clearly, this
particular committee, subcommittee, as well as our overall
committee, is what is happening on the border.
I just got back from the border again last week. I cannot
tell you how many times I have been on the border this year. I
will be back on the border next week. I will be back down on
the border the following week. It is a real issue, and it deals
with juvenile criminality and the system that we have dealing
with juvenile crime, whether it is good or bad. It,
unfortunately, flows right into it. That is why I mentioned
that, if you were to look at Arizona data, you are going to see
at least a very small number of official discharges to ICE, but
there will be, also, not broken out is demographic groups that
come from people who are illegally in this country that have
somehow found themselves in our system in Arizona.
These things are important. To ignore them when--and I
cannot stress this enough. In April, 178,000 encounters. That
means apprehensions. Known getaways, about 40,000. Unknown
getaways estimated to be an additional 100,000. If you have
300,000 people coming into your country every month, like we
have had for the last three months, and which are projected for
the next six months, that is virtually going to impact every
system that you have in your society, including your juvenile
system.
That is why we raised it today. I am unapologetic for
raising it today. I appreciate the witnesses who have
testified. You have given me seeds for thought and
consideration, and I appreciate that.
I thank you, Madam Chair, for letting me have this few
minutes to clarify.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Ranking Member, I hope that we will
come away from this hearing where all of us will say that we
are committed to helping children. You indicated such.
I want to take this moment and I am going to pose some very
quick, clarifying questions within my timeframe. So, if the
witnesses can listen, so that we will conclude the hearing, but
I do think it is important, again, to State that gangs and
immigrants are not synonymous. ICE's own data belies that prior
Administration's attempt to criminalize immigrants. Historical
data on ICE gang enforcement operations show that 60 to 80
percent of alleged gang Members are U.S. citizens. So, claiming
that unaccompanied minors or others contribute to the gang
problem, I think that we can find ways to resolve this in a
different manner.
We understand the crisis, and some of us have the
perspective that the Biden Administration is working on it in a
humanitarian way. I want us to focus on where we are today.
I thank the Ranking Member and his Members for being here.
I want to pose this to Mr. Stevenson and Ms. Levick, very,
very keenly focused on Miller and what we have done with this
Jones decision in terms of juveniles' life without parole. What
kind of inhumane impact does this have on a child when they
have this kind of sentencing? If you might, in the juvenile
system that we have today, not talking about states that have
done well, if we don't correct it, how many of our children
will we lose?
Mr. Stevenson first.
Ms. Levick. I have a quick question for you, Mr. Peterson,
and a quick one for you, Aaron. I hope that I will be able to
get it within my time.
Mr. Stevenson first.
Mr. Stevenson. Yes, I don't think there is any question
that life without parole for a child is devastating. When we
sentence someone to life without parole, we don't actually
allow them to have programming. We don't allow them to get
access to education. We don't allow them to participate in the
rehabilitation programs that exist. That is one of the reasons
that Justice Kennedy was so oppositional to this kind of
sentence for a child.
We do have lots of states that have continued to use this
sentence. We have hundreds of people who have been released as
a result of Miller, and 90 percent of them have done extremely
well. That is the evidence that, I think, supports what the
Court did in Miller and why what the Court indicated in Jones
is something that should be pushed away, as we continue to
eliminate and abolish life without parole for all children in
this country.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Stevenson.
Ms. Levick, very quickly.
Ms. Levick. Yes. I think the good news is that the vast
majority of men and women who have been resentenced since
Miller and Montgomery have not been resentenced to life without
parole. Hundreds of them have come home and are doing
incredibly well, and many of them are contributing to their
communities.
I think that what Jones does is it certainly makes it
easier to impose a life without parole sentence going forward.
That is a sentence to die in prison, and I think that the
solution to that is to abolish life without parole.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank you.
Mr. Peterson, your State has been stupendous, but we are
the only country that has not ratified the Convention on the
Rights of Children. Can you talk about the idea of human rights
for children and the idea that we have not, in essence,
ratified it, from your context, the importance of human rights
for children?
Mr. Peterson. Yeah, I think it is critically important. At
the end of the day, these are children. They are kids. when you
spend time with them--and I heard Congressman Owens reference
his time in our facilities, and he has seen Aaron here today--
that is what you recognize. You come to hear their voice. You
recognize and identify that need for the acknowledgment of
human rights for all children.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Aaron, you are going to be, besides my
voice--excuse me--Mr. Toleafoa, our last voice because you are
our important voice. Help us understand. If you want to share a
little bit about what you did, but more importantly, how you
are different today than you were at the time that generated
the actions, the acts, that caused you to be in prison or in
jail, in your facility today. How are you different today, Mr.
Toleafoa? Tell us from your heart.
Mr. Toleafoa. So, yeah, back when my crime was committed, I
was reckless. I was doing stupid things. In the end, affecting
my victims how I did, it was horrible. I think, for me, so I
was sentenced to 21 years, but, for me, thinking about my
victims, it wasn't that, okay, I was sentenced to 21 years and
that is it. For me, it was more of, okay, I can easily go
through my whole entire 21 years and just come out and be the
same person that I was when I walked through those doors.
For me, it was, how can I become better, so that I can
effect change upon others? So, when they get out, victims like
mine, people aren't going to be experiencing what they
experienced. So, it was just a matter of really reflecting back
on my actions and thinking I didn't want that to happen to
anyone else.
So, how I could repay my victims, how I could attempt to
restore that, is by bettering myself, not becoming worse while
you are inside the system, but becoming better. So, when I
return to the community, I can help people who were once in my
shoes not repeat those actions. So, it is just that a passion
of mine.
So, when I see youth come in here, I am just like, you know
what? You have got two choices. You can either return back to
the streets and be on your way right back in or you can better
yourself. So, that was just the journey that I had to really go
forward on and just really think about my past actions and what
do I want for myself, and how can I better myself for my
victims. That way, I am not just serving this time just to get
out and return right back to the institutions.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Toleafoa, your last voice, your strong
voice, indicates why we came here today on the Juvenile Justice
Pipeline and the Road Back to Integration. It also emphasizes
why we, as Americans, why this Nation has to be able to save
our youth.
I am grateful to the witnesses who have come and given us
that pathway.
Mr. Stevenson, continue your fight for equal justice, and
we will work alongside of you.
Ms. Levick, continue your journey, and we will stand
alongside of you. I believe we can do it in a bipartisan
manner.
Mr. Peterson, you have a unique and effective approach in
Utah. I believe we can follow that on the federal level.
Mr. Toleafoa, again, most eloquent and powerful, I wanted
you to have the last word.
Ms. Vaughan, we welcome all opinions in this Committee.
At this time, with no further business, the Committee now
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:06 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
