- THE NEED TO ENHANCE THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT: PRELIMINARY INJUNCTIONS, BAIL-IN COVERAGE, ELECTION OBSERVERS, AND NOTICE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE NEED TO ENHANCE THE VOTING RIGHTS
ACT: PRELIMINARY INJUNCTIONS, BAIL-IN COVERAGE, ELECTION OBSERVERS, AND
NOTICE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION, CIVIL RIGHTS, AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, JUNE 29, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-30

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov
_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

46-362                   WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chair
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania, Vice-Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Ranking Member
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,      DARRELL ISSA, California
Georgia                          KEN BUCK, Colorado
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAREN BASS, California               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island     TOM McCLINTOCK, California
ERIC SWALWELL, California            W. GREG STEUBE, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          CHIP ROY, Texas
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
GREG STANTON, Arizona
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MONDAIRE JONES, New York
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CORI BUSH, Missouri

PERRY APELBAUM, Majority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION, CIVIL RIGHTS,
AND CIVIL LIBERTIES

STEVE COHEN, Tennessee, Chair
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina, Vice-Chair

JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana, Ranking
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,          Member
Georgia                          TOM McCLINTOCK, California
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              CHIP ROY, Texas
CORI BUSH, Missouri                  MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            BURGESS OWENS, Utah

JAMES PARK, Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

Tuesday, June 29, 2021

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Steve Cohen, Chair of the Subcommittee on the
Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil Liberties from the State
of Tennessee...................................................     2
The Honorable Mike Johnson, Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
the Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil Liberties from the
State of Louisiana.............................................     4
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of New York...........................     5

WITNESSES

Sophia Lin Lakin, Deputy Director, Voting Rights Project,
American Civil Liberties Union
Oral Testimony.................................................     8
Prepared Testimony.............................................    11
Helen Butler, Executive Director, Georgia Coalition for the
People's Agenda
Oral Testimony.................................................    46
Prepared Testimony.............................................    48
Maureen Riordan, Litigation Counsel, Public Interest Legal
Foundation
Oral Testimony.................................................    67
Prepared Testimony.............................................    69
James T. Tucker, Counsel, Wilson Elser Moskowitz Edelman & Dicker
LLP
Oral Testimony.................................................    79
Prepared Testimony.............................................    81

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC. SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Materials submitted by the Honorable Sylvia Garcia, a Member of
the Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil
Liberties from the State of Texas for the record
Testimony from the Honorable Sylvia Garcia, June 25, 2014......   142
A letter to Attorney General Garland from the Texas
Congressional Delegation.....................................   187
An article entitled, ``Justice Department suing Georgia over
voting restrictions,'' CNN...................................   190
Materials submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Member
of the Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights, and
Civil Liberties from the State of Texas for the record
An article entitled, ``Gov. Abbott forces Harris County to
close 11 mail ballot drop-off sites, leaving just one,''
Houston Chronicle............................................   202
An article entitled, `` `Racist voter suppression': Texas laws
keep Latinos from the ballot box, groups say,'' NBC Latino...   206
An article entitled, ``Analysis: It's harder to vote in Texas
than in any other state,'' The Texas Tribune.................   214
An article entitled, ``A strong Voting Rights Act is now more
than ever,'' The Hill........................................   218

APPENDIX

An article entitled, `` `Why Should I Go Vote Without
Understanding What I Am Going to Vote For?' The Impact of First
Generation Voting Barriers on Alaska Natives,'' Michigan
Journal of Race and Law, submitted by the Honorable Jerrold
Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the Judiciary from the State
of New York for the record.....................................   224

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Questions from the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Member of the
Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights, and Civil
Liberties from the State of Texas for the record...............   282

THE NEED TO ENHANCE THE VOTING RIGHTS
ACT: PRELIMINARY INJUNCTIONS, BAIL-IN
COVERAGE, ELECTION OBSERVERS,
AND NOTICE

----------

Tuesday, June 29, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights,

and Civil Liberties

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:09 a.m., in
Room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Cohen
[Chair of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Cohen, Nadler, Raskin, Ross,
Johnson of Georgia, Garcia, Bush, Jackson Lee, Johnson of
Louisiana, Jordan, McClintock, Roy, Fischbach, and Owens.
Staff Present: David Greengrass, Senior Counsel; John Doty,
Senior Advisor; Moh Sharma, Director of Member Services and
Outreach & Policy Advisor; Jordan Dashow, Professional Staff
Member; Cierra Fontenot, Chief Clerk; John Williams,
Parliamentarian; Keenan Keller, Senior Counsel; Gabriel
Barnett, Staff Assistant; Merrick Nelson, Digital Director;
Kayla Hamedi, Deputy Communications Director; James Park, Chief
Counsel; Will Emmons, Professional Staff Member/Legislative
Aide; Matt Morgan, Counsel; Betsy Ferguson, Minority Senior
Counsel; Caroline Nabity, Minority Counsel; Andrea Woodard,
Minority Professional Staff Member; and Kiley Bidelman,
Minority Clerk.
Mr. Cohen. The Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on
Civil Liberties, Civil Rights, and the Constitution is called
to order.
Without objection, the Chair will have the right to call a
recess at any time.
I welcome everyone to today's hearing on the need to
enhance the Voting Rights Act, particularly the areas of
preliminary injunctions, bail-in coverage, election observers,
and notice.
Before we continue, I would like to remind Members that we
have established an email address and distribution list
dedicated to circulating email exhibits, motions, and other
written materials that Members might want to offer as part of
today's hearing. If you would like to submit those materials,
please send them to
[email protected]
all one word.
We will distribute them to Members and staff as quickly as
possible.
Finally, I ask all Members and witnesses, in-person or
remotely to mute their microphones when you are not speaking.
This helps prevent feedback and technical issues. You, of
course, may unmute yourself anytime you seek recognition.
Now, I will recognize myself for my opening statement.
Throughout his historic life, our former colleague, our former
friend, my friend, my dear friend and hero, the late John
Lewis, often said that the right to vote is the most powerful
nonviolent tool we have in democracy.
If we are ever to actualize the true meaning of equality,
effective measures, such as the Voting Rights Act, are still
necessary requirements of democracy. John Lewis almost gave his
life for the right to vote, as did others.
We need to make sure that, as legislators, we can do the
simple things, and that is pass the Voting Rights Act and move
forward.
Under my Chairship, the Subcommittee has devoted
considerable time and resources to his call, the call of John
Lewis to defend the right to vote. We need to act. Both parties
need to act. This is a bipartisan issue.
As we approach the first anniversary of John's passing, we
in Congress must rededicate ourselves to protecting this most
fundamental right at a time when it is again under threat,
including in his home State of Georgia.
Again, I would ask everybody--Democrat, Republican, and
Independent--John Lewis almost gave his life, was there at the
signing of the Voting Rights Act. We need to pass the John R.
Lewis Voting Rights Act in his honor and regard for our oath
and our duties as defenders of the Constitution.
Earlier this year, Georgia enacted a sweeping voter
suppression law, SB 202, with little transparency or normal
legislative process. SB 202 imposes unnecessary and arbitrary
burdens on certain election practices that are
disproportionately used by Black voters and other voters of
color, including voter ID requirements for absentee ballots and
criminal penalties for groups that provide voter assistance.
It is for this reason the Department of Justice filed a
lawsuit last Friday to challenge that law's legality under the
Constitution and under the Voting Rights Act that remains.
While much of the Subcommittee's work over the last 2 years
has been geared toward revitalizing the Voting Rights Act
preclearance provision, in the wake of the Supreme Court's 2013
decision in Shelby v. Holder, we will focus today on other
provisions of the Act that while not a substitute for
preclearance are nonetheless important supplements to it and
remain viable, although may be needing of some additional
strength.
One consequence of the Shelby County decision is, in the
absence of preclearance, both the Justice Department and
private parties have been forced to bring legal challenges to
discriminatory voting laws pursuant to section 2 of the Voting
Rights Act.
Section 2 prohibits any State or political subdivision from
enacting any, quote, ``voting qualification or prerequisite to
voting standard, practice, or procedure which results in a
denial or breach of right of any citizen of the United States
to vote on the count of their race or color, or on account of
membership in a language minority group.''
As many witnesses have told us already, section 2
litigation is expensive, time-consuming, and resource-intensive
to the point that many plaintiffs with meritorious claims of
voting discrimination may be dissuaded from even pursuing a
lawsuit.
The greatest concern with exclusive reliance on section 2
litigation, which is all we have left after Shelby, it is
difficult, if not impossible, to stop the harm to voters that a
discriminatory voting measure can inflict before such a measure
is implemented.
In theory, the Department of Justice can file a section 2
lawsuit, seek a preliminary injunction to prevent
discriminatory voting measures from being implemented. Given
the complexity and time-consuming nature of section 2 cases, it
is hard for anyone seeking a preliminary injunction to obtain
one under the present standard.
Compounding this difficulty is the fact that courts are
reluctant to grant preliminary injunctions in the period
shortly before an election based in part on the Supreme Court's
admonition in Purcell v. Gonzalez. The court should be wary of
enjoining electoral rules when there is inadequate time to
resolve tactical disputes before the election proceeds.
The result, in many cases, the minority voters may be
disen-
franchised by a voting measure that a court may ultimately
conclude is discriminatory but one which would be in effect in
effect during one or more elections.
In short, in the absence of preliminary injunction,
minority voters could be irrevocably harmed by discrimination,
as would democracy, and there would be no other after-the-fact
remedy for that harm.
H.R. 4, the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act from
the 116th Congress, would partly address the situation by
amending the preliminary injunction standard applicable to
voting rights cases to ensure the plaintiffs can obtain an
injunction where they raise a serious question as to the merits
of their claim.
While no substitute for preclearance, this proposal will
help mitigate some of the risk to harm the minority voters
posed by the absence of preclearance.
A less discussed consequence of the Shelby decision is that
it undermines the ability of the Justice Department and the
general public to get notice of any changes to voting laws,
policies, and procedures.
In addition to being an effective enforcement mechanism,
preclearance would function as an effective notice regime. As
Professor Justin Levitt testified before the Subcommittee in
2019, without a preclearance system, it will be more difficult
to learn about and draw appropriate attention to discriminatory
policies so that few entities with sufficient resources and
expertise know where to litigate in the first place.
I guess I slipped over the script there because I said the
word ``line.'' That is probably because I didn't sleep well
last night. The lines are being redrawn as we speak, and the
lines are being drawn in gerrymandered fashions throughout this
country, but through a slip that I was privy to hear, being
done in Tennessee and in my district in such ways as to destroy
the integrity of the city of Memphis, the county of Shelby, and
district geographic lines, done to, in essence, take certain
people out of this district. We should have notice of that and
opportunity to prepare, but we won't.
The need for such notice and transparency changes to voting
measures are particularly acute at the local level where such
changes can be otherwise hard to detect. These include last-
minute changes to election procedures, changing to polling
place resources, and changes in district lines, which are going
on as we speak.
H.R. 4 requires State and local jurisdictions to publicize
types of changes to voting practices and provide other types of
information that may be relevant to assessing potential
violations of the Voting Rights Act.
This type of reporting requirement entails a relatively low
burden on States and plainly bares a logical relation to
facilitating Congress' ability to assure proper function of
law. H.R. 4 offered other enhancements to the Voting Rights
Act, including making it easier for courts to bail-in
jurisdictions into preclearance on a case-by-case basis and,
also, make it easier for courts and the Department of Justice
to authorize Federal election observers.
These proposals, like those concerning preliminary
injunctions and notice are simple commonsense fixes that we
ought to support. We should think of America, we should think
of democracy, and we should think of the Constitution before
politics.
I thank our witnesses for their participation in today's
hearing and look forward to their testimony.
It is now my pleasure to recognize the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee, the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Johnson,
for his opening statement.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is the
Subcommittee's third hearing in the last 3 months regarding the
Voting Rights Act. I understand the focus of today's hearing
will be on preliminary injunctions and bail-in coverage,
election observers, and notice requirements.
I presume my colleagues on the other side of the aisle will
focus on these provisions in the context of H.R. 4, the Voting
Rights Advancement Act. Unfortunately, just like H.R. 1, the
misleadingly named For the People Act, H.R. 4 seeks to
federalize elections. This is about Federal control, a Federal
takeover of an area that has always been within the
jurisdiction of the States.
That would be contrary to the Constitution's explicit
mandate that it is the State legislatures that administer our
elections. H.R. 4 intends to reinstate the preclearance
requirement that was struck down by the Supreme Court in 2013
as unconstitutional. It was for a good reason, and it was well
explained by the Court.
This bill seeks to lower the triggering mechanism, which
subjects jurisdictions to preapproval from the Department of
Justice at the Federal level before they can make changes to
any of their election procedures.
Additionally, the legislation puts in place so-called
practice-based clearance requirements. These would require all
State legislatures and political subdivisions to seek
permission from the Federal Government before they can change
certain laws and policies.
This is regardless of whether the jurisdiction has a
history any kind of discrimination or is covered under the new
formula. This legislation is just another example of a
politically motivated power grab to enable partisan Federal
bureaucrats to control our State election laws.
Voting is a fundamental, constitutionally protected right
in this country, and the 15th amendment requires States to
ensure voting is accessible and available to every American.
States also need to administer elections that are free from
fraud and administrative errors. The COVID-19 pandemic, as we
all know, presented new challenges for the 2020 election, and
it drastically altered how States administer their elections.
Many of these changes were unconstitutionally implemented,
be it executive or court order, completely bypassing State
legislatures as is required in the text of the Constitution
itself.
As a result of the 2020 election and the numerous errors
that resulted, many State legislatures have duly enacted or
proposed changes to their State election laws. They want to
clean this up and make sure that we don't have the
controversies that we had in the last cycle.
These changes largely seek to enhance election integrity
and increase the public's waning confident in our election
processes. It is outrageous to see the Federal Government
fighting back against these commonsense reforms, such as the
latest lawsuit filed by the Department of Justice against
Georgia over its election law.
It appears to millions of Americans that we are weaponizing
the DOJ and trampling upon essential States' rights and the
will of the people enacted through their duly elected
Representatives.
Let me be clear. Republicans want every legally cast ballot
to count, but the only way to give legal votes the weight they
deserve is to close the door to fraud and illegally cast
ballots.
I hope today we can have a productive conversation about
voting rights and how we can best safeguard the ability of all
eligible Americans to vote. I can tell you right now the answer
is not to go backwards and reinstate provisions of the Voting
Rights Act that have already been deemed by the Court to be
unconstitutional.
Our extraordinary Republic has endured for nearly two and a
half centuries based in large part on the understanding that
our elections will be fair and free and secure.
Our Constitution and our institutions will endure, but only
if we support and defend them. It has never been more important
than it is today, and I think we can all agree on that.
I thank our witnesses for appearing today, and I look
forward to your testimony, and Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Johnson
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I think you are on mute, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you. I was.
Does Mr. Nadler, Chair of the Full Committee--is he present
to give a statement, or does he have a statement he wants to
submit?
Chair Nadler. I am here.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you. The Chair of the Full Committee, Mr.
Nadler, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Chair Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate you
holding today's hearing to consider whether Congress might
strengthen provisions of the Voting Rights Act, other than the
section 5 preclearance provision.
This Subcommittee has rightfully spent much of its time
since last Congress devoted to voting rights, specifically
examining the proliferation of racially discriminatory voting
barriers following the Supreme Court's decision in Shelby
County v. Holder.
During these hearings, we have heard significant testimony
urging Congress to restore to full effectiveness the VRA's
preclearance provision, which was rendered effectively void
after Shelby County.
Yet, while section 5 preclearance is perhaps the VRA's most
important enforcement tool and revitalizing this provision is
the most effective remedy to the ongoing widespread and
persistent voter discrimination throughout the country, in the
8 years since preclearance was effectively gutted, we have seen
the critical role that other Voting Rights Act provisions also
play in remedying the plague of voter discrimination. Our
experience since Shelby County has also taught us, however,
that each of these provisions has shortcomings that can be
improved upon.
First, among these is litigation under section 2 of the
Act, which prohibits voting practices or procedures that
discriminate on the basis of race, color, or Membership in
certain language minority groups.
While an important pillar of the VRA, section 2 litigation
is not a substitute for a working preclearance regime. One
weakness of section 2 is the difficulty plaintiffs face in
obtaining preliminary injunctive relief to prevent the
challenged voting law procedure from going into effect while
litigation is pending.
We will hear from our witnesses today that this often
results in the effective disenfranchisement of minority voters
because a challenged law that ultimately is found to be
discriminatory remains in effect for the duration of lengthy
litigation.
There are other provisions that Congress should also
consider revisiting. To begin with, we should look at section
3(c), the VRA's bail-in provision. Congress understood that the
VRA section 5 preclearance provision could be underinclusive,
and, therefore, it included section 3(c) to address situations
in which preclearance may be justified but a jurisdiction might
not meet the requirements for section 5 preclearance coverage.
In such cases, section 3(c) allows courts to retain the
authority to supervise further voting changes in jurisdictions
where the court has found that the jurisdiction in question
violated the 14th or 15th Amendments.
If a jurisdiction is bailed into preclearance, it must
submit any changes to its voting procedures for approval either
to the court or to DOJ. With the court determining both the
scope and duration of such a preclearance requirement.
Despite its availability, however, courts have rarely
invoked section 3(c) as a remedy. This is because plaintiffs
face a high burden in proving a constitutional violation, which
requires a showing of intentional discrimination.
Even where there is evidence that officials acted with
discriminatory intent, courts have shown reluctance to find
that such officials engaged in purposeful discrimination.
Moreover, since the Shelby County decision, some courts
have suggested that not all violations of the 14th and 15th
Amendments support section 3(c) bail-in coverage.
Bail-in coverage can be an important enforcement tool but
given how reluctant Federal courts are to invoke section 3(c),
Congress should consider whether the violations to which this
relief are available are simply too limited to carry out this
provision's purpose effectively.
Another area that we should examine is the appointment of
Federal election observers. Section 8 of the VRA permits the
Attorney General to assign Federal observers to jurisdictions
covered by section 5 preclearance.
Likewise, section 3(a) allows Federal courts to assign
Federal observers in appropriate circumstances. Federal
observers can report voting irregularities, which can lead the
Justice Department to negotiate with a jurisdiction to improve
voting practices without resort to legal action.
Observers also help gather evidence if legal action is
required, and their mere presence can help deter voter
discrimination.
An oft overlooked side effect of the Shelby County
decision, however, is that it significantly reduced the number
of Federal observer appointments. DOJ officials have
interpreted Shelby County as prohibiting it from certifying
jurisdictions for Federal observer coverage because the formula
used to identify such potential jurisdictions was declared
unconstitutional.
As a result, the number of Federal observers assigned since
Shelby County has dropped precipitously. To compensate for the
lack of full-fledged observers, DOJ has relied on so-called
monitors to ensure that jurisdictions with a history of
discrimination conduct the election process in a fair manner.
Unfortunately, these monitors do not possess the same
authority as a Federal election observer, and, as such,
jurisdictions are not required to provide them the same level
of access to the voting process as observers, limiting their
effectiveness.
As we consider revitalizing the VRA, Congress should
consider how to strengthen the ability of the Justice
Department and Federal courts to send election observers
whenever and wherever justified.
In the 8 years since Shelby County, we have seen how
indispensable the Voting Rights Act is in ensuring that all
Americans enjoy the right to vote, free from discrimination.
Section 5 preclearance remains the most potent remedy for
widespread and persistent voter discrimination.
No matter how much Congress strengthens other enforcement
provisions of the VRA, even these enhanced provisions alone can
never be a complete substitute for section 5 preclearance, yet
Congress should not pass up the opportunity to consider
revitalizing and improving the VRA's other provisions which
operate in support of but to cover any gaps left by section 5.
I thank Chair Cohen for holding today's hearing, and I look
forward to the testimony of our witnesses, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Nadler.
It is my understanding that there is not a statement from
the Ranking Member, who ordinarily would be provided that
opportunity at this point, so we will go on to our witnesses.
We welcome our witnesses and thank them for participating
in today's hearing. I will now introduce the witnesses before
they testify and give their oral or written testimony.
All your written statements will be entered into the record
in its entirety. I ask you to summarize your testimony to 5
minutes. To help you stay within that 5 minutes, our witnesses,
there is a timing light on your table if you are there in
person. Green means you are okay; it is within the first 4
minutes. Yellow means you are entering the last minute, and red
means you need to wrap up or have wrapped up.
For witnesses testifying remotely, there is a timer in Zoom
view. It should be visible at the bottom of your screen, or if
you are in full view as I am, on the left-hand side, and it
will give you how much time you have remaining.
Before proceeding with the testimony, I would like to
remind all the witnesses here, you have a legal obligation to
provide truthful testimony in answer to the Subcommittee, and
any false statement can be subject to prosecution under section
1001 of title 18 in the United States Code.
Our first witness is Sophia Lin Lakin. Ms. Lakin is the
deputy director of the American Civil Liberties Union Voting
Rights Project, and assists in the planning, strategy, and
supervision of the ACLU's voting rights litigation nationwide.
She has an active docket in protecting voting rights and
combating voter suppression across the country--unfortunately,
it is very active--and has led work on successful challenges to
discriminatory voting laws in Georgia, Indiana, Kansas,
Missouri, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Virginia.
Currently, she is the ACLU's lead counsel in Sixth District
of the AME, African Methodist Episcopal Church v. Kemp, a
federal lawsuit challenging multiple provisions of Georgia's
sweeping new voter suppression law, SB 202.
Before joining the ACLU, Ms. Lakin clerked for the
Honorable Raymond J. Lohier, Jr., of the U.S. Court of Appeals
for the Second District and the Honorable Carol Bagley Amon in
the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York.
She received her J.D. degree from Stanford Law School, a
school that has a baseball team that is part of an
undergraduate group that lost to Vanderbilt in the College
World Series. Vanderbilt is fighting for the championship.
Stanford is not.
She received her M.S. in management, science, and
engineering and her B.A. in political science from that same
Stanford University. We thank you for the wild pitch that put
Vanderbilt in the College World Series.
Ms. Lakin, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SOPHIA LIN LAKIN

Ms. Lakin. Chair Cohen, Chair Nadler, Ranking Member
Johnson, and Members of the Committee and Subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today. My name is Sophia
Lakin, and I am deputy director of the ACLU's Voting Rights
Project.
The VRA is one of the most successful pieces of civil
rights legislation in our history, but in 2013, the Supreme
Court gutted the VRA's most powerful provision, the section 5
preclearance system, which enabled the Federal Government to
block proposed discriminatory voting restrictions in places
with the worst records of discrimination before they could be
implemented.
As the late Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg famously warned in
her dissent in Shelby, gutting of the preclearance provision
was like, ``throwing away your umbrella in a rainstorm.'' Sure
enough, the downpour came with a wave of discriminatory voting
laws.
The ACLU has been on the front lines. We have opened more
than 80 new voting rights investigations and cases since the
decision. Some of our recent and ongoing cases include Sixth
District of AME Church, which, with other civil rights groups,
we are challenging SB 202, which has been referenced, Georgia's
latest effort to restrict the voting rights of Black and Brown
voters, and NAACP v. McCrory, where we and others successfully
challenged a sweeping North Carolina bill that sought to
eliminate means of participation used by more than a million
voters in the 2012 Presidential election.
This kind of case-by-case litigation, while important and
necessary, is simply insufficient to protect voting rights.
Voting rights litigation is incredibly expensive, complex, and
time-consuming. Their costs can easily run in the six figures.
These cases also take multiple years to litigate, which
means many elections involving hundreds of elected officials
can take place under regimes that are later found to be
racially discriminatory, an irrevocable taint on our democracy
that we have, unfortunately, seen play out in States like North
Carolina and Texas.
I detail several other examples in my written testimony.
The Supreme Court in Shelby based its ruling in part on the
assumption that preliminary relief would be available before an
election to guard against this problem.
The theoretical availability of such relief has also proven
to be inadequate. The current standard for obtaining a
preliminary injunction makes it difficult to obtain. My written
testimony describes 15 cases in which voting rights plaintiffs,
who ultimately succeeded, were unable to obtain preliminary
relief while their cases were pending, with numerous elections
taking place, millions of voters casting ballots, and hundreds
of elected officials taking office under regimes courts
ultimately find are discriminatory or are abandoned.
The problem has only worsened due to the expansion of the
so-called Purcell principle. This is the idea that courts
should be cautious changing election rules if an election is
imminent.
What began as a commonsense warning to consider potential
voter confusion and administrative burdens now operates
effectively as a bright-line Rule against intervening as an
election draws near.
The use of Purcell to stymie voting rights plaintiffs has
skyrocketed in recent years from 6 in 2012 to 11 in 2016, to 58
times in 2020. All too frequently this Rule is wielded
inconsistently in one direction only: To undermine efforts to
ensure that discriminatory practices are blocked before they
can taint an election.
The North Carolina case I mentioned is illustrative. The
law we challenged eliminated 1 week of early voting, same-day,
and preregistration, and the capping of ballots cast out of
precinct.
The law also banned the use of many forms of government-
issued voter ID to vote including student and public assistance
IDs. The Fourth Circuit struck the law down as
unconstitutional, targeting Black voters, ``with almost
surgical precision.''
The case cost $5.9 million and took 34 months to litigate.
In the meantime, the 2014 general election went forward under
the provisions of the new law with 188 Federal and State
officers elected, including 13 congressional seats.
We did everything to prevent this from happening. We
litigated on an expedited timeline and sought a preliminary
injunction before the 2014 midterms, which the Fourth Circuit
granted. The Supreme Court stayed that ruling because of
Purcell, leaving the discriminatory regime in place for the
2014 election.
The law has since been struck down, but it is impossible
now to compensate Black voters of North Carolina for that gross
injustice.
That is just one example. My written testimony details
several others. Racial discrimination in voting continues to
threaten the health of our democracy, and we lack adequate
tools to combat that threat. Stronger voting rights protections
are absolutely critical. Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Lakin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Ms. Lakin, for your work and your
testimony, and I hope you are not a die-hard baseball fan.
Next, I would like to recognize Ms. Helen Butler. Ms.
Butler is executive director of the Georgia coalition for The
People's Agenda. In that role, she leads an advocacy
organization founded by the late great reverend, Dr. Joseph E.
Lowery and compromised with representatives from human rights,
civil rights, environmental, labor, women, young professionals,
youth, elected officials, and peace and justice groups
throughout Georgia and other southeastern States.
She leads initiatives that increase citizen participation
in the governance of their communities in areas including
education, criminal, and juvenile justice reform, protecting
the right to vote, and economic development.
Ms. Butler, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HELEN BUTLER

Ms. Butler. Good morning, Chair Nadler, Chair Cohen, and
Members of the subcommittee. My name, of course, I am Helen
Butler, and The People's Agenda is a nonpartisan, nonprofit
organization founded by Dr. Lowery.
It has always been dedicated to fighting for the voting
rights of Georgia's citizens, through public education,
training, advocacy, and litigation.
In the wake of the Supreme Court's 2013 decision in Shelby
County v. Holder and due to the lack of a preclearance process,
we have been forced to spend even more time and resources
fighting discriminatory voting laws, policies, and practices at
the State and local levels.
Today, I will provide you with some examples of barriers to
the ballot faced by voters of color in Georgia since that
decision and the loss of section 5 preclearance, how my
organization and others have been forced to divert significant
time and resources to monitoring and responding to voting
changes, and why we need to restore the full protections of the
Voting Rights Act, including the preclearance and notice
provisions by enacting the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement
Act.
I have submitted a full written statement to the
Subcommittee for your consideration.
In the last two decades, the Georgia electorate has
undergone significant demographic changes with the percentage
of Black voters and other voters of color increasing. Instead
of welcoming the increasing diversity of Georgia's electorate
and respecting the votes cast by Black voters and other voters
of color, Georgia's conservative legislators' immediate
response to the political changes has been the introduction of
a host of voter suppression bills in both the Georgia House and
Senate, especially during the 2021 legislative session.
The bills were rushed through committees in the House and
Senate often with little or no time for Ranking Members on the
committees, much less the general public, to have an
opportunity to review the draft or final versions of the bills
before they were voted upon.
This process, led by the majority party with virtually no
transparency, culminated in the passage of an omnibus voter
suppression bill, Senate Bill 202.
With almost surgical precision, SB 202 targets the methods
of voting increasingly being used by Georgia's Black voters and
voters of color with arbitrary and unnecessarily burdensome
requirements that will disenfranchise voters and potentially
expose nonprofit civic engagement organizations such as The
People's Agenda to fines and criminal penalties.
The majority party also led the passage of legislation
reconstitution a number of Georgia's county boards of
elections, including Morgan County where I lived and served on
that board since 2010 as well as in Troup County and Spalding
County and others.
I believe that the legislature targeted these boards of
election because of our opposition to efforts to suppress the
Black vote by Conservatives on our boards. Since Shelby County
decision, Conservatives in the Georgia legislature introduced
two mid-decade redistricting bills, which sought to reduce the
percentage of the Black population in Republican-held districts
that were starting to become more competitive.
Given the history of unconstitutional racial gerrymandering
by the Georgia General Assembly, The People's Agenda is
concerned about the potential for a repeat of these tactics
during our current redistricting cycle in Georgia, particularly
in the absence of preclearance of the plans by the Department
of Justice.
In the aftermath of the Shelby County decision, many of
Georgia's county boards of election also proposed or took
actions to close, consolidate, or move polling locations,
oftentimes in areas primarily serving voters of color and
underrepresented communities.
Just, in fact, the Dougherty County Board of Elections
recently is considering closing 10 of its 28 polling locations
allegedly due to low turnout in the 2020 election cycle despite
the pandemic.
In the wake of these new attacks on voting rights of Black
voters and other voters of color in Georgia, The People's
Agenda is extremely concerned about this landscape, and we
believe that Congress must pass legislation to restore full
protections of the Voting Rights Act, including the John Lewis
Voting Rights Advancement Act.
Thank you for your time and your consideration.
[The statement of Ms. Butler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cohen. Thank you Ms. Butler.
Chair Nadler. You are on mute.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir.
Our third witness is Maureen Riordan. Ms. Riordan is a
litigation counsel for Public Interest Legal Foundation, which
she joined in 2021. Previously, she spent 20 years as an
attorney in the voting section of the Civil Rights Division of
the U.S. Department of Justice, where she worked on hundreds of
elections, voting, and redistricting matters.
During the Trump Administration, she served as senior
counsel to the Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights,
where she was responsible for the voting section. Ms. Riordan
received her J.D. from St. Mary's University School of Law and
her B.S. in criminal justice from Seton Hall University.
Ms. Riordan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MAUREEN RIORDAN

Ms. Riordan. Good morning, Mr. Chair, Ranking Member--
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Put your microphone on.
Ms. Riordan. Good morning, Mr. Chair, Ranking Member, and
Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for your invitation to
speak with you today. As indicated, I am an attorney with the
Public Interest Legal Foundation, a nonpartisan charity devoted
to promoting election integrity and preserving the
constitutional mandate that allows States to administer their
own elections.
I have been an attorney for approximately 35 years, 20 of
which I served in the Voting section--I am sorry--20 years at
DOJ, approximately 18 in the Voting Section, in addition to
being senior counsel to the associate AG for civil rights.
From August of 2000 until the Supreme Court's decision in
Shelby County v. Holder, my primary responsibility was to
review changes submitted for preclearance under section 5. I
have also conducted election monitoring throughout the United
States, both with and without Federal observers.
I began my employment approximately 3 months prior to the
2000 election, and when the Florida recount occurred, I was
shocked when I personally observed Voting section staff
discussing strategies, faxing, and receiving information from
DNC operatives in Florida.
I have also witnessed twisted racialism. When George Bush
appointed Ralph Boyd, an African American to head the Civil
Rights Division, I often heard from career Voting section
attorneys that he is not really Black and that no self-
respecting Black man would be a Republican.
These statements and beliefs were many. I would urge every
member here to read the DOJ Inspector General on the Voting
Section, and it provides instance after instance of bad
behavior, often racially motivated, among staff.
It also includes abuse of an African-American paralegal
deemed not Black enough by voting staff.
The Voting section has a long record of abuse by its
attorneys for improper collaboration in reviewing section 5
submissions. It has been sanctioned by courts. Between 1993 and
2000, the Voting section has been sanctioned over $2 million.
For example, in Johnson v. Miller, U.S. District Court
sanctioned the Voting section $594,000 for collusive misconduct
by DOJ attorneys with the ACLU. A Federal court pronounced that
the communications between those two groups, the DOJ and ACLU,
were disturbing and that the dynamics were not those of an
advocate reporting to a higher authority, but rather peers
working together against the jurisdiction that made the
submission.
After a Voting section lawyer professed that she could not
remember details of the relationship, the court found her
professed amnesia to be less than credible.
Abuse of power in the section 5 process is not confined to
Johnson v. Miller, and my written testimony provides additional
instances.
Section 5 was a temporary provision for a reason that no
longer exists. The Supreme Court made clear in Shelby County
that only certain conditions would ever justify any formula for
section 5, including blatant discrimination on a pervasive and
rampant scale. Triggers that are built around political,
partisan goals will not withstand constitutional scrutiny.
The permanent provisions of the Voting Rights Act, such as
section 2, still prohibit discrimination and provide ample
tools to challenge election procedures. Up until this past
Friday when DOJ announced that it is suing the State of
Georgia, the Department of Justice has only blocked five
section 2 cases since Shelby County was decided. Where is the
rampant discrimination?
Section 3 also allows a judge to have a jurisdiction to
submit to the preclearance provisions if it finds that the
jurisdiction intentionally discriminated against minority
voters. That is consistent with the Shelby mandate, that
Federal oversight of State and local elections be closely
matched to need.
H.R. 4, however, would allow a jurisdiction to be subjected
to the rigors of section 3 for violations that are not premised
on intentional discrimination.
Also, the new evidentiary stand for obtaining a preliminary
injunction proposed in H.R. 4 sets Federal law on its head. The
Supreme Court has held that plaintiffs seeking a preliminary
injunction must establish that they are likely to cede on the
merits and also that the injunction should not be granted when
it is against the public interest.
The new standard in H.R. 4 not only disregards the public
interest, but it actually prohibits the court from considering
any interest of the State in application for a preliminary
injunction.
I would like to thank you for your time and your attention.
[The statement of Ms. Riordan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Ms. Riordan.
Our next witness Mr. James Tucker--or Dr. Tucker. He is an
attorney with the law firm of Wilson Elser Moskowitz Edelman &
Dicker in Las Vegas, Nevada. He is one of the founding Members
in the Native American Voting Rights Coalition.
He is Chair of the Census Bureau's National Advisory
Committee on Racial, Ethnic, and Other Populations. He served
as a trial lawyer, senior trial lawyer in fact, on the Voting
section of the Civil Rights Division of the U.S. Department of
Justice.
He is an adjunct professor at the Barrett College William
S. Boyd School of Law at UNLV. Dr. Tucker holds a Doctor in the
Science of Laws and Master of Laws Degrees from the University
of Pennsylvania, a J.D., Order of the Coif, from the University
of Florida, a Master of Public Administration degree from the
University of Oklahoma, and a Bachelor of Arts Degree in
History from the Barrett Honors College at Arizona State
University.
Dr. Tucker, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES T. TUCKER

Mr. Tucker. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Chair Nadler, Chair
Cohen, Ranking Member Johnson, and Committee Members, thank you
for your invitation to testify on the need to enhance the
Voting Rights Act.
This hearing comes just 4 days after the 8-year anniversary
of Shelby County v. Holder. On June 25th, 2013, in a narrow 5-4
decision, the United States Supreme Court struck down the
coverage formula for section 5, the heart of the Voting Rights
Act.
Shelby County's assault on the Voting Rights Act has come
at a high price. In the absence of section 5 preclearance,
previously covered States and political subdivisions have
turned back the clock to make the most basic, first-generation
barriers. Obstacles that impede the ability to register to
vote, to cast a ballot, and to have a ballot counted are a
reality for an even greater number of Americans.
Many governing bodies have increased their exploitation of
racially polarized voting at the expense of existing and
emerging groups of minority voters, seeking equal opportunities
to participate in the political process.
Against this backdrop, it is appropriate that the Committee
has answered the clarion call to renew and restore the Voting
Rights Act. H.R. 4, the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement
Act is named in honor of one of the great champions of American
democracy.
Preserving the fundamental right to vote for all Americans
is what brings us together in this hearing. Today, as a result
of Shelby County, there is no longer any coverage under section
4 of the VRA.
Section 3(c) bail-in currently is the only way that a State
or political subdivision can be required to submit covered
voting changes for preclearance. However, the bail-in provision
is sparingly used. Before Shelby County, only 18 jurisdictions
bailed in under section 3(c), two States--Arkansas and New
Mexico--12 counties, two municipalities, and two school
districts.
Over half of those jurisdictions, 10, were bailed in for
discrimination against American Indians. All but two were
bailed in by consent judgments. Since 2013, only a few more
political subdivisions have bailed in.
Shelby County's legacy and the uncomfortable burden of
finding discriminatory purpose have contributed to a reluctance
by Federal judges to rely upon section 3(c) as a remedy to cure
voting rights violations in the face of judicial findings of
egregious wrongs.
H.R. 4 makes two changes that directly impact bail-in.
First, using a modernized formula, it restores section 5
coverage in States and political subdivisions where it is
needed most.
Second, it gives Federal judges the power to use the
remedial authority in section 3(c), where any voting
discrimination against racial, ethnic, or language minority
voters is established.
Consonant with that discretion of their broad remedial
powers, judges will continue to have discretion to set the
timeframe and the scope of voting changes to which bail-in
applies under section 3(c).
Federal observers, likewise, are an important part of the
Act's comprehensive framework. They prevent voting
discrimination, assist the Attorney General in enforcing
Federal voting protections, and they measure progress with
court-ordered remedies in voting rights cases.
Shelby County has had a devastating impact on Federal
observer coverage. Prior to the Shelby County decision in 2013,
a total of 153 counties and parishes in 11 States were
certified by the Attorney General for Federal observers.
By 2020, just five political subdivisions in three States
were covered for Federal observers under section 3(a) of the
Act--one county in Alabama, three Census areas in Alaska as a
result of NARF's litigation there, and one parish in Louisiana.
In the November 3rd, 2020 election, not a single Federal
observer was dispatched by the Justice Department and the
Office of Personnel Management, which is unprecedented for
coverage of Presidential elections in recent decades.
H.R. 4 will renew and restore vitality in the Federal
observer provisions in three ways. It provides a new coverage
formula for section 5, which would make the covered
jurisdictions eligible for certification by the Attorney
General for Federal observers under section 8 of the Act.
It would amendment sections 3(a) and 8 of the Act to allow
courts and the Attorney General to certify Federal observers
where there has been voting discrimination on the basis of
race, color, or language minority status in violation of
Federal law.
NARF looks forward to working with Members of the
Subcommittee in restoring the vitality of the Voting Rights
Act.
Thank you very much for your attention. I welcome the
opportunity to answer any questions you may have.
[The statement of Mr. Tucker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cohen. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Tucker.
I will now go on to our witness questioning phase, and I
will proceed with the first questions for 5 minutes.
First, Dr. Tucker, you mentioned how there was no observers
during this past election and some changes. Was the Voting
Rights section of the Justice Department absent without a cause
during the Trump Administration?
Mr. Tucker. I think it is fair to say that those of us who
were on the outside looking in are disappointed in terms of
what the enforcement activities were under the Trump
Administration. One of the things that I know, that Ms. Lakin
alluded to and it is certainly something, an issue that we have
also seen with the Native American Rights Fund, is that the
heft of that burden has fallen on private attorneys general,
which are the civil rights organizations and private
individuals and groups that have had to bring the litigation on
their own. It is very expensive.
Just by way of example, in Alaska, it costs us $2 million
in approximately 18 months to be able to stop some language
assistance--the absence of language assistance through a
section 203 case. It is very, very time-consuming and expensive
and unfortunately DOJ--
Mr. Cohen. I am frozen. I am going to go on with my
questioning if that is all right because we are frozen.
Ms. Lakin, let me ask you this, as the lead attorney with
the ACLU, was there any particular reason why there were so few
actions under section 2 in the years that Ms. Riordan pointed
out? Was it because everything had gotten better and all these
States stopped doing their voodoo that they have been doing for
so many years, or was it absence of actions on the government?
Ms. Lakin. Thank you for your question. As Dr. Tucker has
pointed out, the civil rights organizations that have been
working to protect voting rights have been incredibly engaged
in voting rights litigation under section 2, under the
Constitution, under other Federal laws, like the NVRA as well,
so to the extent that the Justice Department itself was not
bringing actions, I would say that that doesn't characterize
the State of litigation in the post-Shelby world.
I think in previous testimony, Dale Ho of the ACLU has
testified to the number of cases that the ACLU itself has
brought under section 2 alone, and then that is certainly quite
a number in the wake.
As Dr. Tucker mentioned, these cases are incredibly costly.
They are complex. They are time-consuming. We have shouldered
our fair share, along with other civil rights organizations,
and really attempted to keep voting rights protected during
this period of time, but it is simply insufficient to protect
voters from losing the right to vote or being forced to vote
under discriminatory regimes. There is no way to compensate
voters after the fact.
Mr. Cohen. Ms. Lakin, you brought up in your testimony
Purcell v. Gonzalez, the case that said, go real easy on
injunctive relief, probably well intentioned, I presume it was,
just as Shelby v. Holder was probably well intentioned but a
disaster. Both were disasters for voting rights and the
opportunity for people to vote.
What should Congress do to address the problems that the
judiciary's application of the Purcell principle has created?
Ms. Lakin. Well, there are a number of things, like the
restoration or reinvigoration of the preclearance regime would
certainly help in many ways because, as I have testified and
many others have testified, the post-enactment relief is not
sufficient, and Purcell is just one example of how that problem
has gotten even worse.
The preliminary injunction standard that is being applied,
this likelihood of success on the merits, which plaintiffs have
to show in order to obtain preliminary relief, courts have
become even more reluctant, I would say, without a very
substantial showing of likelihood of success on the merits, in
part because of the growth and explosion of the use of this
Purcell principle as a way to almost abstain from weighing in
on the merits of the case.
So, you have cases where courts have found a likely
violation, a likely constitutional violation or discrimination,
and yet, because it is close to the election, simply throw up
their hands and say, ``I am just going to let this lie for
now.'' That is certainly a problem, and Congress has many
different ways to get involved.
One would be, of course, lowering the standard for winning
preliminary injunction relief. The second would also be, of
course, restoring the preclearance regime and perhaps then
other means for asking for certain fixes to the Purcell
doctrine itself.
Mr. Cohen. Like it.
Ms. Butler, Georgia, most free, fair election in history,
and yet the legislature came back and took Mr. Raffensperger's
powers away from him after his heroic actions. What were some
of the actions in Senate Bill 202 which will hurt minority
voting? Briefly explain those barriers to the ballot box that
have been brought about by that law.
Ms. Butler. Well, first, it reduces the time to request
absentee ballots from 90 days-180 days, down to 78 days. You
now must provide an ID, a Georgia driver's license, or Georgia
State-issued ID, and if you don't have one of those IDs, you
have to provide copies.
We have a lot of rural people, a lot of elderly people that
don't have access to copiers, that will now have to provide
copying services to get their IDs if they want to vote by
absentee or vote by mail.
The early voting period between the runoff, they reduced
the time down to 4 weeks. That will not give you a time for a
lot of early voting during that runoff period at all.
So, those are some of the kinds of barriers that we have,
that voters of color will be subjected to.
There is broadband. A lot of people in rural areas don't
have broadband access. So, to get these documents to the boards
of election, they will have to do it through other means.
So, it is really important that we put preclearance back
into process for these laws because they are just putting
barriers there. There was nothing about the election process--
we had three--two audits and a recount. So, it really was not
fraud. So, it was a fair election, but they did implement these
laws as well.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you very much, Ms. Butler. I appreciate
your response.
Next, I recognize Mr. Johnson from Louisiana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
This is an exercise in advancing a political narrative. I
mentioned at the outset here this is our third hearing on the
Voting Rights Act in 3 months because apparently the majority
party thinks that this is politically advantageous. I love what
at least one of the witnesses has said here today, bringing
common sense into the equation.
I want to ask Ms. Riordan--am I pronouncing that right?
What is the right pronunciation?
Ms. Riordan. It is Riordan.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you. One recent analyst
said about H.R. 4--I am going to quote them, they said that it
would update the coverage formula by making it, quote, ``more
onerous and almost impossible for States to defend against
lawsuits against them.''
Likewise, opponents of the legislation believe the real aim
of the Act is to reverse the decision in Shelby County, which
has been illustrated here today, and allow political allies at
the DOJ and left-wing organizations to control State election
rules in violation of the principles of Federalism.
I want to thank you for expertise today, your clarity on
this subject this morning. A quarter century at the DOJ in this
arena is quite impressive. You pointed out that H.R. 4 is
hugely problematic.
You testified the Voting Rights Act is still working today
without the preclearance requirement, which is a dated
requirement, as you pointed out. It still clearly prohibits
discrimination, but you noted--and I am very interested this--
the DOJ has only brought five section 2 cases since Shelby
County was handed down 8 years ago? Are they ignoring rampant
acts of discrimination out there? What do you think?
Ms. Riordan. I think that the rampant acts of
discrimination do not exist. I can tell you that there was a
comment about whether or not there were cases brought during
the Trump Administration. During my time period at the front
office as a senior counsel, I am unaware of any request by the
Voting section to bring a section 2 action that was denied by
leadership.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. If I am correct, if my math is
right, 8 years ago, Shelby County was handed down. Wasn't Eric
Holder in charge of the DOJ during part of that time?
Ms. Riordan. He was.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. He didn't bring this army of
prosecutors at DOJ out to go after this rampant discrimination,
did he? I don't remember that.
Ms. Riordan. No. As a matter of fact, the amount of people
that served in the Voting section has decreased since that
time.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Since the 2020 election several
States have enacted or proposed election law changes, as we
have noted in March. Georgia's Governor, Brian Kemp, signed
Senate Bill 202 into law. Some of the other witnesses today are
just breathless in their opposition to this.
My goodness, Ms. Butler just said requiring, for example, a
valid ID to vote is an unreasonable, oppressive requirement. Is
that your view on voter ID as well?
Ms. Riordan. No, it is not. First, the laws in Georgia
already require an ID for in-person voting. Actually, you are
treating absentee voters differently than you are treating in-
person voters. So, it has already been approved by the courts.
I would think that the fact that they are treating those
differently probably could be an equal protection claim that
someone could bring, since why should we be treating absentee
voters differently than in-person voters?
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Very well said. Last week, of
course, the DOJ famously in a press conference filed a lawsuit
against Georgia over its voting law. I just want to know if the
Department of Justice has issues with that law in Georgia,
shouldn't it also file lawsuits against Colorado and New York
and other liberal-run States over their election laws, which
are more restrictive than what Georgia just passed?
Ms. Riordan. I would agree with that. I would also State
that the majority of the provisions that they are fighting and
filed suit over, are provisions that were temporary to begin
with due to the COVID-19 restrictions.
So, basically what they are saying is that we put forward
these provisions to make it a little bit easier for people to
vote due to COVID, and now we want to keep them permanent. So,
they were never meant to be permanent; they were always
temporary.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Exactly right. The chaos that
ensued as a result of the 2020 election was occasioned because
of all those irregularities, and it should be incumbent upon us
to fix the irregularities, so we don't have that chaos going
forward.
Despite the rhetoric you are going to hear from our
colleagues across the aisle all day today, isn't it true that
States are still best situated to enact changes in election
law?
Ms. Riordan. I think so. All my time in the Voting Section,
reviewing changes under section 5 preclearance, the majority of
those changes are really very, very small, very minute. In the
time period that I was there, from 2000 until Shelby County, we
actually reviewed 222,000 submissions, and there were 81
objections during that time period.
That is less than a third of 1 percent of the submissions
that were actually issued an objection.
Some of the things that I included in my written testimony,
some of those objections that really were not based in fact,
but based on politics were included in those 81 objections.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I am out of time, but I think
that last phrase summarizes it. Thank you for being here today
and being clear and being here in person.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Mr. Chair, you are muted.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you. I wish the staff wouldn't mute me
every time. I don't need to be muted. Please don't do that.
Mr. Nadler, you are recognized.
Chair Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Tucker, as I noted in my opening statement, the number
of Federal observers' appointment has dropped precipitously
since Shelby County. To compensate for the significant
reduction, DOJ has appointed monitors instead. These monitors
appear to be a poor substitute for observers because they lack
the same legal authority to demand access to the voting
process.
What can Congress do to strengthen both the authority of
the Federal courts and the Attorney General to appoint
observers under sections 3(a) and 8 of the Voting Rights Act?
Mr. Tucker. Thank you so much for that question, Mr. Chair.
As I mentioned in my written testimony, the fix for Federal
observers is actually very simple. There are really two that we
are talking about here. One is that we, of course, need to
restore coverage under section 5 of the Voting Rights Act. That
would allow the Attorney General to certify, where it is
appropriate, Federal observers in those jurisdictions that are
covered for section 5 preclearance.
The other is a very moderate fix in section 3(a) and in
section 8 of the Act that would simply ensure that the Attorney
General and Federal courts have the ability to appoint Federal
observers in places where there is a violation of any Federal
voting rights law that implicates denial, both denial for
people of color or those who are of language minority groups.
So, it is a very, very simple fix. It is nothing radical.
It is very consistent with what we have seen, and I would
certainly encourage the Committee to include that in the final
version of H.R. 4.
Chair Nadler. Thank you.
Ms. Butler, one particularly unsettling aspect of the
stricter voting laws to emerge in the States since the last
election is that not only do they target or disproportionately
impact minority voters, something we have unfortunately seen
before, which remains a persistent problem since Shelby County,
they also target election officials and administrators. Many of
these election officials and administrators risked their lives
to make the 2020 election a success during the COVID-19
pandemic, and then they stood up for democracy against the big
lie of widespread voting fraud being pushed by the former
President and his allies.
How does SB 202 in Georgia target election officials? Is it
your sense that certain election officials in certain counties
are being singled out?
Ms. Butler. Thank you, Mr. Nadler. Yes, I do.
SB 202 has a provision where the legislature can take over
any county boards of election, can remove any supervisor. Also,
it goes hand in hand with local legislation where they could
actually reconstitute the boards of elections that actually
implement the laws on the local level. That has happened
already in three counties, and we know there may be six other
counties. We are investigating that.
It really takes the responsibility, takes total control.
They removed the Secretary of State being the Chair of the
State election board, again, not accountable to the voters.
So, it takes over total control of all of the local boards
of elections, should they so desire. So, it is a means to not
have a voice for voters, to have their voice, and ensure that
if they are not happy with the outcome of the election, they
can make sure they have the right outcome.
Chair Nadler. Thank you.
Mr. Tucker, one argument that opponents of revitalizing
section 5 make, is that preclearance is still available as a
remedy under section 3(c) of the Voting Rights Act in cases
where a court finds a violation of the 14th or 15th Amendment.
Did Congress ever intend, or section 3(c) designed to Act as a
substitute for section 5 preclearance?
Mr. Tucker. Thank you for that question, Mr. Chair.
No, section 3(c) was meant to supplement, not to replace
the section 4 coverage formula. As I documented in my written
testimony, recently, the Perez v. Abbott decision shows how
reluctant courts can be, even where the record is quite strong,
and the court has actually found discriminatory purpose to
actually apply that remedy. So, no, it is meant to be
complementary, not to be a replacement.
Chair Nadler. What is the importance of that distinction?
Mr. Tucker. The distinction is that it basically places
section 3(c) on the footing that Congress intended when it
passed the Act in 1965. It is meant to be an additional
measure. It is called the pocket trigger. The reason why it is
called the pocket trigger, as I noted in my testimony, Congress
intended that would apply to pockets of discrimination that
were not covered by the geographic coverage formula in section
4.
Chair Nadler. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Nadler.
I am going to yield the Chair temporarily to Ms. Ross, the
Vice-Chair.
Mr. Raskin. All right. I am unmuted.
Ms. Ross. [Presiding.] All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
I will now recognize Mr. McClintock for 5 minutes.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The very nature of an election is that somebody wins, and
somebody loses. Democracy depends on the losing side accepting
the legitimacy of the election. That is imperative, not only
that an election be free from fraud, but it be free from the
appearance of fraud. We saw in this last election what happens
when that appearance is abandoned, and it has been abandoned to
a system where it is very difficult to purge voter rolls of
people who have died or moved. We then send out ballots to all
those names on the rolls, and then we follow up those ballots
with partisan workers to collect them.
There was a single woman in my office who received no fewer
than five ballots at her apartment in Washington, DC, and I got
similar complaints from constituents in my district 3,000 miles
away in California.
There is a reason why drug tests can't be mailed in, and
for that same reason, we had a system that required people to
vote in person, unless they were physically incapacitated from
getting to the polls, and that system worked well. The process
began with registration. You appeared before a deputy registrar
of voters. You swore to your identity and your eligibility. It
wasn't hard to find them. You can find them in every
neighborhood fire station or library. Registration closed 30
days before the election, so candidates knew who they were
communicating with and all parties could then canvas the
precinct and challenge names that had moved or died.
Then on Election Day--and that is an important term--we
called it Election Day, because it was the day after the debate
was over. We all went to our neighborhood polling place which
was usually at a neighborhood elementary school or a neighbor's
garage. We looked our neighbors on the polling board in the eye
as they handed us our ballot. We took that ballot into a
curtained booth where nobody, not our spouse, kids, friends, or
nobody could pressure us, and we cast our votes according to
our own consciences.
We then handed that ballot back to our neighbor who put it
in a locked box. Only those who were physically handicapped and
could not get to the polls were afforded an absentee ballot,
and at 8 p.m., we knew exactly how many votes had been cast,
and usually by 10:00 p.m. we knew the results.
These laws applied to all voters of all races, of all
backgrounds, and they assured the integrity of the vote and the
public's confidence in that vote. Look at how the left has
changed all this. Same-day or automatic registration means
there is no opportunity to identify fraudulent registrations.
Voters can register to vote and then cast votes without ever
coming into contact with another human being. Votes are cast
long before the debate is concluded. Ballots are mailed to
people who died or moved. Votes are cast under the influence of
other family Members or friends. Ballot harvesters can collect
those ballots, meaning there is no chain of custody from the
time that ballot is mailed until the time it is counted.
Ballots arrive days after the election, and often, we don't
know the results of the election until days, and sometimes
weeks later.
Now, Ms. Riordan, we are told that these changes are
necessary because some people are incapable of following the
simple process that ensure the integrity of the vote. I find
that enormously condescending and downright racist. What is
your view?
Ms. Riordan. I have always found that the statement that
any particular minority group is less likely, or unable to
follow the statute's provisions in each State to be very
racist.
Mr. McClintock. How have these changes, recent changes in
our election law, affected public confidence in our elections?
Ms. Riordan. As someone who looked at the 2020 election,
based upon the number of changes in States that really
basically did away with many of the election integrity
provisions, based upon the allegation that it was necessary for
COVID, what you saw across the Nation is people recognizing
that the normal types of statutes that were in place requiring
signature matching or identification or having your ballot
mailed in by a particular day, I think people looked at that
and saw that it was more likely that fraud would occur under
those circumstances.
Mr. McClintock. Doesn't every fraudulent vote invalidate a
legitimate vote?
Ms. Riordan. Yes, sir.
Mr. McClintock. Isn't that the ultimate voter suppression?
Ms. Riordan. I would agree with that statement.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Ross. Mr. Raskin, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
You are muted.
Mr. Raskin. Ms. Butler, I would like to come to you, if I
might. I heard one of our colleagues say somebody wins and
somebody loses in every election. I wish they would tell that
to Donald Trump. America would be a lot better off if he
accepted that. We seem to have two rival theories about what is
going on in Georgia today. The way I see it is every time that
there has been an advance in people's voting rights in history,
there has been a backlash against it.
So, after the Civil War fought to free hundreds of
thousands of enslaved people, and to give them the right to
vote and to bring them up in the reconstruction process, there
was a reaction against that. We saw all kinds of voting
restrictions. Some of it was just violence and terror, but some
of it was grandfather clauses, literacy tests, poll taxes,
character tests, and so on. These laws were instituted to
secure the purity of the ballot, which essentially meant
keeping Black people from voting. We have seen these constant
efforts to undermine voting rights of African Americans in our
history.
It seems pretty clear to me that what is going on in
Georgia is all about the fact that Georgia just elected its
first African-American Senator in history, Senator Warnock,
that Joe Biden was first Democratic candidate to win there in
decades.
That is certainly what is going on if you ask anybody on
the ground in Georgia. Yet, there is this rival theory out
there which is, it is really about fraud, corruption, chaos,
back to that old cover story for racism. I am wondering if you
can help us sort this out, because I don't live in Georgia, and
I haven't been there in a long time, but I do know there were
62 lawsuits brought by Donald Trump and his supporters,
alleging corruption, fraud, and chaos in the 2020 election, and
they were all rejected in the lowest courts in the land,
circuit courts and district courts in the State level, and the
county courts, all the way up to the United States Supreme
Court. They all rejected exactly the kind of stuff we are
hearing today about how there is some impurity of the ballot,
some assault on the integrity of the ballot. Then I hear people
actually accusing, if I am understanding them right, the civil
rights forces of racism, because they are opposing efforts to
restrict the ballot.
So, would you help us sort this out? Is my sense right that
this is just the conventional racist backlash against Black
people voting? Or is there some fraud out there no court in the
land could find that has been completely rejected? I think that
even Attorney General Barr described Donald Trump's claims of
voter fraud as BS, and I am being polite there. I am not
spelling it out. So, let me turn it over to you, Ms. Butler.
Ms. Butler. Thank you. No, there hasn't been any fraud in
Georgia. We had three hand counts of the ballots in Georgia.
That means all 159 counties did an audit, and they did two
recounts, hand recounts, not using equipment, but they did hand
counting. We had the GBI and the FBI look at our signature
match process. It was found competent. There was nothing that
they found wrong with it. There was no fraud. We had an
exceeding number of people turn out to vote, because in this
pandemic with COVID, they were able to exercise that right to
vote, and they did that. Because of that, we now have these
egregious laws that will take over local boards of election,
take total control.
When I am on the board of election, I was on a board of
election, we were responsible for counting the absentee
ballots. We were responsible for making sure that the ballots
were rejected or accepted. We were responsible for accepting
provisional ballots, making sure that proper documentation was
received. So, with the entire process to the poll workers being
trained, we were responsible.
Mr. Raskin. Let me interrupt you for one second.
Ms. Butler. The election--that was--
Mr. Raskin. I want to get one other point in here. I know
that during the election, or right after it was over, former
President Trump called the then Secretary of State
Raffensperger, who is a Republican, and said, ``Just find me
11,781 votes.'' He was trying to encourage him to Committee
election fraud, voter fraud. Is there anything in legislation
that the Republicans are passing that would stop Donald Trump
from trying to implant false votes in Georgia, responded to
that as all?
Ms. Ross. The witness will answer very briefly because the
gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Butler. No, the law does not address that issue at all.
It stops legitimate people from exercising their right to vote.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Ross. Mr. Roy is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Roy. I thank the gentlelady.
Ms. Riordan, when the United States Supreme Court struck
down section 5, they did so, best of my understanding and
recollection, in significant part because it was based on, at
that time, 40-year-old data and that it was based on
information from 1968, 1972, and it was particularly dated, and
in particular, that the record that was put into the record in
2006, when VRA was reauthorized at the time, was replete with
examples where there were cover jurisdictions that had certain
issues that were being raised, and then noncovered
jurisdictions, but there was no real correlation and that that
was part of the problem. Is that roughly correct from your
recollection of the case?
Ms. Riordan. Yes, it is definitely that there seemed to be
no legitimate basis to have certain States covered at that
particular time, and also, the Supreme Court was very clear,
and what they said was it was always supposed to be a temporary
provision, because they understood in the 1960s that it was
necessary to have section 5, but that in the 2000s, it is no
longer necessary.
Mr. Roy. Ms. Riordan, do you think the Department of
Justice is particularly objective in the way that it would
carry out pre-
clearance? Just a simple answer on that one and then I have a
follow-up.
Ms. Riordan. I do not.
Mr. Roy. Are you familiar with the Department of Justice
Inspector General Report from 2013?
Ms. Riordan. I am.
Mr. Roy. Are you aware that chapter 4, part 3 of the
report, page 135, highlights that disclosures and other
confidential information was leaked to reporters likely by
voting section employees?
Ms. Riordan. Yes, that happened on a regular basis.
Mr. Roy. What kind of information was leaked? Can you
provide examples, keeping in mind we are on the clock, but a
few examples for the committee?
Ms. Riordan. I think, during the--I want to say the Georgia
voting ID case, there were individuals who leaked information
from the inner workings of the group that was responsible for
reviewing that particular submission. I can think of that. I
know that there are a couple of--actually one particular
attorney that claimed that she was the basis for one of the
books that was written about the DOJ. Those are just two
examples.
Mr. Roy. Are you aware of the report highlighting that
analysts lied under oath?
Ms. Riordan. I am.
Mr. Roy. Do you have any background or examples of that?
Ms. Riordan. I know that during the inspector general
report, that there was a civil rights analyst that was
specifically asked a question by the attorneys that were doing
the investigation, and that she lied under oath.
Mr. Roy. The report provides examples of non-attorney
voting section attorneys, non-attorney voting section
employees, posting comments to websites concerning voting
section personnel or matters. One example describes an employee
who started a, quote, ``cyber gang,'' unquote, that was engaged
in, quote, ``cyber-bullying,'' end quote. According to the
report, he took, quote, ``he told the OIG that for his internet
postings he selected as his alias the name of the protagonist
of a well-known novel, because he represented the archetype
angry Black guy,'' end quote, page 129 of the report.
Are these the same people that would be doing preclearances
of election law changes under H.R. 4?
Ms. Riordan. Yeah, there are some of those same people
there.
Mr. Roy. Is that troubling to you?
Ms. Riordan. Yes. One of the things that I found to be so
shocking while working in the voting section was the fact that
it was so political. I just think that a section that is termed
``voting,'' that is supposed to be review voting changes in the
Civil Rights Division, should be nonpartisan. It is the
furthest thing from nonpartisan.
Mr. Roy. I apologize for being a little bit late. I had a
conflict, but I suppose there has been some conversations here
about H.R. 1 and S. 1 and about the some of the issues involved
with those pieces of legislation. Obviously, right now, having
hit a wall in the Senate, do you believe that H.R. 4 is trying
to be used as a back door to try to get the Federal takeover of
elections carried out in the absence of being able to currently
get that executed on the Democratic side of the aisle?
Ms. Riordan. I do. I think that this particular bill is
looking to reauthorize a provision of the Voting Rights Act
that is no longer necessary, because there is no rampant
discrimination in voting.
One of the things I said earlier was the fact that during
the time period that I was there from 2000 until 2013, there
were 222,000 submissions that were submitted by local
jurisdictions. Minority--I would say that 98 percent of those
submissions really concern moving a polling place within the
same building.
Mr. Roy. Right.
Ms. Riordan. There is just not rampant voting
discrimination between 2000 and 2013. There certainly isn't
today.
Mr. Roy. When my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
say that quote, ``Voting Rights Act has basically been
overturned by the court.'' That is not true, is it? Right? We
are talking about section 5. The Voting Rights Act remains
firmly in place, protects the rights of American people to
vote. Rather what we are doing is allowing States to continue
to be able to figure out the laws and place voting booths where
they need to be and so forth. Would you agree with that?
Ms. Riordan. I would.
Mr. Roy. Thank you, ma'am.
I yield back.
Mr. Cohen. [Presiding.] Thank you, Ms. Ross, for taking the
Chair, take the Chair and recognize you for your five minutes
of questioning.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
As a civil rights attorney and former State representative,
I have witnessed firsthand the incursion on voting rights in
North Carolina and fought against them. In 2011, the North
Carolina General Assembly completed redistricting that relied
on racial gerrymandering. These newly drawn maps were
ultimately struck down by the United States Supreme Court, and
in 2017, in Cooper v. Harris. However, numerous elections
occurred during the intervening years.
Those who were elected because of the unconstitutional maps
went on to incur incumbent advantage, and in some case, work
against the interests of those who were disenfranchised. I was
there in the North Carolina General Assembly in 2011 when that
redistricting occurred.
In 2013, North Carolina enacted a restrictive voter ID law
which the fourth circuit noted, targeted African Americans with
almost surgical precision. The very forms of identification
prohibited by this law were those disproportionately held by
African Americans. The bill eliminated a week of early voting,
a period which African Americans utilized the most.
Once again, the courts righted the wrongs of the State
legislature. It took nearly 3 years for the litigation to reach
its conclusion. During that period, nearly 200 officials were
elected, including a U.S. Senator, 13 Members of Congress, and
four North Carolina Supreme Court justices.
These cases in North Carolina demonstrate that section 2
litigation, by itself, is not sufficient to protect voting
rights. We need to stop voter suppression before it happens,
not years afterward.
Disenfranchised Americans cannot wait years for their
rights to be restored and uncompensated. It is not possible for
voters to truly receive a remedy on the back end. Efforts to
undermine our core American values should never be allowed to
take effect.
My first question is for Ms. Lakin on the Purcell
principle. In your view, did the Supreme Court intend to create
this elaborate new voting rights doctrine when it issued its
unsigned opinion in Purcell v. Gonzalez in 2006?
Ms. Lakin. No, I don't believe that is the case. If you
look at the very brief unsigned opinion, as you note, it is
mostly a decision about deference to the lower court's
discretion and only in passing does it raise a very commonsense
warning that you should consider specific considerations that
are--come up in elections when you are balancing the equities
in that case, that is, whether or not the injunction is in the
public interest, and would not cause irreparable harm. It has
grown and metastasized well beyond that brief decision and
reference in that case.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much.
Mr. Tucker, courts have interpreted section 3(c) to require
plaintiffs to prove purposeful discrimination to invoke
preclearance as a remedy. Mr. Nadler asked you some questions
about this. This is an already high evidentiary bar for
plaintiffs to meet, but you note in your testimony that courts
have also been reluctant to reach the question of whether the
plaintiffs have established intentional discrimination once the
plaintiffs have already established discriminatory impact. What
accounts for this judicial reluctance?
Mr. Tucker. Thank you so much for the question.
It actually highlights the same issue that Congress
actually visited in 1982 in the 1982 amendments. Following the
City of Mobile v. Bolden decision, that is precisely what we
saw with section 2 cases that there was a reluctance, if
section 2 was going to be construed in the same manner as the
15th Amendment, that judges are, frankly, hesitant to call
their neighbors, to call their friends, to call election
officials that they may have dinner with, racist, and that is
the fundamental problem.
So, what Congress has proposed in H.R. 4 is a very modest
change that would simply recognize that, where voting
discrimination has occurred in whatever form, that
discrimination should also be subject to section 3(c)
preclearance, as the court may find, limited under whatever
circumstance and for whatever time period.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
I yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you.
I think Ms. Fischbach is next for 5 minutes.
Ms. Fischbach. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Riordan, I do thank you for being here in person today.
I appreciate that.
As Mr. Johnson had mentioned earlier that we have had
several hearings on this topic, but to my understanding, the
only thing that has really changed since we have had those
hearings is that the Attorney General is launching the suit
against State of Georgia over SB 202.
I was just wondering if you could maybe comment on, if the
Biden Administration wins that lawsuit, what the effect is
going to be on the elections being conducted in Georgia.
Ms. Riordan. If the Biden Administration is successful in
the section 2 matter, what will happen is one of the things
they are asking for is the State of Georgia, of course, to be
covered under section 3(c). So, every single voting change in
the State of Georgia will need to be submitted to the
Department of Justice for preclear-
ance. They are also asking for a preliminary injunction against
the changes. So, if they are successful, none of SB 202 will
move forward. In addition, they are asking for Federal
observers to be placed there.
In the end game, if they are successful in showing that SB
202 was instituted with a discriminatory purpose, which is what
they are arguing, then SB 202 will not be able to go forward.
It will be declared unconstitutional.
Ms. Fischbach. Thank you. What it sounds like to me is a
real invasion of the Federal Government in the State elections.
What would the implications be if H.R. 4 on States, which are
attempting to answer waning faith in elections by strengthening
election integrity? What would be the effect of the
implications of H.R. 4?
Ms. Riordan. I think H.R. 4, when utilized by the
Department of Justice, will probably put the kibosh on any
State moving forward with election integrity provisions. There
is a general thought within the section itself that there is no
need for election integrity laws. Additionally, based upon the
reauthorization of section 5 in 2006, it is not only whether or
not an election mechanism has a purpose, discriminatory
purpose, it is also whether or not there is any effect on
minority voters.
So, what often happens is you get into a situation where,
let's say, there is a voter identification requirement that is
submitted for preclearance, and that 88 percent of White voters
have that particular ID, but 86.9 percent of African American
voters have that ID. That particular change will be objected to
by the Attorney General. So, it really comes down to a
percentage game within the Department.
Ms. Fischbach. Thank you very much.
What do you think about the constitutionality of H.R. 4,
and are there areas that you would question the
constitutionality?
Ms. Riordan. I would question the initial reauthorization
of section 5's constitutionality for the simple reason that if
anyone reads the decision in Shelby County v. Holder, they
clearly said, stated in that case that for the Federal
Government to exert that type of control, again, that they were
given under section 5, that there would have to be rampant
discrimination against minority voters. Based upon my
experience, enforcing these laws for 20 years, that is just not
the way that I think the evidence comes in. I also think that
changing the standards for a preliminary injunction that
demands that a court ignore a State's purpose for making those
laws is unconstitutional as well.
Ms. Fischbach. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
I yield back my 49 seconds.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Ms. Fischbach. I appreciate that.
Mr. Johnson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for holding
this very important hearing.
Ms. Butler, you previously served as a member of the board
of the Morgan County Board of Elections. Is that correct?
Ms. Butler. That is correct.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. When were you first appointed to
serve?
Ms. Butler. I was appointed in 2010.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. You have served all the way up
until what point?
Ms. Butler. I served until just recently. June 30 was my
last day as a board of election member.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Why was that your last day of
service?
Ms. Butler. The board was reconstituted, as I had
previously stated, through local legislation. It was
reconstituted at the request of our majority Republican County
Commission under the guise that our board was dysfunctional.
What that meant, I don't know.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Well, let me ask you this now. When
you were first appointed to the Board of Elections of Morgan
County back in 2010, how were you first appointed?
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. I was appointed by the Democratic
Party. There were two appointments by the Republican Party, two
by the Democratic Party, and one by the county commission.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. So, it was pretty much so and let
me ask you about Morgan County now. Morgan County is the county
where there are roughly 72.7 percent White and 23.6 percent
Black. Is that correct?
Ms. Butler. That is correct.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Back in the 2020 election, about
28.6 percent of the voters voted Democratic. Is that correct?
Ms. Butler. That is correct also.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. So, you were previously appointed
to serve on the Board of Elections by the Democratic Party
which elected two Democrats and the Republicans had two seats
that they controlled, and then the county commission appointed
one person. That person was nonpartisan?
Ms. Butler. Correct.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. So, you had pretty much a
nonpartisan board. Now, with Senate Bill 202 having become law,
it included a provision that was inserted by your local
legislator that changed the way that the Board of Elections
Members were chosen, correct?
Ms. Butler. That is correct. They are now chosen--I am
sorry.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. The changes was that, instead of
the process that I just explained and you just explained, now
it is the county commission that appointed all five Members to
the local Board of Elections, correct?
Ms. Butler. That is correct.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Now your county commission is how
many Members on the county commission of Morgan County?
Ms. Butler. There are five Members of the county
commission.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. How many of those Members are
Republican?
Ms. Butler. Four.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. So have you a four-to-one
Republican majority on the board of commission that will now
select the Board of Elections Members. Is that correct?
Ms. Butler. That is correct.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. They failed to replace you when
your term expired. Have they appointed anybody else to fill
your position?
Ms. Butler. They have appointed all five Members. They are
four Whites and one Black. Our previous board was three Whites
and two Black.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Okay. Do you know the composition
of the board now, the Board of Elections? Is it four
Republicans and one Democrat?
Ms. Butler. I don't know their political affiliation.
Predominantly, I would say, yes, they are predominantly
Republican.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Well, now, so as one of your roles
as a Board of Election member, you determine where drop boxes
would be situated around the county and you check on the
absentee ballots and provisional votes. What do you think is
going to happen to that now? Will it become politicized in
favor of the Republicans as a result of this new change brought
about by Senate Bill 202?
Ms. Butler. Well, the drop boxes are now limited, and
basically, they are to be inside and will not serve the purpose
for which they were originally placed to make it easier for
people to use them without having to come in contact with
anyone, and they could do them at all different hours of the
day.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. All of that has been cut out by
Senate Bill 202, which requires that the drop boxes be in the
early voting locations which are determined by the Board of
Elections. Isn't that correct?
Ms. Butler. That is correct.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Okay. With that, Mr. Chair, I yield
back. My time has expired.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you.
Now, I would like to recognize Mr. Owens. You talk for 5
minutes.
Mr. Owens. Thank you, Chair Cohen and Ranking Member
Johnson and witnesses. Thank you for holding this hearing and
for your participation today.
The Voting Rights Act passed in 1965 is a critical piece of
legislation that prohibits racial discrimination in voting. Two
months ago, I was asked to participate in a Senate Judiciary
hearing titled, ``Jim Crow 2021: The Latest Assault on the
Right to Vote.'' As I stated at the hearing, I grew up in the
Deep South during the era of actual Jim Crow that actually
suppressed voting. The Voting Rights Act effectively ended Jim
Crow laws enforcement of the 14th and 15th Amendments to the
United States Constitution.
In the United States of America, a person is guaranteed
equal protection under the law and equal access to vote,
regardless of his or her skin color. However, at the Senate
hearing and still today, I was offended to hear the comparison
to Jim Crow laws, and recently passed voter reform laws in
Georgia.
I am going to focus my remarks today on the one area of
alleged voter suppression, the uproar over the requirements
that voters produce a Federal ID.
Unfortunately, today, we have heard the same message that
we heard earlier this year, that Americans, especially lower
income, and minority Americans, particularly Black, are
incapable of following laws and rules to vote in election--
Federal elections. In fact, the section of S.B. 202, the
recently passed Georgia law, states that has brought such
outrage from the left, simply because it requires any person
applying for an absentee ballot to include evidence of a
government-issued ID on the application.
If a voter does not have a driver's license or ID card,
that voter can use a current utility bill, bank statement,
government check, paycheck, or other government documents to
show the name and address of that voter. By the way, 97
percent, 97 percent of the Georgia voters already have
government-issued IDs.
The Georgia law, S.B. 202, includes many positive changes
to the State voting laws. For example, S.B. 202 would expand
the State's early voting period. It codifies the use of ballot
drop boxes. It reduces precinct wait times. This is not voter
suppression as was seen before in the voter's right--in the
Voting Rights Act passed, and yet President Biden's Justice
Department has sued Georgia over S.B. 202 because it allegedly
discriminates against Black voters in violation to the Voting
Rights Act.
I am bothered by statements that poor Black Americans lack
the common sense, education, tenacity, and desire to succeed.
This is the very definition of a condescending bigotry, and for
those who continue this line of thought, I have questions. Do
Italians, Polish, Jewish, and Swedish-Americans also have this
problem of finding it impossible to get an ID? By the way, it
is impossible to succeed in this country to get a job,
education, bank account, travel, or even get a welfare check
without a Federal ID.
My observation, this condescending uproar from the left is
not about fair voting. It is not about representing the hopes
and dreams of poor Black Americans in these urban communities
who simply want, like every other American, to succeed. It is
about power. Every representative who still has a mass number
of constituents in their district who want IDs and have no idea
how to get it should be ashamed of themselves. They offend
their constituents on the bare basics of representation.
In my most humble opinion, putting together a team to help
constituents get an ID, to grab hold of the first rung of the
ladder of success is not a heavy lift. Lack to help their
constituents, waiting for Big Brother Federal Government to do
so is absolute and total negligence.
The bottom line is, Republicans want every legal vote to
count, want to make it easier to vote and harder to cheat, and
yet Democrats have joined to oppose these election integrity
measures. We must do better.
Ms. Riordan--Ms. Riordan--I am sorry. The Constitution
leaves it to the States to administer elections within their
jurisdiction. Are States best situated to determine how to run
their elections?
Ms. Riordan. I believe that the States are best. They are
the ones that know what is going on, on the ground. They are
aware of who their constituents are, and they are the ones that
are directly represented and elected by their citizens in each
State.
Mr. Owens. All right. There is another common misconception
that the new law bans prohibiting drinking water to voters
while voting, waiting in line. In reality, this law does not do
this, correct?
Ms. Riordan. That is correct.
Mr. Owens. Okay. The law actually bans electioneering by
prohibiting non-poll workers from distributing food and water
to waiting voters. However, this is a carve-out that allows
poll workers to make available self-service water to those
waiting in lines. Is this also your understanding of the law?
Ms. Riordan. Yes, it is. As a matter of fact, we would
actually witness very often on the Navajo Indian reservations,
when we would election observation coverage, that that was a
real issue there, that very often the Democrat Party and the
Republican Party actually have barbecues, serving food, et
cetera, outside of the polling place. There really is no place
for that outside of a polling place. We have limitations on
where you should be in regard to where people are voting when
you are part of a party representing the candidate, and that is
what the law is designed to frustrate.
Mr. Owens. Ms. Riordan, I have run out of time. Thank you
again for your clarity.
I yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you.
Next, I will recognize the lady from Houston, Texas, Ms.
Garcia.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for this
opportunity to, once again, have a discussion, a full
discussion, on the Voting Rights Act. Unlike my colleague, the
Ranking Member, who complains that this is the third time in 3
months, I wish we would have even more, because this is really
a very important topic, not just for those of us in Texas, but
for all Americans to ensure the voting rights of all Americans.
So, I wanted to start first with also quoting the Ranking
Member. He said, ``the goal is to have a fair and free and
secure elections.'' In my judgment, I think we had a fair, a
free, and secure election last time.
Ms. Lakin, do you agree? Have we had a fair and free and
secure election?
Ms. Lakin. Thank you for that question. Democracy is
strongest when more of us can participate, not less, and the
turnout that we saw in this past election and people turning
out and voting in record numbers really does support that
voters and our democracy is strong and, as far as we can tell,
all evidence points that this past election was held in a free
and fair manner.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you. Mr. Tucker, do you agree? I would
take a ``yes'' or a ``no'' in the interest of time.
Mr. Tucker. Yes, I agree completely.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you. Ms. Butler? Yes or no in the
interest of time.
Ms. Butler. Yes.
Ms. Garcia. Well, thank you.
Yet, we continue to see that Republican-led State
legislatures across the country seek to restrict voting rights
based on the erroneous and unfounded claim of voter fraud. So,
this, in fact, is a now-or-never moment for American democracy.
While I am proud of my House colleagues and the work that we
have done in passing H.R. 1, we must continue to fight hard
today, every day until we make sure that it passes the Senate.
Voters across the country elected established Democratic
majority in both Chambers of Congress and delivered a unified
government because we vow to protect democracy. Put simply,
this is about ensuring all Americans and all Texans to have and
exercise their right to vote, regardless of their race,
ethnicity, gender, income eligibility, party affiliation, or
language. While the Senate has not voted for the people, our
Governor has continued to do and enact voter suppression laws,
and, in fact, has called a special session to continue his
strategy of doing that in Texas.
So, when I say I commend the Justice Department for
recently announcing that they have filed suit against Georgia,
it needed to be done, and I am glad they did it, Ms. Butler, to
support the work that you and many have done to ensure that all
people in Georgia have a right to vote.
It is much like the fight for us here in Texas where
Latinos are often too burdened by many of the restrictions
imposed by our Governor and his Republican allies, including
barriers to an interpreter and barriers for assistance at the
voting booth. In light of these attacks, we must continue. Our
Texas congressional delegation has sent letters both to the
Justice Department, and to Senator Schumer about meeting and
urging the passage of For the People Act.
So, Mr. Chair, I have for the record and ask for unanimous
consent to put in the record a letter from the Texas delegation
to the Attorney General Garland, urging him to protect the
Voting Rights Act, also a letter from the Texas congressional
delegation to Majority Leader Schumer, expressing the urgent
need to preserve every Texan's right to vote, initially my
written testimony in June 2014 to the Senate Judiciary
Committee on updating the Voting Rights Act in response to the
Shelby County decision and, number four, an article on the
Justice Department suing Georgia over voting restrictions.
I ask for unanimous consent.
Mr. Cohen. Without objection, such should be done.
[The information follows:]

MS. GARCIA FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Garcia. Great. Ms. Lakin, I have a question for you. I
have been concerned particularly every election--I represent a
77 percent Latino district. We get complaints daily as the
election starts, even in voting, about the difficulties
Spanish-speaking voters have in getting an interpreter to be
able interpret anything at the polls, bringing any friends to
help them and assistance to vote, or if bringing in their own
interpreter to vote.
What can we do under section 203 to ensure that any
American with a language barrier has full access to registering
to vote and exercising their right to vote at the ballot?
Ms. Lakin. Thank you for your question.
The voter protections in 203 itself that provides that
voters who seek assistance to be able to vote with very limited
exceptions should have that opportunity. That should be
enforced and respected for voters.
Ms. Garcia. Well, we don't. It is happening here in Texas.
My question was: What else should we be doing under that
section, or any other section of the Voting Rights Act, to make
sure that everyone has the access to the ballot? I can tell you
that as a Senator in Texas, I have a bill to ensure the right
to interpreter and I couldn't even get it out of committee, and
so it is happening. It is real. It happens every election here
in Texas.
Ms. Lakin. In the assistance of Federal observers that I
would pass it to Dr. Tucker to make sure that these provisions
are being enforced would go a long way.
Ms. Garcia. Mr. Tucker.
Mr. Tucker. I would just add that section--
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. The gentlelady is out of time.
Mr. Cohen. We are over time. We are over time. I hate to
interrupt. We are over time, and we have got to yield back to
the next speaker. We are 1 minute over.
Ms. Garcia. Mr. Chair, could I just ask then that he submit
his response in writing for the record?
Mr. Cohen. Sure. Thanks.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Tucker.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you.
Next, we will recognize Ms. Cori Bush from the great State
of St. Louis.
Ms. Bush. Yes, the great city of St. Louis.
St. Louis and I thank you, Chair Cohen, for convening this
hearing and acknowledging St. Louis. Thank you.
To all my colleagues here today and elsewhere, we are
running out of time. Just in the last few weeks alone, some of
our colleagues in the Senate have actively been undermining our
ability to deliver significant voting reforms. I want to focus
my remarks today on nonpartisan Federal election observers.
We all watched as Georgia passed S.B. 202 with a provision
that makes it a crime punishable by up to a year in jail for
nonpartisan volunteers--nonpartisan volunteers to provide
bottled water for voters in line outside of polling places.
That is what we are up against. Several Republican-controlled
States have gone out of their way, time and time and time
again, to suppress Black voters because they fear our power and
our political vision for America. They know what we stand for.
That is justice and our liberation in its totality.
Some of my colleagues can sit here and use coded language
about States' rights and the Federal Government, or we can call
it what it is. This is a conversation about one party's intent,
and their ongoing White supremacist attempts to suppress the
power of Black and Brown, indigenous, and other marginalized
voters. Missouri, my State of Missouri, Georgia, Texas,
Arizona, and the list goes on. Each of these States have
introduced and passed restrictive voter laws. They will
continue to do this without this type of oversight.
It is for this reason that nonpartisan Federal election
observers are needed to investigate, document, and build a
record of discrimination that can be used in courts and to
inform legislation. These nonpartisan observers strengthen our
election process by providing information and oversight when
poll workers and administrators are often and otherwise
overstretched and overworked. In 2016, Federal election
observers were only sent to five States during our presidential
election. This was one of the smallest deployments of Federal
observers since the 1965 Voting Rights Act. Scaling back
observers make it difficult to detect and counter efforts to
intimidate voters, meaning, we don't even know how bad it is in
many States across the country.
So, Mr. Tucker, how do Federal observers play an important
role in enforcing the Voting Rights Act and how has their role
been diminished. I am sorry. How has it been diminished since
the Supreme Court's decision in Shelby County?
Mr. Tucker. Thank you so much for that question.
As I noted in my testimony, I think the easiest way to
think of Federal observers is with the acronym, PEP. A lot of
us, that is how we remember cases. It stands for progress,
enforcement, and preventing. Basically, they prevent
discrimination from occurring. They make voters feel more
comfortable. People are less likely, if they have people
watching, they are less likely to discriminate against minority
voters. They enforce because where they document instances in
which violations of the 14th or 15th amendment of the VRA have
occurred, DOJ has that information that they can prosecute it
criminally, if necessary.
Then they also measure progress because that is really
important. Many of the jurisdictions are covered under Federal
court orders, and it helps the Federal judge assess, how are
they doing? Are they actually coming into compliance with the
terms of the order?
Shelby County's impact has been twofold. One is that, as I
noted, by limiting the section 4 coverage formula for section
5, it essentially eliminates the mechanism by which the
Attorney General can certify jurisdictions for observers. Then
the second thing, as I also noted, is that Federal courts are
reluctant to find intentional or purposeful discrimination
which has limited the scope of section 8, 3(a) relief.
Ms. Bush. Thank you.
Ms. Butler, how have polling site closures
disproportionately impacted Black, Brown, and indigenous
voters?
Ms. Butler. Well, I tell you, most of the polling locations
in Georgia--there have been over 200 or so since the Shelby
decision--they are predominantly in African-American
communities. So, that is how it has impacted. It has made them
so that they consolidate them. People have to drive further
without--in rural areas without public transportation. Everyone
doesn't drive. So, it makes it difficult. It is just a barrier
for people to be able to exercise their right to vote freely.
Ms. Bush. Yes. Our right to vote is the foundation of our
democracy. The right to vote is our instrument for change. Who
we choose to represent us is a reflection of our struggles and
our aspirations as a country and a society. It angers me that
this fundamental right is often suppressed in this functioning
democracy.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Ms. Bush.
Now, I recognize from Houston, Texas, where they not only
sing, but they dance, Sheila Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chair, thank you for your generosity
and thank you for this hearing.
A statement of fact that seems to have eluded my great
friends on the other side of the aisle. The Supreme Court case
decided by the conservative court, the Shelby case, with a
decision that did not need to be rendered in the manner in
which it did, completely exploded the preclearance provisions
and provided the opportunities of freedom, emancipation voting
for African-American voters and other voters at the polls.
Let me be very clear. The very existence of my district and
others were because of the 1965 Voting Rights law. The very
existence of my current 18th congressional district is because
of the 1965 Voting Rights Act and its modifications and
reauthorization in the 2000s.
So, any commentary about poor voters, or African-American
voters not able to get ID cards, incredulous thinking about why
are we having these hearings, we are having these hearings
because the Supreme Court instructs us to have hearings so we
can fix and redo and put back in place a vital lifeline for
American voters of all kinds to have an equal right to vote and
that is clearly why.
Now, let me compare both the 4 years of the Trump
Administration where they barely opened the door of the Civil
Rights Division, and offered three weak section 2 cases,
compared to the Obama study in 2013, this major voting rights
under section 2 of the North Carolina case that brought
fairness to those in North Carolina, as my colleague said, two
Texas cases that involves fair redistricting and the voter ID.
In fact, my case right now is in the court. It is a voter
case, a voter ID district. I am at the mercy of the Voting
Rights Act to do the redistricting in Texas. Let me colleagues
know, and I have said it on today, on this stage, 2021. We will
have to fight to make sure that Texas is fair, so that the
districts are not stolen, because the basis of the growth in
Texas is based on authority to support African American.
So, that lays the groundwork for my questions. This is an
outrage to even be suggesting that we do not need that I think
is important. The Shelby, the justification relief upon the
conservative majority, the justification relied upon by the
conservative majority of the Supreme Court to strike down
section 4 of the Voting Rights Act, today, essentially comes
down and that of times change, Chief Justice has stated that
times have changed. What he neglected to add is the reason why
the times change for.
So, my question to you, Ms. Lakin, is explain why section 2
is not an adequate substitute for vigorous section 5
preclearance. My time is running because of the predicate that
I laid, but I would appreciate it. I have another question.
Ms. Lakin. Just quickly, it is incredibly expensive,
costly, complex, and time-consuming to bring section 2
litigation. As a result, elections can take place. Hundreds of
elected officials and millions of votes can be cast under
regimes that courts later find are discriminatory. There is no
way to compensate voters who have suffered from this
discrimination after the fact. There is no way to rerun those
elections. So, section 2 is simply, it is important, and it is
a vital tool for voting rights advocates, but it is not
sufficient.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The damage was already done with the
voting ID law when we had to come in on the section 2 in Texas.
Thank you so very much.
Ms. Butler, let me publicly apologize to you for having
given such wonderful service and then having your position
eliminated by a move that looks to me that they would imbalance
between the ultimate persons elected. It was based on party.
So, give me your sense what would have been helpful to you if
there was a preclearance as it would be for a voting mission
that you--Ms. Butler?
Ms. Butler. Well, preclearance, of course, would have made
sure that any of these changes would have gone through DOJ's
preclearance process and I do believe they wouldn't have gone
through. We have had to expend a lot of our time as being
plaintiffs in lawsuits for exact match for polling location
changes, and these types of changes wouldn't have occurred if
section 5 of the Voting Rights Act was operable. We wouldn't
have experienced this, I do believe, and it was strictly from
what I can determine right now, based on our objections to
barriers to the voting process.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Tucker, so many of my voters have stated, senior
citizens or people of color, they are bilingual. There are
various issues, but they have the right to vote. What is the
special emphasis of Federal observers how important those are?
Mr. Tucker?
Mr. Tucker. Yes. So, observers, as I mentioned, ensure that
voters are able to exercise their ballot freely, free of
discrimination, and free of intimidation. They are able to
enter the polling place. If they need assistance, they document
that. If it is not given, they document that as well.
They basically are the eyes and ears for the Attorney
General for Federal court and for private attorneys general
that are trying to enforce the 14th and 15th Amendments.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I want to submit into the record the following
if I could: Mail ballot drop-off locations; Houston Chronicle,
``Governor Abbott Limits Mail Ballot Drop-Off Locations''; NBC
News, ``Racist Voter Suppression''; Texas Tribune, ``It's
Harder to Vote in Texas''; and ``A Strong Voting Rights Act is
Needed Now More Than Ever'' The Hill, dated June 26th, 2021,
op-ed.
I ask unanimous consent to submit these in the record. Mr.
Chair, thank you, and that is why we are going to write a
strong Voting Enhancement Act.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you. They will be admitted into the
record.
[The information follows:]

MS. JACKSON LEE FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Cohen. We appreciate that.
That concludes today's hearing. It was an excellent
hearing. We should have probably just discussed the big lie,
and that is the reason why everything has changed with the
voting laws and with the need to have monitors and everything
else that we haven't had since in the past when we had
President Bush, a President in the tradition of Presidents.
Instead, we had the big lie, which Bill Barr [inaudible].
Thank all our witnesses for appearing today.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional written questions for the witnesses, or
additional materials for the record. The hearing is adjourned.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:10 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
