- THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT AT 75: ENSURING THE RULEMAKING PROCESS IS TRANSPARENT, ACCOUNTABLE, AND EFFECTIVE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT AT 75:
ENSURING THE RULEMAKING PROCESS IS
TRANSPARENT, ACCOUNTABLE, AND EFFECTIVE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ANTITRUST, COMMERCIAL,
AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 1, 2021

----------

Serial No. 117-47

----------

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-551                     WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chair
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania, Vice-Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Ranking Member
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr,       DARREL ISSA, California
Georgia                          KEN BUCK, Colorado
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAREN BASS, California               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island     TOM McCLINTOCK, California
ERIC SWALWELL, California            W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          CHIP ROY, Texas
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania,      VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
GREG STANTON, Arizona
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MONDAIRE JONES, New York
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CORI BUSH, Missouri

PERRY APELBAUM, Majority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ANTITRUST, COMMERCIAL,
AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW

DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island, Chair
PRAMILIA JAYAPAL, Washington, Vice-Chair

JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 KEN BUCK, Colorado, Ranking Member
ERIC SWALWELL, California            DARREL ISSA, California
MONDAIRE JONES, New York             MATT GAETZ, Florida
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
MADELINE DEAN, Pennsylvania          BURGESS OWENS, Utah
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
Georgia

SLADE BOND, Chief Counsel
DOUG GEHO, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

Wednesday, December 1, 2021

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable David N. Cicilline, Chair of the Subcommittee on
Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law from the State of
Rhode Island...................................................     2
The Honorable Ken Buck, Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law from the State of
Colorado.......................................................     3
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of New York...........................     4
The Honorable Jim Jordan, Ranking Member of the Committee on the
Judiciary from the State of Ohio...............................     6

WITNESSES

David Michaels, Professor, Milken Institute School of Public
Health, The George Washington University
Oral Testimony.................................................     9
Prepared Testimony.............................................    12
Wendy Wagner, Richard Dale Endowed Chair in Law, The University
of Texas at Austin School of Law
Oral Testimony.................................................    33
Prepared Testimony.............................................    35
Jacqueline Patterson, Founder and Executive Director, The
Chisholm Legacy Project
Oral Testimony.................................................    53
Prepared Testimony.............................................    55
Jennifer Mascott, Assistant Professor of Law; Co-Executive
Director, C. Boyden Gray Center for the Study of the
Administrative State, Antonin Scalia Law School
Oral Testimony.................................................    59
Prepared Testimony.............................................    61

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Materials submitted by the Honorable Pramila Jayapal, a Member of
the Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative
Law from the State of Washington, for the record
Statement from Robert Weissman and Jack Gillis, Co-Chairs,
Coalition for Sensible Safeguards............................    90
Statement from Blake Emerson, Assistant Professor of Law,
University of California Los Angeles School of Law...........    92
An article entitled, ``Administrative Answers to Major
Questions: On the Democratic Legitimacy of Agency Statutory
Interpretation,'' Minnesota Law Revew........................    94
An article entitled, ``We Ran OSHA. Here's the Truth About the
So-Called `Vaccine Mandate,' '' Time Magazine................   175
Statement from James Goodwin, Senior Policy Analyst, Center for
Progressive Reform...........................................   178
Statement from Martha Kinsella, Senior Counsel, Democracy
Program, Brennan Center for Justice..........................   237
A report entitled, ``Proposals for Reform, Volume II,''
National Task Force on Rule of Law and Democracy, Brennan
Center.......................................................   239

APPENDIX

A letter from Kara Rollins, Litigation Counsel, and Mark
Chenoweth, General Counsel, New Civil Liberties Alliance,
submitted by the Honorable Jim Jordan, Ranking Member of the
Committee on the Judiciary from the State of Ohio, for the
record.........................................................   314

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES FOR THE RECORD

Questions from the Honorable David N. Cicilline, Chair of the
Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law
from the State of Rhode Island, for the record.................   320
Response to questions from David Michaels, Professor, Milken
Institute School of Public Health, The George Washington
University, for the record...................................   330
Response to questions from Wendy Wagner, Richard Dale Endowed
Chair in Law, The University of Texas at Austin School of
Law, for record..............................................   335
Response to questions from Jacqueline Patterson, Founder and
Executive Director, The Chisholm Legacy Project, for the
record.......................................................   492

THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT
AT 75: ENSURING THE RULEMAKING
PROCESS IS TRANSPARENT, ACCOUNTABLE, AND EFFECTIVE

----------

Wednesday, December 1, 2021

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial,

and Administrative Law

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:13 a.m., in Room
2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. David N. Cicilline
[Chair of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Nadler, Cicilline, Raskin,
Jayapal, Scanlon, Dean, Johnson of Georgia, Jordan, Buck,
Gaetz, Johnson of Louisiana, Bishop, Spartz, Fitzgerald, and
Bentz.
Staff present: David Greengrass, Senior Counsel; John Doty,
Senior Advisor; Moh Sharma, Director of Member Services and
Outreach & Policy Advisor; Cierra Fontenot, Chief Clerk; John
Williams, Parliamentarian and Senior Counsel; Atarah McCoy,
Staff Assistant; Joseph Van Wye, Professional Staff Member/
Legislative Aide for Antitrust, Commercial, and Administrative
Law; Slade Bond, Chief Counsel for Antitrust, Commercial, and
Administrative Law; Phillip Berenbroick, Counsel for Antitrust,
Commercial, and Administrative Law; Mary Helen Wimberly,
Detailee for Antitrust, Commercial, and Administrative Law;
Ella Yates, Minority Member Services Director; Douglas Geho,
Minority Chief Counsel for Administrative Law; and Kiley
Bidelman, Minority Clerk.
Mr. Cicilline. The Subcommittee will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recesses of the
Committee at any time.
Good morning and welcome to today's hearing focused on the
Administrative Procedure Act and the rulemaking process. Before
we begin, I would like to remind Members that we have
established an email address and distribution list dedicated to
circulating exhibits, motions, or other written materials that
Members might want to offer as part of our hearing today. If
you would like to submit materials, please send them to the
email address that has been previously distributed to our
offices and we will circulate the materials to Members and
staff as quickly as we can.
I would also like to remind all Members and our Witnesses
that guidance from the Office of the Attending Physician states
that face coverings are required for all meetings in an
enclosed space such as Committee hearings, except when actively
speaking. I expect all Members on both sides of the aisle to
wear a mask for the duration of today's hearing.
I now recognize myself for purposes of making an opening
statement. Congress enacted the Administrative Procedure Act 75
years ago to establish guardrails to ensure that the rulemaking
system is open, effective, and accountable. The APA was enacted
in the wake of the New Deal which created new Federal programs
and agencies to respond to the Great Depression.
In the decades since, Congress has enacted landmark
legislation to promote the public interest and protect
children, workers, consumers, the environment, and society's
most vulnerable. These laws ensure that we have clean air to
breathe and clean water to drink, that food and medicine are
safe, that workers are safe on the jobsite and that borrowers
and investors do not get ripped off by predatory lenders. In
most cases, Congress tasked agencies with implementing these
laws through rulemaking, adjudication, and enforcement.
Today's hearing is an opportunity to discuss proposals to
update the Administrative Procedure Act and other laws to
ensure that the rulemaking process is effective, transparent,
accountable, and consistent with Congress' intent. Congress has
long directed agencies to implement and enforce the laws. It is
crucial that our agencies and our rulemaking process are
accountable and that they provide real benefits to improve
people's lives and make them better every single day.
It is equally critical that the rulemaking process aligns
with our democratic values. Administrative agencies should not
be yet another venue that gives powerful corporations and the
wealthy greater access and influence on the public, workers,
small businesses, and disadvantaged communities that do not
have armies of lobbyists.
It appears our current process is struggling in this
regard. As Professor Wendy Wagner will testify and I quote,

Only about half the rules that affect the public involve at
least one public nonprofit or other commentator that is not a
regulated entity. And in proceedings in which a public interest
representative does file a comment, that entity is almost
always outnumbered at least twofold and in some studies tenfold
when compared to industry comments.

Many corporations are still using the Big Tobacco Playbook
to influence and delay actions. As Dr. David Michaels will
testify, powerful corporations employ a strategy to convince
regulators that hazardous products are not so hazardous after
all or at least that there is so much uncertainty that there is
inadequate convincing evidence to increase protections for
Members of the public exposed to that product.
It is critical that we address this problem. Delaying often
directly contradicts Congress' intent when it instructs
agencies to keep the public safe and promote the public
interest. We must also make sure that Congress does not allow
the courts to undo the will of the people. For decades,
Congress has directed agencies to implement statute by issuing
rules. However, in recent years, the Supreme Court has begun to
threaten to dismantle the system of governance that has existed
for 75 years.
Conservatives on the Supreme Court appear posed to try to
achieve what they have been unable to win support for at the
ballot box. In a 2019 dissent in Gundy v. United States,
Justice Gorsuch, along with Chief Justice Roberts and Justice
Thomas, proposed to resurrect the long dormant nondelegation
doctrine, thus Gorsuch and his colleagues would invalidate the
long-standing practice of Congress directing agencies to
implement and execute the laws Congress enacts. This result
would jeopardize nearly every Federal program enacted under
both Democrats and Republicans since the 1930s.
As Justice Kagan correctly explained the logical conclusion
of Justice Gorsuch's dissent would require that most of
government is unconstitutional.
Today's hearing is an opportunity to support potential
paths forward for fixing these and other problems plaguing our
rulemaking system. With that in mind, I am proud to cosponsor
Congressman Jayapal's legislation to address many of these
issues to Stop Corporate Capture Act. This important measure
will ensure a more accountable, effective, and transparent
rulemaking system. It requires greater disclosure and
transparency in rulemaking proceedings, creates a public
advocate to provide for more robust public participation in
rulemaking and ensures that agency actions to implement and
enforce the law accurately reflect congressional
intent.
I look forward to hearing testimony from our esteemed panel
of Witnesses on these matters and their proposals to address
problems in our rulemaking system.
I now recognize the distinguished gentleman from Colorado,
Ranking Member Buck, for his opening statement.
Mr. Buck. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the
opportunity to review the Administrative Procedure Act and
examine ways in which we can better remove obtrusive government
regulations from everyday Americans' lives. This hearing raises
important issues about the growth of the Administrative State
and Executive overreach in recent decades and I look forward to
learning more from our Witnesses today.
Precisely why the Executive Branch is so prone to overreach
is a complex question, but there are two primary reasons that
can explain it. The first is an inescapable reality of human
nature that worried our Founding Fathers. People consistently
aspire to more power. The second has developed over time.
Congress has been unwilling to make hard decisions and as a
result has shifted responsibilities over to the Executive
Branch regardless of the constitutionality of such decisions.
In more recent history, allegiance to party over the
institution of Congress has sped up this shift. Under President
Obama, we Witnessed one of the largest expansions of the
administrative State in the modern era. By acting as though the
Constitution and Congress were merely obstacles to be overcome,
he dramatically increased the powers of the Executive Branch
and further relegated the Congress to a back seat role with the
Democrats in Congress cheering him on. He was so emboldened by
a Congress more interested in partisan wins than constitutional
principles that he believed with a pen and phone he could take
care of most of his legislative needs.
President Trump and Republicans in Congress took important
steps to reign in the Administrative State following the Obama
years. Several measures championed by the Trump Administration
with bipartisan support sought to increase public input and
transparent, streamline online guidance portals, and decrease
regulatory burdens on small businesses with limited resources.
Republicans in Congress have likewise proposed several
bills to restore congressional authority and cut through the
D.C. bureaucracy. I am proud to cosponsor several of these
measures including Representative Cammack's regulations from
the Executive in Need of Scrutiny Act which reestablishes
Congress' primacy, relative to the Administrative State, as
well as
Representative Fitzgerald's Separation of Powers
Restoration Act which reduces judicial deference to agency
interpretations of law.
Instead of continuing to deregulate and unleash the
American economy as we recover from COVID-19 pandemic, the
Biden Administration has chosen to revoke the policies Trump
implemented in what could be generously described as throwing
the baby out with the bath water. That decision, rooted in a
distaste of Trump instead of genuine policy concerns, has real-
world impact for millions of Americans. Already we have seen
what increased regulations on oil and gas companies can do to
the price of fuel in America which has climbed nearly 50
percent since President Biden took office.
In the Founders' vision, Congress served as a crucial check
on the powers of the Executive, collapsing the separation of
powers risks the American freedoms and brings us closer to 18th
century monarchies. Unfortunately, Congress continues to take a
back seat to the Executive Branch leading to increased
regulation and intruding into the lives of our constituents.
Congress must reclaim its power and stop delegating its
authority to the Executive Branch. Any reforms to the APA must
center on streamlining regulations and limiting executive
overreach.
I appreciate the Chair holding this hearing and I yield.
Mr. Cicilline. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the Chair of the Full Committee, the gentleman from New York,
Mr. Nadler, for his opening statement.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Since this enactment of
75 years ago, the Administrative Procedure Act has served as
the foundational law governing the processes and procedures of
the Federal rulemaking system. The safeguards established by
the APA ensure that the public has the right to know about
potential regulatory actions and the opportunity to provide
useful and timely input to improve the rules issued by Federal
agencies. They also provide the public with due process and
rulemaking and require agencies to provide a reasoned analysis
for their decisionmaking.
The APA, along with judicial review, places essential
guardrails on the rulemaking making process to protect the
public from arbitrary and lawless agency actions. In part,
because of these features, the APA serves as a quasi-
constitution for agency accountability and the rule of law.
Many administrative law experts believe that there is
significant room for improvement.
Today's hearing is an opportunity to examine whether the
APA is successfully serving its important goals. Some experts
argue that the various legal checks on agencies and the
oversight mechanisms that are in place need to be strengthened
or streamlined. Other leading scholars have explained that
because the benefits of agency actions often can be difficult
to quantify, agencies have become overly reliant on industry
supplied cost estimates making it more difficult to issue
strong regulations that protect the public.
In other cases, the regulatory system has routinely failed
to reflect adequately the input of front-line workers or
marginalized communities which are often denied a place at the
table during the process. In a complex and evolving world, it
is critical that we have an agile and effective regulatory
system to address the many challenges we face. That is my I
appreciate the efforts of the Subcommittee's Vice-Chair,
Representative Jayapal, to make the rulemaking process more
inclusive, accountable, and transparent. Her legislation, the
Stop Corporate Capture Act, removes opportunities and
incentives for fraud and deception in rulemaking proceedings
and eliminates unnecessary bottlenecks that delay important
regulatory initiatives.
I want to thank Congresswoman Jayapal for her leadership on
this legislation. I look forward to working with her, Chair
Cicilline, Ranking Member Buck, and Members of the Subcommittee
on these issues over the course of the next year.
Finally, as part of the Committee's oversight of the APA,
it is crucial that we ensure that Federal agencies are
accountable, effective, and responsive in ways that materially
improve people's lives. The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated
how important it is that agencies have the tools, resources,
and expertise they need to serve the public.
I was pleased to see that President Biden issued a
memorandum on his first day in office directing his
Administration to prioritize modernizing and improving the
rulemaking process. The memo explained that regulations that
promote the public interest are vital for tackling national
priorities and that streamlined regulatory review is crucial
for enabling the Government to swiftly respond to many pressing
issues facing our country.
Across party lines, 71 percent of Americans support strong
rules to protect the public, keep our workplaces safe, and
protect the environment. It is critical that agencies work
quickly and effectively to implement the laws reflecting the
policy choices of Congress.
I also look forward to working with the President's
permanent Director of the Office of Management and Budget and
the Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory
Affairs to ensure that Federal agencies are faithfully
implementing the law, as well as promoting and protecting the
public interest. These are critical roles.
I was happy to see that just last week, President Biden
nominated Shalanda Young to serve as OMB Director. I urge the
Senate to swiftly confirm her and for the President to move
quickly to name a permanent OIRA Administrator.
In closing, I thank Chair Cicilline for convening today's
hearing on this important topic and I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. Cicilline. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, the gentleman from
Ohio, Mr. Jordan, for his opening statement.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Administrative
Procedures Act is important, and I look forward to our hearing
today and hearing from our Witnesses, but I will tell you this,
what is important is the fact that the Justice Department
continues to treat parents as domestic terrorists. The fact
that the Attorney General hasn't been called back by our Chair
to answer our questions when 41 days ago he came in here and
misled us and more importantly misled the American people, I
just can't figure out.
I want the Committee to understand this. In a 24-day time
period, here is what happened. On September 29th, the National
School Boards Association writes a letter to the President of
the United States asking the President to use the PATRIOT Act
to go after moms and dads. One of the individuals who signed
that letter, Ms. Garcia, two days later, on October 1st, gets a
plum position on a board at the Department of Education. Three
days after that letter is sent to the President of the United
States asking him to treat parents as terrorists, the weekend
of October 2nd and 3rd, Tim Langan, the head of the
Counterterrorism Division at the FBI, is already having
conversations with the Justice Department on how to implement
the letters sent from the School Board Association to the
President of the United States.
So, think about that. The head of the Counterterrorism
Division at the FBI is already talking about how to implement
the memo that hasn't yet been sent from the Attorney General.
We know this because of questioning our colleague, Ms.
Stefanik, had of Mr. Langan, in front of the House Intel
Committee.
Of course, on October 4th, five days after the letter was
sent, we have the now-famous memo from the Attorney General
where he says we want to send to all 94 judicial districts
around the country, every single district, we want a dedicated
line of communication for threat reporting on parents, a snitch
line on moms and dads. All that happens in five days. I have
been around government a while and I have never seen government
move that fast in my life.
Two weeks later, October 20th, because of a brave
whistleblower, we know about an email sent from the same guy,
Mr. Langan, the head of the Counterterrorism Division of the
FBI, he sends an email to special agents in charge, FBI agents
around the country, saying put this threat tag, this
designation, this label, on parents who show up at school board
meetings and speak out against this curriculum that they don't
want their children taught.
The next day, a pretty important day, October 21st, the
Attorney General comes in front of the House Judiciary
Committee and says this: ``I could not imagine any circumstance
where parents are treated as domestic terrorists.''
The the only problem is 24 hours earlier, the head of the
Counterterrorism Division had sent out an email saying exactly
the opposite, using counterterrorism measures against parents,
against moms and dads.
Of course, the next day, October 22nd, the National School
Board Association, because of the political fallout, they
thought it was going to be a political winner, it turned out to
be a political loser for them, and the National School Board
Association withdraws the letter, and they say in that letter
we regret and apologize for the letter we sent on September
29th. All that happened in 24 days.
Again, I have never seen government move that fast in my
life.
Now, those 24 days are just part of the story though.
Because the most important part is what happened before
September 29th. The most important part is the coordination
between the White House and the School Board Association before
the letter was ever sent.
Here is what we know from FOIA requests from communications
made by Mr. Slaven and Ms. Garcia. Here is what Mr. Slaven
said: ``The White House requested additional information from
the National School Boards Association before the letter was
sent.''
Ms. Garcia said this: ``The National School Boards
Association communicated for several weeks with the White House
before the letter was sent.''
In other words, this thing didn't start, and this is the
real story. The National School Boards Association letter
wasn't the catalyst for this flurry of activity by the
Department of Justice against moms and dads. It wasn't the
catalyst; it was just the pretext. It didn't originate with the
School Boards Association, it started with the Biden
Administration and with the Garland Justice Department. They
were looking for an excuse, looking for a pretext to target, to
threat tag moms and dads. The fact that it has been 41 days
since the Attorney General sat at that desk and lied to this
Committee, and we haven't called him back? I just can't believe
it.
Mr. Chair, I hope the Chair of the Full Committee will ask
Mr. Garland to come back and answer our questions because we
have seen this pattern before frankly, and I know the
Democrats, they like to make fun of this, but we have seen this
pattern before. We saw this with the Justice Department in the
Obama-Biden Administration. We saw Mr. Comey and Mr. McCabe, we
saw that Justice Department, that FBI use the dossier as a
pretext to do what they wanted to do, namely go spy on the
Trump campaign. They knew the dossier was garbage, but they
used that as the pretext, as the excuse, to go do what they
already wanted to do. Same pattern here. Exact same pattern
here. They get the School Board Association to write the
letter; here is our excuse to do what we wanted to do, go after
moms and dads because we don't like them objecting to critical
race theory being taught in our schools.
You know what? The one thing they didn't bargain for, the
one thing they didn't bargain for was the fact that moms and
dads said we don't care what you do. We don't care if you try
to chill our speech. We don't care if you put a threat tag on
us, label us domestic terrorists, use counterterrorism measures
from the FBI against us, we don't care. We are going to stand
up for our kids.
The fallout from this, the backlash from this was
unbelievable. Of course, we saw it play out in Virginia. So
again, I would just say it has been 41 days, Mr. Chair, 41 days
since the Attorney General misled us, the Judiciary Committee,
and misled the American people.
I hope our next hearing, whenever that is, Mr. Garland is
in here answering a lot of questions we have. I am sure the
Democrats have some questions, too. The fact that he hasn't
been brought back is wrong and everyone knows it. I yield back.
Mr. Cicilline. Just to be clear so that the record is
complete, there are those of us who have reviewed all these
materials and believe that the Attorney General testified
consistent with everything that is contained in those
documents, but that is for another day.
Mr. Jordan. Would you yield for a question? Would the Chair
yield for a question?
Mr. Cicilline. I yield to the Chair of the Full Committee.
Chair Nadler. I just want to point out that, whatever
everyone thinks about what Mr. Jordan said, it has nothing to
do with the subject matter of this hearing.
Mr. Jordan. Would the Chair yield?
Mr. Cicilline. It is now my pleasure to introduce today's
Witnesses. Our first Witness is David Michaels, a Professor at
George Washington University Milken Institute's School of
Public Health.
Mr. Jordan. Could not imagine any circumstance where
parents are treated as domestic terrorists.
Mr. Cicilline. Additionally, he has held numerous--
Mr. Jordan. --Counterterrorism Division of the FBI--
Mr. Cicilline. The gentleman is out of order.
Mr. Jordan. If you would just yield for one second, I would
like to--
Mr. Cicilline. I will not. I am introducing Witnesses. I
will begin from the beginning so everyone can hear it.
Our first Witness is David Michaels, a Professor at George
Washington University's Milken Institute School of Public
Health. Additionally, he has held numerous posts at other
institutions including the City of New York Medical School, the
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, and the Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai. Professor Michaels also has extensive
experience working with executive agencies. He served as the
Assistant Secretary for Occupational Safety and Health at the
Department of Labor from 2009-2017, and as the Assistant
Secretary for Environment, Safety, and Health at the Department
of Energy from 1998-2001. Professor Michaels received a
Bachelor's Degree from the City College of New York and both
his Master's in Public Health and his Ph.D. from Columbia
University.
Today's second Witness is Wendy Wagner, the Richard Dale
Endowed Chair in Law at the University of Texas at Austin
School of Law where she has taught since 2001. She has held
Visiting and Associate Professorships at Columbia University
School of Law, Vanderbilt University Law School, and Case
Western Reserve University School of Law. Before beginning her
distinguished career in academia, Professor Wagner worked at
both the Department of Agriculture and the Environment and
Natural Resource Division of the Department of Justice.
Professor Wagner received a Bachelor's Degree from Hanover
College, a Master's Degree in Environmental Studies from Yale
School of Forestry and Environmental Studies, and her J.D. from
Yale Law School.
Our third Witness is Jacqueline Patterson. Ms. Patterson is
the Founder and Executive Director of the Chisholm Legacy
Project, an organization that strives to connect Black
communities on the front lines of climate justice with the
resources they need. Before founding the Chisholm Legacy
Project, Ms. Patterson established another organization focused
on social justice, the Women of Color United. From 2007-July
2021, Ms. Patterson served as the Senior Director for the NAACP
Environmental and Climate Justice Program. She currently sits
on multiple advisory boards, including the Center for Earth
Ethics and the Hive Fund for Gender and Climate Justice. Ms.
Patterson holds a Master's Degree in Social Work from the
University of Maryland, and a Master's Degree in Public Health
from Johns Hopkins University.
Today's last Witness is Jennifer Mascott, the Co-Executive
Director of the C. Boyden Gray Center for the Study of the
Administrative State, and Assistant Professor at George Mason
Antonin Scalia Law School. Professor Mascott has also held a
teaching position as an Adjunct Professor in Administrative Law
at the George Washington University School of Law. Before
joining the faculty at Antonin Scalia Law School, Professor
Mascott served as counsel at Consovoy McCarthy Park, LLC, from
April 2019-January 2021. Professor Mascott took leave to serve
as an Assistant Deputy Attorney General at the Office of Legal
Counsel at the Department of Justice. She currently serves as
an Executive Committee Member on the Federalist Society
Separation of Powers Practice Group. Professor Mascott received
a Bachelor's Degree from the University of Maryland at College
Park and a J.D. from the George Washington University School of
Law.
We welcome all our distinguished Witnesses and we thank you
for your participation. I will begin by swearing in our
Witnesses. I ask our Witnesses who are testifying in person to
please rise and I ask our Witnesses testifying remotely to turn
on their audio and make certain that I can see your face and
your raised right hand while I administer the oath.
Do you swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that the
testimony you are about to give is true and correct to the best
of your knowledge, information, and belief so help you God?
You may be seated. Let the record show the Witnesses
answered in the affirmative. Thank you again. Please note that
your written statements will be entered into the record in
their entirety. Accordingly, I ask that you summarize your
testimony in five minutes. To help you stay within that time
frame, there is a timing light in Webex. When the light
switches from green to yellow, you have one minute to conclude
your testimony. When the light turns red. It signals that your
five minutes has expired.
I now recognize Professor Michaels for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID MICHAELS

Mr. Michaels. Thank you, Chair Nadler, Chair Cicilline,
Vice-Chair Jayapal, Ranking Member Jordan, Ranking Member Buck,
Members of the Subcommittee. My name is David Michaels. I am an
epidemiologist and professor at the School of Public Health at
George Washington University. I am honored to have been invited
to provide testimony on updating the Administrative Procedure
Act including through the Stop Corporate Capture Act.
From 2009-2017, I served as Assistant Secretary of Labor
for OSHA, the longest-serving Administrator in the Agency's
history. I have also written many articles and two books on the
use of science and regulation.
Public health tragedies from cigarettes and asbestos to the
climate crisis and the widespread PFAS contamination of our
drinking water have necessitated the growth of America's public
health environmental regulatory system. The objective of the
laws and regulations and the agencies empowered to enforce them
is not only to stop the damage and prevent future harm, but
also to maintain and strengthen the free market system.
Laws and regulations are the underpinning of our economic
system. They define market structure and property rights while
attempting to ensure that property rights don't intrude on
personal liberties. It is clear that our current system of
protecting the public's health, safety, wellbeing, and
environment does not function well. We are in a constantly
changing world characterized by the rapid appearance of new
hazards and crises that can significant and potentially
cataclysmic effects.
We need an agile, regulatory system to address many
difficult challenges: The climate crisis, COVID-19 variants,
environmental injustice, income and wealth and equality, the
affordable housing shortage, antibiotic resistant organisms,
the opioid overdose epidemic, and the threats to financial
stability proposed by crypto currency to name just a few. We
need good research to address these.
The science community has long recognized the funding
effect. Studies funded by a private sponsor tend to deliver the
results the sponsor wants. Recognizing the financial conflicts
of interest and influence of study, virtually every scientific
and medical journal requires authors to disclose potential
conflicts especially who paid for the study.
Published studies are now accompanied by a statement by the
authors of sources of their funding and potential conflicts to
alert readers and regulators to look more closely, knowing that
financial interests may have influenced the results. In
contrast, the Federal Government does not require any such
disclosures when accepting public comments on proposed
regulations, permits, or other actions or documents.
The Stop Corporate Capture Act requires that participants
in our regulatory system provide conflict disclosures
comparable to those required by scientific journals. When I ran
OSHA, we asked for the same disclosures from parties submitting
technical comments in our rulemaking to strengthen silica, and
beryllium exposure standards. This helped us identify material
produced by conflicted scientists, especially those mercenary
studies produced for the sole purpose of delaying or weakening
public health protection lists.
While disclosure is a useful step, it is not enough. The
deeper problem is the financial conflict itself since this is
what shapes the research. Under the APA, studies conducted by
conflicted scientists are still entered into the regulatory
proceedings and agents currently must consider them.
The Tobacco Playbook manufacturing scientific uncertainty
about the product's harms is often done by scientists employed
by product defense firms whose business model involves
producing studies that provide whatever conclusion the client
wants and can pay for it, generally, minimizing their product's
harm.
In my books, I document how product defense firms have done
this dirty work for manufacturers of cigarettes, asbestos,
fossil fuels, diesel engines, PFAS, and a long list of other
deadly products.
The Subcommittee should consider amending legislation to
add teeth to the disclosure requirements. If an agency
determines a study is irreparably tainted by conflict of
interest, the agency should be able to exclude it from the
records.
The Stop Corporate Capture Act has many other valuable
improvements to the regulatory system including establishment
of an Office of Public Advocate and the private right of action
for regulatory failures.
I strongly support these provides and I address them more
fully in my written testimony. I applaud your efforts here
today and I look forward to your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Michaels follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Professor. I know recognize
Professor Wagner for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF WENDY WAGNER

Ms. Wagner. Chair Nadler, Chair Cicilline, Vice-Chair
Jayapal, Ranking Member Jordan, Ranking Member Buck, and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today.
As you know, the regulatory State is vital to the healthy
function of our government, and the Administrative Procedure
Act lies at the very heart of that healthy functioning.
Yet, 75 years of piecemeal oversight by the courts, the
Executive Branch, and even Congress has taken its toll on the
effectiveness of the APA. Some of these added requirements,
particularly those coming from the Executive Branch and the
courts, work at cross purposes.
Others are ineffective or even backfiring, and all these
problems are long standing and have been around at least since
the Reagan and Clinton Administrations.
Now, to understand these problems, it's important to
contrast what the APA promises to do on paper with what is
actually happening in practice. This vantage point, I think,
also highlights the excellent progress Representative Jayapal's
bill makes in revitalizing the APA.
So, on paper, the APA provides procedural requirements that
are designed to ensure agencies are held accountable both for
their scientific analyses and for their policy decisions. For
example, when an agency promulgates a rule, it must first
publish its initial proposal for public comments.
It must then, by the terms of the APA, consider all those
comments, and if the agency fails to do this in ways that run
afoul of the APA, the courts can force the agency to start over
again.
This process is, in fact, lauded by a number of
administrative law scholars as providing an excellent model for
robust democratic deliberation.
So, that's APA on paper. What is actually happening in
practice? I'll identify two problems.
First, the design of administrative process is very much
concerned with ensuring agencies bring their very best science
to the table. Seventy-five years of implementation has yielded
some major cracks in this foundational goal.
Foremost among them is the risk of politicization of agency
expertise. There is a long-established practice within most
Executive Branch agencies that position the political decision-
maker at the apex of all agency decisions including the
scientific record.
Thus, while the agency's technical experts may conduct an
impeccable synthesis of the available scientific literature
bearing on a policy question, the political officials are
positioned, if they find it useful to their interests, to edit,
change, including experts to come in and pick up some of the
available scientific green on a policy question.
The political officials are positioned they find it useful
to their interests to edit, change, or otherwise manipulate
that scientific record before it is ever made public. They can
even select the Members of the peer review panels.
Second, the APA is designed to hold agencies accountable to
the public. Yet, the hodgepodge of judicial decisions and
Executive Branch policies sometimes have the effects today of
creating incentives for agencies to be behave less accountably
and to find ways to work around Congress' requirements set out
in the APA.
The academic literature is overflowing with examples, and
I'll just highlight one. As noted, under the APA agencies must
solicit public comment on their proposed rules, but they need
not ensure that the resulting participation includes all
affected groups.
So, to get the rule through, in fact, some courts actually
negotiate those proposed rules with the most litigious groups.
Empirical evidence bears out that agencies sometimes negotiate
the rule proposals with industry in advance before it's
published.
We also see, as Chair Cicilline mentioned, that in about
half of the rules that protect the public, the public itself
and the public interest groups are nowhere to be found in
commenting.
Yet, all this is irrelevant to judicial review. To reverse
these problems and many more, I commend Representative
Jayapal's bill. It provides a much-needed public advocate.
It institutes controls on the quality of science used for
regulation and it provides greater transparency over White
House review, and that's a small sampling of what it
accomplishes.
I think still more legislative direction is needed in this
area. My written testimony includes a number of complementary
proposals, but the highest priority is for Congress simply to
place the burden on the agencies to establish why we should
trust their processes both in terms of their expertise and in
terms of their accountability.
One thing we have learned over the last 75 years
prescriptive requirements can be worked around and backfire.
General demands for explanation can go a very long way to
enhance agency accountability.
An agency, for example, should explain how it has
firewalled its scientific experts from political pressure. It
should explain how public deliberations included meaningful
deliberations with all major affected groups throughout the
entire rulemaking process.
Mr. Cicilline. Professor Wagner?
Ms. Wagner. In return, the courts could be directed by
Congress to afford the most excellent agency processes greater
deference.
Mr. Cicilline. Professor Wagner, your time has long
expired. We're going get to questions and answers, if that's--
Ms. Wagner. I am sorry, but I applaud your efforts. I did
not see my red light is on.
Mr. Cicilline. There is always room for applause.
Ms. Wagner. Okay. Thank you. I look forward to your
questions.
[The statement of Ms. Wagner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cicilline. Thank you so much.
I now recognize Ms. Patterson for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JACQUELINE PATTERSON

Ms. Patterson. Thank you so much and thank you for having
me and for hosting this critical conversation.
Our communities have seen the impact of the outsized
influence of corporate entities on rulemaking for environmental
regulations. EPA records from 1994-2009 found that industry
groups held a virtual monopoly over informal communications
that happened before proposed rules were publicly available.
On average, industry groups engaged 170 times more in
informal communications with EPA than public interest groups.
These were communications that occurred before any proposed
rules were even written.
By the time the notices were published, comments from the
public were buried in an avalanche of well-funded heavily
credentialed comments from industry insiders and their highly--
paid allies.
Industry groups submitted 81 percent of the comments during
the notice and comment period, compared to public interest
groups who submitted a mere four percent.
Furthermore, between 2001-2011, the Office of Information
and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA)--met with five times as many
representatives of industry than with people representing
public interest groups.
The University of Wisconsin at Madison found a strong
correlation between interest groups lobbying OIRA and the
changes in the final rules that favored those very interest
groups.
So, for us, this is important because the people who are
paying the price for a regulatory system that's being governed
de facto by polluters include communities who are on the front
lines of the health, social, and economic impacts due to
unregulated toxic exposure, communities who are on the front
lines of near-roadway air pollution from the under regulated
combustible engine, communities and nations disproportionately
impacted by climate change due to barely-leashed greenhouse gas
emissions, and 76,000 coal miners who have died of Black lung
disease because coal dust went grossly under regulated.
Meanwhile, the average annual compensation of a coal
company's CEO is $9.8 million. The profits made by the energy
sector are in the billions as a result of a hamstrung
regulatory system that paves the path for the companies to
operate without rules that protect public health and wellbeing.
When the public participates in the rulemaking process, it
truly makes a difference. We have submitted written testimony
and organized five multi-state delegations to provide in-person
testimony on mercury and air toxic standards, new source
performance standards, and beyond. School teachers, nurses,
firefighters, community leaders, youth, aunties, uncles,
participated in these proceedings.
As a result, we had an EPA official in tears as she
listened to the testimony of a grandfather from Steubenville,
Ohio, with his grandson on his lap as he testified on the air
quality he wants for his community and for his grandson.
A coal company showed us its stripes as it cut off annual
support to an NAACP branch saying, we only support our friends
and your organization talks bad about coal to the EPA, so
you're no longer our friend. In the end, we saw equity-based
changes in the language for proposed rulemaking on air quality.
Government entities are already putting infrastructure in
place to ensure that they are truly acting as taxpayer-
supported public service.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission established the
Office of Public Participation. The Government Services Agency
is engaging in a listening relationship with the NAACP's
Centering Equity in the Sustainable Building Sector Initiative.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has established a
memorandum of agreement with the NAACP and with the Institute
of the Black World.
So, we know what's possible. For our nation's regulatory
system, going forward, it literally holds the lives and
wellbeing of the people and the planet in its portfolio of
responsibilities, so we offer these recommendations.
Develop a parallel to the FERC Office of Public
Participation throughout our regulatory apparatus, and then the
capacity of this office must be significant, including
technical assistance providers, community liaisons, popular
educators, communicators and beyond to ensure a robustly
successful effort of meaningful engagement and informed
decision making.
Make rule language user friendly. It should not take a law
degree to interpret these draft rules. Of the people, by the
people, for the people. We must take these words seriously.
Find the communities that are on the margins and develop a
system with a thorough set of mechanisms to engage those
communities. Only the rising tide that builds from the margins
inward will lift all boats. Pardon for the mixed metaphor.
Finally, develop legislation governing and preventing money
interests from having access to rule developers and decision-
makers. This includes guidelines around industry officers and
executives becoming the decision-makers themselves by going
into elected office and then working in allegiance and
collusion with the industry.
So, I'll close by saying that only with the above can we
begin to deliver equal protection under the law. Only then can
we begin to dream of the true Promised Land, one that lives up
to the tenet of liberty and justice for all.
More details are in my written comments. Thank you so much.
[The statement of Ms. Patterson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Ms. Patterson.
I now recognize Professor Mascott for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER L. MASCOTT

Ms. Mascott. Thank you so much, Chair Nadler, Chair
Cicilline, Vice-Chair Jayapal, Ranking Member Jordan, and
Ranking Member Buck, and Members of the Subcommittee for having
me here today.
I'm Jennifer Mascott, a Professor at Scalia Law School, co-
lead of the C. Boyden Gray Center for the Study of the
Administrative State and currently serve as a public member on
the Federal agency the Administrative Conference for the United
States.
I'm so pleased to be here today to talk about this very
important topic. I'm glad the Committee is looking into
bringing more rulemaking accountability and transparency and
reexamining the Administrative Procedure Act 75 years out.
As my written statement talks about, the APA has not been
meaningfully changed on the rulemaking procedural side in the
75 years since it was enacted in 1946 as a textual matter, but
as a practical matter, through various judicial opinions and
agency practices over the years, arguably, today, the way that
rulemaking works is quite different from the way in which the
original text of the APA provided the procedures to occur.
So, some of the ways in which practice deviates from the
statutory text Congress could address, perhaps, by revisiting
the APA and either specifying ways in which agencies can bring
more transparency and go back to the original text of the APA
or updating the APA procedures to reflect 21st century
practices.
Some specific examples are that the APA, for example,
provided for a category of formal rulemaking where parties
would have a chance to come and give oral presentation of their
views, be questioned, introduce testimony.
In the 1970s, because of a Supreme Court opinion, the bar
for requiring agency formal rulemaking has been made so high
that, as a practical matter, that category of agency action
really no longer exists.
The Department of Agriculture sometimes uses formal
rulemaking, but to the extent that Congress thinks agencies
should be subject to more procedures, give more public input,
the formal rulemaking category could be expanded.
The consequence of the formal rulemaking category being
conscripted was that more procedures were put into the informal
rulemaking category, which I think today notice and comment
rulemaking actually, arguably, is quite different from the text
of the APA as well, which provided really only that agencies
provide a written opportunity to provide comments and agencies
provide a statement of basis and purpose in the final rule.
Today, as some of my colleagues have noted, as a practical
matter, rules are hundreds of pages long. Lots of explanation
can be very unpredictable in the courts which rules are going
to be upheld, which are not, and agency practice can be
inconsistent across the board. So, I would recommend Congress
revisit that procedure as well.
The final consequence that is arguably the most damaging is
that because informal rulemaking notice and comment rulemaking
has become so challenging, agencies have really been motivated
to do quite a lot through informal guidance statements--
interpretive statements--that might be posted on websites,
issued as letters, suggesting that maybe an agency will engage
in an investigation or bring a charge and sometimes is taken, I
think, as a just threat or concern by risk-averse American
families and businesses and individuals and corporations.
So, through informal guidance documents agencies often are
significantly impacting the behavior of the American people
without having to go through any procedural requirements at
all.
So, one thing I also think Congress could consider is the
Trump Administration had several Executive Orders to address
these practices, encouraging transparency and guidance
documents, making sure that guidance documents were not
imposing new standards, were not being used to issue threats,
were not being relied on in adjudication.
It also had an Executive Order requiring agencies to make
clear what level of intent would be chargeable in a criminal
offense.
So, President Biden has rescinded those EOs but Congress,
of course, could take legislative action to impose those
procedural requirements across the board.
I think the reason that the hearing today is so important
is because today, as time has gone on, more and more actions
are being taken that impacts American lives and families and
local communities through rulemaking.
So, I agree that a very important consideration is bringing
more accountability and transparency. I think at the end of the
day, less regulation in the Executive Branch, more policymaking
by Congress, will ultimately be the solution, because as we're
seeing today and, I predict, we'll see in the question and
answer, there can be an awful lack of consensus questions about
how agencies should act. Very challenging to figure out how to
make democratically accountability agencies that are run by
just one individual or one set of individuals.
So, the Madisonian model, of course, in our founding
documents of separation of powers policymaking in Congress. So,
if the courts are not going to require more specificity in
legislation, Congress could always decide on its own to revisit
the laws that govern agencies and make very clear what the
requirements are going to be that agencies have to follow and
bring kind of that separation of powers brought to bear either
through the Separation of Powers Restoration Act--the REINS
Act--or other legislative proposals on the table.
Thank you so much.
[The statement of Ms. Mascott follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jayapal. Thank you for your opening statements. We will
now proceed under the five-minute rule for questions, and I'll
begin by recognizing myself for five minutes.
Many Americans are taught in civics class that Congress
passes a law and that's it. The reality is that major
legislation enacted by Congress that addresses climate change,
workers' rights, healthcare, must also be implemented and
enforced by the Executive Branch to become a reality.
To do that, Federal agencies go through a process of
administrative rulemaking or the creation of regulation that
enforces the law.
Unfortunately, this has turned into a shadowy process where
special interests and big corporations send a bevy of lobbyists
to make sure that the rules benefit them.
There's limited transparency or accountability in the
creation and enforcement of regulation, little opportunity for
the average citizen to combat industry-backed research,
meetings, testimony that's too often vying against the public
interest and, at the end of the day, allowing corporations and
special interests to essentially capture our government with
their massive and undue influence on Federal agency.
Mr. Michaels is the former Assistant Secretary of Labor for
OSHA. You've seen firsthand how companies thwart regulation
through funding sham academic studies or powerful lobbying
groups.
What impact do these instruments of power have on the
administrative process and how does this impact workers?
Mr. Michaels. Representative Jayapal, thank you for that--
Ms. Jayapal. You need to turn your microphone on. Thank
you.
Mr. Michaels. Representative Jayapal, thank you for that
question.
It's a huge impact. The wealthy corporations and wealthy
individuals know how to impact the system in so many ways from
the very beginning where they have lawyers who are preparing
documents. They hire scientists to produce studies they know
they have findings that will impact regulation.
There's a revolving door, and so they hire very senior
administrative officials who then can help them get through
regulation, and the most sort of lurid examples I think
everybody's aware of is that Perdue Pharmacy pharmaceuticals
hired the FDA regulator, essentially, who looked at the opioids
that they were producing to then work with them to make sure
they could sell more opioids, really leading to this disastrous
opioid epidemic.
The public doesn't have an equal say in this and that's
exactly the problem, and the agencies are outgunned, as you
heard from Professor Wagner. Knowing that they will end up in
court, regulators often sort of pull backward and they
negotiate with themselves even to protect the agency and to get
something through.
The result is that our regulations are weaker, they're not
protective, and people are paying the price through illness,
through death, and through a destroyed environment.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Professor.
Ms. Patterson, you're an expert in environmental and
climate justice, and you've seen how the rulemaking process
falls short in considering social equity and environmental
regulation.
Congress has required agencies to consider a host of
industry-friendly economic factors when making rules but it
hasn't done the same for elements like equity and justice.
How can Congress address that oversight?
Ms. Patterson. Thank you. So, one example is to make sure
that we actually do have those avenues for public engagement in
this conversation.
So, as I talked about the Office of Public Participation
and then also really building the capacity of agencies to be
able to--and through that in building the capacity of agencies
to be able to engage directly with communities.
So, communities and public interest groups know the types
of mechanisms that we need to have to ensure that we're
delivering equity and they need to be able to be at the table
with equal status to be able to put those ideas forward.
Ms. Jayapal. Very important. Thank you.
Professor Wagner, the Office of Information and Regulatory
Affairs is responsible for reviewing proposed regulation by
agencies, but it's often criticized for having too much
control. OIRA instructs agencies to make substantial changes to
rules, sometimes delaying the implementation of regulation
altogether.
How does Congress work to make OIRA more efficient?
Ms. Wagner. Thank you for that question.
Actually, your bill does an excellent job on that front.
First, it suggests that OIRA can't even be involved with an
agency rule until the agency checks that rule into OIRA. Right
now, OIRA works upstream before the review process.
Second, your bill requires much more transparency on the
nature of the changes. I think it would be even more helpful to
know why the changes were made, maybe even put some
prohibitions on changes to the scientific record, especially
scientific records that have prior been peer reviewed by expert
panels before they hit OIRA.
So, it could go even further. I think putting some
transparencies protections in place that are enforceable would
go a long way.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you so much.
As legislators it's our responsibility to restore the
public's faith in our government and my bill vastly improves
that process.
My time is expired. I yield back, and I now recognize the
gentleman from Florida for five minutes, Mr. Gaetz.
Mr. Gaetz. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Patterson, in Chair Cicilline's introduction of you, he
referenced your master's in public health and so I want to ask
a question about public health. Is there a different chemical
composition for vaccines in White neighborhoods as opposed to
non-White neighborhoods?
Ms. Patterson. Yes. So, my master's in public health does
not mean that I have in any way had any access to be able to
examine the different compositions of different vaccines that
are provided in different neighborhoods.
Mr. Gaetz. Do you have any basis to believe that the
vaccines being administered in White neighborhoods versus non-
White neighborhoods are different?
Ms. Patterson. I don't have any basis to even begin to
evaluate that question because, again, I don't have access to
the data samples or anything like that.
Mr. Gaetz. What about the batching process? Is there
something called a White batch of vaccines as opposed to a
batch of vaccines that would be intended for non-White people?
Ms. Patterson. Not that I've heard of.
Mr. Gaetz. Not that you've heard of.
It's interesting. I found a tweet of yours from December 3,
almost a year ago today, 2020, where you tweeted, ``My COVID-19
vaccination plan: Go to the Whitest neighborhood I can find to
make sure my dose comes from a White batch.''
How should we think about that tweet?
Ms. Patterson. As the humor that it was intended, albeit
kind of a dark humor in terms of the reality of the Tuskegee
experiments and so forth in our community.
So, there was a whole string of commentary that we had
following from that about how it was a shame that we even have
to think in these types of terms. So that's where--
Mr. Gaetz. Well, it would seemingly be more of a shame if
we thought in these terms without a basis, and I understand
people, put things on Twitter sometimes that are jokes.
I noted in response to your tweet an account called Urban
Dashboard replied, ``You have a great sense of humor but too
painful to laugh at that joke,'' and then you replied, ``I
know. It's all too painful all day every day, and as I said, I
was barely joking because it's real!''
Ms. Patterson. Yes. Yes. The situation is real.
Mr. Gaetz. So, is it real that there's different--because
you talked about a White--are White batches real?
Ms. Patterson. As I said before, that the reference was
putting in context this larger conversation about the
differential access to affordable and quality healthcare in our
community. So, it shouldn't be taken literally.
Mr. Gaetz. No, but you're--I have to correct you. Oh, it
shouldn't be taken literally. Okay. Well, I guess my question
is, you gave testimony today about your concern over the
monopolistic sharing of information, about the criticality of
the input of public interest groups, about we have to stop the
politicization of agency decisions. Do you think it damages
public health and do you think it damages the credibility of
public interest groups like yours when you put out that your
personal vaccination plan is to go to the Whitest neighborhood
so that you can ensure that your dose comes from the Whitest
batch?
Ms. Patterson. Absolutely not, because, A, I didn't--
absolutely not.
Mr. Gaetz. You don't think that's dangerous? So, how do I
know if a batch is a White batch? If I wanted to follow--
Ms. Patterson. Again, I've already--you're asking me a
question--
Mr. Gaetz. If wanted to follow your vaccination plan and I
wanted one from the White patch, too, where would I go?
Ms. Patterson. Again, you're being facetious, and I've
already responded to the question, and so I'm not going to
respond to it again because there's no new information to
provide.
Mr. Gaetz. Do you think that being facetious about race-
based vaccination issues is dangerous? Because we have seen
data that there are communities of color that are more
skeptical of vaccines. Do you think that facetious comments
like this are helpful?
Ms. Patterson. So, I think that they're important to raise
the dialogue about why it is that people are more skeptical. I
think it's important to raise the dialogue about how you can
ensure that we do have--you're interrupting me.
Mr. Gaetz. I only have a few moments left so what's--
Ms. Patterson. You're interrupting me. You're interrupting
me while I'm answering your question.
Mr. Gaetz. Yeah, I'm interrupting you because I only have a
few seconds left.
Ms. Patterson. No, you're asking me a question. I'm asking
the question and now you're breaking into my response.
Mr. Gaetz. What's the most important part of the dialogue
to understand ``from a White batch?''
Ms. Patterson. So, I think it's not really a legitimate
seeking of information when you're breaking in when I'm
actually responding to the question.
Mr. Gaetz. It's always legitimate to ask Witnesses before
the Committee about their own statements and it's--
Ms. Patterson. It's not legitimate to interrupt when
somebody's trying to answer the question.
Mr. Gaetz. Okay. Do you regret this tweet? Since it seems
to be causing some consternation, do you regret having sent it?
Ms. Patterson. No. Because it's causing consternation with
you, it caused an interesting and important dialogue. That is
not one that I'm the only one having, that a number of us are
having in the community.
Mr. Gaetz. Again, but I think that sometimes that dialogue
can metastasize into disinformation and can actually harm the
people that you say you're here to help.
My time is up. I yield back.
Ms. Patterson. No, it actually acknowledges the reality of
what we all think.
Mr. Gaetz. There's so reality of a White batch. That's just
something you made up.
Ms. Jayapal. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
I now recognize the Chair of the Full Committee, Mr.
Nadler.
Chair Nadler. Thank you. Professor Wagner, I'm particularly
concerned that the Supreme Court may resurrect the
nondelegation doctrine as a means of undoing the ability of
agencies to implement statutes such as the Clean Air Act.
Last month, the Supreme Court granted certiorari in West
Virginia v. EPA in which this question will arise. Can you
explain what the nondelegation doctrine is and what its
resurrection would do to major legislation that Congress has
passed in the last 80 years and what the stakes are if lower
courts begin applying this doctrine?
Ms. Wagner. Yes. Thank you, Chair, for that question. The
nondelegation doctrine is a doctrine the courts have pulled out
of the Constitution, a few words, that Congress shall make the
laws, has a lawmaking power.
So, the courts have interpreted that as requiring Congress
to make all laws without being able to delegate broad
discretion and delegations to the agencies.
As an aside, there's a lot of literature now, particularly
two important articles, that suggests there's no historic basis
for even thinking there is such a doctrine in the Constitution.
Putting that aside, over the last 200 years the courts have
only applied the nondelegation doctrine twice in 1935, in fact,
because it has sort of a flimsy basis.
So, this is something we have worried about from time to
time but hasn't really come to the fore. So, what has happened
in Gundy is that we see some conservative justices in their
dissent suggesting a whole new test for thinking about when
Congress has delegated too much lawmaking power to the
agencies.
They say that statutes could be unconstitutional,
potentially, if the agencies have more power than simply
filling in the details or making fact finding. So, the minute
agencies go beyond that there's a threat.
This could be catastrophic, in fact, for the administrative
State if that kind of dissenting position became the majority
position because almost--I think the last count I saw was 99
percent of Congress' statutes would essentially be at risk of
being unconstitutional under that theory of the nondelegation
doctrine.
Hopefully, the justices won't go that far. If I were a
Member of Congress, I would be very concerned about this new
nondelegation doctrine trend because instead of Congress
deciding what its lawmaking power is and how much it wants to
delegate policy to agencies, it will be the courts deciding
what Congress' lawmaking power is.
Chair Nadler. Thank you. In recent years, Federal courts
have begun to challenge long-standing precedent and in cases
where Congress has not provided clear direction courts
generally defer to an agency's reasonable interpretation of a
statute the agency administers. This is known as the Chevron
deference.
Chevron was a unanimous decision. After 30 years, why are
courts now beginning to question agency deference, and if
courts eliminate Chevron deference and decide cases under de
novo review, how will that affect the ability of an agency to
do the jobs Congress has delegated to them?
Ms. Wagner. Thanks again for the question. I think the
question is a really hard one. I, unfortunately, would probably
cite to ideology as the shift in Chevron and the approach to
Chevron.
As the courts give less and less deference to agencies,
we're going to see a lot more litigation against agencies.
We're going to see rules come even slower, less protection of
the public health, because it's just a feeding ground for lots
of litigation.
So, as agencies lose deference, we will see a lot less
protection of the public health than already is the case.
Chair Nadler. Thank you.
Ms. Patterson, prior to the agency issuing a significant
rule, the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs reviews
the rule. That review process often includes input from and
meetings with affected industry stakeholders.
In your experience, is the public, particularly front-line
communities and vulnerable groups most likely to be affected by
an agency's action, involved and represented during this review
process? If not, how is the absence of these stakeholders
likely to affect the rules that agencies issue?
Ms. Patterson. Thank you so much.
The absence of the stakeholder voice and engagement is
impacted by the people making the decisions not having the full
understanding of what the impacts are and, therefore, the
rulemaking not incorporating those very impacts.
So, through not having the voice of communities that can
speak to the impact and also speak to what types of remedies
actually work for them--and we all know the adage that the
people closest to the problems are also people closest to the
solutions--without that input then, again, the rule is myopic.
The rulemaking can be myopic and missing those critical voices
and analysis. Thank you.
Chair Nadler. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Jayapal. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Johnson, for five minutes.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to at the outset here thank Ranking Member Jordan
for what he said several moments ago continuing to draw
attention to the weaponization of the Department of Justice
under Attorney General Merrick Garland and it is--unlike what
Mr. Nadler said earlier, it is directly relevant to the subject
of this hearing.
There is a theme. The theme is the continued abuse by the
Executive Branch of our constitutional norms, that the
Executive Branch is doing far beyond what is the scope of what
it's designed to do and the agency problem is a big part of
that with regard to the specific subject of this hearing.
There's four key points that I think just, really, we need
to make.

(1)  Over regulation harms individuals and families and small
businesses and the economy. Federal agencies are now wielding
just such a tremendous amount of power that unelected
bureaucrats abuse it all the time. They are unelected, they're
unaccountable, and that kind of power was never anticipated by
the Founders of this country.
(2)  President Biden has revoked, of course, as we have noted,
some of President Trump's most significant steps to check the
Administrative State. In fact, he's done the opposite.
The Biden Administration wants to radically expand the
Administrative State and even allow agencies to Act outside
their statutory authorization without impunity. The Biden
Administration's overreach warrants congressional oversight.
(3)  The modern Administrative State presents serious concerns
about agencies' political accountability and about preserving
individual freedom.
Long-standing features of the Administrative State
conflict with constitutional principles including the
separation of powers between the three branches of government.
(4)  Finally, Congress really does need to Act in this space.
Congress should never consider proposals to check the Biden
Administration--we should consider proposals to check the Biden
Administration's progressive vision.

This vision they have is that we would have rule by woke
bureaucrats. We have to restore congressional authority
relative to the Administrative State and better shield the
liberties of the American people.
With that, I wanted to ask Professor Mascott a couple of
questions about the APA. Of course--for folks watching at home,
the Administrative Procedure Act was passed into law in 1946.
Of course, it was in response to President Franklin
Roosevelt's New Deal, and the New Deal, of course, caused the
Executive Branch to balloon with the creation of many new
agencies to implement his social and economic programs.
The legislation had noble intent, of course. It was
supposed to create uniformity across the Federal government. It
was supposed to include the public in the agency processes and
reinforce the role of judicial review of agency actions.
What's happened is really the opposite, in many ways. The
Supreme Court instituted the Chevron deference, which we all
know, and the APA has allowed Federal agencies to, largely, go
unchecked.
So, Professor, just a quick question. Can you give us just
a quick summary of the separation of powers and nondelegation
principle arguments against the Chevron deference doctrine?
Ms. Mascott. Yes. I mean, the key separation of powers
arguments as you're alluding to, obviously, the constitutional
structure meant to protect individual liberty is to have three
separate branches each playing a different role.
So, the general idea as it relates to the APA and the
hearing would be, as folks have talked about, the role of
Congress in legislating and setting policy and that has a very
important function, obviously, because the Members here, of
course, can directly represent electoral interests to families
and businesses at home, across the country.
So, there's not a single bit of action that will ever be
able to be taken to bring that level of accountability and
transparency and democracy and freedom from single
administrative agencies acting in the separate branch of
government. The Executive Branch was meant to carry out the
law.
Then, finally, the Chevron doctrine, as you've noted, is
the question about on questions of law when an executive agency
is supposed to be interpreting the power that Congress has
given to it through a law who is responsible for making that
determination.
So, currently the courts have given deference to the
Executive Branch, which inherently creates a bit of a conflict
of interest on the law because the agency carrying out the
power is then responsible for determining its scope.
So, Congress could take action by clarifying that the
actual terms of the original APA, which essentially says that
agency action is supposed to be set aside if it's inconsistent
with law, is, in fact, meant to impose a de novo standard
review on questions of law and clarify that, and that would, in
a significant measure, bring some accountability.
Although, again, I think generally regulation needs to
decrease. Federal action in general needs to decrease, but to
the extent that it's taken at all it really should be by the
broad representative body--Congress, House, and Senate--acting
together with presidential signature on laws.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Very good. Twenty-five seconds
left. Do we need to completely eliminate the Chevron deference
or is it a more modest reform?
Ms. Mascott. I think Chevron deference does not have a
place under the terms of the APA. So, I think it should be
eliminated on questions of law.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Very good. Thank you for your
time.
I yield back.
Ms. Jayapal. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Raskin, for five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much.
Some regulatory agencies like the FTC, the CPSC, OSHA, and
the EPA have been saddled with so-called hybrid rulemaking
statutes that require a more formalized process for issuing
rules with hearing procedures and cross-examination
requirements that are far more suited to adjudication than
rulemaking.
Dr. Michaels, you are a leading expert in the field and a
constituent of mine that I'm very proud of. Do you think that
these procedures should be removed in favor of the usual APA
notice and comment rulemaking procedures that have been
abandoned for these particular agencies and commissions?
Mr. Michaels. Congressman's Raskin, it's a great question,
and something that's very important that we should be looking
at. I don't know about totally abandoning them because I think
that hybrid procedure actually gets to some very important
conclusions.
In OSHA we have the system where anybody who testifies at a
hearing can cross-examine anyone else who testifies. So,
there's tremendous opportunity to gather an evidentiary record.
On the other hand, it takes a long time.
So, I would like to think about, and I think we should all
be thinking about, ways to cut down the amount of time
necessary to do this, to cut down the analytical requirements.
The OSHA law says that OSHA has to show that every regulation
is economically and technologically feasible in great detail.
As a result it takes many years to issue a standard. The silica
standard we put out took 19 years.
Mr. Raskin. Let me ask you--and I will throw in Professor
Wagner here, too--do think that the current OIRA review process
is cost-effective and should be maintained as it is given the
added time that is taken for such review and given the growing
criticism that OIRA primarily focuses on reducing regulatory
costs rather than increasing regulatory benefits for social
efficiency generally? Should OIRA really be assigned a
different role than it currently has?
Ms. Wagner. Yes, thank you. I sort of straddle the fence
there, but I actually think that we wouldn't lose anything if
we got rid of OIRA review.
Currently it's not only causing delays and leading to
mysterious withdrawal rules, but OIRA is really getting in the
details including changing the science, overriding long
extensive regulatory processes including expert peer review,
and then literally changing the standards like it did in the
secondary ozone. So, off the cuff, I am not sure we would lose
anything by getting rid of OIRA review.
The White House should be involved in agency decisions and
should interact at some level. It's just not clear to me that
it should be through this formalized extremely controlling,
very secretive OIRA review process.
Mr. Raskin. Got you. Dr. Michaels, what do you think?
Mr. Michaels. You know what, I agree. I think OIRA can play
a useful role. I don't think it should be eliminated. I think
we do need an interagency review process, but the Stop
Corporate Capture Act includes much more transparency, which in
my testimony I address, which is really important.
I also think it's worth nothing that while OIRA really has
been a conduit for special interests to be able to intervene
secretly in regulations in the past, I think the current
Administration is working very hard to eliminate that and to
expand OIRA's commitment to not just looking at costs and
benefits, which are important of course, but to looking at
equity, justice, distributive effects, and pushing agencies to
do that. I think that's really a useful thing for them to do.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. A lot of statutes are silent on the venue
for judicial review of regulatory rules that are adopted. Under
the APA this means that rules governed by particular statutes
are often subject to review in a District Court chosen by the
challenger which delays the review and of course promotes forum
shopping.
Professor Wagner, since there's no need for an evidentiary
hearing in such proceedings, nor for a two-stage review of such
rules, would you agree with me that Congress should instead
require that all judicial review of legislative rules go
directly to the courts of appeal?
Ms. Wagner. I think that's an excellent suggestion. The
forum shopping that we've seen over the years is--leads to
terrible inconsistency and lots of complicated District Court
rulings. So yes, I think that is an excellent idea.
Mr. Raskin. You have written that the notice and comment
process has become dominated by corporate interests and other
highly-resource commenters. What can be done to address this
problem? Is there any thought of having agencies provide
assistance to applicants who don't have the same resources to
participate in proceedings?
Ms. Wagner. Thank you for that question. I definitely think
we should think about subsidies and ombudsman and proxies
provided to major effective groups.
As I mentioned in my oral and written testimony, I also
think that Congress should simply create incentives for
agencies to justify their decision-making processes from
beginning to end, that they have considered and included all
major groups, putting the burden on the agency--
Ms. Jayapal. The time of the gentleman has expired. Thank
you. I now recognize--the Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from North Carolina, Mr. Bishop for five minutes.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Is my mic working? Yes. Okay. I was interested to read
briefly--unfortunately, I didn't get long enough time with the
materials from you to spend much time with them, but it strikes
me that there is this multilayered potentially undermining of
the constitutional structure imbedded in the APA, and some of
these things--I am sorry, what is your name at the end, ma'am?
Ms. Mascott. Professor Mascott.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Professor Mascott. You have
addressed that--and as I sort of collapsed them all, there
was--you have got concentration of power in legislative
enforcement and adjudicative power in one place in the agency
as opposed to the Madisonian design that you have talked about
where the Founders were careful to separate power and create
separate parts of government vying against each other.
It insulates a lot of Federal policy, maybe the primary
generator of Federal policy from democratic control, because
you are separate from the voters.
Courts are to arguably--now, Professor Wagner, I was
intrigued by the fact that you say you don't see any--maybe no
basis for the nondelegation doctrine to be read in the
Constitution; and we probably need longer than I have here to
talk about that, but it seems to me at least there is an
argument that courts abdicate their role to say what the law is
with the regulatory deference doctrines. I think people would
probably think of more examples, but presidents increasingly
resort to the form of regulatory rulemaking and order-issuing
mechanisms to ascribe a patina of legitimacy to the most
egregious abuses of power. The examples would be the OSHA vax
mandate, at least the Fifth Circuit's view of that.
Professor Michaels, I know you have taken a different view
in Time Magazine, I understand. Or before that sort of a
recalcitrant President Biden ordering an eviction moratorium
extension after the Supreme Court had said it couldn't be done.
Then you go even beyond that to this issue of the fact that
if that isn't all bad enough, much agency action now is by
informal guidance that isn't even subject to the procedural
protections of the APA in making rules, or even in the
adjudicative processes.
All of that is very troubling to me. I applaud the fact
that we are looking at this, but the other thing that is very
striking to me as a relative newcomer here is that sort of the
main thrust as I perceive it of what the majority's questions
have been, what the majority's Witnesses have said, is that
they want to go further in the sense of being careful to
advance some and maybe suppress others in the regulatory input
process to achieve some notion of justice.
Those ideas seem to me, without having had an opportunity,
Representative Jayapal, to study your bill yet, to raise
questions about First amendment rights of speech and
petitioning the government. So, all of that is troubling to me.
Then I was listening to Mr. Gaetz and then someone sent me
this. I don't know if it's Professor Patterson or Ms.
Patterson; forgive me. I don't have the Witness list in front
of me. I was handed something that was from your appearance at
the Racial Capitalism Designs for Energy Transition and the
Green New Deal at the Rhode Island School of Design.
In response to it someone who talked about--a gentleman
named Baker who posed a question about the opportunity of
revolution, you answered and you said,

I would also agree and, well, although maybe I would say I'm
not only opposed to revolution; I'm in favor of revolution,
very much so, although NAACP might not really cosign with that.
And I do believe in order for us to truly have liberation or
for us to truly have human rights and so forth we can't--the
system isn't going to allow for it fully.

I would love to skip more. I think I am getting the essence
of it. You say that you are for changing the State. So, let me
leave my time I think to you, Ms. Patterson, or Professor
Patterson, if that's correct; pardon me for that. Are you a
revolutionary? Do you believe we should dispose of the American
State as it is constituted?
Ms. Patterson. When I say this--when you say dispose of the
American State, I'm not sure how to interpret that, but I
definitely believe that our system was designed for there to be
winners and losers. I believe that it was predicated on this
notion of really what we've seen in terms of so much of the
power going to people who are seeking profit. I believe that
for us to truly have liberty and justice for all we have to
change a system that does have so many pathways for profiteers
to thrive and so little pathways for justice to prevail for
front-line communities. I have--
Ms. Jayapal. The time of the gentleman has expired.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Ms.
Scanlon, for five minutes.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, Chair. So, we are talking about the
Administrative Procedure Act, the process by which Federal
agencies can write and enforce regulations to implement the
statutes that Congress passes and serve the public interest.
We have talked a little bit about the Office of Information
and Regulatory Affairs, or OIRA, as its acronym is known, and I
wanted to focus--and this is called sometimes the most powerful
government agency that no one has ever heard of.
I wanted to focus a little bit on the cost benefit analysis
that is used in our regulatory system because there is a lot of
concern that we are not accurately judging costs and benefits,
that it is too weighted to what are the costs to a corporation,
for example, that might be impacted by a regulation and not
really thinking about the impact on the public of either
regulation or deregulation.
So, Dr. Michaels, you mentioned in your testimony--I think
you said just as regulations have costs and benefits the
failure to protect the public's health, safety, and well-being
also has costs and benefits which--and often the benefits
accrue to private parties who are profiting from actions that
hurt the public.
So, what occurs to me is, for example, if we have a large
company dumping into our streams or something, there are
impacts there on wildlife, on downstream homes, families, and
water quality, et cetera, but we don't seem to adequately take
those costs into effect when we are doing these regulatory
reviews.
Can you explain a little bit about how the failure to
regulate has costs and provide us with some examples?
Mr. Michaels. Thank you. That's a really important
question. We have a system that allows and encourages delay.
For the government to step in to protect workers, to protect
the environment they have to go through a long process. It
could be extremely long. As long as that goes on the regulated
parties have no incentive to address the problem. So, those
costs to individuals and to the environment are never even
taken into account.
When we get to the actual regulation itself, when we try to
estimate what's the cost of the regulation, it's often to the
polluter or to the corporation. Then the benefits are much
harder to monetize because benefits--what is clean air worth to
you to be able to see beyond the smoke, or the emotional impact
on the family whose breadwinner has been killed in a work-
related accident? We don't say that's one of the--that cost to
the polluter, to the corporation is not considered.
So, we have a whole system that essentially privileges
corporations, polluters, and manufacturers of dangerous
products over the people who could be affected by their
products.
One of the really important points in the Stop Corporate
Capture Act is to say we have to start dealing with that. We
have to look at benefits you can't monetize. What does it mean
to be able to have a type of animal species which will
disappear from the earth? Is that valuable to us? Of course, it
is, but how much is that?
Ms. Scanlon. Well, you said what is clean air worth? I
represent a district where I think one in four of our kids have
asthma and largely as a result of pollutants in the atmosphere.
So, it is worth a hell of lot both to those kids and their
families, but also in terms of the costs to society of treating
that asthma, of lost opportunities for those kids.
Do you have suggestions, specifically suggestions on what
we can do to redress this imbalance in how we assess costs and
benefits?
Mr. Michaels. Well, I think the two steps that we're taking
right now, which first, President Biden's memo saying that OIRA
should begin to address this; and we expect a memo to come out
of OIRA soon, is an important first step, and of course, this
legislation which just raises the issue.
I think we need a public discussion to talk about this. We
need people to really talk about what is it worth? Can we
accept loss of a species or our kids getting asthma, which of
course means a lot more than simply just the cost of going to
the physician, which already is a big cost. What does it mean
to have a life where you can't really do certain things or
you're always afraid? We don't have good ideas how to monetize
that. Maybe we can't put a dollar amount on it, but we have to
take that into account and take our regulations more seriously
to make sure people have better lives.
Ms. Scanlon. All right. I do think some of the costs are
actually readily available, but the focus has been too narrow
in our regulatory systems.
Mr. Michaels. Yes.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay. I see my time is expired. Thank you. I
yield back.
Ms. Jayapal. The time of the gentlelady has expired. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Bentz, for
five minutes.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Madam Chair. My question is really to
Professor Mascott, but our systems obviously are becoming
incredibly complex, and I am just going to talk about
environments for a moment.
In Oregon, our governor decided after our legislature did
not pass cap-and-trade to delegate the institution or the
implementation of that particular Green New Deal concept to the
DEQ, the Department of Environmental Quality. The rulemaking
began.
There has been some suggestion that this rulemaking is not
balanced and perhaps those large corporations, who by the way
in this case are supplying energy to all the rate payers in
Oregon, are perhaps being too aggressive in trying to protect
those who they serve, and that perhaps other folks should be
invited in; as they are by the way, to be heard, if you will.
It sounds as though from remarks made earlier that there is
a demonization of anyone that is corporate, and I just want to
call out that what I have seen in my years in the Oregon
legislature was just the opposite, where we saw corporations
doing their best to try to protect against inappropriate means
of transitioning from different types of power, power
generation.
My question to you is if this concept of more balanced
input that we have heard suggested is to occur, what form would
it take? Because what I have seen is that those who are charged
with providing electricity and energy to our folks, that is
their job, and so they show up, doing their best to try to make
sure these rules that have been delegated after they couldn't
get it through a legislature which happened, also, with Rule
1.11(d) in this body, or the then-president wanted that to
happen.
What would you suggest being done to convince folks that
the public is being heard? By the way, the public is being
heard in our State, but we have heard maybe it is not being
heard now. So, professor, what would you suggest?
Ms. Mascott. Sure. Thanks, congressman. Obviously, at the
State level separation of powers principles might be different
States by State, but I think the general principle, the
Madisonian principles stands true at every level of government
in the sense that, as folks have noted, concentrated power does
tend to corrupt, or at least keep one from being able to see
multiple perspectives.
So, I think having--it is helpful to have many voices
involved. I categorically do not think that the best way to
approach that is through trying to shoehorn it into the
rulemaking process. I think that the Constitution has provided
for all voices: Corporations, businesses, families, religious
organizations, parents, to be heard through their electoral
representatives really in Congress, which is why policy making
should be made by legislative bodies.
Because whether it's the State legislature divided up
between local districts or the Federal legislature divided up
between 435 communities represented across the country that
process is the optimal one for many voices and interests being
able to be heard through a representative democracy and that
there shouldn't be necessarily an artificial balancing put into
place in the rulemaking process.
I think the challenges that we're hearing from many of the
Witnesses today with people feeling like they're fairly heard
in rulemaking simply is evidence again that too much rulemaking
is happening at the Federal level and in the Executive Branch.
That it can really be in the best interest of Congress and the
America people for Congress, whether it's a--one of the larger
agency organic statutes or the APA itself, to take a close look
at recommendations for how to give more clear direction to
executive actors about how to carry out power.
If institutionally that seems like it would slow things
down or be a challenge, a model like the REINS Act where the
executive agencies do the work of the research, kick proposals
to Congress but Congress then brings it to electoral
accountability to bear and yet saying yea or nay to the
legislative process could be one proposal for moving forward.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you and I appreciate that. I'm going to
yield the last 30 seconds to Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. I don't know if 30 seconds does it for me.
Professor Mascott, let me just--I sort of summed up some of
the challenges I saw. Is that an apt summary? What can you say
about the legislation? I don't know if you have seen
Representative Jayapal's legislation, but there is some
Warren--Elizabeth Warren has legislation I understand that
codifies the deference to Chevron and it does some other things
on INPO. Do you have any views on that or how that would
improve APA or the Administrative State?
Ms. Mascott. Well, to your first question about are we
getting at all the constitutional questions, I do think one
underlying, even more threshold question is the level of
division of power between the Federal government and the State
government and local bodies. So, I think Federal government is
a government of enumerated powers, and so everything should be
limited. I have not, and I'm happy to take a look after the
hearing, had a chance to look at professor--or Ranking Member
and Vice-Chair Jayapal's bill. Be happy to do so. I think--
Ms. Jayapal. Time of the gentleman has expired. If you want
to just--
Ms. Mascott. All right.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Fitzgerald, for five minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Madam Chair. My colleagues have
discussed many of the problems with the unchecked power of un-
elected bureaucrats in the Federal government. There is perhaps
no better example of this than the conduct of the FBI in the
Russiagate investigation.
This Committee spent significant time on allegations that
President Trump colluded with Russia. He was ultimately
acquitted of these allegations by the Senate. These allegations
have been proven to be a sham that wasted years of what could
have been spent on more important issues like securing our
southern border.
DOJ Inspector General Michael Horowitz released a report in
December of 2019 that concluded the FBI Trump Russia
investigation was filled with serious missteps and concealed
information from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act,
FISA Court. Now, the Durham investigation has demonstrated that
the Steele dossier was wildly inaccurate. The Clinton campaign
cash Fusion GPS to draft a dossier as opposition research. I
think we all know that now.
Fusion GPS relied on information from Igor Danchenko, a
Russian who worked at the Brookings Institute. Mr. Danchenko
based his information on tales--on tall tales from Chuck Dolan,
a public relations executive who worked extensively with the
Clinton campaign in the past.
The whole scheme was a vicious circle that began and ended
with the Clinton campaign. The fact that the Steele dossier
served as the basis for two years of Democrat obstruction needs
to be investigated further by this Committee.
Changing gears. We should also be looking at many of the
unconstitutional rules issued by the Biden Administration and
the executive agencies. The Administrative State's powers have
encroached significantly on the Legislative and Judicial Branch
over the last several decades. It is now common for an agency
to write a regulation with the force of effective law, executes
the regulation, and adjudicates disputes under that regulation
consolidating, consolidating all three Federal powers into a
single entity.
Other ways agencies set policy raise similar concerns. For
example, seeking judicial deference to agency views. Due to the
broad delegations of authority and statutes and expansive
interpretation of the Constitution's commerce clause the
Founders would likely neither recognize nor bless the modern
Administrative State.
A few months ago, I introduced the Separation of Powers
Restoration Act to mitigate the abuse of powers by un-elected
bureaucrats in our Federal agencies. The bill would overturn
the Supreme Court decision in Chevron v. Natural Resources
Defense Council that in interpreting an ambiguous statute court
should defer to the agency's interpretation.
Ms. Mascott, can you discuss how this legislation would
help curb some of the executive overreach by the Biden
Administration that has been discussed here today and restore
what we all would consider better checks and balances to the
Legislative and Judicial Branches?
Ms. Mascott. Sure. So, as we've talked about a lot of the
agency statutes that are in play now do delegate broad power to
the agencies or have been interpreted that way.
So, I think the first thing to do would be tighten up those
standards so it's clear by the text of the statute that as you
say because--and as your bill I think points out, because those
standards are already so broad, then giving deference to the
individuals who are supposed to carry out the power to
interpret what it means can often lead to even greater
concentrations of power and less accountability and
transparency.
What's interesting actually is the initial Chevron decision
was issued by--was written by then-Justice Stevens and his
understanding over the years apparently was that it was not
even meant to put into place a new system of deference
necessarily, although that's how it's played out over time.
It's inconsistent the way it's carried out now with the
text of the APA, and so the Separation of Powers Restoration
Act would helpfully clarify that the current standard of
judicial review, or restate, or redirect that courts should
decide what the law is--and make sure that Congress'
instructions to agencies on questions of law are more clearly
followed and not handed over to the Executive Branch to
interpret and carry out.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield
back.
Ms. Jayapal. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, for five
minutes.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Madam Chair.
In 1984, the Supreme Court unanimously decided Chevron v.
NRDC and created a standard of deference that courts apply when
reviewing an agency's interpretation of a statute.
This standard has been applied numerous times across
numerous Administrations, although, I might add that
Republicans tend to want to do reform when a Democratic
President and Administration is in power. This standard has
been applied numerous times and it has been revisited and
ratified by the Supreme Court on several occasions.
Congress and agencies have relied for over 30 years on the
concept of Chevron deference when enacting legislation and
issuing rules.
Professor Wagner, can you explain the concept of Chevron
deference and why it is so important for generalist courts to
defer to expert agencies when interpreting ambiguous statutory
language?
Ms. Wagner. Yes, thank you for that question. So, Chevron
does say that if the statute is clear, then the court
interprets it. When the statute is ambiguous, then we look to
what the agency's interpretation is. The reason is because
those are policy-laden political decisions and the judiciary is
not equipped, nor appropriate to decide political issues. So,
that is the structure underlying Chevron and why the courts
thought it was appropriate that when it comes to policy making
we would defer to the political branches.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you. Do you think it is
healthy that the current Chevron analysis and the body of law
under that analysis should remain undisturbed by legislative
fiat?
Ms. Wagner. Thanks for that question. The truth of it is
the courts have been all over the map and many have not
followed Chevron at all, nor do they even cite Chevron. I think
that the Chevron doctrine has a great deal of sense behind it
in terms of not having the courts meddle with political
decisions.
So, I think having a signal from Congress, that is an
appropriate way for the courts to review agency decisions would
be super helpful because unfortunately a lot of courts are not
applying Chevron deference.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you. Ms. Patterson, opponents
of government action often fall back on the narrative that
regulations kill jobs or that they hurt the economy despite
evidence to the contrary. How can Federal agencies ensure that
agency action is informed by actual data and evidence?
Ms. Patterson. Thank you so much. So, certainly, we should
rely on data from even our own agencies, such as the Renewable
Energy Laboratory, the National Renewable Energy Laboratories,
and otherwise that very much point out the opportunity--even in
the Department of Labor--the opportunities in the new energy
economy.
So, recognizing that while we do have a necessary mandate
to protect the public and protect our environment on which we
all rely for our existence, we also have a mandate to ensure
that the economy thrives. We can do in the new energy economy,
that we know that the solar-wind energy technicians are the
number one growing job in the country. We know that solar
industry is one of the top 10 growing industries in the nation.
We know that this data exists from our own agencies and
otherwise.
So, it's really to make sure that we know what that data is
and that we're in dialog with labor and with front-line workers
groups to ensure that we know what they want in the path to a
new energy economy.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, professor. Also,
Professor Wagner in her testimony discussed how agencies and
other parties have found gaps and loopholes around the notice
and comment process under the APA and this can result in
agencies essentially pre-negotiating with some stakeholders
outside of public view.
Do civil rights groups, public interest organizations, and
front-line communities usually have access to this pre-
negotiation of rules?
Ms. Patterson. Not that I've experienced. That's coming
from a civil rights organization and working with multiple
public interest groups as the data that I showed in the
beginning that's in the written record now. There is such an
extreme deferential in terms of that access, and so no.
Ms. Jayapal. The time--
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Well to be clear--
Ms. Jayapal. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
Ms. Jayapal. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee, the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Buck, for
five minutes.
Mr. Buck. I thank the Chair.
Professor Michaels, I was looking at your written statement
and on page 11 you quote President Biden's order from January
20. There are several factors that you believe should be
considered in addition to cost. Am I correct in that? You need
to put your microphone on. We are going to have a conversation
here. We want to make sure everybody can hear us.
Mr. Michaels. Yes, sir.
Mr. Buck. Okay. So, the one that jumped out at me, and I
really don't understand it, is the word equity and the concept
of equitable. Professor Michaels, there are three professors on
this panel today, three in this room. Is that correct?
Mr. Michaels. I believe so.
Mr. Buck. Okay. The Democrats have chosen on your nameplate
to put the word professor, but on the two ladies' nameplates
they only have the word Ms. Do you think that is equitable that
the Democrats have discriminated against the women who are
professors here?
Mr. Michaels. I'm not sure it's inequitable, but it's
certainly incorrect.
Mr. Buck. Well, okay. In terms of equity, we want to
promote equity. Why would you possibly discriminate against--
and from their testimony today far more interesting to me than
yours, frankly. I think that we should promote the idea that
they are professors. So, I think it is really unfortunate that
the Democrats have shown their discrimination and I think it
should be corrected at some point, that they are professors and
we should treats them that way.
Mr. Michaels. I would agree with you.
Mr. Buck. Professor Mascott, let me ask you something: I
think that there are a number of other factors that are
involved that President Biden wants the agencies to consider,
and one of them is public health and safety. Do you think that
defunding the police is part of the consideration for public
health and safety?
Ms. Mascott. Well, look, thank you, Congressman. So, I'm
here obviously for legal expertise, and so don't have as much
on the policy, but I think, generally speaking, that the policy
determinations of which factors should be looked at in
regulating and in making the laws--
Mr. Buck. I was really asking about defunding the police.
You don't want a go with me, do you? I will ask you another
one.
Ms. Mascott. Well, defunding police--
Mr. Buck. How about social welfare? Do you think it is fair
for the Biden Administration to tell gun owners what kinds of
guns they can use to protect their homes and their families? Is
that the kind of consideration that the Biden Administration
wants when he issued this order?
Ms. Mascott. Well, I think that what I was trying to say
before is that, no, the Biden Administration shouldn't be, I
don't think, putting in place any of those factors when it
carries out laws by Congress unless Congress has put the
factors in itself.
Mr. Buck. Here is another one: They talk about racial
justice. Is it racially just to discriminate against Asian
students when they apply to universities or law schools as
opposed to other students? Is that racially just?
Ms. Mascott. Well, I agree with your concern about that as
well, and again do not think that imposing a particular view of
racial justice should be done by the Executive Branch.
Mr. Buck. How about environmental stewardship? Certainly,
the fuels that the Chinese use for their energy are far more
destructive to our environment and cause more harm in terms of
the climate change theory than the fuels in the United States.
Do you think the Biden Administration would consider that in
this memo that they wrote?
Ms. Mascott. I have concerns, as I mentioned before, with
the Executive Branch really doing anything to choose what
factors should and should not be looked at in regulations.
Mr. Buck. I have got one more for you.
Ms. Mascott. I think it's a decision for Congress.
Mr. Buck. You are going to like this one. It talks about
the interests of future generations. Is the Biden
Administration interested in protecting unborn babies?
Ms. Mascott. Well, again, I think that is an issue that
should be dealt with at the State and local level and with
legislation and not by the courts taking it off the table or by
the Executive Branch.
Mr. Buck. I have something from your testimony that you
might want to answer more than those couple of questions, but
here's one for you: You talk about the Biden Administration
rescinding different Executive Orders from the President. One
that I am definitely concerned about as a former prosecutor is
the ability of administrative agencies to enact criminal
statutes, or criminal rules.
Any thoughts on rescinding that?
Ms. Mascott. To be honest, I was surprised actually that
the Biden Administration rescinded it because it did seem to me
to be a policy that would have bipartisan support because there
is a lot of criminalization at the Federal level in general. To
impose it by regulation is challenging and what the Executive
Order simply did was to say that it needs to be very clear from
agencies what level of intent is going to be used to prosecute.
It seems like everybody--
Mr. Buck. I thank you for your question--your answers.
Ms. Mascott. Okay.
Mr. Buck. I'm sorry, but I have run out of time. I yield
back.
Ms. Jayapal. The time of the gentleman has expired. I want
to thank the gentleman for pointing out the unintended errors
on nameplates. We will get new nameplates made and put before
us.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from Pennsylvania,
Ms. Dean, for five minutes.
Ms. Dean. I thank the Chair. I thank all the testifiers.
Madam Chair, and to the testifiers my absence here is because I
am running between two hearings, so please take it as no
indication of an absence of interest in what you have testified
to. I thank you for participating today.
Dr. Michaels, I was interested in something that I read in
your testimony. You described the Tobacco Playbook which has
had an impact and maintained a grip on American society for
decades, in fact, my entire lifetime. Could you please detail
the Tobacco Playbook, provide an example of how that is--what
it is and what it was and how it is being used today?
Mr. Michaels. Thank you, Representative Dean. The tobacco
industry with the help of the public relations industry figured
out in the early 1950s that they couldn't say that tobacco
didn't cause lung cancer, smoking didn't cause lung cancer, but
they could say the science is unclear and they inflated
anything that didn't look like lung cancer being caused by
tobacco. So, for example, they put out some pamphlets that say,
bald men are at greater risk for lung cancer, which of course I
was interested in.
The point is they would avoid addressing that problem to
delay regulation. That strategy now, that disinformation
playbook, is widely used. We see it in climate change of course
where the fossil fuel companies paid some very marginal
scientists to go out and say no, no, the studies don't say
this; they say that.
So, now we have a whole industry that creates this
disinfor-
mation, that does strategic literature reviews and then puts
them into the EPA or the OSHA to say look, we've looked at this
literature and it's not right. As I talk about in my testimony,
it could take an agency years to respond to that. Of course, as
we talked earlier, delay of regulation has a real cost to the
public.
Ms. Dean. As a point of personal privilege, my father wrote
60 years ago an article entitled, ``England Warns Its Use.''
So, I worry desperately about disinformation campaigns of old
and disinforma-
tion campaigns of today.
Ms. Patterson, what do agencies need to do to make
providing input more accessible for front-line communities and
other affected groups? You stated effective groups need a seat
at the table in your testimony. What concrete steps can we take
here to make sure that effective groups have a seat, have a
voice against the issue at hand and the rulemaking at hand as
well as against disinformation?
Ms. Patterson. Yes, thank you so much.
First, to really make sure that the information that is
being under consideration that is put in terms and in forums
that are accessible for communities to be able to know what
they are weighing in on. So, ensuring that we have digestible
information in terms of what's being proposed.
Before I talked about having concrete mechanisms, like an
Office of Public Participation and so forth, and therefore
making sure that those offices have people that are able to be
liaisons, to be translators, to be communicators and popular
educators, to be able to reach the communities that need to be
able to give this input.
Second, to make sure that the avenues for providing the
inputs are there, that at every juncture that the public, the
communities know where they can give input in the same way as--
I talked about the disparities in the beginning, that at all
the junctures, whether it's before something is being written
so they can give input on design while it's being written, so
they can give input on process, and then providing input on
final drafts. So, ensuring that we're really doing an audit of
all levels and all pieces of the continuum. So, those are some
of the concrete examples. Certainly, in my written testimony I
gave a little bit more, but go on. Yes.
Ms. Dean. I thank you very much for that. I will use the
remaining time that I have maybe with a global question, Dr.
Michaels. In addition to what Ms. Patterson just said, what
would a well-functioning rulemaking system look like? What
concrete improvements can we make from what we have right now?
Mr. Michaels. Well, certainly, a level playing field. Right
now, wealthy individuals, corporations have a tremendous amount
of input, and it just isn't fair. Poor communities,
disadvantaged communities, just regular folks, workers, people
who care about their environment have nowhere near the ability
to weigh in. So, as long as we have a system that works now, we
really need advocates for the rest of us, not just for the
wealthy and powerful.
Ms. Dean. I thank you. I thank you all for your
participation and your testimony today.
With that I yield back.
Ms. Jayapal. The gentlewoman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr. Jordan
from Ohio, for five minutes.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Madam Chair. Professor Mascott, when
was Dr. Fauci elected to office?
Ms. Mascott. At no time.
Mr. Jordan. Has he ever been elected to anything?
Ms. Mascott. He's not--certainly not in the current role.
Mr. Jordan. Is he a Member of Congress?
Ms. Mascott. No.
Mr. Jordan. Now Dr. Fauci is a smart guy. In fact, if you
don't believe me, just ask him. He said Sunday on a TV show
that, quote, ``I represent science.'' So, I am not saying he is
not a smart individual, but who does Dr. Fauci answer to?
Ms. Mascott. Well, well, at this point, I mean presumably
indirectly to the President, but I take your point.
Mr. Jordan. Well, I don't even think--professor, with all
due respect, I don't even think he answers to the President
because President Biden says we follow the science and Dr.
Fauci has basically said I am science, almost like God
speaking. So, I don't even think he answers to the President.
So, this is what scares me is the fact that it is people
who have never put their name on a ballot, never went out and
talked to we the people who are making the decisions, and
frankly the Democrats' Witnesses likes it that way. Let me just
read from Mr. Michaels', Professor Michaels' testimony this
morning. Just one sentence.

We need an agile regulatory system to address the climate
crisis, COVID-19 variants, environmental injustice, massive
income, wealth inequality, affordable housing shortage,
antibiotic resistant organisms, the opioid overdose epidemic,
and threats to the financial stability posed by crypto-
currency.

We don't need a Congress. We don't need a Congress. We got
this regulatory system that the Democrat Witness thinks we
need. So, forget like putting your name on a ballot and going
actually out and talking to the people and getting elected to
office and being in the United States Congress. We don't need
it according to Mr. Michaels.
Ms. Mascott. So, I think--
Mr. Jordan. Isn't that your concern?
Ms. Mascott. Yes, I think you're putting your finger on a
very poignant example and current practice where we have a
significant problem facing the country, obviously the pandemic.
There's a very broad statute, the quarantine statute from the
1940s that had not been carried out anywhere close to the way
it has been applied recently. In the past--
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Michaels doesn't want to limit to that. Dr.
Fauci may want to. Who knows what he wants. He probably just
wants to be dictator. Mr. Michaels doesn't want to limit it to
that. He talks about affordable housing. He is talking about
cryptocur-
rency. He is talking about environmental injustice. I mean he
is talking about all kinds of things that he thinks the
regulatory State needs to be able to agilely in some kind of
fashion be able to deal with.
Ms. Mascott. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. So, it is not just quarantine issues.
Ms. Mascott. Well, of course, and I think the reason--what
you're pointing to, right, is the breadth of a law and how it's
being interpreted. If we defer to the Executive Branch's
interpretation, that housing and cryptocurrency and whatever
else falls within--
Mr. Jordan. That is how it works, isn't it? There are
always some exceptions and there is some give and take in the
comment period for these, but the agency proposes a rule.
Ms. Mascott. Right.
Mr. Jordan. Then they enforce the rule. Then if there is a
dispute, they have an Article 1 Judge, Executive Branch Judge,
adjudicate. They want more of that. They want them to do that
for everything. So, why do we need a Congress?
Ms. Mascott. Right, the concentration of power I think in
single entities is one of the greatest problems facing our
system of government.
Mr. Jordan. No kidding. No kidding. Some of these people--I
mean the people who make decisions and impact small business
owners, Americans--I mean just every single day the regulatory
State, the bureaucratic State runs this country, and it is a
huge problem. It is the biggest threat to liberty I think we
see. I haven't seen the bill that the Chair is introducing, but
my gut tells me it probably moves in the direction that their
Witness wants it to go, which is more power to the bureaucratic
State. Is that your interpretation of their bill? I don't know
if you have seen it either, because I haven't.
Ms. Mascott. I have not seen the bill. I will say I think
the most constitutional approach would be for power to be
disbursed among different decision makers: State, local,
communities, and families. Then at the Federal level policy
making in Congress. You all have a lot of power here to be able
to put those systems in place and make policy decisions.
Mr. Jordan. We are supposed to have a lot of power. It is
something we need to claim back or take back. This idea that
bureaucrats are going to run the country is, as I said before,
frightening.
You said this earlier. I just want to read this. I think
this is--you put this well and you just basically said the same
thing.

The distribution of power over separate branches of government
helps to ensure that each branch can more effectively perform
its function of serving as a check on the other branches in
order to better secure.

This is the important part:

the private interests of every individual. The security
for civil rights consists in the multiplicity of interests.

That is the Constitution. That is what this Committee is
supposed to uphold. More than any other Committee in the
Congress we are supposed to be focused on that and, yet, we
have Witnesses come in here and basically say do away with
Congress. Let the regulatory State run the country. That is
frightening. I yield back.
Ms. Jayapal. The gentleman yields back.
I see unanimous consent to add a number of statements and
letters regarding the current State of the rulemaking process
and potential legislative reforms. A letter from Robert
Weissman and Jack Gills, the Co-Chairs of the Coalition for
Sensible Safeguards; a letter from Blake Emerson, Assistant
Professor of Law at UCLA's School of Law, an article by David
Michaels and Jordan Barab published by Time magazine titled,
``We Ran OSHA: Here's the Truth About So-Called Vaccine
Mandate;'' a letter from James Goodwin, the Senior Policy
Analyst at the Center for Progressive Reform; a letter from
Martha Kinsella, Senior Counsel at the Brennan Center for
Justice's Democracy Program; the Brennan Center's National Task
Force on Rule of Law and Democracy's Proposals for Reform,
Volume 2. So, ordered.
[The information follows:]

MS. JAYAPAL FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jayapal. I now recognize the gentlelady from Indiana,
Ms. Spartz, for five minutes.
Ms. Spartz. Thank you, Madam Chair. I think we talk a lot
about corporations here and hiring scientists. I think
scientists hired by government are also not less biased because
every scientist, every project I have seen, every study usually
always pleases the payer. Every government study always yields
the result that the government asks them to yield. So, I would
not really give too much credibility to government pay studies.
Or a lot of universities pay, if you want to actually get
tenure, if you are not published your work within the small
group of people that have their own views, you are probably not
going to get a tenure.
So, there is a lot of subjectivity. Honestly, if you look
about we are replacing right now the really liability with
unenforceable regulations where most of them should be decided
in the court of law and not given so much immunity. A lot of us
are joking that and a lot of these attorneys will be out of
business if we continue giving these unlimited immunities.
My question is just a quick question I have for Dr.
Mascott. You are a professor of law. I am just in accounting.
When I look at the level of regulation and Executive Orders
that have been expanding to the level, unbelievable. I was
shocked to see that actually Congress doesn't have a
streamlined process to deal with Executive Orders.
Congressional review acts does not apply. So, we streamline at
least somewhat to look at regulations. Do you believe we need
to really do a better job to see how we can deal more
effectively with Executive Orders?
Ms. Mascott. I do think that Executive Orders at times are
being used in ways that they were not originally intended. I
mean, the intent of the Executive Order, of course, is for the
President to be able to oversee the Executive Branch.
I think the fundamental problem is that Congress needs to
take a greater share of the policy making power, delegate
narrower areas of authority with more detail and then there
would not be as much of an area of discretion within which the
Executive Order would operate.
Ms. Spartz. So, just generally, if we make a lawless
ambiguous, which I really know alot attorneys don't, but I do.
So, that would help. Is there anything that for us really to
oversee and streamline the process if we do believe that
President; and regardless who it is, Republican of Democrat
president, overstepping his authority?
Ms. Mascott. I certainly think in areas of laws and just
start subject matter by subject matter where it's causing the
greatest concern, whether it's now with the pandemic or
whatever, for Congress to exercise its policy will, and that
could be through constraining what the Executive, including by
Executive Order, is able to do in areas of domestic policy.
Ms. Spartz. So, just define a little better what they can
do?
Ms. Mascott. Absolutely. Much better, yes.
Ms. Spartz. Okay. Well thank you so much. I yield my time
to Mr. Johnson of Louisiana.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thanks so much, my colleague. The
APA is supposed to provide greater transparency and public
participation in agency rulemaking, and I am pleased to hear my
colleagues, including the gentlelady from Washington, stress
the importance of this principle, especially in the area of
healthcare.
So, I am a bit surprised that my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle all voted for the Build Back Better Act,
which waives APA rulemaking and judicial review in more than a
dozen places with respect to the regulation of drug prices.
The question really quick is, does any Member of the panel
believe that significant agency actions like this should be
done in the dark with no notice and comment or judicial
oversight, especially with such a significant area in the
economy? Anybody? Anybody agree with that?
The question is do the Witnesses think that these
provisions need to be removed to ensure that the public knows
how drug pricing is being regulated and what went into those
decisions?
Professor Michaels, do you have an opinion on that? Should
it be removed?
Mr. Michaels. You know what, I can't comment on that since
I don't have any direct knowledge of what the provisions are in
the Build Back Better Bill.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Okay. All right. How about, Ms.
Wagner, any comment on that?
Ms. Wagner. Unfortunately, I also don't know anything about
it.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. You know what, none of our
colleagues know either. There was no discussion about these
provisions when the House was considering the bill. I would be
surprised if any Member, any of my colleagues are even aware it
is in there. Isn't that why we need greater deliberation and
transparency in governmental action?
Professor Mascott, comment on that? Thoughts about it?
Ms. Mascott. Well, I certainly think consistent with just
the general nature of my comments, and, again, I have not
myself seen that particular legislative proposal, but I think
the policy making when we're talking about imposing new
requirements on regulated people and individuals should be done
through Congress.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. So, just for reference of those
who want to thumb through this at home, pages 647, 2000, 2015,
2020, 2062, 2081, 2114, and 2124. At least eight places in this
bill it puts it in a dark closet and allows un-elected woke
bureaucrats to make the rules.
I would yield to Mr. Buck.
Mr. Buck. I was just wondering if my colleague thought that
anyone in Congress had read that bill before it passed, because
to my knowledge we got that bill with just a few hours before
we voted on it.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. I am out of time, but I don't
think it was possible to read. I yield back.
Ms. Jayapal. The time of the gentleman has expired.
This concludes today's hearing. Thank you to our
distinguished Witnesses for attending.
We must curb the undue power of corporations, prioritize
the interests of the public, and clear a path for public
participation in the law. Legislation like my bill, the Capture
Act, will vastly improve the rulemaking process by increasing
accessibility, transparency, and accountability. I look forward
to working with my colleagues to address this issue.
Without objection, all Members will have five legislative
days to submit additional written questions for the Witnesses
or additional materials for the record.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:13 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES

FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
