- OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF PRISONS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE
FEDERAL BUREAU OF PRISONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM,
AND HOMELAND SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEETH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-53

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-550          WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

JERROLD NADLER, New York, Chair
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania, Vice-Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Ranking Member
SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas            STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,      DARRELL ISSA, California
Georgia                          KEN BUCK, Colorado
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          MATT GAETZ, Florida
KAREN BASS, California               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York         ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island     TOM McCLINTOCK, California
ERIC SWALWELL, California            W. GREG STEUBE, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          CHIP ROY, Texas
VAL BUTLER DEMINGS, Florida          DAN BISHOP, North Carolina
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
SYLVIA R. GARCIA, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
GREG STANTON, Arizona
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MONDAIRE JONES, New York
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CORI BUSH, Missouri

AMY RUTKIN, Majority Staff Director and Chief of Staff
CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM, AND HOMELAND SECURITY

SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas, Chair
CORI BUSH, Missouri, Vice-Chair

KAREN BASS, California               ANDY BIGGS, Arizona, Ranking
VAL DEMINGS, Florida                     Member
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania         LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island        TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin
TED LIEU, California                 THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky
J. LUIS CORREA, California           VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
STEVE COHEN, Tennessee               BURGESS OWENS, Utah

KEENAN KELLER, Chief Counsel
JASON CERVENAK, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

Thursday, February 3, 2022

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Chair of the Subcommittee on
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security from the State of Texas     2
The Honorable Andy Biggs, Ranking Member of the Subcommittee
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security from the State of
Arizona........................................................    31

WITNESS

Michael Carvajal, Director, Federal Bureau of Prisons
Oral Testimony.................................................    48
Prepared Statement.............................................    50

STATEMENTS, LETTERS, MATERIALS, ARTICLES SUBMITTED

Materials submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Chair of
the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security
from the State of Texas, for the record
A letter from Alison Guernsey, Clinical Associate Professor,
Iowa College of Law..........................................     6
A statement from Homer Venters, Adjunct Faculty, NYU School of
Global Public Health.........................................    38
A collection of letters of experiences of 17 women across five
federal facilities provided by the National Council for
Incarcerated and Formerly Incarcerated Women and Girls,
submitted by the Honorable Cori Bush, Vice-Chair of the
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security from
the State of Missouri, for the record..........................    88
Materials submitted by the Honorable Ted Lieu, a Member of the
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security from
the State of California, for the record
An article entitled, ``Bureau Of Prisons Special Tactical Force
Under Scrutiny For Use In DC Protests And Training Mishaps,''
Forbes.......................................................   108
An article entitled, ``The Story Behind Bill Barr's Unmarked
Federal Agents,'' Politico...................................   113
An article entitled, ``Man is 16th to die from COVID-19 at Fort
Worth prison; cases spike at women's facility,'' Fort Worth
Star-Telegram, submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee,
Chair of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland
Security from the State of Texas, for the record...............   132

APPENDIX

Materials submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Chair of
the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security
from the State of Texas, for the record
A statement from Jesselyn McCurdy, Managing Director of
Government Affairs and Sakira Cook, Senior Director, Justice
Program of the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human
Rights.......................................................   138
An article entitled, ``Flaws plague a tool meant to help low-
risk federal prisoners win early release,'' NPR..............   145
An article entitled, ``Fatal Gang Fight Spurs Nationwide
Lockdown of Federal Prison System,'' The New York Times......   152
A report entitled, ``Reducing Jail and Prison Populations
During the Covid-19 Pandemic,'' Brennan Center for Justice...   153
A report entitled, ``Cases spike at Fort Worth prison;
whistleblower complaint says top staff have no COVID plan,''
Fort Worth Star-Telegram.....................................   203
An article entitled, ``Stroke Victim `Dumped' By Prison Guards
At Bus Stop, Massive Search Launched: Attorney,'' Baltimore
Daily Voice..................................................   209

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES FOR THE RECORD

Questions to Michael Carvajal, Director, Federal Bureau of
Prisons, submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Chair
of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security
from the State of Texas, for the record........................   214

OVERSIGHT OF THE

FEDERAL BUREAU OF PRISONS

----------

Thursday, February 3, 2022

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Sheila Jackson Lee [Chair of the Subcommittee]
presiding.
Members present: Representatives Jackson Lee, Bass,
Demings, McBath, Dean, Scanlon, Bush, Cicilline, Lieu, Cohen,
Biggs, Chabot, Steube, Tiffany, Massie, and Fitzgerald.
Staff present: John Doty, Senior Advisor and Deputy Staff
Director; David Greengrass, Senior Counsel; Cierra Fontenot,
Chief Clerk; John Williams, Parliamentarian and Senior Counsel;
Merrick Nelson, Digital Director; Keenan Keller, Chief Counsel
for Crime; Mauri Gray, Deputy Chief Counsel for Crime; Nicole
Banister, Counsel for Crime; Veronica Eligan, Professional
Staff Member/Legislative Aide for Crime; Jason Cervenak,
Minority Chief Counsel for Crime; Ken David, Minority Counsel;
Kiley Bidelman, Minority Clerk; and Carter Robertson, Minority
USSS Detailee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Good morning. I just had the privilege of
attending the Nation's Prayer Breakfast and so as I look at the
hearing that we held last week, I am committed that we will
have not only justice accountability, but that we will look to
prison reform and have restoration. I have the faith that this
will happen. I hope this hearing will bring us to that point.
The Subcommittee will now come to order. Without objection,
the Chair is authorized to declare recesses of the Committee at
any time.
Good morning, again, and welcome to today's Oversight
Hearing of the Federal Bureau of Prisons. I would like to
remind the Members that we have established an email address
and distribution lists to circulate exhibits, motions, or other
written materials that the Members might want to offer as part
of our hearing today. If you would like to submit materials,
please send them to the email address that has been previously
distributed to your offices, and we will circulate the
materials to the Members and staff as quickly as we can.
I would also ask all the Members to please mute your
microphones when you are not speaking. This will help prevent
feedback and other technical issues. You may unmute yourself
any time you seek recognition.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement. Today's
hearing on Oversight of the Federal Bureau of Prisons is a
follow up to the hearing the Subcommittee held on January 21,
2022.
It was our commitment to our Members that they would have
the actual representative at this time of the Federal Bureau of
Prisons to be able to hear directly from the leadership and to
secure answers.
The hearing last week probed the Bureau's implementation of
the First Step Act, the impact of COVID-19 on BOP, the Bureau's
response to the pandemic, and the implementation used of
compassionate release within the Bureau among other topics,
very crucial topics in the line of justice and accountability.
During that hearing, many questions were raised and many of
our Members thought it best to speak directly to the Director
of BOP. Therefore, I am pleased to have Director Michael
Carvajal here today so that we may delve deeply into many
issues faced by the Bureau. Two years into the pandemic, COVID-
19 remains the most pressing and impactful issue facing the
Bureau of Prisons as the virus continues to wreak havoc among
many of the Bureau's facilities. I am uncomfortable as to
whether or not they have met the challenge and met the task.
From the outset, the virus has had exacerbated the
increased health risks for people living or working in confined
spaces which is especially true for prison systems where social
distancing must be balanced with a need to ensure safety and
security.
We continue to hear horror stories of BOP facilities
struggling to contain the virus. For instance, we heard last
week from Senator Chris Murphy that approximately 40 percent of
inmates at the Danbury Federal Correctional Institution in
Connecticut were in either isolation or quarantined with only
80 correctional officers available for service which means that
every officer on duty is responsible for three prison units. We
in the Congress must collaborate to ensure that the remnants of
the past can be corrected by this Administration that has a new
approach, new commitment to the reformation of this system.
Then on Monday, we learned that Federal Medical Center,
Carswell, the women's facility in Fort Worth in Texas, my
state, has the fourth highest COVID positive numbers of any
group facility in the country with 248 inmates and 46 members
who are COVID positive. Eight women have died of COVID-19 at
FMC, Carswell, since the beginning of the pandemic, while 18
inmates have died of COVID at Fort Worth male facility.
In the past two weeks, the number of COVID-19 positives in
the BOP system has fluctuated between 6,000 and 9,000 inmates.
In that same two-week period, five more inmates in BOP
custody have died of COVID-19, bringing the number of inmates
to die of COVID-19 related illnesses to 284. It appears that
there are just too many inmates in the Bureau's custody to
control and successfully reduce the spread of COVID-19 and it
appears that there has been a slow and ineffective utilization
of compassionate release which should be complied with
discretion that the Bureau has.
The Bureau of Prisons has several mechanisms within the
authority to reduce the number of inmates in its custody,
compassionate release, the CARES Act, and the First Step Act,
modified even by then Attorney General Barr. Although using
overly-restrictive criteria, BOP released thousands of prisons
under the CARES Act who have reestablished themselves with
their families and in their communities and importantly, have
not re-offended. The Bureau and DOJ should be commended for
their decision to rescind the previous Administration's opinion
that would have called many of these individuals back into
custody unnecessarily.
I think it is important to note that these individuals that
had been released were more released on their application for
compassionate release as opposed to the BOP assisting their
prisoners and determining that they could be released which
causes the problems that we have now.
However, thousands of prisoners continue to test positive
for COVID-19 and others die, BOP has failed to effectively
utilize its authority to request compassionate release for
inmates. I think they are just waiting. Some may die.
From January 1, 2020-January 30, 2021, during the height of
the pandemic, the Bureau of Prisons filed less than one percent
of the total compassionate release motions filed throughout the
entire country. In an attempt to respond to this issue and to
help alleviate the rise of spreading COVID, we have expanded
compassionate release, and later expanded compassionate release
again to allow inmates to file their own motions 30 days after
they first made a request with their warden. Notably, as few as
one fourth of 284 inmates who died in custody of COVID-related
illnesses, actually filed a motion for compassionate release,
raising questions about efficiency and efficacy of the process.
One is left to wonder how justice was served by the process
for the 62 inmates who filed for compassionate release
themselves or through counsel and whose preexisting medical
conditions were cited by the Bureau after they died of COVID-
related illness while in custody. Why couldn't there be a
response? The Bureau not only grapples with inmate infections
and deaths, but also with staff member infections and death.
In the last two weeks, the number of COVID-19 positive
staff members have ranged from 900 to almost 2,000 and 7 staff
members have died of COVID-related illnesses. While staffing
shortages have long been a problem for the Bureau of Prisons
has made a bad situation even worse. Statistics do not hold
well for the State of operations for Bureau facilities across
the country.
As staff members become infected or are required to
quarantine due to exposure, COVID-19 directly affects the
remaining staff's ability to provide safety, security, general,
and COVID-related medical services, and recidivism-reducing
programming to inmates.
I do want to take this moment as I conclude my remarks to
be able to give appreciation to the corrections officers and
staff that operate with compassion, hopefully sensitivity, and
strength as they work every single day. Ninty-eight facilities
remain at Level 3 of the modified operational levels which
includes social distancing in all areas of Bureau facilities.
As of Monday, all Federal prisons are under a national lock
down as two inmates died during a fight involving multiple
inmates at U.S. Penitentiary Beaumont, including those in
gangs. Although details are not forthcoming due to the on-going
FBI investigation, this incident raises concern about the
safety and security of the facility, particularly in my
backyard, Beaumont, which has been compromised by longstanding
staffing shortages.
The consequences of staffing shortages at BOP have been
witnessed time and time again. The death of Jeffrey Epstein was
linked in part to the hours of overtime that officers guarding
him were required to work and augmentation which required an
employee who was not a corrections officers to guard him. I
went to that facility. I saw the needs, the freezing cold, and
the needs of those employees that were there. They begged for
help and did not get it. Epstein's death precipitated the
closing of the Metropolitan Corrections office. Our Chair has
worked very hard on this issue.
So, I hope as we go forward that we will listen to the
issues. We know some issues are being investigated by the OIG.
We understand that the conditions at many of the prisons are
not what they should be. We know that the PATTERN risk
assessment tool which is at the core of the implementation of
the First Step Act and other programs has not been effectively
utilized. We hope to answer that question on the PATTERN
program that indicates that the National Institute of Justice
identified errors in PATTERN Version 1 that I understand are
being addressed to revise the version of PATTERN. Inmates who
were assessed under the current version of the tool were
disadvantaged by those errors. They must be reassessed under
the new version.
Prison is a place of accountability and punishment, but it
should also be a place of redemption, restoration, service, and
certainly a place that is decent for staff to work at. I look
forward to this discussion with our Director, and I look
forward to continuing to try and restore the Federal Prison
Bureau in the way that it should perform.
Without objection, I will submit into the record the
following documents, written testimony submitted by Alison K.
Guernsey for the January 21, 2022, Subcommittee hearing
entitled ``The First Step Act, The Pandemic, and Compassionate
Release: What Are the Next Steps for the Federal Bureau of
Prisons?'' A letter from Alison K. Guernsey, dated February 1,
2022, and two accompanying attachments; written statements
submitted by Dr. Homer Venters for the January 21, 2022,
Subcommittee hearing, ``The First Step Act, The Pandemic, and
Compassionate Release: What Are the Next Steps for the Federal
Bureau of Prisons?''
[The information follows:]

MS. JACKSON LEE FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. I now recognize the distinguished Member
from Arizona, the Ranking Member for his opening statement.
Thank you and welcome, Mr. Biggs.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I first thank you,
Madam Chair, for holding this hearing and I also thank you for
bringing in Director of Prisons, Director Carvajal, because I
think about your swift response to many of us who requested
that his presence be here and I appreciate your response to
that, Madam Chair, and we are grateful for that.
I welcome Director Carvajal as well. Thank you for your
service, sir. We are glad to have you here today.
The Federal Bureau of Prisons is tasked with protecting
society by confining offenders in the controlled environments
of prisons and community-based facilities. BOP's duty is not
merely to provide housing, food, and security for Federal
inmates, but also to help inmates become law-abiding citizens
upon release.
All Americans have an interest in BOP's mission because the
vast majority of Federal inmates, well above 90 percent, will
someday be released into our communities regardless of our
efforts to reduce recidivism. BOP's job is not an easy task,
and it has only become more complicated due to COVID-19. In
response to COVID-19, BOP undertook a number of steps to
safeguard the health, safety of inmates, Bureau of Prisons
staff and the public. BOP prioritized inmates for home
confinement who did not post significant risk to the public,
restricted the number of visitors, and limited the movement of
inmates among detention facilities. These are reasonable
measures, but my colleagues on the other side of the aisle want
to go even further. They have tried to use COVID-19 as a reason
to let more convicted criminals back on to our streets. They
even wrote Attorney General William Barr, urging him to ``use
every tool at his disposal to release as many prisoners as
possible.''
They even passed legislation in the House that would pay
states to release inmates in State prisons and local jails.
Think about that. My colleagues across the aisle want to use
our tax dollars to incentivize States to put more convicted
criminals on the streets earlier.
The consequence of these actions has deadly real-world
results as we have unfortunately seen. In March of 2021, Eric
Reinbold was released from BOP custody after being granted
compassionate release based on COVID vulnerability. By July,
just four months later, Reinbold was accused and charged with
murdering his wife. Just a few weeks ago in Oregon, Clifford
Uptegrove was charged with first degree robbery, first degree
theft, and felony fleeing and unlawful use of a weapon.
Uptegrove had been granted compassionate release for COVID-
related reasons the previous year.
In spite of these innumerous crimes that have been
committed by inmates released early, my colleagues across the
aisle are calling for more inmates to be released regardless of
their crime or prison sentence. Democrats on this Committee
want to open the jails and defund the police. They are turning
a public health crisis into a public safety crisis as well.
I tell you, Director Carvajal, to please pass on our
appreciation to your officers and employees. They have a tough
job and I want them to know they have our support. To that end,
I understand that many BOP officers have voiced concern over
the Biden vaccine mandate. I strongly oppose any efforts to
mandate COVID-19 vaccines and have introduced legislation to
prevent Federal agencies from imposing COVID-19 vaccine
mandates.
I look forward to hearing from Director Carvajal today. I
also request that, Madam Chair, that we soon have the D.C.
Director of the U.S. Marshals Office in for a hearing as well.
I think some of the evidence that came out of last week's
hearing would do well for both sides of the aisle to hear from
the Marshals Office. I appreciate you again bringing in
Director Carvajal. It is good to have him here.
I thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back the balance of
my time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Ranking Member for his
statement. I acknowledge at this time the service of our Chair,
Mr. Nadler, and the service of our Ranking Member, Mr. Jordan.
I thank them for their leadership of this Committee.
It is now my pleasure to introduce today's Witness Michael
Carvajal, who is the Director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons.
He began his career with the Bureau of Prisons in 1992 as a
correctional officer at the Federal Correctional Institute,
Three Rivers, Texas. He is, in essence, a committed, dedicated
servant to the Federal Bureau of Prisons. He served in position
of leadership in Texas, Kansas, Louisiana before becoming the
Regional Director of Northeast Region in 2016.
Mr. Carvajal became the Assistant Director for the
Correctional Programs Division in 2018 and held that position
until he was appointed Director in 2020 in the last
Administration.
Let me again take note of his service and as well, the many
corrections officers that I have had and staff, the privilege
of meeting throughout the system. As I indicated, our task here
is to provide a reform and restoration and continue the
improvement on the institution of the Federal Bureau of
Prisons. We welcome you, Mr. Carvajal, Director Carvajal, and
we thank you for your participation.
I will begin by swearing in our Witness. I ask our Witness
to turn on your audio and make sure that I can see your face
and raise your right hand while I administer the oath.
Do you swear or affirm under penalty of perjury that the
testimony you are about to give is true and correct to the best
of your knowledge, information, and belief, so help you God?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, I do.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Let the record show the Witness
answered in the affirmative. Thank you. Please note that your
written statement will be entered into the record in its
entirety. Accordingly, I ask that you summarize your testimony
in five minutes. To help you stay within the time frame, there
is a timing light on your screen. When the light switches from
green to yellow, you have one minute to conclude your
testimony. When the light turns red, it signals that your five
minutes has expired. I now recognize Director Carvajal for five
minutes. Thank you. You are recognized.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL CARVAJAL

Mr. Carvajal. Thank you and good morning, Chair Jackson Lee
and Ranking Member Biggs, other distinguished Members of the
Committee. It is my honor to speak today on behalf of the
37,000 Bureau of Prisons correction professionals who worked
day-in and day-out to support our critical law enforcement
mission.
The Bureau's work is incredibly challenging and has been
exacerbated by the COVID-19 virus. Our management of the
pandemic has been highly scrutinized despite the fact that we
have worked in lockstep with the CDC in shaping the guidance
for the benefit of everyone who works in the corrections
environment. The Bureau was one of the first Federal agencies
to offer COVID testing and vaccinations and in January 2021,
the CDC recognized the Bureau for leading all jurisdictions and
Federal entities in its rate of vaccination utilization.
Approximately 80 percent of our staff and 70 percent of our
inmates have been fully vaccinated and we continue to increase
those rates.
After issuance of the CARES Act, the Bureau began screening
and transferring both vulnerable and eligible inmates to
residential re-entry centers and home confinement. The Bureau
has transferred more than 37,000 inmates to community custody
with more than 9,000 of those transferred pursuant to the CARES
Act, after review of medically vulnerable inmates for potential
placement and home confinement continues, based on assessments
and the balance with our law-enforcement mission.
Another common criticism is that we are under-staffed. The
narrative is routinely misrepresented without reference to
factual data. We have approximately 1,100 correctional officer
vacancies. However, 7 institutions out of the 121 make up
almost 40 percent of these vacancies. Increasing and
maintaining our staffing levels within appropriated funding
levels remains our priority. Last calendar year, we hired over
3,000 staff and at one point, advance hired 1,000 staff above
our funding levels. We have proven that we can hire employees.
Although hiring is not an issue at the majority of our
locations, we are routinely outbid by competing State and local
corrections or law enforcement agencies who pay a higher wage.
Accordingly, we continue to work with the Department to
consider the use of additional incentives so we may be more
competitive.
Another area of misguided criticism is the implementation
of the First Step Act. The Bureau worked with the Department on
the development of the risk and needs assessment system and
supported the National Institute of Justice who developed the
approved risk assessment, called PATTERN. Staff were trained on
the First Step Act including the new PATTERN tool and we worked
with the union to negotiate policies to support implementation
of the law. We recomputed the sentences of over 153,000 inmates
to ensure that they received good conduct time under the new
law. We are delivering more than 80 different programs based on
individual inmate assessments. We hired additional staff to
expand our re-entry program, and we initiated additional
activities to support inmates about mental health issues,
disabilities, or other special needs.
We have expanded programming for female inmates, drug
treatment, and vocational training. Over 75,000 inmates
participated in First Step Act programs by the end of 2021 in
spite of the constraints caused by the pandemic. We are
modernizing the inmate education platforms to include the use
of tablets for better program assess ability and we have
created an online system to directly connect the community
volunteers to BOP facilities.
Additionally, we are exploring ways to provide inmates with
ID cards compatible with State requirements under the REAL ID
Act. We engaged external experts to evaluate our inmate
programs and we are working with the NIJ to engage academic
consultants to review our risk and needs assessment system.
We are also developing a stronger data analytics platform
to enhance monitoring and evaluation of our programs and our
spending. The BOP worked in concert with the Department to
finalize the role regarding First Step Act time credits. We
applied the Rule retroactively and immediately released almost
4,000 inmates from home confinement and RSD. We are releasing
approximately 1,600 inmates from BOP facilities and
transferring nearly 2,500 inmates intotpre-release custody. In
sum, over 8,000 inmates have had their time credits applied
towards pre-release custody or supervised release.
The Bureau supports and has always been committed to the
implementation of the First Step Act and we are statutorily
compliant. Last year, the Government Accountability Office
reported highlighted areas where the Bureau needed to improve
and in response, I established a task force to address these
identified areas. As a result of the task force's work, eight
of the priority recommendations identified are now closed. Our
work in this area continues.
Chair Jackson Lee, Ranking Member Biggs, and other
distinguished Members of the Committee, this concludes my
statement.
[The statement of Mr. Carvajal follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Biggs. Madam Chair, I think you are still on mute.
Ms. Jackson Lee. That is because of my very delicate
fingers. I pressed it and it doesn't seem to want to open up,
so try to hit it real hard.
Let me do something a little different, if I might, and I
am not sure if Ms. Bass here on?
Ms. Bass. Yes, yes. I am here.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Bass, I am going to yield to you for
beginning at this time and I will follow. Thank you so very
much.
Ms. Bass is recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Bass. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Good morning, Director Carvajal. I am glad to have you here
before the Committee today and I am sure you are aware that two
weeks ago, this Subcommittee held a hearing on matters
pertaining to the Bureau of Prisons, the First Step Act, and
the COVID epidemic. I was glad to hear from several experts on
these topics, but I am afraid I am still left with a few
questions, questions that I believe you might be the one to
answer.
Let me just take a minute to thank you for your service to
BOP and then also to acknowledge your quick responsiveness on
several occasions when I reached out with particular specific
situations.
One of the ways the CARES Act attempted to address the
COVID epidemic within our prison system was by providing the
BOP with additional authority to grant compassionate release
for incarcerated persons who met a number or criteria to
demonstrate a low risk of re-offense as opposed to the way it
was described a few minutes ago, Democrats asking for the
prison doors to just be opened indiscriminately.
Can you tell me how many people within the BOP have been
granted early release under this program? I wanted to know for
those people that were granted, how many re-offended?
I know there have been individual cases, but I want to know
if you have numbers overall or percentages of how many people
were re-incarcerated due to a technical violation such as
missing a curfew or a phone call? Or how many people were
released and are unaccounted for? How many people offended
again with violent crimes?
Mr. Carvajal. Thank you, Congresswoman Bass, and I
appreciate the opportunity to make some distinctions here. I
think that there is often confusion. I am going to try to
clarify while I am up here. First, as I stated in my opening
remarks, we released over--or transferred over 37,000 under the
CARES Act to home confinement and community placement.
Compassionate release is a separate entity. The BOP does
not have the authority to independently release someone from
our custody. Under the statute and our current policy, we make
a recommendation to the court. The court makes the final
decision, not the Bureau of Prisons. The Bureau of Prisons
doesn't take a position on the motion in and of itself. As you
stated, there is criteria.
We use our policy criteria to evaluate and ensure that each
individual case is compelling and--extraordinary and compelling
circumstances that they are fully considered. These are
individualized cases. We also take into account public safety
and victim impact, but I stress that we do not independently do
that, and the court makes the final decision.
We do not track data. I don't have it in front of me for
compassionate release because when the inmate receives a
reduction in sentence, they are no longer in our custody.
I can answer the other part of your question of the 37,000
that we transferred to home confinement in the community,
approximately 9,000 of those were specific to the CARES Act.
Three hundred twenty, approximately 320 that I am aware of have
committed violations have been brought back to secure custody.
Eight of those were new crimes that I am aware of. One was a
serious crime. I don't have the details in front of you. I am
sure that we can get them for you.
Ms. Bass. You said again 320, could you repeat that again?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, 320 of the inmates under CARES Act home
confinement have re-offended and have been brought back to
secure custody.
Ms. Bass. So, you don't know of those 320 how many were
technical violations that brought them back? You said eight
committed new crimes. Could I assume that the rest were
technical or not?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, I can clarify that. I appreciate that,
Congresswoman Bass. The most common offense, about 160 of the
320, were for abuse of alcohol or drugs. Some of them were
escapes. They weren't where they were supposed to be. Most of
them were violations of that nature, some with misconduct.
Eight of those were new crimes committed. The rest were
technical violations.
Ms. Bass. Can you talk about, in my remaining seconds,
vaccine distribution, (1) among staff, how many staff have been
vaccinated, and (2) the inmates?
Mr. Carvajal. Sure, our staff, we have approximately 80
percent of our staff, which is about 30,000 staff that are
fully vaccinated. We have about 95,000 inmates, 93,000-95,000
inmates, it is a moving target, changes constantly, that is
about 70 percent of our population. We continue to offer the
vaccine and the booster to all inmates and of course, people
can change their mind at any time if they choose to come back
and get it, we make the vaccine available.
Ms. Bass. For the 20 percent of the staff that are not
vaccinated, what protocols do you have in place? Do they have
to get tested weekly or what is in place?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, prior to the mandate, we were offering
weekly testing. It was voluntary. Obviously, when the mandate
came out, we mandated weekly testing for unvaccinated. There
was a preliminary injunction issued in January by a judge. We
are observing that. We ceased enforcement of the vaccine
mandate and all processes with it, but we continue to encourage
staff and inmates to become vaccinated, and as I say, that is a
moving target, but we average about 80 percent staff, 70
percent inmates.
Ms. Bass. Thank you. My time has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. My fingers are now working, Ranking Member
Biggs, and it is my pleasure to yield to you your five minutes
for your questioning of the Director. Thank you very much.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. Director Carvajal,
again, thanks for being here today. A Federal court issued an
injunction to block implementation of President Biden's vaccine
mandate for Federal employees. Were any BOP employees fired for
not receiving the vaccine prior to the injunction being issued?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, I don't have the exact numbers
off my head, but we can certainly follow up and get that
information back to you.
Mr. Biggs. So, Director, are you saying that, yes, you
believe some were required, but you don't have the exact
number?
Mr. Carvajal. I do believe some were, Congressman, but I do
not have that information in front of me, and I could certainly
get it back to you.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you.
Do you know if those employees will be rehired?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, again, I will consult with my
human resource directors. There are processes. So, we are
observing the processes, and they do have a new process. So, we
can get back to you with that exact information.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you very much.
Other Federal agencies are creating databases to track
employees who request religious exemptions to President Biden's
vaccine mandate for Federal employees. Has the BOP created a
database to track religious exemption requests?
Mr. Carvajal. Again, Congressman, with the mandate, we were
exploring and reviewing and approving, as necessary, religious
and medical exemptions. We have ceased that process because of
the preliminary injunction, and we are following the guidance
given to us, and we--
Mr. Biggs. Okay. I just want to make sure I understand
this. I am sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt. I just want to
make sure I understand this. So, you were constructing a
database and you are not now? Is that what I understood? That
is what I understood.
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congressman, obviously, we track it. We
have a process to keep track of the information. So, yes, there
is a database. Along with everything else we do, it is tracked
for accountability purposes, so that we know what the status is
and things of that nature. We have since ceased the enforcement
of that.
Mr. Biggs. Okay. I appreciate Ms. Bass' line of questioning
because I have a lot of the similar-type questions. In my
opening statement, I mentioned a couple of examples of
individuals released from BOP custody because of COVID-19, and
they committed serious crimes afterwards. Is BOP tracking
recidivism rates to see if individuals who have been released
because of COVID-19 have committed crimes after their release?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, the recidivism data that we use,
our recidivism rate for the Bureau of Prisons is 43 percent.
The States actually own the recidivism data. We work with them.
I don't know that enough time has elapsed since the passage of
the CARES Act, but I would have to ask specific questions about
that. Again, there is a difference between someone we release
and tracking them and someone who is still in our custody in
home confinement.
Mr. Biggs. So, I understand that the court makes the final
determination on a compassionate release petition. Are you
tracking those who have been released on compassionate release
for recidivism rates?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, I don't want to misspeak. Again,
when we release someone from our custody, we do not, the Bureau
of Prisons does not track them. They are released from our
custody. They are returning citizens. The State, again, owns
the recidivism data. We work with them and other entities to
get that, but I can have my staff get back with you. I,
obviously, don't know the exact procedures, but we can get that
information for you.
Mr. Biggs. So, okay. I appreciate that. I wish you would
and reach out to my staff.
In particular, for instance, I want to make sure I
understand this. So, in Arizona, if someone is given a
compassionate release, you guys don't track it, but the Arizona
law enforcement, Department of Corrections, maybe the
Department of Public Safety, somebody is tracking it and gives
you data? Is that your understanding?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congressman. It is a collaboration of us
working with the State and other law enforcement entities.
There are a lot of moving parts here. Again, it is way above my
head, but, yes, that data, obviously, being tracked.
Mr. Biggs. Yes, and I guess I have been asking about
compassionate release, and I would assume the First Step Act,
the same thing under a recidivism issue?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes. Obviously, there is interest in our
First Step Act data, and we are working with NIJ and outside
consultants to review data and things like that. We are working
on a platform. I know one of the criticisms early on is that we
didn't have that data. Again, there is a lot of moving parts.
It isn't because we don't want to track it. There is a lot of
entities here. We have to collaborate with other local, State,
and Federal law enforcement agencies to appropriately do that.
Mr. Biggs. Well, Director, I hope that we can get that
information sooner rather than later. Whatever we can do to
help facilitate that, please let me know. I will have my office
reach out to you, and if you would have yours reach out to
mine. I think this information is critical because I think
everybody wants to understand that.
Thanks again for being here.
Madam Chair, my time has expired. I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Ranking Member very much. I
will now yield myself the customary 5 minutes.
My time is short, Mr. Carvajal. Thank you so very much. I
appreciate your respect of that.
Following the deaths of two inmates in the U.S.
Penitentiary in Beaumont, Texas, on Monday, all BOP facilities
have had a lockdown. Can you explain the decision to institute
the lockdown, the national lockdown, and how long are inmates
confined to their cells during the 24-hour period? If you can
just give a brief answer on that, we will take a longer one in
writing. Director?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congresswoman, a decision to lockdown
the entire agency is a serious one. We did it because we felt
we needed to find out what is going on. I won't get into
specific operational things, but the groups involved, there are
approximately 2,500 in our custody spread throughout the
agency. We need to make sure that we separate them and secure
them. I am hoping that the lockdown will be short-lived. We do
not like keeping inmates, again, in their cells, and we will do
our best to get them out quickly but keeping the safety of
everyone in mind.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
If you would give this Committee an update on the moment
that the lockdown stops, we would appreciate it, for all the
Members.
Following up, Beaumont Low in Texas, a low-security
facility, currently has 10 infected inmates; 942 inmates have
recovered from COVID--that seems very high--out of 1,974 total
inmates, including the camp and the correctional institution,
which includes low-offense individuals. That is almost half of
the inmate population that has been infected with COVID-19.
Twenty staff are COVID-positive right now and 40 have
recovered.
How many inmates were placed into home confinement from FCI
Beaumont Low? How many inmates were released on the
compassionate release from FCI Beaumont Low? Are old inmates at
low-security facilities such as FCI Beaumont Low given priority
to be assessed for release under the CARES Act compassionate
release or First Step Act? If so, what age inmates are given
priority? If not by age, are any inmates at FCI Beaumont Low
given priority to be assessed for release? You can answer the
last question first, please. Director?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congresswoman. I don't have the exact
data for every specific institution like Beaumont Low. We could
certainly get you that data. I know we have it; I just don't
have it off the top--
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Do you use the CARES Act? Is
that ongoing to be utilized today since it is still operable in
law? Do you use that?
Mr. Carvajal. Absolutely. We continue to screen inmates for
the appropriate placement under the CARES Act.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Under the CARES Act, with your discretion,
individuals do not have to meet the 50 percent time of their
sentence, is that correct?
Mr. Carvajal. That is one of the criteria, along with
others. There are only four hard criteria.
Ms. Jackson Lee. It is correct--right, but they do not have
to meet a 50 percent incarceration rate of their sentence?
Mr. Carvajal. In instances like that, we do have the
discretion. There usually is a higher-level review. If the
staff at the institution feel that it is appropriate outside of
the CARES Act, we have procedures in place to review cases such
as that.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes, but you have that authority. Mr.
Manafort and Mr. Cohen, to your knowledge, did not have 50
percent of their sentence, is that correct?
Mr. Carvajal. I am not going to talk about individual
specific cases, Congresswoman, but we have procedures in place.
We have a Committee that reviews them. I can certainly go
through that process if you would like.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I would appreciate it if you
could provide us in writing, if you are not going to discuss it
on the individuals released under the 50 percent rule.
Let me ask you, what are you doing to prevent more COVID-19
deaths in the BOP facilities?
Mr. Carvajal. Congresswoman, we have been in lockstep with
the CDC and other entities from day one. We are doing the same
thing that everyone else in the country and the world is doing.
We are learning how to mitigate this virus. As stated earlier,
it is hard to social distance inside a prison. We have learned
from that. That is why we appreciate the ability under the
CARES Act to transfer people out, because we were able to lower
our population in those low-security facilities, as the one you
described, who it is harder to maintain. We are following CDC
guidance. We do everything in collaboration with them. Frankly,
our pandemic plan actually assisted in writing the correctional
guidance for the pandemic.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Thank you, Director. I will get
the rest in writing. Thank you very much.
Are you aware of the racially disparate impact of the
PATTERN risk assessment tool, and that inmates of color may be
more likely to be scored as high risk than white? With this in
mind, have you considered revising the threshold cutoff between
risk categories, which would enable more individuals to earn
credits for an early release and maximize the benefits of the
First Step Act, and take away the racial disparity that we see
very clearly? Director?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congresswoman, I want to stress one
thing. The PATTERN tool, the BOP did not develop it. It is
developed by NIJ and approved by the Attorney General. We are
aware of changes. We appropriately make those adjustments and
rescore inmates anytime there is a change. We work with the
Department to do that. We are the end user of that tool; we did
not create it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Finally, do you think it would help
inmates on the compassionate release if BOP filed the motions
rather than the inmates?
Mr. Carvajal. Congresswoman, as I stated earlier, we don't
have the authority to independently release someone. We work
with the Department of Justice, and we make recommendations to
the court. The judiciary makes the final decision. We do make
staff available to gather documents. We work with the
attorneys. We work with the public defenders and the courts to
ensure that all the documents are available, so that we can
go--it is just not a quick process. That is what people need to
understand. The compassionate release process is a difficult
one, and it has to be done individually. Each individual case
has to be fully considered under its unique circumstances. It
is not a fast process.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. My time has expired. Thank you
very much. We will pursue that with you.
I now yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to thank you, Director Carvajal, for being here with
the Committee today.
Before coming to Congress over a quarter century ago now, I
served as a local elected official on the Cincinnati City
Council and on the County Commission, Hamilton County, Ohio. In
those two capacities, I was very involved with our
incarceration at the local level--things like double-celling
inmates to help with the overcrowding situation that we had,
and then, work release programs, where we got inmates out
picking up trash on the highways, cutting down weeds, two-for-
one-type programs, and those types of things.
So, when I got here to Congress and onto this Committee,
the Judiciary Committee, I wanted to continue in that effort.
One of the closest things was prison industries are now UNICOR,
which I wanted to discuss here in a second.
I also got involved and worked with, for example, former
Representative Rob Portman, who is now a United States Senator.
He was one of the principals moving forces for the Second
Chance Act, which we worked with him on, and then, the First
Step Act, which we passed some time ago. I worked with Adam
Schiff in a bipartisan manner on the Justice Reinvestment
Initiative, to make sure that Members--we have sent out letters
over the years urging Members to support funding for that
particular program.
So, before I ask you about UNICOR Prison Industries, I just
wanted to say that most of the inmates we have at the Federal
level--this is certainly the case at the local level as well--
these inmates, whereas, most of them, for the most part, do
need to be removed from society because they have committed a
crime, and, yes, punishment is involved. The fact is the vast
majority of these folks are going to be out on our streets
someday. So, we are a lot better off as a society if we
recognize that and, if possible, reform some of them and get
them job skills that they can actually work in the private
sector someday, to keep them from coming back. Now, it doesn't
work perfectly, but it can work. I strongly support those and
will continue to do that.
Back to prison industries, which, then, transformed into
UNICOR, this is the program that we have where the prisoners at
the Federal level actually are in work programs. So, they are
learning a skill that they will, hopefully, be able to carry
over into the private sector, which should help recidivism
rates, which means that people don't come back to prison. The
recidivism rates are far too high, as we know; people do tend
to come back. This is one where the rates tend over time to
better when you actually give these people a skill. Oftentimes,
we might think of a stereotype of people are making license
plates, or something, but it could be furniture; it could be a
whole range of things.
So, I would just like to give you a little time here, if
you could, to tell us how that program is going; what your
experience has been. How has it affected recidivism rates? Is
it a positive thing, those types of things, Mr. Director?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, thank you, Congressman.
UNICOR absolutely is a benefit to the agency. It was
established by Congress in 1934. The sole mission of UNICOR is
to train and employ inmates, for exactly what you said, and
give them a skill to return as productive members of society.
The last recidivism review they did on UNICOR, which is
several years old, 24 percent of inmates that worked for
Federal Prison Industries were less likely to recidivate; 16
percent of them were more likely to be gainfully employed upon
release. So, it is a good program. We like to say it is one of
our No. 1, if not the No. 1, evidence-based programs because it
teaches the skills you spoke of. You are correct, approximately
95 percent of people in our custody are going to return to
society. So, it is important to do that.
We have a board of directors. They take their statutory
responsibilities very seriously. They do minimize the impact to
any given industry. Certainly, we do that through public
comment, board hearings, things of that nature. For those that
think we are taking from local industry, there are procedures
in place to stay compliant with that.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much.
I don't have a lot of time left. So, just let me ask one
other thing. I know that one of the greatest challenges that
you all have when inmates are there, they are criminals, so
they have got there because they committed a crime. They can
prey on each other, or they can make it very dangerous for the
guards. So, a program like prison industries, is that also a
mechanism for a tool for maintaining kind of good behavior and
making sure that it is a less dangerous environment than it
otherwise might be?
Mr. Carvajal. Absolutely, Congressman. One of the biggest
things that we battle in a prison is idle minds. So, anything
we can do to keep people productive and learning a trade or a
skill is our goal.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. I think my time has
expired, Madam Chair. So, I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman's time has expired. Let me
for a moment thank the Members who are here today. I will yield
to Ms. Demings in a moment, but I want to acknowledge
Congresswoman Dean, Congresswoman Scanlon, Congressman
Cicilline, Congressman Lieu, Congressman Cohen, Congressman
Biggs, Congressman Chabot, Congressman Steube, Congressman
Tiffany, Congressman Massie, Congresswoman Spartz, Congressman
Fitzgerald, and Congressman Owens. Thank you for your presence
here today.
It is my pleasure now to yield 5 minutes to the gentlelady
from Florida. You are now recognized, Ms. Demings. Thank you so
very much for your service.
Ms. Demings. Well, good morning, and thank you so much,
Madam Chair. Thank you for the exceptional work that you are
doing in this particular area.
Director Carvajal, it is great to see you, and thank you
for joining us.
I just want to, first, just make it quite clear that we all
understand that there are some people who need to be locked up,
but we also understand that many of them will integrate back
into society, and it is incumbent upon us to make sure that
they have the training, tools, techniques that they need to be
successful. We all understand that.
Director, you spoke a little bit about UNICOR and how
successful it has been. Could you just talk a little bit more
about that program and how we can even improve upon the success
of that program? How can Congress be a better partner in
helping those that will be coming back into society?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, I appreciate that, Congresswoman. I
think speaking about it and being able to support the program,
in and of itself--oftentimes, we are criticized that we are
taking jobs from the local communities. As I stated earlier, we
have a Board of Directors who oversees that. It is a great
program--the more that we can keep inmates, teaching them the
trades and working.
The other thing that I think that hits home is that we are
teaching them the soft skills of re-entry. Some of these folks
have never had an actual job in a factory and punched a clock,
so to speak. They are also earning a decent living for being
incarcerated. Part of that is paying their financial
responsibility. A lot of them are able to help support their
families. Again, teaching that soft skill, which is 50 percent
of our mission, re-entry.
I have to stress that we want the same thing. We want
people to go back to society as productive members of society,
and we are committed to doing that. Half of our mission is
keeping people safe and secure. The other half, which we are
equally committed to, is making sure that they get the skills
to go back and be productive members of the community.
Ms. Demings. Director, thank you for that.
You also talked about in your opening statement some of the
challenges that you have in terms of needing staff and
requirements, that you are being outbidded by other State and
local organizations or agencies. I am certainly sensitive to
that.
Could you talk a little bit more about what--look,
increased salaries are probably ``the answer,'' but could you
talk about some of the other maybe creative ways that you are
looking to not only recruit COs, but to retain them?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes. Thank you, Congresswoman. Very much a
priority for us. It always has been. Again, I stated earlier
that there is a narrative out there that we can't hire. That is
not true. We have proved we can hire.
We have several locations that are chronically difficult to
staff. In those places, as you stated, we have a hard time
competing with local industry or other correctional agencies.
We don't set the pay bands for that. OPM does that. We are
working with the Department on other types of incentives. We
use recruitment and retention incentives. We use relocation
incentives. All of those are things that we work with to get
approval from the Department and support going to OPM to be
able to look at these areas.
Some of the hard-to-staff places, as the Congresswoman
stated earlier, are Beaumont. Beaumont, as the rest of the U.S.
pay scale, it is really hard to compete with local industry
there, when they, frankly, can get paid more working down the
street. That is one of the challenges. Beaumont is a great
facility. I spent four years of my career there. So, it is not
the facility; it is us being able to compete with the location.
Ms. Demings. Director, finally, I remember hearing some
concerns about or centered around officer safety because of
staffing shortages, where personnel that weren't necessarily
trained as correctional officers, if you will, were being
utilized in that capacity. Could you talk a little bit more
about that? If that is just a rumor, set all of us at ease
about it.
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congresswoman, I absolutely appreciate
the opportunity to set the record straight here. First, we
would not put untrained people in there. We are very fortunate,
as a correctional agency--it is one of the things we pride
ourselves on--that all our staff are correctional-trained
correctional workers. They receive the same training regardless
of where they work. We have uniformed staff that are
correctional officers, and the nurses, the food service people,
the teachers, everyone goes through the exact same training.
That gives us the ability to utilize these staff safely, Okay?
So, that narrative is inaccurate when you hear it.
We are challenged with staffing. I will tell you that we
are funded at 90 percent. During my tour as Director, our
priority has been staffing. We have funded all the positions
that we get money for. As I mentioned earlier, at one point, I
hired 1,000 over. My staff went 1,000 over. We are able to do
that because our human resources know our attrition rate. So,
we try to get ahead of it, but it is a constant challenge.
There is a lot of moving parts. It is a very large
organization. Thirty-eight thousand staff is a lot of people to
keep track of. Ms. Demings. Thank you so much, Director.
Madam Chair, I am out of time. I yield back. Thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady yields back. Her time has
expired. Thank you so very much.
My pleasure to yield now 5 minutes to Congressman Steube.
You are recognized.
Mr. Steube. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Director, thanks for being here. Obviously, the Committee
has a lot of questions, and we appreciate your attendance
today.
On July 1st of last year, I wrote a letter to both you and
the Director of the D.C. Department of Corrections about the
treatment of the January 6th suspects. Your office responded on
July 21st. The D.C. Department of Corrections has so far
refused to answer, and we are almost a year after the fact that
I sent the letter.
Director, I recognize that many of the most egregious
examples of mistreatment of January 6th inmates happened not in
your system, but in the D.C. Jail. It has reported that January
6th inmates in the D.C. Jail who are not vaccinated for COVID-
19 are forced into solitary confinement for 14 days after
meeting with their attorneys. Yes or no, does BOP have the same
policy in your facilities?
Mr. Carvajal. No, Congressman, we do not.
Mr. Steube. Well, I am glad to hear that, and that also
highlights how out of step and illegal the policies are of the
D.C. Jail regarding January 6th inmates.
It has also been reported that January 6th inmates in the
D.C. Jail have not been allowed haircuts or to attend religious
services unless they are vaccinated for COVID-19. Yes or no,
does BOP have the same policy?
Mr. Carvajal. No, Congressman, we treat all people in our
custody--everybody has equal access and is treated with dignity
and has access to everything equally, regardless of--
Mr. Steube. Thank you for your response. This further shows
how egregious the D.C. Jail's mistreatment are of January 6th
inmates.
It has further been reported that January 6th inmates in
the D.C. Jail have been denied medical treatment. This was
largely the basis for a Federal judge finding the warden in
contempt. In your experience as a career law enforcement
officer and a prison official, is this acceptable conduct by a
correctional institution to deny medical treatment?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, I am not going to comment on
what another correctional agency does without knowing all the
information. I just stress to you that, in the BOP, which is
who I represent, everyone has equal access to medical care
programs, community placement, things of that nature. I would
refer you to D.C. Corrections.
Mr. Steube. Well, I did, and they are not answering my
questions. So, I am just highlighting the differences in how
you run your agency and how they are running theirs.
Additionally, I would like to ask for an update on the
statistics provided to me in your office's response to that
July 1st letter. If you know the answers offhand, that would be
great, but I understand if you don't have that in front of you
or you don't know. I would like your commitment today to follow
up with my office on the following:

First, the number of January 6th inmates in your, in BOP's
custody that are awaiting trial and the number of such inmates
who are in special housing units.
Second, the number of January 6th inmates serving sentences
and the number of such inmates who are in special housing
units.

I would ask your commitment today to get me those
responses.
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congressman, I could get you those
responses. I am aware of we have 19 in our custody. Eight of
those are pretrial. As to their specific housing today, I don't
want to misspeak, but I will certainly follow up with that
information with your staff.
Mr. Steube. Okay. I would appreciate that.
You said 19 in custody, and how many in pretrial
confinement?
Mr. Carvajal. Nineteen in custody. Eight of those are
pretrial. I don't know their exact status today. I don't want
to misspeak.
Mr. Steube. If you could provide the details of that, not
just to me, but I am sure the Members of this Committee would
also be interested in that information.
I have got a little bit of time left. So, one more
question. In your office response to my letter, it was noted
that judges, quote, ``routinely make recommendations to the
Bureau regarding placement of an inmate at a specific
institution or enrolled in programs.'' Your office also noted
that the Bureau's policy requires, and I quote, ``a good-faith
effort to follow these judicial recommendations.''
I would point out that such judicial recommendations are
often very much at the discretion of the judge. While I
generally have faith in our judiciary to fairly call balls and
strikes on purely legal matters, on discretionary issues such
as this, it is obviously possible for personal biases to come
into play.
So, my question is this: If a judge makes a recommendation
on the terms of a January 6th inmate's custody, and that
recommendation was influenced by the judge's political
leanings, BOP would be compelled by policy to make a good-faith
effort to follow the recommendation, is that correct?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, recommendations that are made by
the judiciary, we certainly respect them and work with them,
but there is a lot of moving parts inside our agency. We make
the final determination. It is simply that, a recommendation,
and we give it the look, but, ultimately, we make those
decisions based on the best place to quarter and keep people
safe and secure.
Mr. Steube. Thank you, Madam Chair. My time is expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you.
It is my pleasure to now yield 5 minutes to the gentlelady
from Pennsylvania, Congresswoman Dean.
Ms. Dean. I thank you, Madam Chair, for hosting this
important hearing.
I thank you, Director Carvajal, for your work.
I was happy to hear last April before a Senate Judiciary
Committee that BOP was working to expand mental health
treatment and vocational training and life skills. I also hope
the BOP is expanding substance use disorder treatment, recovery
therapy, and the rest.
One thing I have in mind, in particular, are educational
opportunities. We know they make all the difference in helping
to break this cycle of recidivism and reincarceration, which is
why I introduced Elijah Cummings' PREP Act, legislation that
would ensure that incarcerated individuals receive educational
opportunities they need to successfully re-enter their
communities, re-enter their lives after completing their
sentences.
Can you give us information on the number of people today
enrolled in your system in educational opportunities?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congresswoman. The current information
is we have over 75,000 inmates enrolled in one of our 80
Evidence-based Recidivism Reduction Programs and Productive
Activities. Even since COVID, although we were hindered by the
pandemic and we had to slow things down, over 151,000 inmates
completed programming. Of course, the literacy programs, the
GED, we offer many trades. We have over 200 career technical
educations. We have done a lot of work with expanding programs
specifically for the female offenders. We have dedicated staff
just to make sure that we process that population's special and
unique needs. We are working with the Department of Labor to
expand apprenticeship programs because we know that vocational
trades help people get jobs when they go out.
Ms. Dean. Some of the things that the PREP Act would do
would be higher education, college credits. What percentage of
inmates are enrolled in educational programming?
Mr. Carvajal. Congresswoman, I don't have the exact numbers
off the top of my head, but I will certainly follow up. I am
sure we could get you that information.
Ms. Dean. Okay. Terrific. If you would share that with the
Committee, that would be great.
What programs are in place regarding addiction and
substance use disorder? What percentage of inmates struggle
with either mental health or addiction? How many are being
offered treatment?
Mr. Carvajal. Congresswoman, we have many drug-abuse
programs available. We have a Residential Drug Abuse Program
that is one of our best evidence-based programs. We also, under
the First Step Act, expanded our MAT treatments. It targets a
specific subset for people with opioid use disorder. We
currently work on expanding those treatments.
I don't know the exact percentage. It is a high amount of
people that come into our system with drug and alcohol abuse
programs. I don't have the exact percentages, but we could
certainly get them to you.
Ms. Dean. I would really appreciate it if we could get the
percentages and, also, to understand if treatment is
universally available throughout the system. We know that there
is a high correlation of addiction and substance use disorder
and incarceration.
On to the solitary confinement in the few minutes that I
have left. We read reports; we hear from inmates and their
families on the dangerous side effects of solitary confinement,
the serious, lasting psychological damage, contrary to the very
set of questions I just asked you.
Pre-pandemic, it was conservatively estimated that 60,000
to 80,000 people were confined to solitary, and we understand
that solitary may have been used as a substitute during COVID
for isolation, medically required isolation. Can you give us an
update on the use of solitary confinement, and importantly, I
hope on a recognition that it is a failed practice?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congresswoman. We average around 9,000
inmates at any given time in our restrictive housing units.
About 8,000 of those are for administrative purposes--pending
placements and conducting investigations. Sometimes there are
separations for their own safety. There was 1,100 in there
pending disciplinary action. We try to use alternative
sanctions. We try to limit the time that someone spends in
restrictive housing.
One of the things that we have done to address this issue,
for just some of the reasons you stated, is that we have
expanded what we call our Reintegration Housing Unit Program,
which allows that group of inmates who tend to spend time in
restricted housing a general-population-type atmosphere, a
smaller general population, so that we can remove them from
restricted housing.
So, that is something that we monitor daily. We are
committed to ensuring that everyone in there has access to
programming. They do medical and everything else. We also
ensure that we make rounds daily and check on the inmates. They
have constant inmate contact.
Ms. Dean. Director, I thank you for your answers and I look
forward to the information coming to the Committee.
I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentlelady. Her time is
expired.
I am pleased to yield 5 minutes to Mr. Tiffany. Mr.
Tiffany, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, and good morning, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Good morning.
Mr. Tiffany. First, Director, can those that were fired,
your staff, as a result of not taking the vaccine, can they get
their jobs back?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, we have processes for all that,
and I'm certain that we will follow them and afford us the
appropriate due process, following OPM guidance and regulations
and all the rules and laws.
Mr. Tiffany. Are prison ministries allowed in the Bureau of
Prisons?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congressman, they are.
Mr. Tiffany. Have they been in during COVID?
Mr. Carvajal. Well, we had to restrict through our COVID
operations, obviously, people coming in, for their safety and
for ours. We don't want to introduce COVID into our
environments. So, it's been restricted, but we worked on that
and we have a matrix out there operational.
The institution CEO, if they fall into that criterion, they
can make those adjustments daily. So, for any given place,
Congressman, I can't answer that today, but we can certainly
get you the information if you're interested in a specific
location.
Mr. Tiffany. Please do that. With the explosion in crime in
the United States in the last couple of years, have you seen an
increase in the inmate population in the Bureau of Prisons?
Mr. Carvajal. Actually, Congressman, our population has
decreased over the last several years.
Mr. Tiffany. Is part of that as a result of the COVID
releases that you've done? I think you detailed those numbers
earlier.
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congressman, it is. Please keep in mind
that we're on the back end of the criminal justice system, so
it takes time to go through the system. So, I would defer some
of that information probably to the DOJ. We get them at the
back end of it.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much. Whether you're vaccinated
or unvaccinated, you can still contract COVID-19. Why are we
still releasing inmates?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, if I understand your
correction--or your question correctly, under the CARES Act, is
that what your question is, why are we releasing inmates under
the CARES Act?
Mr. Tiffany. Yeah, yes.
Mr. Carvajal. Because it is a statute, we're following it,
the guidance that we were given. So, we follow the law,
Congressman.
Mr. Tiffany. Do you think we should rethink that, as the
Congress sets this policy, or can change the policy?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, I would defer to you and the
Members of Congress to answer that.
Mr. Tiffany. So, we had the two stabbing deaths down in I
believe it's the Beaumont facility in Texas. Prior to the
stabbing incident, if these two people would have had COVID, is
it possible they could have asked for release under the law?
Mr. Carvajal. Well, Congressman, I want to make sure I
paint the right picture here. We're going to appropriately
review everybody by the criteria, but the level, the security
level where this incident happened and the fact that these
individuals were members of a security threat group and at a
high security, the chances of them being released were probably
very slim.
Because one of the criteria is you cannot have a crime of
violence, and it appears that these individuals were involved
in violence, precisely why prisons exist. There is a small
fraction of people, as these, that are going to continue their
criminal activity.
Mr. Tiffany. It's not completely ruled out that they could
have gotten released.
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, that's why we have the criteria,
and we utilize our good discretion and judgment and follow that
statute.
Mr. Tiffany. Federal prison inmates are keeping large sums
of money, as much as $100,000 each in government-run deposit
accounts, effectively shielded from court orders, including
people like the pedophile Larry Nasser, the Boston bomber, and
Mr. Tsarnaev. What's specific plans does the Bureau have in
place to ensure victims get what they are owed?
Mr. Carvajal. Hey, Congressman, good question. First, I
want to stress something that currently the BOP does not have
the authority to seize funds independently from an inmate
without their consent. We are working with the Department of
Justice to change that Rule that will allow us to automatically
encumber funds or a portion of their funds to pay fines and
restitution. Our inmate trust fund collections about six
million annually to make sure that they pay restitution, but I
stress again that we don't independently have the authority to
retrieve funds.
We work with other law enforcement entities. In that case,
the United States Marshal's Office, the United States
Attorney's Office, and the courts, in those matters when we
have to do that.
Mr. Tiffany. Yeah, I think that's something, Madam Chair,
that should really be looked at. The other thing that I would
urge, Madam Chair, we need to hear, after hearing Mr. Steube's
questioning, and I'm so glad the representative from
Pennsylvania was concerned about the solitary confinement.
We need to have a hearing on the January 6th detainees. We
need to have a full airing of what is going on with those
January 6th detainees, because they are being submitted to
conditions that many on this Committee, including the other
side of the aisle, find reprehensible. It's time to have a
hearing on January 6th detainees.
I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman's
time has expired, and I'm pleased to yield to the gentlelady
from Pennsylvania, Ms. Scanlon. You're recognized now for five
minutes.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, Madam Chair, appreciate you having
this hearing today. Thank you, Director Carvajal, for being
with us.
I was hoping you could help me clarify just for a minute
what the baseline population that we're talking about here,
sorry. As I understand it, the inmate population for the Bureau
of Prisons from 1940-1980 was around 24,000. Is that right?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, ma'am. If my memory serves me correctly,
yes. I don't have that information right in front of me.
Ms. Scanlon. I'm actually pulling it off your website here.
Then the population doubled in the '80s to about 58,000,
doubled again in the '90s to 136,000, and continued to climb
until 2013, at which point the Bureau of Prisons was housing
about 217,000 people. Is that right?
Mr. Carvajal. That is correct.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay, what is your current census of inmates
in the Bureau of Prisons?
Mr. Carvajal. I'm not sure I understand your question,
Congresswoman.
Ms. Scanlon. Are you currently housing about 153,000
inmates?
Mr. Carvajal. Oh, yes, I'm sorry, I just didn't hear you.
About 153,000, 134,000 at our 120 Bureau facilities. There's
about 62,000 in for--private contract facilities, 7,100 in
RRCs, and the 5,400 I mentioned in home confinement for CARES
Act.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay, thank you, I was having trouble figuring
out where all the numbers were.
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, those are rough estimates, they change
daily.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay, I think everyone on the Committee knows
that by the time we got to 2013, or so we had widespread
agreement, everyone from the Koch brothers to the Obama Justice
Department saying we are over-incarcerating people in this
country and it's a huge financial drain as well as a huge waste
of human capital and a human rights problem.
Now, there's been some emphasis on the purpose of the
Bureau of Prisons to be punishment, but it also has a
rehabilitative purpose, doesn't it?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congresswoman. I'd like to stress
something, that we're not here for punishment. The taking of
their time by the courts and the criminal justice system,
that's the punishment. We're here to house people that are
remanded to our custody, and more importantly, to prepare them
to re-enter society, keep them safe while we're here.
We're not here as punishment, that's not how we look at
this agency.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay, I'm particularly interested, as some of
my colleagues have been, in the rehabilitative function, the
efforts that are made to ensure that when people are released
from prison, they're able to successfully re-enter, and that
they're not worse off than they were before they went in.
Because that doesn't seem to serve society well either.
What is the current recidivism rate, to your knowledge,
from the Federal prisons?
Mr. Carvajal. It's about 43 percent.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay, you might want to update the website,
it's saying 34 percent. Has there been a significant change in
recent years?
Mr. Carvajal. No, ma'am, I'll have to have my staff look at
that website. I've never--I'm not familiar with it being in the
'30s.
Ms. Scanlon. It's on the home page.
Mr. Carvajal. We'll correct that.
Ms. Scanlon. So, with respect to--my colleague Ms. Dean
talked a little bit about some of the educational programs. I
recently had a constituent reach out about a relative's
participation in the Bureau of Prison's Drug Abuse
Rehabilitation Program, or RDAP.
They've encountered problems getting all their earned
credits counted towards release because the program was paused
by COVID-19. Eventually this constituent's relative was able to
get the credits, but they had to go to court, and that's not a
particularly cost-effective method of dealing with this for
anyone.
I know that RDAP was paused at many facilities. Is that
still the case? If not, is it back up and running at all
facilities where it was previously offered?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congresswoman. As I stated earlier,
COVID certainly impacts our institutions. We have an
operational matrix dictates how they operate. We have been
affected by it. I know that certain inmates have been affected.
We expect our staff to work with them.
I'm not familiar with the particular case you're talking
about, but we can certainly get back with you on that, the
specifics of that case.
Otherwise, we go to the point of trying to work with them
so that they can benefit from home confinement, finishing the
program, getting their time credits in. The whole goal is for
them to get the time credits.
Again, I'd like to stress that we're not trying to keep
people in except unless they need to be in. If they earn any
time credits, we want them to go back to society as
appropriate.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay, one last question, I'm running out of
time. I was very interested in the effort to put more
apprenticeship programs in there so that people have hard
skills that are going to enable them to become employed when
they get out. What is the trajectory on that? How many places
have apprenticeship programs, and what efforts are being made
to expand that?
Mr. Carvajal. We're--
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Director, I'll allow you to answer the question. Thank you.
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you.
Mr. Carvajal. Congresswoman, we can get back to you with
that specific information. We are working with Department of
Labor to grow that program.
Ms. Scanlon. Okay, thank you, appreciate it. Yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank the gentlelady for her questioning.
Now, it's my privilege to yield five minutes to Mr. Massie.
The gentleman is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Massie. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to thank you, Director Carvajal, for your staff
being responsive to one of my inquiries about how many
vaccination exemptions have been granted at the BOP. It looks
like, as of January 20, there were 4,738 exemptions. Most of
them were religious exemptions.
Instead of asking you, I want to inform you that this has
had a very negative effect on the morale of the officers, that
fact they are required to live under a vaccine mandate and the
inmates are not. It's interesting that the inmates have more
rights than the officers themselves.
They also resent that they've had to apply for religious
exemptions when, in fact, they should have been granted a
medical exemption. At least some of them have been able to get
the exemptions.
You may want to check in on whether you completely
suspended this mandate, because there are officers who are
still required to do the weekly testing if they're not
vaccinated, per the mandate, and also to certify that they have
a religious exemption. Even as of this week they've had to do
that.
I appreciate the accommodations that you have made, because
it will negatively affect morale in recruiting if we do keep
this vaccine mandate in place.
I want to ask you how many correctional officers were
budgeted for the BOP by Congress? I'll give you my number, it's
not a gotcha. The number I have, I'm just trying to see if it's
correct, is 20,446.
Mr. Carvajal. That, yes, Congressman. Again, I appreciate
the opportunity to clarify that. Specific correctional
officers, what we call the correctional officer that work those
posts, is approximately 14,000.
The 20,000 you're referring to is 6,000 additional support
positions that fall under the correctional officer series. This
is a classification issue, and it's often confusing, that
encumbers other positions that work in correctional services.
The actual, true correctional officers that we look at is
approximately 14,000.
Mr. Massie. Have the 6,000 been hired?
Mr. Carvajal. We have a currently, Congressman, about 1,100
correctional officer vacancies right now. Almost half of those
are at seven locations that are hard to fill.
Mr. Massie. Okay. There's one facility in my district,
Ashland FCI, where five years ago they had 130 officers, and
now they have 100 and they're told they're going to 98, yet
they've got more inmates. We see that augmentation is being
used there.
So, I'm concerned that the inmates are going up and the
officers are going down. Because I'd like for it to be a safe
environment, and I think if it's understaffed, it's not safe.
Also, they're utilizing overtime virtually every day at that
facility, and it would be cheaper for the taxpayers if we had
more slots filled.
I've heard that augmentation is being used there to
backfill some of those slots. I'm not going to debate whether
they're trained enough, you've already addressed that, and you
assured us they are. What is augmentation and where do those
people come from when they go serve in roles that correctional
officers might otherwise fill?
Oh, I think you're muted, Director.
Mr. Carvajal. Sorry. Augmentation is a necessary tool that
we use in our agency to make sure that we complete the first
part of our mission, and that's to keep everyone safe and
secure, to be able to do the second part of our mission, which
is give people a chance to return.
As you stated, we often use, we try not to do it, but it's
certainly a tool that we have to use, we use people from other
disciplines, such as teachers, nurses, and things of that
nature. We try to limit that. Those decisions are based upon a
roster locally. The CEO makes those determinations.
I stated earlier we have approximately 1,100 correctional
officer vacancies. I'd like to stress, Congressman, that we are
funded at 90 percent. We have 38,884 positions. We are funded
for 35,161. That's about 3,723 vacancies, about $500 million
we're short.
Our correctional official fill rate has got as high as 94
percent, it's currently 92 percent. So, our goal is to fill
every single position that we are funded for, but I can't spend
money we don't have.
Mr. Massie. Okay. I would for you to look specifically at
Ashland FCI. My concern about augmentation should be a concern
we all have, is when you take away from being teachers to being
guards or other services, then the teaching doesn't happen.
Then we can see higher recidivism, because we know that
vocational schools and education correlate to recidivism.
I would hope that you can get those slots filled, that we
get more slots. We can rely less on overtime and less on
pulling those teachers away who are so important and the other
people who are important for complying with First Step Act.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for indulging me, and I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, the gentleman's time has
expired. It's my privilege now to yield five minutes to the
gentlelady from Georgia, and I thank her for her very powerful
remarks this morning at the National Prayer Breakfast. The
gentlelady from Georgia, Ms. McBath, is recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. McBath. Thank you, Chair Lee, and good afternoon,
Director Carvajal. I thank you for being here today, and I
thank you for your service as the Director, as you will soon be
leaving the Bureau. We just want to thank you for your service.
During this Subcommittee's last hearing, we had an
opportunity to review implementation of the First Step Act. At
the BOP, and the impact that COVID-19 has had on the BOP
operations.
I used that opportunity to inquire at that time into the
BOP's policies addressing the treatment and care of pregnant
women. Specifically, the BOP's alignment with national guidance
for the health and safety of pregnant woman.
Since that time, I was pleased to hear that the BOP has
taken actions to better align its policies on about five of the
eight care topics that the GAO found to not fully be aligned
with the national guidance recommendations.
I hope that the Bureau will continue to work to ensure that
all eight of those care topics are met, so that the health and
wellbeing of pregnant women at the BOP facilities are fully
protected and cared for.
Today, however, I do want to examine how BOP is handling
its re-entry services. The successful re-entry of citizens into
society is integral to annual recidivism efforts, crime in our
communities, and the financial health of these offenders'
rejoining society.
However, it's difficult to, I guess actually to assess
recidivism patterns unless you are properly collecting the data
on it. For example, the last Federal justice statistics
publication on recidivism of Federal offenders that I was able
to locate was published in June 2016.
The latest publication on the employment statuses on
released Federal offenders was published last December but
cover Federal inmates released back in 2010. So further, the
latest, the latest BOP publication on recidivism that I was
able to find was from 2006.
Director Carvajal, what steps has the BOP taken to improve
its data collection to effectively track the progress of
incarcerated individuals as they transition from prison to re-
entry centers or home confinement?
Does the BOP have plans to create standard metrics to
evaluate re-entry outcomes, such as job placement, recidivism,
so that the BOP facilities can share their best practices?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congresswoman. I appreciate your
interest in this. This is very important to us. It's a very
complicated process for the gathering of recidivism data. We
work in conjunction with the States and other law enforcement
entities. We are not sole owners of that data.
I will tell you that staff are working with other
components to set up a platform, and we're committed to working
on bettering that platform to get that data and to track it.
Ms. McBath. Sir, then once that is done or initiated and
completed, could you just please, I'd love, my staff, we would
love to have what that platform looks like and what it entails,
if you would.
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, we can do that, Congresswoman.
Ms. McBath. Thank you. I'm also curious to know how many
re-entry coordinators did the Board of Prisons have per prison
or per prisoner? How many vacancies are there for these jobs?
You've made mention of the number of vacancies that you have,
but how many vacancies are for these jobs and what steps has
the Board of Prisons taken to fill these positions?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congresswoman. We are committed to
filling all our vacancies. As I stated earlier, we strive to do
that. I don't know the exact number of re-entry affairs
coordinators, but those are positions that we strive to fill,
as we do all our positions.
As I stated earlier, we have filled every position we have
funding for, and we're committed to continue to do that. I can
get you the exact numbers, I can get back with you on that, I
don't have them in front of me.
Ms. McBath. No, we really appreciate that effort. I think
my colleagues and I would be really interested to have that
information, and I really appreciate that.
Well, as has been stated by many of my colleagues before
me, we're very, very concerned about, actually people say that
criminals have rights. Yes, they do have rights, just as
victims have rights.
We just want to make sure that when those that are
incarcerated do have the ability to have fair treatment while
they are incarcerated. Because at the end of the day, they're
human beings too.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair, I yield back the balance of
my time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady had yielded back, thank
you. It is my privilege now to yield five minutes to the
gentleman, Mr. Fitzgerald, you are recognized for five minutes.
Thank you.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Madam Chair, sorry about that.
My colleagues on the other side of the aisle introduced
several pieces of legislation that would eliminate bail in the
Federal system and make States then utilize bail for pretrial
release, ineligible for grants under the Edward Byrne Memorial
Justice Assistance Grant Program.
These reforms continue to be pushed in the wake of the
tragic events where violent criminals are released, either on
bond or when they're involved in some of these terrible crimes,
of which some of my colleagues have been talking about this
morning.
Jurisdictions in California, Maryland, New Jersey, New
York, and in my own district, which I represent Milwaukee
County, has modified their bail practices to eliminate or de-
emphasize the use of monetary bail systems.
Coupled with some of my colleagues' desire, which has been
going on for a year, discussions about defunding or dismantling
police department or bail reform efforts, it's troubling. It's
making some of the communities less safe or it's sending the
wrong signal or message to some of these individuals that
ultimately commit these crimes.
Additionally, the Pretrial Integrity and Safety Act will
provide grants to States if they eliminate their money bail
systems. Then things like the Minnesota Freedom Fund, which
even Vice President Harris was involved in for a period of
time. So, this fund and others that are similar have
contributed to this overall concern.
Then right in my back yard, in the 5th Congressional
District in Wisconsin, we had the national attention given to
the Waukesha Christmas parade murders that happened. Darrell
Brooks, the individual, was released on a $1,000 bond after
running over a woman with a vehicle. This is prior to the
parade.
Then he was released on bail, despite having a lengthy
criminal history, including a charge for aggravated battery and
an outstanding warrant in Nevada after skipping bail for a sex-
related crime. Then, as you know, he subsequently drove his car
through the Christmas parade in Waukesha, Wisconsin, killing
six individuals, one of whom was an eight-year-old boy.
Bail reform policies such as cashless bail that have been
supported by some of my colleagues actually do more harm than
help, in what would be consider some of the minority
communities, that could have benefitted from some of these
reforms, as we discuss them at the State and Federal level.
So, Director, I guess crimes that are considered felonies
are being treated as misdemeanors or civil infractions in
controlling the criminal and the justice system from the
perspective of the benefit always goes kind to the criminal,
what's the fallout? I know you talked about this earlier, but
under the First Step, the Act calls upon prisons to create
rules around evidence-based recidivism reduction programs and
productive activity.
Can you comment? There must be a relationship between those
incarcerated and certainly the set of statutes, both at the
State and Federal level and how they affect that. What's the
interaction, during your period of time as Director?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, I'm not sure I understand your
question. We're committed to re-entry. That's 50 percent of our
mission. That other is keeping people safe and secure. We don't
control who comes to our custody, that's on the front end of
the justice system. The courts determine that.
So, when they come in here, our mission is to keep everyone
safe, secure, and ensure that they have equal access to
programming. As I stated before, 95 percent of those people
return to society.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Just one more quick one then. One of my
experiences as a State legislator, as well as in the kind of
relationship that I've tried to develop with the Federal system
within the State of Wisconsin, one of the things that's always
linked is the literacy rate compared to recidivism.
We find that if an inmate can read at an eighth grade
level, they're far more likely to recommit. Is that something
you guys have looked at or checked into, and is it something
that you monitor?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congressman, we have lots of literacy
programs, a high school equivalency, GED. We encourage inmates,
that's part of the risk and needs assessment when they come in.
We assess them and we address their needs. We assign them
programs to address their needs. That's precisely what the
First Step Act is for. We were doing that all along. We've had
a risk and needs assessment, we just formalized it under the
First Step Act.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentleman for his questioning.
Now, I'm pleased to yield to the gentlelady from St. Louis,
Missouri, Vice Chair of this Committee. Congresswoman Bush, you
are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Bush. St. Louis and I thank you, Chair, for convening
this important hearing.
I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record the
experiences of 17 women across five Federal facilities which
have been provided by the National Council of Incarcerated and
Formerly Incarcerated Women and Girls.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

MS. BUSH FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Bush. Thank you. In these emails, women in Federal
custody detail horrifying accounts of not being allowed to get
out of their beds all day because of COVID lockdowns, being
forced to eat expired food, having little to no access to
medical services to treat cancers and other underlying
conditions, having to pay two dollars to file a sick complaint.
This is happening under your watch. These are complaints
coming from not one or not two facilities, but five different
facilities, which makes clear that these issues are not
isolated, but they're systemic. These women cannot hold you
accountable, Mr. Carvajal, they cannot, but we can.
I would like to use this opportunity to ask you questions
that they cannot directly ask you out of fear of retaliation.
Mr. Carvajal, yes or no, are you aware of these complaints
across so many of your facilities?
Mr. Carvajal. Congresswoman, I'm not aware of those
particular complaints, but I'm certainly interested in hearing
from you or staff so that we can look into them. If that
happened, I find it unacceptable.
Ms. Bush. Thank you, thank you. Our staff will be in touch,
thank you for that.
Are complaints filed by people in BOP custody being logged
and am I able to access those logs?
Mr. Carvajal. We absolutely keep a log of complaints. We
take all allegations seriously. We have an Office of Internal
Affairs.
We follow the process, we work with the Office of Inspector
General, and when needed other law enforcement agencies, and
certain the FBI and investigatory agencies. We take all those
complaints and allegations seriously and we look into them.
Ms. Bush. Am I able to access the logs?
Mr. Carvajal. Congresswoman, if you'd like I could have my
staff reach out to you--
Ms. Bush. Okay.
Mr. Carvajal. See, if there is particular information
you're interested in, and if we can, we will provide that to
you.
Ms. Bush. Thank you, thank you. In the midst of a raging
pandemic that has made incarcerated individuals uniquely
vulnerable, rather than allowing people to serve their
sentences from their homes with their families and away from
the trauma and abuse of the BOP system, the Federal prison
population has grown. Keeping them in prison is an Act of
cruelty.
In April of last year, you told the Senate Judiciary
Committee that 50-75 percent of those incarcerated have been
reviewed for home confinement, and that 24,000 out of over
150,000 people in Federal custody have been placed in home
confinement.
As of today, have all those incarcerated been reviewed for
home confinement now, instead of the 50-75 percent?
Mr. Carvajal. Congresswoman, we review all eligible inmates
for home confinement under CARES Act. We did that, we've placed
over 37,000 inmates. Nine thousands of those, more than 9,000,
were specific under CARES Act placement. Those are 9,000
inmates who would not be out in community custody at this point
in their incarceration.
Our population is actually reduced, Congresswoman.
Ms. Bush. Okay, well, we looked at the website earlier
today, so is the website inaccurate?
Mr. Carvajal. I'm not certain which information you're
referring to.
Ms. Bush. We went to the Federal Bureau of Prisons website.
Two weeks ago, I along with Representative Bonnie Watson
Coleman, we sent a letter seeking clarification from the Bureau
on the implementation of the Office of Legal Counsel's new
guidance for those on home confinement under the CARES Act.
We asked for a response no later than February 7 of this
year. Can we get a commitment from you that such a response is
forthcoming, Mr. Carvajal?
Mr. Carvajal. Congresswoman, I'm aware of your letter, and
we are certainly working on answering it. Understand, please,
that there is a clearance process which I do not control. We
are committed to getting you a response to your letter.
Ms. Bush. Thank you. My office will be in contact. I yield
back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The gentlelady yields back. Thank you very
much. It's my pleasure now to yield to the gentleman from Iowa,
Mr. Owens, for five minutes. Mr. Owens, you're recognized for
five minutes.
We'll then be happy now to move to the gentleman from Rhode
Island, Mr. Cicilline. We're pleased to yield Mr. Cicilline
five minutes, you are recognized now.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you,
Director, for being here. I, too, joined the letter that
Congresswoman Bush just referenced, and very much look forward
to your response to that.
We held a hearing on January 21, 2022, to learn more about
the Bureau of Prison's response to the pandemic and
specifically discuss compassionate release as a tool to reduce
prison occupancy and keep people safe.
My first question is I have a piece of legislation that
would expand compassionate release availability during a public
health emergency. Given all the evidence we've seen about
successful reintegration through compassionate release during
COVID, it seems to me that it makes sense to fully utilize this
tool.
So, my first question is what is the Bureau of Prison's
current policy for considering compassionate release of
individuals at high risk of serious illness from COVID-19?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, the compassionate release
process is sometimes confused with the home confinement, which
we use. It's a quicker placement.
The reduction in sentence process is much more difficult.
It wasn't designed to be a timely process. Each individual has
to be reviewed and unique, extraordinary, and compelling
circum-
stances--
Mr. Cicilline. Director, so is it my understanding, you
don't use compassionate release or recommend compassionate
released to people who have a serious risk of illness with
COVID-19, you don't use that process at all?
Mr. Carvajal. Under the CARES Act, we review everyone for
placement on home confinement. Yes, we do, if they file a
reduction in sentence motion, we do evaluate it and assess it
under our policy. We just don't independently release someone
from our custody.
Mr. Cicilline. No, I know you don't, my question is do you
use compassionate release of individuals at a high risk of
serious illness from COVID, and what is your current policy in
terms of applying compassionate release to such individuals?
That's not a hard question.
Mr. Carvajal. If they submit a request, we follow our
policy in the statute and review it. If it's appropriate, we
make the motion, and if not, it is denied.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. Healthcare workers across the country
are obviously experiencing incredible burnout after two years
fighting on the front lines of this pandemic. I presume that
correctional staff feel similarly, especially during outbreaks
in the facilities.
Given the statistics I've seen on overtime and infection
rates and considering the ongoing risk of COVID-19 and
continued staffing shortages and BOP's expanded authority to
release individuals to home confinement, why is BOP not
utilizing mitigation strategies like compassionate release more
fully to reduce the number of incarcerated individuals in
Federal prison?
Mr. Carvajal. We are utilizing it, Congressman. We make
recommendations to the court as appropriate. The court makes
the final decision, not the BOP.
If the motion is made up, the inmate, under the First Step
Act, which they can do that after 30 days, we don't take a
position on the motion. We're not party those cases, it goes
through the system.
Mr. Cicilline. Director, my colleague Congresswoman Dean
raised questions about solitary confinement, and the number she
referenced I concur with. The number increased 500 percent in
2020, with about 300,000 people in solitary confinement at any
one time. The policy of using solitary or restrictive housing
as a substitute for CDC-recommended medical isolation has
caused unbelievable harms to incarcerated individuals.
My question is what steps has the BOP leadership taken to
ensure that it's following the appropriate guidance, like the
CDC guidance to place people in medical isolation not solitary
confinement or restrictive housing during this or in any future
public health emergency?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, we follow the CDC guidance. In
some cases, we go above and beyond. I'd like to clarify,
though, that medical isolation is often confused with solitary
confinement. There are instances when inmates placed in
restricted housing are isolated also, medically isolated. In
those cases, it's appropriate.
We don't place people from the general population who are
placed in medical isolation, we don't place them in restricted
housing. If there's a case where it's an issue where we're out
of space or something, they're appropriately tacked--there's
different rules for that.
Mr. Cicilline. Director, in February 2020, the UN Special
Rapporteur on Torture issued a statement related to the use of
solitary confinement in United States prisons, stating that,
and I quote, ``The severe and often irreparable psychological
and physical consequences of solitary confinement and social
exclusion are well-documented and range from progressively
severe forms of anxiety, stress, and depression to cognitive
impairment and suicidal tendencies. This deliberate infliction
of severe mental pain or suffering may well amount to
psychological torture,'' end quote.
My question is, is the BOP aware of the mental and physical
damage of solitary confinement on the individuals in their
care? Do you have policies in place to try to reduce the use of
solitary confinement?
Will you furnish this Committee with all the background and
supporting documents to reveal to us really the status of the
use of solitary confinement and your efforts to mitigate it?
I think you're on mute, Mr. Director.
Mr. Carvajal. Sorry. Yes, Congressman, that's a lot of
information. We will certainly get that to you. I will tell you
that we are committed to continuing to appropriately reduce our
use of restrictive housing.
In some cases, there's a reason for it and we do, but we
have policies in place. Making rounds, making sure that they
have access to programming and earning time credits. We can get
you all that information, and we can answer any questions you'd
like regarding that.
Mr. Cicilline. I appreciate that. Director, one final
point. The making rounds is not, the fact, that you check in on
somebody while they're experiencing what has been described as
psychological torture isn't sufficient, so I look forward to
that information.
I thank the Chair, and I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, the gentleman's time has
expired, thank you. My pleasure now to yield the distinguished
gentleman from California, among many of our Members on this
Committee. We yield to you, Mr. Lieu, for five minutes. You're
now recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chair Sheila Jackson Lee, for holding
this important oversight hearing. Thank you, Director Carvajal,
for your public service.
Approximately how many COVID-19 vaccines did the Bureau of
Prisons administer?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, we've administered to date over
292,000 doses to both staff and inmates. Eighty percent of our
staff, give or take, 80 percent are vaccinated, and about 70
percent of our inmate population.
It's a moving target because there's always people coming
in and out. Every single person is offered the opportunity to
be vaccinated.
Mr. Lieu. Did anyone die as a result of getting the COVID-
19 vaccine?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, I do not know that. I would have
to get you information from a medical doctor. I don't have that
information in front me.
Mr. Lieu. Sir, you would have been told if someone died
after getting COVID-19 vaccine, wouldn't you have?
Mr. Carvajal. I'm sure I would have, Congressman, I just
don't have that information in front of me.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. Why don't you get back to us, but I'm going
to tell you, you would have been told if that, in fact,
happened.
Now, did you see that the CDC recently came out saying that
if you get a COVID-19 vaccine and a booster shot, you are 97
times less likely to die than if you're unvaccinated, from
COVID, are you aware of that?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Lieu. Okay, I want to agree with the former President,
who said that COVID-19 vaccines are one of the greatest
achievements of mankind. I want to talk about the religious
exemptions.
I happen to be Catholic. The Pope, who is also called the
Vicar of Christ, has said that getting a COVID-19 vaccine is a
``moral obligation.'' What I want to know is, was the Bureau of
Prisons giving any religious exemptions to folks who were
Catholic, and if so, what possible basis could that be on?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, I don't personally review those
exemptions. We have processes in place, and I'm certain that we
can get you that information. We have actually ceased because
of the preliminary injunction; we've ceased the process of
religious and medical exemptions for the time being.
Mr. Lieu. If you could get me that information, that would
be great.
Chair Jackson Lee, I'd like to enter two articles for the
record. The first is from Forbes Magazine, June 19, 2020, it's
entitled, ``Bureau of Prisons Special Tactical Forces Under
Scrutiny for Use in DC Protests and Training Mishaps.''
The second article is entitled, ``The Story Behind Bill
Barr's Unmarked Federal Agents,'' from Politico, and it's dated
June 5, 2020.
[The information follows:]

MR. LIEU FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Lieu. Director Carvajal, I'd like to ask you, were
Bureau of Prisons personnel used to crack down on protesters,
and were they, in fact, unmarked?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, we did assist the Department of
Justice and other law enforcement components during those
protests. Initially, and I answered this, I was asked this
question during a press conference, initially, within the first
few days, our staff were not properly marked.
In essence, for the people on the civilian side to
recognize them, they had local institution logos. We corrected
that within a couple of days. We appropriately marked them to
show they were Bureau of Prisons personnel.
It was an oversight, and when it came to our attention, we
appropriately marked them. They all now, when deployed, if
deployed, they are appropriately marked to indicate they are
operating under the Federal Bureau of Prisons if they are
Federal officers.
Mr. Lieu. So, for any future occurrences, they will all be
identified, am I understanding that correctly?
Mr. Carvajal. They were. We corrected the issue before the
end of that, and we have deployed them since, and they are all
appropriately identified as Federal Bureau of Prisons officers.
Mr. Lieu. There are also allegations that there was
excessive use of force, that some of them may have used tear
gas and other actions that were not appropriate. So, my
question goes to training. These Bureau of Prison folks,
they're trained to deal with prison issues, but do they also
get training on dealing with crowds who are exercising their
First amendment right to free speech?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congressman. I know that some of those
things are under current review, so I don't think it would be
appropriate for me to comment on them. I can check back with my
staff and get the status of that, and we can answer your
questions offline.
I don't want to misspeak in this forum. If the matter is
still under review.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, if you give that information. It's
important, because I'm going to introduce a bill with
Congressman Earl Blumenauer that will prevent the Attorney
General from randomly deputizing, actually the U.S. Marshals
from randomly deputizing Bureau of Prison folks and then
sending them out to cities to crack down on First amendment
free speech, folks who are exercising that right.
With that, I yield back.
Ms. Jackson Lee. That was my fingers again, but thank you
very much, Mr. Lieu, for your questioning. It's certainly my
privilege now to yield to another important, distinguished
Member of this whole body, and that is Mr. Cohen of Tennessee.
Mr. Cohen of Tennessee, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
holding this hearing. If I ask any questions that have been
asked earlier, Mr. Carvajal, let me know, I've been at a
hearing of the Helsinki Commission. We had the Polish Foreign
Minister, and very involved in those issues.
These are important issues as well and I wanted to make
this hearing, and I'm happy I can. The pandemic has highlighted
many of the failing of our Federal prison system, and the
Bureau of Prisons has unfortunately failed to protect the
health of those within their custody and their staff from
COVID-19, or address chronic understaffing.
The BOP has also lacked transparency and vigor in
implementing important criminal justice reforms, such as the
First Step Act, Mr. Carvajal. What lessons have you learned
during your tenure and what advice do you have for your
successor to address some of these issues that we've seen
within the Bureau of Prisons? Mr. Carvajal?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, yeah, sorry.
Mr. Cohen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carvajal. Trying to unmute here. Well, if you're asking
about the lessons learned from the pandemic, first, we followed
the CDC guidance from day one. We learned that we need to
protect the most vulnerable, the elderly, isolate the sick, and
quarantine the exposed, the same lessons that the rest of the
country and the world have known. Restrict movement,
communicate better.
Those are some of the lessons learned. I think that we've
gotten good processes in place. We work with the CDC; we've
invited them into our institutions. They have visited us. Our
pandemic plan is worked in collaboration with the CDC.
Mr. Cohen. Well, let me ask you about the First Step Act.
That was one of the few successes Mr. Trump had, that and the
Operation Warp Speed. I'd say it seemed like it should have
been pursued with vigor, and it wasn't.
Why was First Step Act and trying to get individuals that
should be eligible for release not operation warp speed for the
Bureau of Prisons?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, I'm not sure I know what you're
referring to. We are fully compliant, statutory compliant, with
the First Step Act. We had implemented a risk and needs
assessment way ahead of the time it was due. We formalized it.
We've released inmates under the First Step Act, they're
earning time credits. I'm not certain what you're referring to.
Mr. Cohen. Was there a date in late January that you needed
to have a certain report in on folks that would be eligible for
release? Maybe you got it done, I don't know, but at one point
it wasn't done.
Mr. Carvajal. Well, we were awaiting the finalization of
the rule, that's a process which I don't control. We submitted
that draft Rule under the last Administration at the end of
January 2020, and it was finalized in January. We are
statutorily compliant with the First Step Act, Congressman.
Mr. Cohen. Excellent, well, that's good. I led a letter
along with Representative Bonnie Watson Coleman and the Biden
Administration urging them to avoid the reincarceration of
those released to home confinement under the CARES Act,
allowing those released to apply for commutations of their
sentences.
In your view, was home confinement under the CARES Act
successful, number one. Do you agree that those released have
largely proven their ability to successfully assimilate back
into their homes, families, and communities?
Mr. Carvajal. Congressman, we're always committed to
returning people to society. Ninety-five percent of our people
will go. We understand this is important to the CARES Act,
we've done so.
We've released over 37,000 to home confinement, 9,000 of
those under the CARES Act. Only 320 of those have reoffended,
and we follow the statute and the rules. So, we follow the laws
that are implemented, and we continue to do so.
Mr. Cohen. The Department of Justice Office of Legal
Counsel published a memorandum concluding that the Bureau of
Prisons was not required to return those released to home
confinement under the CARES Act to prison once the emergency
period ended.
Has the Bureau of Prisons under your guidance begun taking
steps to effectuate the Department of Justice memorandum and
new interpretation of the law so that the people who are on
home confinement would be able to remain on home confinement
and then apply for commutations?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congressman, I'm aware of the OLC
opinion, we're working with the Department. We have not yet
nailed down the how. When we do that, we will be as transparent
as possible to make sure that everyone gets the information.
We certainly take the information and guidance of the
Attorney General and will continue to follow the laws.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir. Let me ask you this: You were
the head of the Bureau of Prisons, were you not, when Mr.
Epstein allegedly committed suicide?
Mr. Carvajal. No, I was not, Congressman.
Mr. Cohen. You weren't? Okay. You were there, though, when
Michael Cohen was arrested and brought back and put in solitary
confinement when he tried to exercise his First amendment
rights, were you not?
Mr. Carvajal. I believe that did happen under my tour, yes.
Mr. Cohen. Did you have--were you asked--did you have
anything to do with that, were you made aware of it, the desire
to have him brought back into custody and put into solitary
confinement?
Mr. Carvajal. No, Congressman, I was not made aware of that
prior to. I was briefed on it afterwards because he's a high
publicity case, as any high publicity. I was not directly
involved in that decision.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you. Based on Mr.--last question, Madam
Chair. Since Mr. Epstein committed suicide, and the security
there was awful, have you seen to it that Ms. Maxwell's had
better care or supervision to make sure she doesn't do anything
to end her life?
Ms. Jackson Lee. I'll let the Director answer the question,
the gentleman's time has expired. Director, you may answer.
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congressman. I don't want to discuss
specific security issues on any individual, but we
appropriately ensure that people in our care have the
appropriate supervision and security.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much. This has been an
important hearing, insightful approaches by our Members on both
sides of the aisle.
As we come to a conclusion, Mr. Biggs, as Ranking Member,
do you have any additional points that you might want to place
on the record at this time?
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Madam Chair. First, thank you,
Director, again, for being here. I look forward to the number
of responses that you indicated to me that you would have your
staff give to me.
I look forward to seeing those, and Madam Chair, I'll yield
back to you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentleman very much. Director,
just one final point that comes out of the testimony of Dr.
Homer Venters, who is an adjunct faculty at the NYU College of
Global Health, who was with us in our previous hearing.
His investigation revealed a disturbing lack of access to
care when a new medical problem is encountered. We've heard
those questions, line of question, coming from several Members.
This process called sick call in most carceral setting
relies on the ability of incarcerated people to submit a
written or electronic concern and then be seen in a face-to-
face encounter with a day or two.
In the first BOP facility that he had the time to--had the
opportunity to visit, as he inspected the Metropolitan
Detention Center in Brooklyn, New York, it quickly became
apparent that not only were many people reporting that their
sick call requests, including COVID-19 symptoms, were being
ignored, but that the facility was actually destroying their
original request, which violates basic correctional standards.
As this is an accountability hearing and it is a
recognition that there should be, if you will, accountability
in the exercise of punitive measures. We all have concluded
that these are human beings deserving of restoration and
dignity, men and women.
Can you comment on that kind of action?
Mr. Carvajal. Yes, Congresswoman. I appreciate you allowing
me to clarify that. First, I am aware of the report. We looked
into it, and we followed up. I won't discuss that specific
incident, but I will reassure you that each of our institutions
has an outpatient care clinic.
It's overseen by a board, state-certified physician and a
medical director. We have outside oversight, we have joint
commission, AAAHC, ACA. We receive the same reviews that any
outside clinic or nursing home would.
Our mortalities are reviewed by independent review. So, I'm
not sure--I mean, we get oversight. If there's a mistake made
or something of that nature, we're going to investigate it and
do something about it, correct the issue.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Director. What I would ask
specifically is some of the questions that may not have been
answered more thoroughly, our staff will get with you so that
we can get answers in writing.
That, in particular, at the Metropolitan Detention Center
in Brooklyn, New York. Your memory, or it may not come to your
attention, I want a direct response and answer on that matter.
I thank you for that.
I'm also going to suggest that there is a Board of Health
oversight for the Department of Prisons--Federal Bureau of
Prisons. I know that you do have a number of other agencies. I
think one that is specifically focused on helping the Bureau
going forward will be very helpful.
Let me finally submit into the record ``Man is 16th to Die
of COVID-19 at Fort Worth Prison, Cases Spike At Women's
Facility.''
[The information follows:]

MS. JACKSON LEE FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. I conclude, Director, let me say I'm not
sure of whether or not you'll appear before this Committee or a
Committee in the other body. Let me take this opportunity to
show our appreciation from a person who has chosen as his
career to serve the nation.
Obviously coming into the Bureau many, many years ago, you
have continued to make a commitment to serve this nation. It is
my privilege to be able to say thank you for your service. It
should go unnoticed you've served under many Administrations,
Democratic and Republican.
You've chosen to commit yourself to, hopefully, the lives
and the ultimate liberty of individuals that we hope will be
restored and will enter society, and never to return again. I
hope that is your vision. You've stayed.
I thank you; I want to make sure that we thank the
hardworking officers who go by the appropriate mixture of
reform, accountability, and compassion.
Thank you again for your testimony this morning and your
service to the nation. This concludes today's hearing. Thank
you to our distinguished Witness for attending.
Without objection, all Members will have five legislative
days to submit additional written questions for the Witness or
additional materials for the record. The hearing is now
adjourned. I hope that was heard. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:03 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES FOR THE RECORD

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
