- MEMBERS' DAY HEARING

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEMBERS' DAY
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, APRIL 22, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-8

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and Labor

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edlabor.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
44-332 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR

ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia, Chairman

RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona            VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina,
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut              Ranking Member
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      JOE WILSON, South Carolina
Northern Mariana Islands           GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania
FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida         TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
MARK TAKANO, California              ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina        RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
MARK De SAULNIER, California         JIM BANKS, Indiana
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          JAMES COMER, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          RUSS FULCHER, Idaho
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          FRED KELLER, Pennsylvania
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina
LUCY Mc BATH, Georgia                MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut            BURGESS OWENS, Utah
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 BOB GOOD, Virginia
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota                LISA C. Mc CLAIN, Michigan
HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan           DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico   MARY E. MILLER, Illinois
MONDAIRE JONES, New York             VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina     SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana              MADISON CAWTHORN, North Carolina
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York, Vice-Chair  MICHELLE STEEL, California
MARK POCAN, Wisconsin                JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas                Vacancy
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland

Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director
Cyrus Artz, Minority Staff Director

------

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Hearing held on April 22, 2021...................................     1

Statement of Members:
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', Chairman, Committee on
Education and Labor........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2
Foxx, Hon. Virginia, Ranking Member, Committee on Education
and Labor..................................................     2
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:
Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Rhode Island..................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Scanlon, Hon. Mary Gay, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Pennsylvania......................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5

Additional Submissions:
Cartwright, Hon. Matt, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Pennsylvania:
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Cohen, Hon. Steve, a Representative in Congress from the
State of
Tennessee:
Prepared statement of....................................    16
Craig, Hon. Angie, a Representative in Congress from the
State of
Minnesota:
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Hill, Hon. French, a Representative in Congress from the
State of
Arkansas:
Prepared statement of....................................    21
Lawrence, Hon. Brenda, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Michigan:
Prepared statement of....................................    22

MEMBERS' DAY HEARING

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 22, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Education and Labor,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:16 a.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott (Chairman of the
Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Scott, Grijalva, Wilson, Adams,
DeSaulnier, Mrvan, Bowman, Pocan, Foxx, Walberg, Fulcher,
Miller-Meeks, and Steel.
Staff present: Jessica Bowen, Professional Staff; Ilana
Brunner, General Counsel; Christian Haines, General Counsel;
Sheila Havenner, Director of Information Technology; Eli
Hovland, Policy Associate; Ariel Jona, Policy Associate; Andre
Lindsay, Policy Associate; Richard Miller, Director of Labor
Policy, Max Moore, Staff Assistant; Mariah Mowbray, Clerk/
Special Assistant to the Staff Director; Veronique Pluviose,
Staff Director; Banyon Vassar, Deputy Director of Information
Technology; Claire Viall, Professional Staff; Cyrus Artz,
Minority Staff Director; Hannah Matesic, Minority Director of
Operations and Carlton Norwood, Minority Press Secretary.
Chairman Scott. Good morning. The Committee on Education
and Labor will now come to order. And welcome everyone. The
Committee is meeting today for a Member's Day Hearing. This
hearing is an opportunity for non-Committee Members to inform
the Committee of their interests and priorities as it relates
to the Committee's jurisdiction.
Members who wish to testify will sit on the panel remotely,
and each Member will be given five minutes to present their
testimony orally. After the Member presentations, Committee
Members may ask questions if they wish.
This is an entirely remote hearing and Committee Members
are familiar with the practices and procedures of remote
hearings, and our Members and witnesses are also familiar with
the five-minute rule. Should the chair experience technical
difficulties or need to step away to the floor to vote, Dr.
Adams or another majority Member is hereby authorized to assume
the gavel in the Chair's absence.
While the roll call is not necessary to establish a quorum
of official proceedings conducted remotely, or with remote
participation the Committee has often made it a practice
whenever there is an official proceeding with remote
participation for the Clerk to call the roll, that will make
clear who is present at the start of the proceeding.
However, in light of votes which may be called fairly soon
we will forego that roll call. Pursuant to Committee Rule 8(c),
opening statements are limited to the Chair and Ranking Member.
So, I will recognize myself now for the purpose of making an
opening statement.
Today the Committee is gathered to hear from Members of
Congress about their priorities for improving our educational
system, supporting workers, making healthcare more affordable
and strengthening our economy. Committee's jurisdiction covers
a wide range of policy areas that impact Americans across the
country throughout their lives from birth to retirement.
Accordingly, we have a responsibility to receive input and
ideas from Members of Congress representing all parts of our
diverse nation. Today's hearing is an opportunity to be able to
engage in an open dialog about the work we must still do to
support our communities.
And so, we will discuss how we can work together in a
bipartisan manner to help our constituents recover from the
COVID-19 pandemic and improve the quality of life for students,
educators, workers, and families.
I want to thank the Members for joining us today and
welcome your input and look forward to working together to
ensure that America is a country where everyone can succeed. I
now recognize the distinguished Ranking Member for the purpose
of making an opening statement, Dr. Foxx.
[The statement of Chairman Scott follows:]

Statement of Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott, Chairman,
Committee on Education and Labor

Today, the Committee is gathered to hear from Members of Congress
about their priorities for improving our education system, supporting
workers, making health care more affordable, and strengthening our
economy.
The Committee's jurisdiction covers a wide range of policy areas
that impact Americans across the country throughout their lives-from
birth to retirement.
Accordingly, we have a responsibility to receive input and ideas
from Members of Congress representing all parts of this diverse nation.
Today's hearing is an opportunity to engage in open dialog about
the work we still must do to support our communities. We will discuss
how we can work together in a bipartisan manner to help our
constituents recover from the COVID-19 pandemic and improve the quality
of life for students, educators, workers, and families.
I want to thank all the Members, again, for being with us. We
welcome your input and look forward to working together to ensure that
America is a country where everyone can succeed.
______

Ms. Foxx. Thank you, sir. I apologize. There's a lot going
on this morning. I'm not going to take up too much time. I
acknowledge the work our Committee does to provide educational
opportunities for all Americans, ensure a well-equipped high-
quality workforce and allow business owners to thrive in a free
enterprise economy.
From pre-K to retirement, this Committee touches every
American life and impacts the way we learn, work, and succeed.
In fact, in the 4-months since the 117th Congress began, more
than 40 percent of the rule bills have come out of this
Committee.
Our jurisdiction spans from protecting religious liberty
and freedom of speech on college campuses to ensuring balance
and labor management relations in combating overzealous
enforcement by Federal bureaucrats.
And while we continue to work on these policies, today is
an opportunity to broaden further those horizons and hear from
new voices. Mr. Chairman I could brag all morning about this
Committee, but I'll end by welcoming our guests to the best
Committee in Congress. Thank you I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Foxx follows:]

Statement of Hon. Virginia Foxx, Ranking Member,
Committee on Education and Labor

Good morning, I welcome our guests for this year's members day
hearing.
I will not take up too much of our time, but I will acknowledge the
work our Committee does to provide educational opportunities for all
Americans, ensure a well-equipped, high-quality workforce and allow
business owners to thrive in a free-enterprise economy.
From pre-K to retirement, this Committee touches every American
life and impacts the way we learn, work, and succeed. In fact, in the
4-months since the 117th Congress began, more than 40 percent of the
rule bills have come out of this Committee.
Our jurisdiction spans from protecting religious liberty and
freedom of speech on college campuses to ensuring balance in labor-
management relations and combating overzealous enforcement by Federal
bureaucrats. And while we continue to work on these policies, today is
an opportunity to broaden further those horizons and hear from new
voices.
Mr. Chairman, I could brag all morning about this Committee, but I
will end by welcoming our guests to the best Committee in Congress.
______

Chairman Scott. Thank you. And we appreciate the Members
for their testimony today. Before the witnesses begin, we will
remind you to unmute and be cognizant of how much time you have
remaining. We'll let all of the witnesses make their
presentations before we move on to Member questions.
The first witness we have with us today is the gentlelady
from Pennsylvania's 5th congressional District, Representative
Scanlon.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MARY GAY SCANLON, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA

Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member
Foxx, and the entire Committee. Thank you for holding this
hearing and providing us with the opportunity to share my
constituents' priorities with the Committee.
As a former school board Member representative of a
district that includes over 20 institutions of higher ed,
ranging from private to community colleges, to technical
schools, we know that from preschool through post-secondary,
investing in education is a crucial piece of our Nation's
recovery from the pandemic, as well as a necessary foundation
for our children's future.
I represent Pennsylvania's 5th congressional District which
includes parts of Philadelphia and its suburbs. Our K-12
schools range from some of Pennsylvania's and the Nation's
highest performing schools, to some of its most under
resources.
The Philadelphia School District is the largest school
district in the Commonwealth, and one of the largest in the
country. Even before the pandemic, K-12 public schools across
region were in desperate need of repairs. I have toured schools
with children in my district and have seen crumbling paint,
crumbling infrastructure--you know rooms that were unusable
because they had exposed heating elements. Local reporting has
uncovered way too many troubling instances of damaged asbestos,
lead pipes, and asthma triggers like mold and mildew inside our
schools, and our region has one of the highest asthma rates for
children in the country.
So, these unhealthy toxic schools pose safety risks that
make children, educators, and staff sick. So especially now, as
we have schools working to bring students back to the
classroom, the need for investment in our public-school
facilities is even more apparent.
So, I really am very grateful to Chairman Scott for his
leadership on school infrastructure. Congress made significant
progress last year passing H.R. 2, The Moving Forward Act,
which included legislation from the Ed and Labor Committee to
rebuild America's schools, and we really, really need that
support.
I strongly support the President's commitment to investing
in the modernization and repair of public-school facilities as
part of the American Jobs Plan. Our children, our teachers, our
school staff deserve to learn and work in safe buildings. The
pandemic has been hard on students, on students with
disabilities, and disrupted and delayed learning has an
especially outsized impact.
As we help students make up for lost time in the classroom,
we need to invest specifically in K-12 special education, and
early intervention services included under the IDEA. Time and
again, school leaders have told us they need additional IDEA
funding. We need to meet the promise of the IDEA from almost
over 40 years ago to fully fund that mandate.
All students are entitled to a free and appropriate public
education, and we need to help school districts ensure that
students with disabilities receive the high-quality education
they deserve.
I also ask that your Committee continue to lead on
solutions to make college more accessible and affordable for
all. Pennsylvania has one of the highest student debt loads in
the country, including the highest amount of average debt, and
one of the higher percentages of people who have debt. I often
hear from my constituents burdened with student loan debt.
All too often I meet with parents whose children's college
education choices have been limited by the fact that their
parents are still paying off their own debt. We need to support
and invest in improving the opportunities for all students,
improving the quality of higher ed, and lowering the cost of
college.
We also need to support and invest in alternative pathways
to four-year degrees such as apprenticeships which make up the
backbone of Vo-ed programs in a region like mine. As we work to
rebuild our economy, it's essential to connect workers with
opportunities that give them access to the critical skills and
high-paying jobs of the future, not the past.
And they need those jobs to support themselves and their
families. So, thank you again to the Committee for its work on
these important issues, and for allowing me the opportunity to
share these priorities with you. I am looking so forward to
working with you in this new Congress, and with that I yield
back.
[The prepared statement of Rep. Scanlon follows:]

Prepared Statement of Rep. Mary Gay Scanlon
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Scott. Thank you very much. The next witness is
the gentleman from Rhode Island's 2d congressional District,
Mr. Langevin.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF RHODE ISLAND

Mr. Langevin. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and thank you. Can
you hear me OK? Very good. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member Foxx, Members of the Committee. I want to thank
you for accepting my testimony on my Education and Labor
priorities this morning.
I want to extend my sincerest thanks to you Chairman Scott,
for your leadership and the Members of the Committee in
providing the equitable education for all students promoting
fair labor practices and ensuring that we prepare our workforce
for the challenges that lie ahead.
So, Mr. Chairman, my first priority as Co-Chair of the
Career and Technical Education Caucus is that we continue to
fund and strengthen CTE and similar workforce development
programs. CTE programs have been proven to launch students in
rewarding careers and fill workforce gaps.
Classes in cybersecurity, coding, graphic design, and
robotics just by way of example make CTE the workforce pipeline
of the future. My second priority is to provide resources for
English learners and promote bilingual education. The English
learner population is rapidly growing in Rhode Island, my home
State, as well as it is across the country.
These students require particular assistance to stay on
grade level and our country should celebrate students who can
speak multiple languages. Moreover, there is an English learner
teacher shortage, so to that end I will be reintroducing the
Reaching English Learner's Act to address that gap.
So, this bill will fund partnerships between institutions
of higher education and high-need school districts to develop
teacher prep programs that are tailored to train teachers
providing bilingual education, offering social and emotional
support, and engaging our families and communities. And the
bill also includes a loan forgiveness program.
Finally, I urge this Committee to take up Dominic and Ed's
Law which I introduced yesterday. Mr. Chairman young people who
become permanently disabled have their student loans forgiven,
but this isn't the case for the loans taken out for student
loans by their families, and I believe that they should be
forgiven as well.
It's time for Congress to address this glaring loophole to
make sure that the parents aren't struggling to pay off student
debt as they help their kids again with a now significant
disability after the fact, and a significant life change.
So, with that Mr. Chairman, I just want to thank you and
the Committee again for the opportunity to testify before you
today and yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Rep. Langevin follows:]

Prepared Statement of Rep. James R. Langevin
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Scott. Thank you. We'll have all of the witnesses,
is Ms. Scanlon still with us? I don't see her camera on.
Ms. Scanlon. Yes.
Chairman Scott. OK good thank you.
Ms. Scanlon. Sure.
Chairman Scott. We'll now have questions from Committee
Members, and I'll recognize myself first, and thank both of the
witnesses for being with us today. You both mentioned issues
that we're working on. You both supported the apprenticeship
legislation and the Rescue Bill which will go a long way in
addressing some of the issues that have been brought up, but
the alternative education and the funding where it's most
needed, the K-12 money was distributed based on the Title I
formula, which means it will go to areas where it is most
needed.
And so, I appreciate the testimony from both of you. And
will yield back the balance of my time and recognize the
Ranking Member, Dr. Foxx.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have read the
testimony that's been submitted by all of the witnesses, and I
have no questions. Thank you very much.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Arizona, Mr.
Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you Mr. Chairman and I have no
questions and other than to thank our colleagues for their
presentation. Thank you.
Chairman Scott. The gentle Gentlelady from Florida, Ms.
Wilson?
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank you to the
Members who have taken time to come before our Committee today.
The Rescue Bill that we just passed is going to provide so much
support for your public education in your particular cities.
However, I'm not sure about capital improvement as far as
buildings and schools, but I heard you say that you were a
Member of the school board Representative
[Scanlon]. And I think in this particular where we are now
and the climate of schools and the major--I guess you would say
the major role that schools played throughout the pandemic, and
that teachers play keeping children afloat, and parents
realized that the teacher's job was so hard because there they
were with children at home, and they had no idea what to do
with them.
I think it is time for your district to float a bond issue.
And get the people to sign on to that bond issue so that you
can go in and repair those broken schools. I was on the school
board we did a bond issue. I was a school principal we did a
bond issue, and now we're in the midst of another one.
So, we have no crumbling schools. So, a lot of times people
don't realize the importance or the impact that schools
actually make on a community. In fact, they are the heart of
your community, so this would be a great time to float that.
And I also wanted to let you know that I'm filing a bill to
forgive loans for students who major in certain disciplines
when they are in college.
I call them service jobs. And I think that in our offices
our interns, not our interns, but our workers, our actual staff
Members, get help with their student loans. I think teacher's
loans should be forgiven, firefighters, police officers,
nurses, people who go into the public defender's office, the
State attorney's office, their loans should be forgiven.
So, I have a bill and I'm asking all of you to sign on for
that. I also think that we need to incentivize some kind of way
school districts to hire black men, especially in elementary
schools. You say you have a teacher shortage, and I'm sure you
have a huge segment of African American little boys who need
role models in their school district who would change the whole
climate of your school if you--that's the hardest thing to
find.
But we've got to incentivize them with good pay, student
loan forgiveness, all kinds of ways. So, we have a bill that
I'm going to be working with Mr. Bowman on to do that, to make
that available.
And I also think that children find themselves in a
position with lots of student loans because no one really
guided them in the 12th grade. So, we have a lot of student
loan counselors in college, but it's too late. They need to
know where they're going, what not to get into. It's almost
like credit card debt.
You send them a new credit card these private colleges send
them an application. It looks good, so they signed up for it,
so I think there needs to be a lot of prevention before we
actually get into this student loan debt. I think right now we
can look at for a lot of relief.
I don't know if everybody realizes, but it's a lot of money
for public schools K-12, the money was in all of the relief
bills that we passed, and you have to remember that these
schools were closed. So, they saved money on gasoline for the
school buses, electricity, so they have a pretty hefty budget,
so I would work with my local school districts to make sure
that they were spending the money wisely.
And so, when they actually get the rescue money from the
last bill that our Chairman worked so hard to get passed, that
they will put that in a situation where it would best benefit
all of our Title I students, because that's the formula that we
use to get the money, and I yield back Mr. Chair.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. And I think the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania mentioned using some of that money to catch up for
lost learning, and that's one of the obvious purposes of the
legislation. I will remind Members that if your camera is not
on, you're not considered as present.
So, I'll represent and recognize the Gentlelady from Iowa,
Ms. Miller-Meeks.
Ms. Miller-Meeks. Thank you, Chair Scott, and Ranking
Member Foxx. At this point in time, I don't have a question, so
I will if I may reserve my time.
Chairman Scott. No problem. Dr. Adams?
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't have any
questions. I just wanted to first of all thank my colleagues
for coming. I was especially interested in the school board
Member, and I started my career there too, and certainly the
comments that she has made regarding our children is something
that we really need to think about, and we have been thinking
about it.
But my you know education goes pretty far back for me. I
started on the school board. My daughter is now a principal in
Gilford County, and you know I'm hoping that we--we've got a
pretty exciting Committee, so I just want folks to know that
I'm also working with my colleagues in the Senate on a bill to
strengthen teacher preparation programs.
When I was a professor at Bennett College, I worked with
the teacher ed program, and so we do have a need to build a
strong, diverse teaching workforce. Yes, we need more black men
in there too, so the comments that Congresswoman Wilson made I
think are certainly very appropriate.
So, I wanted to thank you all for coming to the hearing. I
thank you for giving us this opportunity today. I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. And I'll again remind Members
that if your camera is not on, you're not considered as present
for the purposes of recognition. Next the gentleman from
Indiana, Mr. Mrvan.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chairman, and respectfully, I would
just like to thank all the Members who joined us today for
sharing their opinion and advocating for the educational system
and your districts, and I yield back any of my time. Thank you,
Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. I appreciate the gentleman. And
the gentleman from New York, Mr. Bowman. Excuse me, wait a
minute, the gentlelady from California Ms. Steel, do you have
questions?
Ms. Steel. Mr. Chairman, no I don't.
Chairman Scott. OK.
Ms. Steel. I'm just listening here. Thank you.
Chairman Scott. Sounds good. The gentleman from New York,
Mr. Bowman.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you to the
witnesses for being here and thank you for bringing up the
important issues of school infrastructure, and a special thanks
to Jim for bringing up our English language learners and CTE
programs.
I've been fighting in New York to you know expand access to
CTE programs for a number of years. You know way back in the
day they used to be pretty abundant in New York, and then we
shifted to sort of this ``college-or-else'' perspective in our
K-12 schools. And of course, you know college is important and
that's a pathway for many kids, but the CTE pathway is such an
important one, and such a powerful one.
And what I keep telling people is, and Representative
Wilson is going to understand this, kids love to learn with
their hands, and they love to work with their hands, and they
love to learn by doing things, and not just operating in the
theoretical space.
So, you know I appreciate you both for being here and
uplifting those issues. And I just want to briefly associate
myself with every single thing Representative Wilson mentioned.
I started my career teaching in 1999 as an elementary school
teacher. And as soon as I entered the classroom, I realized I
was more than a teacher.
I was a role model and father figure to these children of
color who unfortunately didn't have a father figure in the
home. And I was one of those kids. I grew up with a single mom,
and I didn't have a father figure, so I knew the responsibility
there. And had the privilege of serving over 20 years in K to
12 schools serving as a teacher, a mentor, a father figure, to
both young boys and young girls, Ms. Wilson.
They needed the connections and support as well. So, no
questions. I just want to offer my experience and expertise in
whatever legislation you both are working on. It's really
exciting and thank you so much for being here. And hopefully
next time we have one of these we'll have 20 Members of
Congress presenting to the best Committee in the House. So,
thank you both so much.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Does any other Committee Member
seek recognition? I notice that the gentleman from Idaho, Mr.
Fulcher, and the gentleman from California, Mr. DeSaulnier are
both on the screen. Are either seeking recognition? The
gentleman from Idaho?
Mr. Fulcher. Mr. Chairman thank you. Thank you for holding
this hearing. Just no questions today, just appreciate the
testimony, the opportunity to listen and learn. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Well, thank you. I wanted to make sure that
since we did not have a roll call that your presence was
recognized. Mr. DeSaulnier did you have a comment? Thank you.
Does any other Committee Member wish to seek recognition?
If not, I want to remind our colleagues that pursuant to
Committee practice materials for submission to the hearing
record must be submitted to the Committee Clerk within 14 days
following the last day of the hearing, preferably in Microsoft
Word format pursuant to House rules and regulations.
Items for the record should be submitted to the Clerk
electronically by emailing submissions to

[email protected]
and again I want to thank
our witnesses for their participation today. The input of our
colleagues is paramount to what we can accomplish in Congress.
I ask the Ranking Member if she has any closing comments?
Dr. Foxx do you have any closing comments, Dr. Foxx?
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No, I just thank all of
our colleagues for being with us today. And I hope everybody
has a great break.
Chairman Scott. Good. Well, thank you and I want to again
join the Ranking Member in thanking our colleagues for joining
us today and sharing their ideas with the Committee. And if
there's no further business before the Committee without
objection the Committee stands adjourned. Thank you.
[Additional submission by Hon. Matt Cartwright, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Pennsylvania
follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 10:43 a.m. the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
