- FOOD FOR THOUGHT: EXAMINING FEDERAL NUTRITION PROGRAMS FOR YOUNG CHILDREN AND INFANTS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FOOD FOR THOUGHT: EXAMINING
FEDERAL NUTRITION PROGRAMS FOR
YOUNG CHILDREN AND INFANTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CIVIL RIGHTS AND
HUMAN SERVICES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JULY 28, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-25

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and Labor

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edlabor.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-177 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR

ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia, Chairman

RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona            VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina,
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut              Ranking Member
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      JOE WILSON, South Carolina
Northern Mariana Islands           GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania
FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida         TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
MARK TAKANO, California              ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina        RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
MARK DeSAULNIER, California          JIM BANKS, Indiana
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          JAMES COMER, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          RUSS FULCHER, Idaho
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          FRED KELLER, Pennsylvania
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut            BURGESS OWENS, Utah
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 BOB GOOD, Virginia
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota                LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan           DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico   MARY E. MILLER, Illinois
MONDAIRE JONES, New York             VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina     SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana              MADISON CAWTHORN, North Carolina
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York, Vice-Chair  MICHELLE STEEL, California
MARK POCAN, Wisconsin                JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas                Vacancy
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland

Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director
Cyrus Artz, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CIVIL RIGHTS AND HUMAN SERVICES

SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon, Chairwoman

ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina        RUSS FULCHER, Idaho, Ranking
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut                Member
TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico   GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania
FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana              LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland               SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia  VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina (ex
(ex officio)                           officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Hearing held on July 28, 2021....................................     1

Statement of Members:
Bonamici, Hon. Suzanne, Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Civil
Rights
and Human Services.........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Fulcher, Hon. Rich, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Civil
Rights
and Human Services.........................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     6

Statement of Witnesses:
Burris, Jessica, North Carolina WIC Participant;
Breastfeeding Peer Counselor, Montgomery County Department
of Health--
WIC Department.............................................    28
Prepared statement of....................................    30
Farrell, Trevor, Senior Vice President and Chief Commercial
Officer, Americas, Schreiber Foods, Inc....................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    25
Garrett, Paula N., MS, RD, Division Director, Division of
Community Nutrition, Virginia Department of Health.........    14
Prepared statement of....................................    16
Turner, Teresa L., MS, RD, LDN, SNS, FAND, Nutritionist,
Child and Youth Services, United States Army...............     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10

Additional Submissions:
Questions submitted for the record by:
Thompson, Hon. Glenn, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Pennsylvania..............................    50
Response to question submitted for the record by:
Mr. Farrell..............................................    52

FOOD FOR THOUGHT: EXAMINING
FEDERAL NUTRITION PROGRAMS FOR
YOUNG CHILDREN AND INFANTS

----------

Wednesday, July 28, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Civil Rights and Human Services,
Committee on Education and Labor,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m.,
via Zoom, Hon. Suzanne Bonamici (Chairwoman of the
Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Bonamaci, Adams, Hayes, Leger
Fernandez, Mrvan, Bowman, Scott (ex officio), Fulcher, McClain,
Spartz, Fitzgerald, and Foxx (ex officio).
Staff present: Ilana Brunner, General Counsel; Alison Hard,
Professional Staff; Rasheedah Hasan, Chief Clerk; Sheila
Havenner, Director of Information Technology; Carrie Hughes,
Director of Health and Human Services; Ariel Jona, Policy
Associate; Andre Lindsay, Policy Associate; Max Moore, Staff
Assistant; Mariah Mowbray, Clerk/Special Assistant to the Staff
Director; Kayla Pennebecker, Staff Assistant; Veronique
Pluviose, Staff Director; Banyon Vassar, Deputy Director of
Information Technology; Cyrus Artz, Minority Staff Director;
Michael Davis, Minority Operations Assistant; Amy Raaf Jones,
Minority Director of Education and Human Resources Policy;
Hannah Matesic, Minority Director of Operations; Eli Mitchell,
Minority Legislative Assistant; and Mandy Schaumburg, Minority
Chief Counsel and Deputy Director of Education Policy.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, good morning. We're ready
to begin. I will count down from five and then we will start.
Five, four, three, two, one. The Subcommittee on Civil Rights
and Human Services will come to order. Welcome everyone. I note
that a quorum is present.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
``Food for Thought: Examining Federal Nutrition Programs for
Young Children and Infants.'' This is an entirely remote
hearing, and as such the Committee's hearing room is officially
closed. All microphones will be kept muted as a general rule to
avoid unnecessary background noise.
Members and witnesses will be responsible for unmuting
themselves when they are recognized to speak, or when they wish
to seek recognition. If a Member or witness experiences
technical difficulties during the hearing, please stay
connected on the platform, make sure you are muted, and use
your phone to immediately call the Committee's IT director
whose number was provided in advance.
Should the Chair experience technical difficulty, or need
to step away, Mrs. Hayes, or another majority Member is hereby
authorized to assume the gavel in the Chair's absence. To
ensure that the Committee's five-minute rule is adhered to,
staff will be keeping track of time, and using the Committee's
remote timer.
The remote timer appears in its own thumbnail and will show
a blinking light when time is expired. Members and witnesses
are asked to wrap up promptly when their time has expired.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 8(c) opening statements are limited
to the Chair and Ranking Member, and I recognize myself now for
the purpose of making an opening statement.
Today we are meeting to examine Federal nutrition programs
that support young children, and to discuss our opportunity,
and in fact our responsibility to give all children a healthy
start in life. This hearing will focus on two key programs, the
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and
Children, or WIC, which serves low-income parents and children,
and the Child and Adult Care Food Program, or CACFP, which
serves children and adults in after school and care settings.
For decades these programs have been essential to the
healthy development and long-term success of millions of
children. Each month WIC provides about 6 million people,
including more than half of all infants, with access to
tailored nutrition counseling, healthy food prescriptions,
breastfeeding support, and health screenings and referrals.
The Child and Adult Care Food Program provides the millions
of children and adults in childcare and daycare centers across
the country with healthy meals and snacks. But the full effects
of the Federal nutrition initiatives cannot be understood
through numbers alone.
In my home State of Oregon, I see first-hand the meaningful
difference these programs make in the lives of our
constituents. The Oregon Child Development Coalition, OCDC,
provides childcare, education, and nutrition services to more
than 4,000 children across the State. In 2009, a study
analyzing the benefits, and areas for improvement of CACFP
found that parents rely on the nutrition education, and the
healthy food provided for their families through the OCDC,
giving parents more confidence even as prices of food and
housing rise.
Providers who were interviewed focused on the need to
support more children by removing administrative barriers. An
updated CACFP will allow providers like OCDC to continue care,
and make sure more children in need can access nutritious foods
without raising their prices.
This is just one example of the critical role Federal
programs play in connecting young children and families with
healthy food, and vital health services. And despite these
successes, we know that child hunger, malnutrition and
inadequate access to care persists in many of our communities,
particularly in the aftermath of COVID-19.
Approximately one in three households with children
struggled with food insecurity in the early stages of the
pandemic. For households with young children, the lack of
access is even worse. Within the first weeks of the pandemic
nearly half of mothers with young children faced food
insecurity.
[online recording cut out here] I'm going to say that
again. Within the first weeks of the pandemic nearly half of
all mothers with young children faced food insecurity.
This alarming surge in child hunger demands full action.
Last year this Committee moved swiftly to strengthen access to
Federal nutrition of public health programs, by providing key
flexibilities for WIC, so programs and services could be
delivered remotely to those in need.
We temporarily strengthened WIC benefits to help families
afford fruits and vegetables, and we expanded access to
nutrition assistance for young people in homeless shelters,
while securing the need for CACFP providers. These decisive
steps have helped dramatically reduce rates of food insecurity
among families.
Even with these temporary enhancements however, it's
imperative that we not miss the opportunity to take the lessons
we learned in the last year to update and bolster child
nutrition programs. Our work remains unfinished until every
child, infant, and family in this country has access to the
basic nutrition they need for a strong start in life.
Today with the help of our distinguished witnesses, we will
discuss the next steps to take toward that goal of ending
hunger. For example, as we work to reauthorize Federal child
nutrition laws, we must modernize and expand both WIC and the
Child and Adult Care Food Program. We can invest in updated
technology to eliminate barriers that still prevent families
from accessing WIC's lifechanging benefits, and we can expand
the number of meals covered by the Child and Adult Care Food
Program, as well as simplify the program's administration so
that more care providers can participate.
In addition, future legislative packages must include
significant investments in WIC and the Child and Adult Care
Food Program. I applaud President Biden's commitment in the
American Families Plan to expand affordable, accessible
childcare. With any investment to expand and strengthen the
CARE economy, corresponding investments must be provided, early
childhood nutrition programs.
As we invest in our physical and human infrastructure,
basic nutrition support for young children must be a top
priority. I hope today's discussion will lay a strong
foundation for our continued work to make certain all children
and infants have the nutrition they need to succeed.
I want to thank our expert witnesses again, and now I yield
to the Ranking Member Mr. Fulcher for his opening.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Madam Chair. Young children and
nursing or expecting mothers need adequate----
Chairwoman Bonamici. Excuse me Mr. Fulcher, apparently the
livestream is down, so we need to break just a minute here.
We're going to--I've been informed that the livestream is down.
House rules require that we suspend until it's back up, so
we're going to pause momentarily.
[pause]
All right, so we will reconvene, and I will go back to the
place, and just finish the end of my opening statement, and
then I'll turn it over to Mr. Fulcher.
Today, with the help of our distinguished witnesses we will
discuss the next steps we must take for the goal of ending
hunger. For example, as we work to reauthorize Federal child
nutrition laws, we must modernize and expand both WIC and the
Child and Adult Care Food Program.
We can invest in updated technology to eliminate barriers
that still prevent families from accessing WIC's lifechanging
benefits. And we could expand the number of meals covered by
the Child and Adult Care Food Program, as well as simplify
program administration, so more care providers can participate.
In addition, future legislative packages must include
significant investments in WIC and the Child and Adult Care
Food Program. I applaud President Biden's commitment in the
American Families Plan to expand affordable, accessible
childcare. With any investment to expand and strengthen the
care economy, corresponding investments must be provided to
early childhood nutrition programs.
And as we invest in our physical and human infrastructure,
basic nutrition support for young children must be a top
priority. I hope today's discussion will lay a strong
foundation for our continued work to make certain that all
children and infants have the nutrition they need to succeed.
I want to thank our witnesses again, and I now yield to the
Ranking Member Mr. Fulcher for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Bonamici follows:]

Statement of Hon. Suzanne Bonamici, Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Civil
Rights and Human Services

Today, we are meeting to examine Federal nutrition programs that
support young children and to discuss our opportunity, and in fact, our
responsibility to give all children a healthy start in life.
This hearing will focus on two key programs:

The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women,
Infants, and Children, or WIC, which serves low-income parents
and children, and

The Child and Adult Care Food Program, or C-A-C-F-P, which
serves children and adults in afterschool and care settings.

For decades, these programs have been essential to the healthy
development and long-term success of millions of children.
Each month, WIC provides about 6 million people-including over half
of all infants-with access to tailored nutrition counseling, healthy
food prescriptions, breastfeeding support, and health screenings and
referrals.
The Child and Adult Care Food Program provides the millions of
children, and adults, in child care and day care centers across the
country with healthy meals and snacks.
But the full effects of these Federal nutrition initiatives cannot
be understood through numbers, alone. In my home State of Oregon, I
have seen-firsthand-the meaningful difference these programs make in
the lives of our constituents.
The Oregon Child Development Coalition, OCDC, provides child care
education and nutrition services to more than 4,000 children across the
State. In 2009, a study analyzing the benefits and areas for
improvement of CACFP found that parents rely on the nutrition education
and the healthy foods provided for their families through the OCDC,
giving parents more confidence even as prices of food and housing rise.
Providers who were interviewed focused on the need to support more
children by removing administrative barriers. An updated CACFP will
allow providers like
OCDC to continue care and make sure that more children in need can
access nutritious foods without raising prices.
This is just one example of the critical role Federal programs play
in connecting young children and families with healthy food and vital
health services. And despite these successes, we know that child
hunger, malnutrition, and inadequate access to care persists in many of
our communities, particularly in the aftermath of COVID-19.
Approximately 1 in 3 households with children struggled with food
insecurity in the early stages of the pandemic. For households with
young children, the lack of access was even worse. Within the first
weeks of the pandemic, nearly half of all mothers with young children
faced food insecurity.
Today, with the help of our distinguished witnesses, we will
discuss the next steps we must take toward the goal of ending hunger.
For example, as we work to reauthorize Federal child nutrition
laws, we must modernize and expand both WIC and the Child and Adult
Care Food Program.
We can invest in updated technology to eliminate barriers that
still prevent families from accessing WIC's lifechanging benefits. And,
we can expand the number of meals covered by the Child and Adult Care
Food Program, as well as simplify program administration so that more
care providers can participate.
In addition, future legislative packages must include significant
investments in WIC and the Child and Adult Care Food Program. I applaud
President Biden's commitment in the American Families Plan to expand
affordable, accessible child care. With any investment to expand and
strengthen the care economy, corresponding investments must be provided
for early childhood nutrition programs. As we invest in our physical
and human infrastructure, basic nutrition support for young children
must be a top priority.
I hope today's discussion will lay a strong foundation for our
continued work to make certain that all children and infants with the
nutrition they need to succeed.
I want to thank our witnesses, again, and I now yield to the
Ranking Member, Mr. Fulcher, for his opening statement.
______

Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Madam Chair. Young children and
nursing or expecting mothers need adequate nutrition. The
better the nutritional status, the more likely both child and
mother will have safer pregnancies, stronger immune systems,
and longer lives.
We also know that good access to food leads to more
productive learning environments. That's why Federal nutrition
programs date back to the 1940's. There's a national interest
in supporting a heathy baseline for future generations. There's
also a critical role for private partners, including religious
and other non-profit entities that help provide these services
to people.
We saw this last year as we dealt with COVID-19. Today the
Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act and the Child
Nutrition Act authorized both, the Special Supplemental
Nutritional Program for Woman, Infants and Children, or WIC,
and the Child and Adult Care Food Program, or CACFP.
These programs help provide nutrition services to
vulnerable women and children. Through WIC, the Federal
Government provides funding to states for the purpose of
assisting low-income women who are pregnant, breastfeeding, or
have children up to the age of five.
State agencies work with tens of thousands of authorized
retailers, so these vulnerable mothers can purchase certain
foods such as fruits, vegetables, milk, whole grains, cereal,
juice, and eggs. CACFP on the other hand, reimburses meals or
snacks served in eligible childcare centers, daycare, homes,
and adult daycare centers.
In fiscal 2019 almost 5 million children and adults from
low-income households benefited daily from the program. Last
year Congress appropriated over 25 billion in taxpayer dollars
for Federal child nutrition programs. Congress acted quickly on
the on-set of COVID-19 pandemic to help millions of vulnerable
people keep access to this nutritional lifeline.
The Families First Coronavirus Response Act boosted WIC
funding and allowed the USDA to grant flexibility waivers from
certain requirements. Pandemic-related emergency actions helped
ensure these vulnerable populations maintained access to these
nutritional services. These programs and more, continue to
operate because of executive action.
While appropriate last year, the facts on the ground are
not the same. Operation Warp Speed has done its job, and life
is returning to normal for most Americans. It's time for
Congress to be wise stewards of taxpayer money by reinstating
the statutory and regulatory system.
With any government program, particularly one that costs
tens of billions of dollars a year, we must carefully balance
how to administer the program without exposing taxpayers to
waste or abuse. Republicans support good government solutions
to prevent waste and improve recipient's interaction with the
child nutrition programs.
Government programs too often encumber participants with
unnecessary hurdles in archaic processes. Many families deserve
the seamless experience. I look forward to hearing from today's
witnesses on how best Congress can strike the right balance
when we reauthorize the child nutrition programs.
My instinct tells me that industry partners can help
Congress deliver on the promise of WIC and CACFP. The Federal
Government is out of touch with how to help families access the
nutrition programs that are available to them. Congress must
work with these entities to help disadvantaged Americans get
the nutrition they need to thrive.
Any reauthorization of the child nutrition programs must
leverage the knowledge and experience of local partners because
they know what works best for the vulnerable people we hope to
serve. Thank you, Madam Chair, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fulcher follows:]

Statement of Hon. Rich Fulcher, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Civil
Rights and Human Services

Young children and nursing or expecting mothers need adequate
nutrition. Well-fed children have numerous advantages. According to
research, the better the nutritional value, the more likely both child
and mother will have stronger immune systems, safer pregnancies, and
longer lives.
We also know that access to food leads to more productive learning
environments. That is why Federal nutrition programs date back to the
1940's. There is a national interest in supporting a healthy baseline
for future generations. There is also a critical role for private
partners, including religious and other non-profit entities, that help
provide these services to people. We saw this last year as we dealt
with COVID-19.
Today, the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act and the
Child Nutrition Act authorize both the Special Supplemental Nutrition
Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) and the Child and Adult
Care Food Program (CACFP).
These programs help provide nutrition services to vulnerable women
and children. Through WIC, the Federal Government provides funding to
states for the purpose of assisting low-income women who are pregnant,
breastfeeding, or have children up to the age of five. State agencies
work with tens of thousands of authorized retailers so these vulnerable
mothers can purchase certain foods such as fruits, vegetables, milk,
whole grain cereal, juice, and eggs.
CACFP, on the other hand, reimburses meals or snacks served in
eligible child care centers, day care homes, and adult day care
centers. In Fiscal Year 2019, almost 5 million children and adults from
low-income households benefited daily from the program.
Last year, Congress appropriated over $25 billion in taxpayer
dollars for Federal child nutrition programs.
Congress acted quickly at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic to
help millions of vulnerable people keep access to this nutritional
lifeline. The Families First Coronavirus Response Act boosted WIC
funding and allowed the USDA to grant flexibility waivers from certain
requirements. Pandemic-related emergency actions helped ensure these
vulnerable populations maintain access to these nutrition services.
These programs and more continue to operate because of executive
action. While appropriate last year, the facts on the ground are not
the same. Operation Warp Speed has done its job, and life is returning
to normal for most Americans. It is time for Congress to be wise
stewards of taxpayer money by reinstating the statutory and regulatory
system.
With any government program, particularly one that costs tens of
billions of dollars a year, we must carefully balance how to administer
the program without exposing taxpayers to waste or abuse.
Republicans support good government solutions to prevent waste and
improve recipients'
interaction with the child nutrition programs. Government programs
too often encumber participants with unnecessary hurdles and archaic
processes. Needy families deserve a seamless experience.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses on how best
Congress can strike the right balance when we reauthorize the child
nutrition programs.
My instinct tells me that industry partners can help Congress
deliver on the promise of WIC and CACFP. The Federal Government is out-
of-touch with how to help families access the nutrition programs
available to them. Congress must work with these entities to help
disadvantaged Americans to get the nutrition they need to thrive.
Any reauthorization of the child nutrition programs must leverage
the knowledge and experience of local partners because they know what
works best for the vulnerable people we hope to serve.
______

Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Ranking Member Fulcher.
Without objection, all other Members who wish to insert written
statements into the record may do so by submitting them to the
Committee Clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5
p.m. on August 11, 2021.
I will now introduce the witnesses. Teresa Turner is a
School Nutrition Specialist and Registered Dietician. She
serves at the Army Child and Youth Services Nutritionist at
Fort Meade.
Next, we have Paula Garrett, a Registered Dietician. She
serves as the State WIC Director for the Virginia Department of
Health, and a Member of the Board of Directors for the National
WIC Association.
Trevor Farrell is Senior Vice President and Chief
Commercial Officer Americas at Schreiber U.S., and Jessica
Burris is a WIC Breastfeeding Peer Counselor with the
Montgomery County, North Carolina Department of Health, and a
mother of three, whose children were able to get a healthy
start in life through WIC.
We appreciate the witnesses for participating today, and we
look forward to your testimony. Your written statement will
appear in full in the hearing record, and you are asked to
limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute summary. After your
presentation we will move to Member questions.
The witnesses are aware of their responsibility to provide
accurate information to the Subcommittee, and therefore we will
proceed with their testimony. I will first recognize Ms.
Turner, Ms. Turner?

MS. TERESA L. TURNER, MS, RD, LDN, SNS, FAND,
NUTRITIONIST, CHILD AND YOUTH SERVICES, UNITED STATES ARMY

Ms. Turner. Thank you, great morning. Chair Bonamici,
Ranking Member Fulcher, Committee Members, and my fellow
distinguished panelists, I am honored to have the opportunity
to speak before you today. My name is Teresa Turner, and I am
the nutritionist at U.S. Army Child and Youth Services at Fort
Meade. I am also the current President of the Maryland Academy
of Nutrition and Dietetics, an affiliate of the National
Academy, the world's largest organization of food and nutrition
professionals whom I am here representing today.
We believe that providing well-balanced nutritious meals,
and establishing early, healthy eating habits is critical to
our country's current nutrition security crisis. We are
particularly concerned about long-standing and ongoing racial
and ethnic disparities, including those evidenced in, and
heightened by the pandemic.
We believe that Congress has a great opportunity through
the upcoming CNR, to strengthen critical nutrition programs
like CACFP, to address some of the root causes of these
disparities. As a proud civilian employee of the U.S. Army, I
believe strong, Federal programs are an investment in our
country's health, and in military preparedness.
Today I will share with you some of my experiences,
operating CACFP, and discuss recommendations to improve the
program by one--allowing childcare centers and homes the option
of serving an additional meal.
Two--streamlining program requirements, reducing paperwork,
and maximizing technology to improve program access. And last
three--providing adequate reimbursements and funding to cover
the operating costs of providing healthy foods. I run the meal
programs for six child and youth programs on base.
During normal operating hours I monitor roughly 300
employees that facilitate providing breakfast, lunch, and
afternoon snacks to children each day. I take immense pride in
providing meals that are cooked from scratch and meet the high
nutrition standards set forth by the CACFP.
I know that my Army peers could feel good about leaving
their children at our centers as they set out to serve our
country. Like all childcare facilities across the country, mine
took a significant financial hit due to the pandemic. We were
serving about 1,000 children a day, and saw that number
decrease to a mere 300 through the physical limitations of
distance guidelines.
We do not charge our parents for food, and the only way our
program brings in revenue is by spaces filled and food
reimbursement. The program's revenue fell significantly, but
labor and fixed costs remained the same. I was appreciative of
the funding from Congress that provided some relief for
childcare centers that lost money because of declining
participation.
Supply chain disruptions and increases in food and
transportation expenses are also significant challenges. These
additional costs have added even more of a financial burden
onto my program--an issue my peers across Maryland, and across
the country are also experiencing.
As much as the pandemic hit my bottom line, it also
impacted the financial security of families. It is time to
reinstate an additional meal or snack into CACFP, aligning with
National Childcare Standards which specifically State that
young children need to eat small, healthy meals and snacks
throughout the day.
My centers are typically open for a full day of care, and
for children who are there eight plus hours, it is too long to
go without having the recommended compliment of meals and
snacks. If programs were able to provide an additional meal, it
would take some time and stress off of the parents.
There is broad consensus that many childcare homes and
centers across the country are not participating in CACFP due
to the inadequate benefits, as well as burdensome paperwork.
The Academy recommends streamlining program requirements,
reducing paperwork, and maximizing technology to improve
program access.
The outdated requirement for parents to specify normal
hours of daycare should be eliminated. This form limits when
children can receive meals and snacks, and it's based on
outdated assumptions that parents work regular and consistent
hours.
Many low-income families work a wide-variety of shifts,
which may change from week to week. Many states require forms
to be updated with every change and creating paperwork burdens
for both the parent and the provider. Additionally, we are a
compassionate reassignment, which means we also serve children
who have medical and behavioral challenges.
Sometimes the child will not be available to eat the meal
in the time indicated as our normal hours. When this happens, a
child who may be receiving special care or unable to
participate during regular meal service hours, receives a meal
that is not reimbursable.
There are a number of small changes that can make
administering the program easier. In addition, moving to annual
eligibility for for-profit childcare centers, which streamline
program operations in many low-income areas.
Last, we recommend increasing CACFP reimbursements to make
up for the increasing cost to transport, purchase and prepare
healthy foods. Food and transportation costs continue to rise
and purchasing healthy food items was already harder to access
than less healthy food prior to the pandemic.
The Academy believes that increasing reimbursement is an
investment in our children's health. We need to establish
healthy habits at an early age to promote healthy behavior and
prevent obesity. We cannot afford to not invest in raising
healthy children.
Thank you so much for your time today. I will be happy to
respond to any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Turner follows:]

Prepared Statement of Teresa L. Turner
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you for your testimony, Ms.
Turner. Next, we're going to hear from Ms. Garrett. Ms. Garrett
you're recognized for five minutes for your testimony.

MS. PAULA N. GARRETT, MS, RD, DIVISION DIRECTOR,
DIVISION OF COMMUNITY NUTRITION, VIRGINIA
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

Ms. Garrett. Chair Bonamici, Ranking Member Fulcher,
Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Foxx, and Members of the House
Education and Labor Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
speak before you about improvements to the Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children, WIC.
My name is Paula Garrett, and I'm testifying today in my
capacity as the Virginia State WIC Director, and as a Member of
the Board of Directors for the National WIC Association, a
national non-profit organization representing 89 State WIC
agencies, 12,000 front line service provider agencies, and the
6.3 million mothers, infants, and young children that rely on
WIC.
WIC is an effective program that provides tailored
nutrition education, healthy food, and support to pregnant and
postpartum women and children age up to five. WIC's public
health and nutrition services help assure healthy pregnancies,
healthy births, and a healthy start for young children.
Every dollar spent on WIC returns $2.48 in healthcare
savings, as healthier birth outcomes result in Medicaid
Savings. The WIC benefit which addresses nutrient concerns,
reduces child food insecurity. In 2009, changes to the WIC food
packages introduced fruits, vegetables, and whole grains,
resulting in improved child diet quality and increased
availability of health foods in grocery stores.
WIC's breastfeeding support has too made significant
impacts on breastfeeding initiation rates among WIC infants,
however, as of 2018, only 57 percent of eligible WIC
participants are receiving WIC services, and the program
experienced declines in participation partly attributed to
structural barriers to access, suggesting opportunities to
modernize and streamline WIC.
Waiver authorities provided through the Families First
Coronavirus Response Act allowed WIC agencies to safely
administer services via video and phone. Since the pandemic,
the Virginia WIC program has seen a 12 percent increase in
participation.
Remote appointments eliminate some common barriers to
participation, such as transportation, or time off of work,
resulting in increased attendance, and engagement of parents
during appointments. Relaxing the physical presence requirement
post-COVID to allow video and phone certification appointments,
while creating flexibility to issue benefits as families more
conveniently schedule health assessments at either the WIC
clinic, or physicians? offices, would assure that WIC meets the
realities of families.
Remote options should not phaseout certain health
screenings which are essential to WIC's public health nutrition
mission. Facilitating two-way communication of health
information between physicians and WIC clinics, extending
certification to 2 years, and streamlining certification
periods across participant categories would help reduce
repetitive paperwork and testing, which often can deter ongoing
participation.
The extension of the postpartum eligibility, 2 years, well
positions WIC to be part of the Federal Government's response
to racial disparities and maternal health, particularly
maternal mortality, and morbidity among black and indigenous
women. The Virginia WIC program partnered with the Virginia
Department of Social Services, and the Virginia Department of
Medical Assistant Services to conduct data matching through
Medicaid, SNAP, and TANF.
Building Federal partnerships within Medicaid, and
expanding adjunctive eligibility to include Head Start, and the
Children's Health Insurance Program, and the Food Distribution
Program on Indian reservations would support child retention in
WIC and streamline certification.
As State WIC agencies prioritize technologies and
initiatives for more modern accessible WIC experience, funding
is needed to support improvements to State management
information systems. In the American Rescue Act, Congress
invested 880 million dollars in WIC outreach innovation and
program modernization, and temporarily increased WIC's fruit
and vegetable benefit.
This investment has been increasingly well-received by
Virginia's WIC families, increasing the overall value of the
WIC food package would support access to nutritious foods,
program retention, and the shopping experience. During the
pandemic, USDA was able to scale up SNAP's online shopping
pilot giving years of prior planning which WIC lacked, leaving
WIC unable to adapt as complicated transactions and families
without equitable shopping options.
National online purchasing from WIC should be available no
later than October 2024. The WIC Farmers Market Nutrition
Program, F&P, provides an able benefit to WIC families to shop
at local farmers markets, increasing or eliminating the FMP
Able Benefit Cap of $30.00, would further support healthy
shopping options and local agriculture.
Cost-efficient technologies and statutory change to
electronically process WIC F&P and WIC EBT transactions at
markets is necessary. Thank you for your attention to WIC's
pivotal role and promoting maternal, infant and child
nutrition. I look forward to working with you to advance other
solutions that enhances WIC's public health impact.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Garrett follows:]

Prepared Statement of Paula N. Garrett
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you for your testimony, Ms.
Garrett. Mr. Farrell you're recognized for five minutes for
your testimony.

MR. TREVOR FARRELL, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF COMMERCIAL
OFFICER, AMERICAS, SCHREIBER FOODS, INC.

Mr. Farrell. Thank you, Chairwoman Bonamici and Ranking
Member Fulcher, for inviting me to participate in this
important hearing regarding the nutrition program for women,
infants, and children. At Schreiber Foods we strive to do good
through food every day.
We're a customer brand leader in shelf staple beverages and
yogurt, along with natural processed cream cheese. With more
than 9,000 employees and annual sales in excess of 5 billion
dollars, we partner with the best retailers, restaurants,
distributors, and food manufacturers around the globe.
That includes providing safe, delicious food like cheese
and yogurt, through WIC. As the House Education and Labor
Committee begins to draft a Child Nutrition Reauthorization
Bill, dairy companies like Schreiber ask you to ensure that
WIC' s supplemental food package includes varieties and package
sizes that reflect item preferences of WIC participants, and
market availability within categories such as milk and dairy.
Specifically, Congress should allow WIC participants to
choose yogurt package sizes and flavor varieties that better
match our current consumer preferences. Congress should also
affirmatively enable all WIC participants to choose reduced fat
2 percent milk to ensure that pregnant women, mothers, and
children redeem their milk vouchers, and receive milk's
nutritional benefits.
Schreiber and the entire dairy industry are proud of the
role we play in contributing to improved health outcomes for
WIC families. Dairy products provide a number of essential
nutrients and are core components of diets recommended by the
dietary guidelines for Americans.
Milk, yogurt, and cheese provide high-quality protein, and
13 essential nutrients, including calcium, Vitamin D, and
potassium. According to the dietary guidelines, these nutrients
are key dietary components of public health concern. The health
benefits of dairy products include better bone health and lower
risk of both Type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. These
are three critical areas of concern for WIC demographics.
Unfortunately, 90 percent of the U.S. population does not
meet the levels of dairy consumption recommended by the DGA's.
To help improve upon this nutritional issue, WIC's supplemental
food package provides redemptions for milk, yogurt, and cheese.
Unnecessary specifications and package restrictions however,
caused the WIC dairy program to be too restrictive.
Congress should allow WIC participants to choose yogurt
package sizes and flavor varieties that better match current
consumer preferences. 33 states, and the District of Columbia
only allow WIC households to select one 32-ounce container of
yogurt, instead of choosing from a selection of the much more
commonly sold single serve yogurt containers, such as 4-, 5.3-
and 6-ounce cups.
In yogurt there are 200 plus varieties available in single
serve containers, compared to only 33--35 varieties offered in
the 32-ounce size. Even the 634 million pounds sold in 32-ounce
containers are only 23 percent of the 2.7 billion pounds sold
across single serve and 32-ounce sizes together.
This means that WIC participants are limited only to a
fraction of the yogurt available on store shelves. As USDA
reviews and updates the food package, the Department should
clarify that states may allow participants to use their yogurt
redemption for containers that total up to 32 ounces.
Congress should allow WIC participants to choose yogurt in
smaller package sizes, which have more flavor options, are more
popular with consumers, and are more readily available in
stores. Congress should also affirmatively enable all WIC
participants to choose reduced fat 2 percent milk.
In 2014, the Department took away the most popular milk
variety, reduced fat 2 percent milk, from children older than
two, as well as pregnant and lactating women, unless the WIC
participant had documented medical conditions, limiting variety
impacts access.
A 2015 study found that many stores in Hispanic majority
and low-income neighborhoods were less likely to carry low-fat
1 percent or non-fat milk. This could result in less WIC
participant access to grocery stores in their neighborhoods,
and therefore less milk consumption by WIC families. Congress
should allow all WIC participants to choose reduced fat 2
percent milk so that pregnant women, mothers, and children can
have better access to milk's nutritional benefits.
In conclusion, the more the WIC program allows the
varieties and sizes that people want to buy, and are widely
available, the more likely eligible families will participate
in WIC. During the COVID pandemic milk variety and yogurt
container size flexibilities were successfully used through
waivers managed by State agencies to maintain food access for
WIC participants.
They allowed these participants access foods that met WIC
nutritional needs and were more readily available in the supply
chain and on store's shelves. This allowed women, infants, and
children better access to products such as yogurt and reduced
fat milk, which improved our ability to provide essential
ingredients and health benefits of dairy products to WIC
participants.
Doing this long-term seems like a logical step. Thank you
again for allowing me to participate in this hearing and I look
forward to any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Farrell follows:]

Prepared Statement of Trevor Farrell
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Ferrell, for your
testimony. And we have next Ms. Burris. Ms. Burris you are
recognized for five minutes for your testimony.

MRS. JESSICA BURRIS, NORTH CAROLINA WIC PARTICIPANT;
BREASTFEEDING PEER COUNSELOR, MONTGOMERY
COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH--WIC DEPARTMENT

Ms. Burris. OK thank you. Chair Bonamici, Ranking Member
Fulcher, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Foxx, and Members of
the House Education and Labor Committee, thank you for holding
today's hearing and providing me with the opportunity to share
my experience with WIC services.
My name is Jessica Burris. I'm a mother of three in North
Carolina, and I'm so grateful that each of my children was able
to get a healthy start thanks to WIC. As a parent, I had
questions that didn't always have easy answers, especially
about how to change my diet while pregnant, and what to feed my
toddlers to make sure they grow up healthy.
WIC was there for me with the answers. I have relied on the
monthly benefit to purchase nutritious foods that were
otherwise too costly. But WIC is more than a food benefit. The
nutrition and breastfeeding support nurtures a community that
helps new parents like me build healthier lives for our
families.
I was first pregnant when I was 14, and I had a lot of
choices to make quickly. Even when I'm with my mother and a
strong community behind me, I was still immensely grateful that
there was a program like WIC to support me and my growing
family.
WIC staff ensured that I could afford food for my daughter,
and help build my nutrition knowledge to successfully
breastfeed, make smart choices while shopping, and cook healthy
meals. Today my oldest daughter is living and working in
Charlotte, and I couldn't be prouder of how she grew up.
As I was raising her, I met my husband, found work, and
settled in Troy, North Carolina. When we were ready, my husband
and I had two children. While we were more established then,
and even though my daughter was on Medicaid, I didn't even
imagine that we would be eligible for WIC.
It was almost when my daughter was a year old before we
found out through a healthcare worker that we could apply for
WIC, and she referred us to a clinic. My younger children would
have never received WIC support if there hadn't been a
connection between WIC and Medicaid. We have to make it as easy
as possible for eligible families to be connected to WIC
services.
Allowing for remote certifications after the pandemic is an
important first step. The program's in-person requirements were
a barrier to our family, as we live in a small county that
doesn't even have a birthing hospital. When my son and younger
daughter were first certified in 2018, I had to drive 25 miles
away to reach the WIC clinic.
The time and distance carried a cost, as my husband and I
had to balance the WIC appointments with work responsibilities,
and childcare arrangements. These challenges became worse
during the pandemic as I am one of the millions of American
women whose work was disrupted.
I am thankful that WIC waived in-person requirements
starting in March 2020. I was able to recertify my children for
WIC through a phone call without hassle, and without exposing
my family to COVID-19. I was also able to receive nutritious
education through online platforms, text messages and by phone.
Because of the age difference between my children, I've
been able to see how WIC has adapted over the years. With my
oldest daughter, I was just starting to learn how to shop and
prepare nutritious foods. Even in the 1990's WIC encouraged
healthier options and steered me away from purchasing sugary
cereals for my daughter.
When my younger children reconnected with WIC, I was
excited to see all of the changes that moved WIC's foods closer
to the advice of doctors and scientists, like the addition of
fruits and vegetables. I was overjoyed when North Carolina WIC
announced the higher value for fruits and vegetables in June
2021. The benefit is typically only $9.00, which is nowhere
near enough to ensure my kids have consistent access to fruits
and vegetables.
With the added value up to $35.00 per month, I'm able to
make fresh, nutritious meals for my children and introduce them
to new varieties of healthy foods. WIC is not just a food
benefit. WIC recognizes that good nutrition is part of overall
health and through education and health screenings at clinic
sites, has provided my family with individualized counseling.
In 2018, my local WIC clinic offered lead screenings, and
identified that my 3-year-old son had high levels of lead.
Since my pediatrician did not screen for lead, we would have
never known and sought treatment if not for WIC. After the
pandemic it's important to rethink WIC's relationship with
Medicaid and doctors? offices and encourage greater
collaboration.
WIC has a highly effective breastfeeding peer counselor
program, and I was fortunate enough to be recently hired as a
peer counselor. Local WIC clinics in North Carolina partner
with birthing hospitals to provide breastfeeding support at the
bedside--a critical time for breastfeeding initiation.
These local partnerships with WIC outside the clinic walls
and connect WIC into the broader healthcare system which
reflects the reality of how families like mine receive care. I
participated in WIC twice at very different parts of my life,
but WIC has consistently delivered support, healthier foods,
and important public health services that have significantly
impacted the nutrition and well-being of my children.
I thank you for considering improvements that will build on
the important work of this essential program.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Burris follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jessica Burris
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Ms. Burris, and to all the
witnesses for your testimony. Under Committee Rule 9(a) we are
now going to question the witnesses under the five-minute rule.
And I will recognize Subcommittee Members in seniority order,
and as Chair, I recognize myself for five minutes.
So according to the USDA, as many as 30 million adults and
12 million children have not had enough nutritious food to eat
during the pandemic. And at the same time we've seen some
declining rates of participation in WIC and CACFP in recent
years. Ms. Burris, the WIC Farmers Market Nutrition Program,
FMNP, which you mentioned, is an excellent program.
But we know that many WIC participants are not able to
fully benefit because it is capped at $50.00 per participant.
As a WIC participant, have you been able to receive the Farmers
Market Nutrition Program benefits, and if so, what has your
experience been like, and do you agree that benefits should be
increased for this program?
Ms. Burris. It is not available in my county. It's
available in all surrounding counties. I would love for it to
be available in our county. We do have a farmer's market. I
think my sister has access because she lives in Wake County in
Raleigh, as she has had a positive experience with it. But I
think it's great, and I would love for our county to have
access to that.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you very much. And Ms. Turner,
you're a witness testifying on behalf of the Academy of
Nutrition and Dietetics, AND as you mentioned. I want to give
you a chance to respond. Mr. Farrell mentioned that AND
position paper on dairy, to justify the argument for 2 percent
milk and WIC. Could you clarify what that position paper
actually says about dairy?
Ms. Turner. Thank you so much for that question,
Congresswoman. I believe the document that is being referenced
is the consensus statement that was created by not only the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, but also the American
Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, the American Academy of
Pediatrics, as well as the American Heart Association.
The consensus statement, excuse me, does in fact encourage
children from 12 to 24 months to drink whole milk, and then for
children older than 24 months it recommends consuming water or
milk with less fat than whole, like skim and 1 percent.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you. And it's my understanding
as well that if a child has a nutritional need, they can still
get 2 percent if they have a doctor's prescription, is that
correct?
Ms. Turner. Absolutely with a special diet statement.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you. So as I detailed in my
opening statement, we've been receiving feedback from providers
really since 2009 about how to improve CACFP, and I'm soon
going to be reintroducing my Early Childhood Nutrition
Improvement Act.
This legislation will update the law to streamline
paperwork requirements and incentivize care providers to
interpret this program, and it will support greater access to
nutritious foods for kids. These changes are long overdue, and
I enjoyed bipartisan support for these changes over the past
several years.
Importantly under current law, CACFP only provides up to
two meals and one snack per day. So Ms. Turner, how would
adding the option of a third meal or a snack per day help
children and working families?
Ms. Turner. Thank you again. I'm a numbers person, so
absolutely adding just a single meal per day, 5 days per week,
all year long is 260 meals that the parent would not have to
provide. That leaves peace of mind for the parents. That leaves
less stress for the parents which makes for a better household,
and the child is more food secure.
It doesn't just benefit us as a program, it benefits the
child as an individual, and the family as a whole. And I think
that's really the most significant part.
Chairwoman Bonamici. And could you describe, you talked
about how many children are in your care program. Are they
hungry at the end of the day if they're there for a long day?
Ms. Turner. Absolutely. And there are smaller snacks that
we give, but not a reimbursable snack, and not a full hearty
snack that could supplement that hunger.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Terrific, well thank you so much. And
I guess I want to ask Ms. Burris as well, I don't know if
you've used the CACFP program, but what's your thought on
whether children who are in a childcare setting, at the end of
the day and they're still hungry, should they be able to get
another meal at the end of the day through the CACFP program?
Ms. Burris. Yes, thank you. Both of my children are in a
daycare. I don't know if they participate in the program, but
it sounds like that's what they have. They do get a snack after
lunch. It's usually like a handful of Goldfish maybe, so they
are really hungry when they come home.
So I do think that it would be great if that would be
improved in the daycare setting.
Chairman Bonamici. Thank you so much and I just want to as
I begin to yield back, I just want to mention to my colleagues
that I have been working on this proposal for CACFP. It has
traditionally enjoyed bipartisan support. We're looking at
providing that third meal for the kids who stay a long day, but
also streamlining as we heard from so many that the paperwork
requirements to make the administration smoother, and more
efficient for the care providers and families. And I see my
time is expired. I want to set a good example and yield back.
And now I'm going to recognize the Ranking Member Mr.
Fulcher for five minutes for your questions.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Madam Chair. Just as a reminder to
everyone in that last exchange, Ms. Turner made a comment that
adding or expanding the program would just create meals where
the parents wouldn't have to provide them. That's really not
true. Parents will have to provide the meals, it's just a
question of which parents, because it's a taxpayer issue, and
we have to fund these things in some fashion.
But to that end I want to ask a question of Mr. Farrell.
Food prices are up, and we're all seeing it, we're all dealing
with that, and we've just come through a massive pandemic.
We've infused a tremendous amount of money into the money
supply, and that's going to have ramifications. It's called
inflation.
How has that impacted from your vantage point, how has that
impacted the WIC program?
Mr. Farrell. That cost structure, as you said,
Representative Fulcher, they're intense right now. The last 2
years we've seen labor, freight, and packaging increases on our
business alone in the tens of millions of dollars. It's so
difficult right now to find labor. It's so difficult to
efficiently source the raw materials that we need.
And so the dairy industry is doing everything that we can
to mitigate and protect consumers from this additional cost.
But to execute programs like WIC it's only going to get tougher
from a cost perspective, and so allowing the use of these
programs to be less cumbersome and less restrictive will help
with those cost pressures.
Mr. Fulcher. So as a followup to that, I know that there
are regulations, or guidance if you will in these programs that
limit WIC participants, and what they can purchase in the
store. What are some of the ramifications of those regulations
or guidelines on the WIC program?
Mr. Farrell. Yes, I mean again if they can't purchase 2
percent milk, except for infants below 2 years old, it's just
taking the most common milk item on the shelf away from a lot
of WIC participants. Many stores don't have a full array of
milk products, so they're not able to give the nutritional
benefits because they don't have options to sell to WIC
participants.
Similarly in yogurt, a lot of these neighborhoods where WIC
participants live don't have the 32-ounce size of yogurt even
as an option. Typically, you know, the store shelves are
smaller, a lot less space, and so just having a single serve is
often times the only option that a WIC participant would have,
and if those items are not shelved, then they're not going to
get the nutrition and other benefits that dairy products
provide.
Mr. Fulcher. So you talked about the packaging, Mr. Farrell
again, I'm sorry. You talked about the packaging issue. I'm not
sure I completely understood it. You mentioned a 32-ounce
container, and do I understand it correctly that to qualify for
the program that's the container that needs to be utilized, and
is that one of those factors that could be changed, it could
broaden the access to various products?
Mr. Farrell. That's correct. There's some vagueness in the
way that the laws are written because the states are actually
implementing the rules a bit differently, but 33 states, plus
the District of Columbia, are interpreting the rules to say
only 32-ounce size.
We would like to see clarification so that 32 ounces in
total with a combination of sizes as an option for consumers be
a more clear rule written into the changes you're about to
make.
Mr. Fulcher. So I've only got a minute left, and Mr.
Farrell I want to just close with a sales pitch from my home
State. We are a major dairy producer in the State of Idaho, and
so to that end your view on the importance of dairy as part of
the daily diet, and why it's so important to have it included
here.
Mr. Farrell. Yes. I mean it was in my testimony the
importance of what dairy can bring to the diet. Again, milk and
water were prescribed as the best beverages to have for
children ages one to five. We want to make that accessible, but
there's so many, 13 key nutrients, it helps with bone health,
it reduces the risk of cardiovascular disease.
You know there are so many public health benefits of dairy,
and we want to make sure that as many WIC participants as
possible get access to those.
Mr. Fulcher. Mr. Farrell and panel Members, thank you so
much. Madam Chair I yield back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Ranking Member Fulcher.
Next, I'm going to recognize Dr. Adams for five minutes for
your questions.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Madam Chair. Good morning, everybody.
Thank you, Representative Bonamici and Ranking Member Fulcher,
for holding the meeting. We know that children are our future,
but how they can be our future when they do not have adequate
nutrition during their formative years is really the question.
The pandemic has exacerbated the food insecurity for many,
particularly for children, and I pointed this out over and over
again, as many of you have as well. But streamlining and
modernizing the application process will help alleviate the
burden on those who could obtain proper nutrition through
established government programs.
Ms. Burris, as a fellow North Carolinian welcome to the
Committee. But as a WIC participant, can you share more about
your experience with shopping for WIC foods?
Ms. Burris. Thank you. My experience overall is pretty
positive. The only setbacks have been not labeling in the
stores, like saying what WIC foods are available. Like not
having proper labeling. Some stores have great labeling, and
some don't, that's where the benefit app comes in handy,
because if you're not sure you can scan the bar code and it
tells you if it's a WIC approved item or not.
I just think more advertisement in the stores. Not really
advertisement, but just pointing out which are the WIC approved
items for parents. That's just really the only thing that I
could see that needs improvement, but overall it's a good
experience, and I'm very satisfied with the foods that are
available.
Ms. Adams. Right. OK. Thank you. So if we had that, what
you just mentioned, that identification and so forth, that
would make your shopping experience better, thank you. Ms.
Turner thank you for your service.
In addition to providing nutrition education experience
with children through the programs at Fort Meade, you've also
worked to engage parents and caregivers. So how does providing
nutrition education for parents and other family Members help
you achieve your goals with the program?
Ms. Turner. Thank you so much. Children need people to care
for them. They also need people to guide and lead them. They're
not responsible for their own food, they don't work, and so
it's important that the adults in their lives that they look up
to, and that take care of them are able to understand healthy
habits and proper nutrition so that they can pass those on to
the children.
Role modeling, basic nutrition education, access, how to
save money while grocery shopping, how to read nutrition
labels, all of that information goes to the parents and
caregivers, and they're more confident and comfortable to pass
that information on to the children, and that's what they need,
that guidance in their homes.
Ms. Adams. Right. Ms. Garrett would you explain or speak to
the impact that children of color experience within the WIC
program, and what other measures could be taken by Congress to
support all children and families?
Ms. Garrett. Thank you for your question. As far as what
we're doing for WIC, we provide the nutrition education, and
assessment, and the healthy foods we need to support our
families. What we've seen in the pandemic is that our
participation has increased significantly.
Because we found that families were more food insecure, and
that they needed this benefit. And so the waivers, especially
the waiver for reduced, excuse me, for remote certification,
and physical presence helped to facilitate some of those
barriers that our families faced, and also the waiver to allow
for some flexibilities in the foods also allowed for families
to receive the benefit that they were entitled to have.
Ms. Adams. Thank you. Mr. Farrell nearly all of your
testimony focused on dairy and packaging sizing. Could you
speak to other important aspects of the WIC program?
Mr. Farrell. Yes, for sure. I mean I think again trying to
provide nutritional benefits, it's not just dairy, but
similarly fruits and vegetables, grains. We're just trying to
get nutrients to these participants. The reason dairy is a
factor again, there's a study that 90 percent of U.S. citizens
are not getting enough dairy in their diets.
But I do think it's just it's simply part of a balanced
diet, and those other fruits and vegetables are as critically
important.
Ms. Adams. Right. Ms. Garrett, I just have a few moments,
but what forms of support does WIC offer new mothers?
Ms. Garrett. Well we provide especially breastfeeding
support, in terms of the breastfeeding peer counselor program.
We also have done bedside WIC certification appointments. Now
granted that has not happened since COVID, but we have had
several of our districts who provide certification appointments
right at the bedside, so the parents never leave the hospital
without their WIC benefits, and then we also----
Ms. Adams. Thank you. Thank you, ma'am, I'm out of time.
Ms. Garrett. Thank you, thank you, Dr. Adams.
Ms. Adams. Madam Chair I'm going to yield back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Dr. Adams. Next, I'm going
to recognize the Ranking Member of the Full Committee Dr. Foxx
from North Carolina. Dr. Foxx you're muted.
Ms. Foxx. Sorry.
Chairwoman Bonamici. There you go.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. Thank you, Chair Bonamici. Thank you
for our witnesses. My questions are going to be for Mr.
Farrell. Mr. Farrell the WIC program fails if we don't have
industry partners in the program. To me that means we need to
ensure the program requirements do not limit the ability of
those partners to meet the needs of the participants, while
still being able to operate through business.
You've discussed a little bit with Chair Fulcher about the
problems you've seen in your business. So can you react to
that, and discuss a little bit more about what that means that
we should consider as we reauthorize the program without
necessarily repeating what you told Mr. Fulcher?
Mr. Farrell. Yes, thank you Representative Foxx. Nutrition
programs like WIC and SNAP, they work well when the involve
foods that are accessible in the market, and throughout the
supply chain. And problems occur when product specifications,
rules and regulations, limit what's readily available.
And it also hurts stores trying to participate in WIC
because they don't have access. So as a result, WIC
participants, they're losing both accessibility to foods and
stores, and they're losing access to stores altogether. You
know we've got to get these nutritional benefits in the hands
of our consumers, and you know the more rules and regulations
we put on to that access, the harder it is to do that
effectively.
Ms. Foxx. Yes. The 32-ounce example you used is very good.
You know I sit here and listen to my colleagues talk about
feeding more and more and more meals. There seems to be
absolutely no sense of where the money comes from to pay for
these programs. I bring up accountability in all programs all
the time.
It should be a major focus, as we're utilizing taxpayer
dollars. This is not manna from heaven that we have, so
taxpayer dollars. And the American people are the most generous
people in the world. They help their neighbors in need. So
while I know accountability is largely the responsibility of
the government, it takes all partners in our programs to help
protect the integrity of our programs.
Mr. Farrell, what are some accountability provisions you
recommend helping ensure the WIC program is meeting its purpose
without wasting precious taxpayer dollars? And I'll ask Ms.
Turner and Ms. Garrett to answer that as well, once Mr. Farrell
completes his response, and you see I have 2 minutes, so we
need fairly quick responses.
Mr. Farrell. Yes, I do think that you know the
responsibility for those in the industry like the dairy
industry is to make sure that our products meet WIC standards,
nutritional standards, container size requirements, et cetera.
The more restrictions, and the more--the tougher it is for us
to do that effectively and efficiently, it's just going to make
access that much harder.
I think accountability really falls outside of our
industry, but I do agree with the things that you're saying
there. To me it's not so much about more money into the
program, it's more about making it efficient and allowing these
products to truly get in consumers? hands.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Turner, a quick response please.
Where can we be more accountable to have more money?
Ms. Turner. Thank you so much. Considering it's an
investment in children, and investment benefits everyone in the
whole community, I think it's important that the community and
the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics agrees that the
community contribute and is able to contribute to all of the
investments of children to benefit society as a whole.
Ms. Foxx. Ms. Burris? I'm sorry, Ms. Garrett, apologize.
Ms. Garrett. Thank you, Representative Foxx. As a State WIC
Director I am one of those individuals who is responsible for
holding our budget accountable. So in reference to the 32-ounce
container size, that's a State option, and we have to make sure
that we are making best use of the food funds that are provided
to us.
So those types of decisions are the ones that we have to
make. In choosing different container sizes you also introduce
increased cost into the food package that is already at some
times already exacerbated.
Ms. Foxx. OK. Mr. Farrell I'll go back to you for just a
second. You brought up the issue of inflation. You brought up
the issue of having a hard time finding labor. Nobody has
mentioned farmers. I have a lot of dairy farmers in my
district, and they are being killed by inflation, particularly
the cost of fuel.
Would you like to add anything to what you said about how
inflation is impacting farmers?
Mr. Farrell. Yes absolutely. Farmers operate on very thin
margins as you know. Everything that you said is absolutely
true. It's a tough place to be right now as a farmer, and of
course we need them to be healthy, and to provide great
products to consumers and WIC participants.
Ms. Foxx. Yes, it starts right there. If we don't have them
because there will be no ``investment,'' in children. Thank you
very much. I yield back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Dr. Foxx. Next, I recognize
Representative Hayes for five minutes for your questions.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you. Thank you, Chair Bonamici, and thank
you to all the witnesses today for being here. The programs we
are discussing are crucial to supporting new mothers and
children through the early stages of childhood and setting up
entire families for success.
Ms. Turner, I want to thank you for your comment just now
that investing in our children is investing in our communities.
That is something very important to remember. Despite the
program's continued success for those who utilize it, we know
that in recent years the WIC program has seen a significant
decline in participants.
This is especially concerning in light of all of the child
hunger crisis that we've seen caused by COVID-19. So my
question is for Ms. Garrett. In your work as a WIC State
Director, do you find that many families are unaware that they
qualify for the program?
Ms. Garrett. So thank you for your question Representative
Hayes, yes, we find that a lot of our parents find that they
are not actually eligible for the WIC program, and so we'd like
to thank Congress for the passage of the 880 million dollars
that would allow for WIC modernization and outreach to actually
help families to find out that they're actually eligible.
And also, looking at expanding adjunctive eligibility to
Head Start families, and to also people who are getting CHIP,
and then for the food distribution program on Indian
reservations. Folks don't know that they are eligible, and that
is where we're finding that we have 43 percent of the Nation's
participants who could actually benefit from the program.
So putting measures in place to expand the program would be
a great benefit.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you. That is actually a problem that I've
been working on during my time in Congress. And it actually has
received bipartisan support. This month I introduced the WIC
for Kids Act with Representative Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon.
This legislation would expand adjunctive eligibility to
include Members of a family participating in SNAP, Medicaid and
TANF, and expand eligibility to those participating in Head
Start, Early Head Start, the food distribution programs on
Indian reservations that you just referenced, and the
Children's Health Insurance Program.
Our bill also extends child certification periods to 2
years and provides flexibility so families can recertify at the
same time. The next question for you Ms. Garrett as well. I'm
glad to see that you recommend expanding adjunctive eligibility
to Head Start in your testimony.
Can you share more about why adjunctive eligibility to this
program and others would help families?
Ms. Garrett. Well families have already gone through the
eligibility process for attainment into or participation in
those programs, and if we align our certification eligibility
guidelines along with those, adjunctive eligibility means
almost ``automatic eligibility'' into the WIC program.
So it makes it much easier for families that have already
been determined eligible for those other programs, then they
would be automatically eligible for the WIC program and can
have those benefits.
In the past we have partnered with Head Start in providing
nutrition appointments, certifications, nutrition education,
right there in the Head Start centers where parents can
actually come, drop their children off for Head Start, take
care of their WIC certification appointments and nutrition
education appointments, and get their benefits and take them in
one fell shot.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you. I've actually seen that in my own
district, in my community. We have Head Start centers that are
community-based centers where there is housing, there is
employment, there are just all of these wrap around services
that once parents drop off their children they can access. I'm
very proud that my community has started that. I was a Head
Start child myself, and all of my children went through Head
Start.
And like Ms. Burris, I was a young mom who accessed the WIC
program. The other thing that I'm hearing a lot of, and Ms.
Turner kind of touched on it, is the need for an additional
snack during the day. So with the remainder of my time, Ms.
Turner can you just if there's anything else you want to share
about why that is important.
Ms. Turner. Absolutely. Thank you again for that question.
Resources--everyone is not able to provide, especially with the
pandemic, especially with job loss and food insecurity on a
whole. Everybody is not capable of providing, and so it's
important to take care of children who are not responsible for
the State that they're in. They shouldn't go hungry because of
access.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you. Thank you so much. Madam Chair with
that I yield back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you Representative. Next, I
recognize Representative Spartz. I don't know if you're here
because you're not on camera, oh there you are. I recognize you
for five minutes for your questions.
Mrs. Spartz. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate the
conversation, and I think it's an important conversation, but I
also you know, I look at a lot of government programs and the
economy, and I'm noticing that they're very costly, very
expensive, and not have as much value at the end of the one
they're trying to accomplish, so definitely we have to look at
how we can have much more accountability and return on
investment.
But also there also how we can look at some of that
underlying causes, and what we are really trying to achieve to
get people really to become self-sufficient, learn good healthy
habits, eating habits. We really still we talk about you know
having issues with obesity. We still have you know, a certain
amount of children, in schools still have obesity issues, which
is a big problem.
So is there are any other part of this problem should we
additional flexibility in choice. I think it will make it more
efficient, and probably healthier and better for people, but
Mr. Farrell is there any other things maybe wrap around
services, around and other things that would be useful that we
can educate mothers, and you know about some you know, maybe
healthy eating habits and other things.
Should we incorporate some additional things that could be
useful?
Mr. Farrell. I think continued education, Representative
Spartz, which you have mentioned. Again, dairy is an example.
13 essential nutrients, including calcium, Vitamin D, and
potassium, you know, to make sure that mothers understand that
that's important to their diets, and the diets of their
children.
You know I think within dairy at times as an example, there
can be myths like full fat dairy foods. Is it good for you, or
is it bad? And you know recent studies have shown that there
are far more positive benefits in having full fled dairy foods,
you know, it does not have negative health outcomes like
obesity, diabetes.
And so we've got to educate consumers. I think that's the
biggest thing, and others have talked about you know how do we
do a better job in store of making sure that WIC participants
understand what products they can go to. I think Jessica
mentioned that.
I do think that's a really positive thing that we should
try to accomplish.
Mrs. Spartz. Maybe Ms. Garrett and Ms. Turner, you can add
since you kind of work at that State level, and from research
perspective because it seems to me until we educate people to
make healthy choices themself, you know, nothing's going to
happen. How are we going to do a better job?
I recently went to the store and looked how many foods, I
usually have a rule if it's more than five ingredients I'm not
buying it OK, this is my personal rule, but I don't understand
what is on the package, I am not buying it you know.
But how we can educate people to make these healthy
situations, because and then I think the interest will adjust
to provide healthier products you know, but there are a lot. I
just went to the store. I don't do much time shopping, I'm too
busy, and I'll look at how many products are so unhealthy, and
a lot of them have empty shelves, and I'm thinking this is
pretty hard to stay healthy, made in this food.
So any thoughts you have Ms. Garrett and Ms. Turner, I have
a few minutes left.
Ms. Garrett. OK. Well thank you for your question. So what
we do in the WIC program is that we provide immense nutrition
education. That is actually the cornerstone of our program.
Many people think it's providing supplemental foods, but it's
actually the nutrition education that provides the cornerstone,
like we said before, that gives the young children a backbone
by which to stand further in life.
And so, we tried to streamline the nutrition education to
meet the families where they are, and they're doing right now
everything is virtual, but prior to COVID, we were doing
individual nutrition education, group nutrition education,
online nutrition education platforms, to meet parents where
they are, so that we can ensure that they get the nutrition
education without being a burden to them.
And then also what we've done in creating our food labels
that Ms. Burris spoke of, we call them WIC, but we call them
wholesome, informed choices, which lets people know who are not
receiving WIC, that these choices that have been made and put
on our food package, are wholesome and informed choices for all
individuals who are living in the Commonwealth of Virginia.
So the dieticians that have looked at the food package and
determined what foods need to be put on those are making sure
Congresswoman Spartz, that it is healthy for all individuals.
Mrs. Spartz. I'm sure that they look at this, you know,
labels too. I need to make sure that people, Ms. Turner I have
like only 2 seconds left, can you add something to it.
Ms. Turner. Yes. Ms. Garrett covered a lot of it actually,
thank you so much for the question. The best part about the
CACFP, and child nutrition programs, is the education
component, how it's built into the program, and you don't serve
food and administer the program without adding nutrition into
it from the child all the up until the adult.
Mrs. Spartz. OK. Well thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you Representative. I now
recognize Representative Leger Fernandez for five minutes for
your questions.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much Chair Bonamici, and
to our witnesses for making sure that our mothers and our
precious, precious, little ones are receiving the nutrition
they need. You know across this country because of inequality,
and because our Federal minimum wage is a poverty wage, many of
our working families simply don't earn enough to provide
nutritious food.
And I think we need to focus on the importance of that
investment, and that that is indeed taxpayer money well spent.
You know earlier this month Secretary Vilsack visited my
district, and spoke with a roundtable of nutrition experts,
parents, farmers, you know I have an incredibly rural district
with dairy farmers, all kinds, chili farmers, all kinds of
farmers, and Native Americans.
We discussed the importance of connecting the local farms
to schools and programs like WIC because that also supports the
local supply chains, which we saw was a problem in the
pandemic. But it also helps the rural economy itself, you know,
while providing families with healthy nutritious foods,
connecting them to the farmers.
Ms. Garrett and others, you spoke about you know the
farmer's market role. Can you talk about what some of those
additional benefits that we might see connecting WIC and
farmers, connecting parents and their children at farmers
market to the farmers. Share a little bit more of your
experience regarding that.
Ms. Garrett. OK. Here in Virginia we have the Farmer's
Market Nutrition Program, and it's not as large as we would
like for it to be, however, it does bring the local agriculture
and our WIC participants together so that children and families
can see where their food actually comes from.
A lot of times at their grocery store they just think that
you know food appears magically from a fairy that they have
food here in the grocery store, but actually touching and
actually providing income back into local economies is what we
are trying to do in addition to providing healthy foods,
letting people see this is where these foods come from.
These are the individuals who are providing these foods to
you so you can actually have that connection, that community
connection. I think that we should look at increasing that
farmer's market, that nutrition benefit to families so that
they can actually enjoy more of those fresh fruits and
vegetables that come from their communities.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Right. And in New Mexico, in Santa Fe
we actually double up the value because we know that that fresh
food that's not sort of--that's not done at you know,
industrial scales, is both healthier, but also more expensive.
So I want to move on to talking about the impacts that the
pandemic had on the rise in childhood obesity. In my State by
the time that students reach kindergarten, 38 percent of
American Indian students are overweight, or obese. You know, 30
percent of Hispanic students, and 21 percent of white students.
I know Ms. Garrett you shared in your written testimony
that there is specific obesity prevention efforts. I'd love to
hear how you think and, or other witnesses in the time I have
left to talk about the importance of that, of addressing those
issues.
Ms. Garrett. So I'll speak very briefly ma'am. One of the
things that we're also talking about in good nutrition
education is how physical activity also couples with that. Even
though in the pandemic we weren't able to participate together
in activities, families were still able to go outside and play.
So when we talk about some of the measures that we have as
far as our WIC program is concerned, we're looking to provide
low-fat food options for our families that are culturally
appropriate for them as well. And so making sure that you're
finding foods that are culturally appropriate, that are low in
fat, and then integrating the need for physical activity along
with that helps to reduce the incidence of childhood obesity,
and also making sure that we do not inundate our children with
sugary beverages and high sugar cereals and the like.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. All right. I really appreciate the
focus on the cultural appropriateness. You know there was a lot
of blue corn grown in those farms, those local farms I talked
about, which is a staple in Native American pueblos in my
district, and yet there isn't an easy way to get those into the
market, to get those into USDA, so we'll do that. Madam Chair,
my time is about up, and so I will yield back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you very much. And I see that
they are calling votes I believe at this time. I'm going to
recognize Mr. Fitzgerald for five minutes, and turn the gavel
over to Representative Hayes, and then when I come back from
voting I will take back over, so Representative Fitzgerald,
you're recognized for five minutes for your questions.
Representative Hayes you will preside until I get back.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a couple of
questions real quick for Mr. Farrell. Being from Wisconsin, and
as Mr. Fulcher said earlier, you know there' s a lot of dairy
in this State, and so I wanted to ask, it appears that milk
consumption in some of the school programs has been declining
over the last 8 years. Is there a simple fix like how about
flavored milk?
Mr. Farrell. Yes, for sure, that would be a simple fix that
I think would really have a big impact Representative
Fitzgerald. Good to be with you today. We've got a production
facility in the West Bend which I know is in your district in
Wisconsin.
But yes, you know, flavored milk is an example. In 2012
when USDA removed flavored milk, as well as higher fat milk
varieties, consumption declined by more than 10 percent during
the proceeding 5 years. And then when low-fat flavored milk
returned, 58 percent of schools that were surveyed showed
increased milk consumption.
That change definitely made an impact. Flavored milk has
the same nutritional benefits as regular milk, same thing with
2 percent versus lower fat varieties. And so giving WIC
participants more options, giving school programs more options,
is going to allow us to give them the health benefits of dairy
in a bigger way.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. And just one other question for
you. While this hearing is about WIC and CACFP, I want to ask
about sodium in the school meal programs, and what concerns do
you have, if all, any? Target 3 of the sodium requirements
could be instituted and there seems to be some concerns around
that.
Mr. Farrell. Yes, major concerns. The dairy industry is
continuously making products as healthy as possible for
consumers, and that includes sodium reduction. It's been a big
initiative across our industry. But the Target 3 sodium limits
being proposed for school meals, it's just beyond technological
and food safety limits.
It's going to actually increase risk in consumers, and I
don't think we want to do that. Salt serves a functional and
food safety purpose in the manufacturing process, and in the
products even as they're out on the store shelves. It affects
fermentation which you know helps us prevent the growth of
pathogens.
So you know I do think the Target 3 sodium limits could
drastically reduce or eliminate cheese in school meals. I don't
think that's a good thing, and so I think we need to just make
sure that we fully understand the impacts.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you very much. Thanks for being here
today, and Madam Chair I yield back.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you for your questions. I now recognize
Representative Mrvan, you have five minutes for your questions.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chairwoman. At this time first I want
to start off by saying I represent northwest Indiana, Lake
County, part of this for 15 years I worked in serving as an
elected official of the most vulnerable populations. My county
of Lake County had 10.5 deaths per 1,000 when it came to infant
mortality.
With that, we talked about, or I heard return on
investment. There was a study in the Journal of American
Medical Association that came out on December 6 that found that
babies born to WIC participation in vulnerable communities are
33 percent less likely to die in the first year of life. That
to me is a great return on our investment in prioritizing.
And so I know that WIC, along with other collaborative
partners made a major impact in infant mortality in my county,
and I just want to express that to you, and Ms. Turner, all
that you do for the most vulnerable populations.
My question today is this Committee provided nearly 400
million for outreach in program modernization work in WIC to
try to recruit and retain more participants for this important
program. Ms. Garrett, why is it important for the USDA and
Congress to be focused on increasing recruitment and retention
in WIC?
Ms. Garrett. Well thank you for your question, sir. The
fact that you just mentioned the return on the investment with
your community in itself, and that you saw that there was--
according to the report that you just read, there's a 33
percent reduction in infant deaths, is why we need to expand
the outreach for the WIC program.
It also is used to you know to help retain those people
that are already on the program, to show them the benefits for
those who are not on the program, and to retain those that are
on the program the benefits that the program can provide to
them. Not only is it about the supplemental food, but it's also
about the nutrition education, it's also about the assessments,
it's also about the referrals.
A lot of times WIC is the first point of entry into
healthcare for a lot of our participants, and so this is where
we're able to catch a lot of those issues that would
potentially present themselves as problems for our families
later on in life. And so this money that is being provided for
us, this funding, would then help to expand that, and also help
to streamline the program that we have.
You know we're always looking to modernize our program. As
you've seen in the pandemic, we've had to make a lot of changes
very quickly to make our program relevant as we move forward.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Ms. Garrett. And as I talked about,
as an administer of emergency assistance, we participated in
making sure we saw 3,500 people a year, and those families were
required--or not required but were encouraged to look into the
WIC program to change those statistics of childhood development
outcomes, and also as we've talked about, the infant mortality.
My second question, and I just want to say that was a
coordinate effort to make sure that we kept recruiting and
talking about it and uplifting the benefits of the WIC program.
In addition to nutritional support and breastfeeding
counseling, WIC participants receive health and immunization
screenings?
Ms. Burris, could you speak to the impact of these
screenings in your community, especially the tests that may not
always be conducted by a physician, such as blood lead tests.
Ms. Burris. Thank you. So I had a personal experience. My
son when he was 3, we had just entered into WIC, and he got his
lead and his iron tests, and it came back high in lead. I would
have never known because his normal pediatrician visits never
tested for lead.
So we had to go to the pediatrician and do three followups
to see his lead levels drop, and we figured out what it was,
but we would have never known. And even when I first I was on
WIC for like a month when my daughter joined, because I was an
exclusively breastfeeding mom, but I didn't realize that my
iron was low. They had to check my iron.
So just things like that, it just makes such a big
difference, and it made me feel good that was there, because
otherwise I wouldn't have known.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Ms. Burris. In closing I just want to
say I've worked first-hand on this issue in making sure that
the most vulnerable populations had access to food. The impact
that it has, and the outcomes that studies show that children
who are eating nutritious meals have value and also reducing
the infant mortality, is something that one of the reasons why
I'm here in Congress, is to make sure that we advocate for
that.
So going forward I just want to thank all the advocates who
are doing what they can on a daily basis to make sure that
people have access to this program. With that I yield back.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you so much Representative Mrvan. Our
next Member should come from the republican side,
Representative McClain, are you available for questioning? OK.
So I'll go to our next democrat witness, who is Representative
Bowman. Please unmute and ask your questions for five minutes.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much Madam Chair. Am I unmuted?
Yes, I think I am, yes thank you. Ms. Turner, thank you so much
for your testimony today, and your work serving military
families as a nutritionist for the Army, and also your work as
President of the Maryland Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics,
excuse me.
Less than a year ago I was a principal for a middle school
in the Bronx and providing after school programming for our
students was a critical part of serving students and the
community, providing a safe, nurturing, enriching place for
students to be outside of regular school hours is a major
priority I hear about for my constituents, especially in terms
of protecting our youth from exposure to high rates of
violence.
You know from your work that no matter how high quality a
program is in terms of enrichment offerings, if a child is
hungry, everything else is secondary. For many children in my
district the food they get from an after-school program might
be the most nutritious source of food they'll get before the
following day at school, through their school breakfast
program.
In addition to needing more out of school time programs
overall, we need these programs to all be able to offer
nutritious foods to the students they serve. What kind of
barriers do after school programs, excuse me, after school or
out of school time programs face in accepting--excuse me,
accessing CACFP? How can we best alleviate these barriers?
Ms. Turner. Hi. Thank you so much for your question. Some
of it is knowledge about the program, not knowing how to get
into the program, the paperwork barriers, the verification
barriers that I spoke of in my testimony. To make it not as
difficult, and not as cumbersome for on both the side of the
program, and the side of the child and family, so that it's
easy to enter the program and be able to receive the food.
Mr. Bowman. Awesome. As you know Ms. Turner, COVID-19's
harmful economic toll on families led to a spike in food
insecurity because so much of this past year has been remote
for students. We don't have complete, nor immediate visibility
into child hunger that could emerge suddenly. That means a
student and their family experiencing hunger can easily
experience it in isolation, and without being connected to
programs or resources to address this need immediately.
The next school year is just around the corner. What are
your thoughts on the need for tracking student hunger on a
continuous basis, and how could the way we administer the CACFP
program help in that important effort?
Ms. Turner. Thank you so much. The main aspect of technical
assistance and nutrition education as a way to reach people,
and a way to inform them about what is available is helpful as
well as you mentioned tracking could be a part of that to
connect the two and bridge the gap between what is missing.
Mr. Bowman. How can we support coordination and
collaboration at the local and Federal levels between child
nutrition programs, and schools, after school programs, and
childcare settings? Do you have examples of that anywhere in
the country where it's working really well?
Ms. Turner. At this time there's not a specific example,
but I can certainly get back to you if you will allow me to.
Mr. Bowman. Well I appreciate that, absolutely. My office
will be in touch and thank you for your testimony. Madam Chair
I yield back.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you, Representative Bowman. Again,
Representative McClain are you available for your questions?
OK, the next Representative on the democrat side is
Representative Mfume. OK, I'm not really sure what other
Members are available, so we're going to take a brief recess.
There's votes going on right now, so that has something to do
with it, so we'll take a brief recess and be back momentarily.
(Recess.)
Mrs. Hayes. I have handled the gavel back to the Chair and
informed the Chair we are making progress here. If we were in
the middle of a question my apologies.
Mr. Vassar. Chair Bonamici, Chair Hayes had just recessed
immediately before you sat down.
Chairwoman Hayes. Oh terrific, OK. The recess is the call
of the Chair. We will reconvene when we have more Members come
back and join us thank you and when Chairman Scott comes back,
we will reconvene.
[Recess]
Chairwoman Bonamici. OK. I have returned. I will reconvene
the hearing of the Civil Rights and Human Services Subcommittee
and recognize the Chairman of the Full Committee Representative
Scott for five minutes for your questions.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, can you hear me?
Chairwoman Bonamici. Yes, we can hear you.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. I appreciate the accommodation.
Before I get to our questions, I'd like to take a moment to
recognize Ms. Garrett who is a former constituent of mine, and
a graduate of Hampton University in my district. Ms. Garrett,
thank you for being with us today to discuss these very
important issues.
You are just a few minutes ago discussed the fact that WIC,
investments in WIC actually saved money, $2.48 for every dollar
spent. You also mentioned that it reduces--we just mentioned
that it reduces our infant mortality. The way it does that is
reduce low birth weight which is very expensive.
Can you go into detail about how we save money on
investments in WIC?
Ms. Garrett. Yes. Thank you, Chairman Scott, for the kind
words, and yes, a proud HVC Alum, Hampton University. So to
answer your question sir we, just like Ms. Burris said earlier,
we are able to detect many issues that present themselves early
on in many (audio cut back in) women's pregnancies.
And so what we're doing is that we, you know, periodically
we are doing health checks on our pregnant women. We do weight
checks. We are making sure that they are eating properly,
they're eating to feed two. We're also assuring that many of
the women are getting tested for gestational diabetes.
And so, we're ensuring that a lot of the milestones that
one that is pregnant would also meet, we're also following up
on them, so ensuring that these women are healthy going into
their pregnancy a lot of times will help to reduce low birth
weight babies. And it will also help to deter and bring down
the incidence of maternal mortality and morbidity by providing
these women the nutrients that they need in order to have a
successful and healthy pregnancy.
Mr. Scott. And do you also reduce remedial education costs?
Is that a cost savings too by investments in WIC?
Ms. Garrett. A lot of times it is because like I said we
are providing for children, the nutrients they need in order to
start off on a health setting, on a healthy foot, and also
making sure that the nutrition that they receive is appropriate
for their development at that point.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Now you offer services that you
normally require to be in-person that you're offering remotely,
what services are we talking about?
Ms. Garrett. So currently we are doing our certification
appointments remotely, so those will be the ones that families
present themselves in, in which they would have a full
certification visit with--get their metric measurements taken,
a nutrition assessment done, nutrition education done, those
are done virtually, so either by video or by phone, and then
also nutrition education is being presented to families through
video and phone conversations as well.
Mr. Scott. And do you lose very much by doing it remotely?
Ms. Garrett. Actually we've increased by doing it remotely
because it's done at the convenience of the parent and the
family.
Mr. Scott. OK. And how can we make it easier to participate
in WIC?
Ms. Garrett. Well some of the things that we can streamline
is looking at our certification requirements, looking at the
time that is necessary, and then to conduct an assessment
appointment, and then look at how we can continue to have these
relaxed physical presence requirements moving forward through
WIC.
Mr. Scott. OK. Mrs. Turner can you talk about the
importance of combining summer and after school meals with
education programing?
Ms. Turner. Absolutely. When children learn all together
and things aren't siphoned, they're able to absorb the
knowledge pretty well. If you mix nutrition education with the
other education they receive, with their favorite things, with
colors and movies that they watch, they're able to recall this
information and utilize it later to make healthier decisions.
Mr. Scott. And how do you help their families as well as
the mother and child, how do you help the whole family?
Ms. Turner. Something we like to call learning up,
especially when you teach young children. They're very excited
about the things they learn, so they can't wait to get home and
talk to their brothers and sisters and parents and grandparents
about the new fruits and vegetables they tried, about what a
whole grain is, and you'd be surprised that older people will
learn totally new things that they might not have discovered
before through the eyes of their children.
Mr. Scott. Thank you so much. Thank you, Madam Chair, for
the accommodation, thank you.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Chairman Scott. And it
appears that there are no further Members to ask questions, so
pursuant to Committee practice materials for submission to the
hearing record must be submitted to the Committee Clerk within
14 days following the last day of the hearing, so by close of
business on August 11, preferably in Microsoft Word format.
Only a Member of the Subcommittee or an invited witness may
submit materials for inclusion in the hearing record, and the
materials must address the subject matter of the hearing.
Please submit materials to the Committee Clerk electronically
by emailing submissions to
[emailprotected]
.
Again, I want to thank all of the witnesses for your
participation today. Members of the Subcommittee may have some
additional questions for you, and we ask you to please respond
to those questions in writing. The hearing record will be held
open for 14 days to receive those responses.
And I remind my colleagues that pursuant to Committee
practice, witness questions for the hearing record must be
submitted to the Majority Committee Staff or Committee Clerk
within seven days. The questions submitted must address the
subject matter of the hearing, and I now recognize the
distinguished Ranking Member Mr. Fulcher for a closing
statement.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Madam, Chairman, and thank you to
those who testified. You know we have this tendency to as
Members of Congress, to throw money at problems, and sometimes
that's just necessary.
And I think all of us agree the importance of these
programs and the importance of having strong nutritional value
and just making that available to those who are vulnerable. And
so we're in significant agreement on that. Where we disagree
probably has to do with some of the access questions, what may
be available in terms of dairy of course.
We've talked about that a lot. And just the expansion and
the necessity as to whether or not we are smarter in expanding
the existing programs, or if it's wise to allow private and
public to re-engage and take more of a responsibility when it
comes to running these programs.
So on the republican side at least from my standpoint,
it's--and I try to be mindful of being wise stewards as
taxpayers and making that available and leveraging our private
entities and our partnerships in this effort. But Madam Chair
it's educational. I thank you for your efforts, and I thank
those who took their time to testify before us today.
Please know that you're appreciated. With that I yield
back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Ranking Member Fulcher. I
now recognize myself for the purpose of making a closing
statement. Thank you so much to the witnesses for sharing your
expertise and your stories. Today we focused on efforts in
Congress to address childhood hunger, as well as our
responsibility and opportunity to meet the needs of children
and families to Federal nutrition programs, including WIC, and
the Childhood and Adult Care Food Program.
But from my perspective we have established not only at
this Subcommittee hearing, but over the years, that these
dollars spent are a good investment. Children are our future.
Our families are so important. These programs are designed to
give young children a healthy start in life and expand the
access to nutrition services for families.
And thank you again for the witnesses for explaining why
that's important. Unfortunately, as our witnesses made clear,
the pandemic caused an already alarming child hunger crisis to
surge. The American Rescue Plan has helped to reduce rates of
food insecurity, but too many Americans, especially people of
color, are still experiencing food insufficiency.
The ongoing needs in our communities across the country is
why we must pass key proposals in the American Families Plan as
well, and permanently reauthorize child nutrition programs. As
I said at the start of the hearing our work remains unfinished.
Until every child, infant and family has access to the basic
nutrition they need for a strong start in life.
I look forward to working with all of my colleagues to
finally make that aspiration a reality. And thank you again to
everyone for a productive hearing. If there's no further
business without objection, this Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Questions submitted for the record and the responses by
Mr. Farrell follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 11:55 a.m., the Subcommittee adjourned.]

[all]
