- EXAMINING THE POLICIES AND PRIORITIES OF THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION AND THE OFFICE OF FEDERAL CONTRACT COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE POLICIES AND PRIORITIES
OF THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
COMMISSION AND THE OFFICE OF FEDERAL
CONTRACT COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CIVIL RIGHTS AND
HUMAN SERVICES

of the

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, APRIL 27, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-43
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-932 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR

ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia Chairman

RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona            VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina,
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut              Ranking Member
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      JOE WILSON, South Carolina
Northern Marina Islands            GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania
FREDERICA WILSON, Florida            TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
MARK TAKANO, California              ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina        RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
MARK DeSAULNIER, California          JIM BANKS, Indiana
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          JAMES COMER, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          RUSS FULCHER, Idaho
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          FRED KELLER, Pennsylvania
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 BURGESS OWENS, Utah
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut            BOB GOOD, Virginia
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan, Vice Chairman  LISA McCLAIN, Michigan
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota                DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan           MARY MILLER, Illinios
TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico   VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
MONDAIRE JONES, New York             SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina        MADISON CAWTHORN, North Carolina
FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana              MICHELLE STEEL, California
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              CHRIS JACOBS, New York
SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK, Florida
MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CIVIL RIGHTS AND HUMAN SERVICES

SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon, Chairwoman

ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina           RUSS FULCHER, Idaho
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut              Ranking Member
TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico   GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania
FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana              LISA McCLAIN, Michigan
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisonsin
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland               VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina
ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia    (Ex Officio)
(Ex Officio)

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on April 27, 2022...................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Bonamici, Hon. Suzanne, Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Civil
Rights and Human Services:.................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Fulcher, Hon. Russ, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Civil
Rights and Human Services:.................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8

WITNESSES

Burrows, Charlotte A., Chair, U.S. Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission.....................................    10
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Yang, Jenny R., Director, Office of Federal Contract
Compliance Programs........................................    26
Prepared statement of....................................    28

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Keller, Hon. Fred, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Pennsylvania:
Statement dated September 18, 2007, from the Coalition To
Preserve the Attorney-Client Privilege.................    62
Email dated May 5, 2022, to Jenny Yang from the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce....................................    67

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record by:
Ms. Charlotte Burrows....................................    78
Ms. Jenny R. Yang........................................   127

EXAMINING THE POLICIES AND PRIORITIES
OF THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
COMMISSION AND THE OFFICE OF FEDERAL
CONTRACT COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS

----------

Wednesday, April 27, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Civil Rights and Human Services,
Committee on Education and Labor,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:21 a.m.,
2175 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Suzanne Bonamici
[Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bonamaci, Adams, Hayes, Leger
Fernandez, Mrvan, Scott (Ex Officio), Fulcher, McClain,
Fitzgerald, and Foxx (Ex Officio).
Also present: Representatives McBath, Mfume, and Grothman.
Staff present: Brittany Alston, Staff Assistant; Nekea
Brown, Director of Operations; Ilana Brunner, General Counsel;
Rasheedah Hasan, Chief Clerk; Sheila Havenner, Director of
Information Technology; Stephanie Lalle, Communications
Director; Andre Lindsay, Policy Associate; Aileen Ma,
Professional Staff; Kevin McDermott, Director of Labor Policy;
Kota Mizutani, Press Secretary; Max Moore, Professional Staff;
Kayla Pennebecker, Staff Assistant; Veronique Pluviose, Staff
Director; Michele Simensky, Oversight Counsel-Labor; Banyon
Vassar, Deputy Director of Information Technology; Sam Varie,
Press Assistant; ArRone Washington, Clerk; Tanisha Wilburn,
Director of Labor Oversight and Counsel; Cyrus Artz, Minority
Staff Director; Michael Davis, Minority Legislative Assistant;
Mini Ganesh, Minority Staff Assistant; John Martin, Minority
Deputy Director of Workforce Policy/Counsel; Hannah Matesic,
Minority Director of Member Services and Coalitions;
Operations; Ethan Pann, Minority Press Assistant; Krystina
Skurk, Minority Speechwriter; Ben Ridder, Minority Professional
Staff Member.
Chairwoman Bonamici. The Subcommittee on Civil Rights and
Human Services will come to order. Welcome everyone. I note
that a quorum is present. I note for the subcommittee that Mrs.
McBath of Georgia, and Mr. Pocan of Wisconsin are permitted to
participate in today's hearing with the understanding that
their questions will come only after all members of the
subcommittee on both sides of the aisle who are present have
had an opportunity to question the witnesses.
The subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
Examining the Policies and Priorities of the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, and the Office of Federal Contract
Compliance Programs. This is a hybrid hearing pursuant to House
Resolution 8, and the regulations thereto.
All microphones, both in the room and on the platform, will
be kept muted as a general rule to avoid unnecessary background
noise. Members and witnesses will be responsible for unmuting
themselves when they are recognized to speak, or when they wish
to seek recognition.
When members wish to speak or seek recognition they should
unmute themselves and allow a pause of 2 seconds to ensure that
the microphone picks up their speech. I also ask that members
please identify themselves before they speak. Members who are
participating in person should not be logged onto the remote
platform to avoid feedback, echoes and distortion.
Members participating remotely shall be considered present
in the proceeding when they are visible on camera, and they
shall be considered not present when they are not visible on
camera. The only exception to this is if they are experiencing
technical difficulty and inform committee staff of such
difficulty.
If any member experiences technical difficulty during the
hearing you should stay connected on the platform, make sure
you are muted, and use your phone to immediately call the
committee's IT director whose number was provided in advance.
Should the Chair need to step away for any reason another
majority member is hereby authorized to assume the gavel in the
Chair's absence.
To ensure that the committee's 5-minute rule is adhered to,
staff will be keeping track of time using the committee's
digital timer on the remote platform. For members participating
in person the timer will be broadcast in the committee room on
the television monitor as part of the platform gallery view,
and visible in its own thumbnail window. The committee room
timer will not be in use.
For members participating remotely this will be visible in
gallery view in its own thumbnail window on the remote
platform. Members are asked to wrap up promptly when their time
has expired.
Finally, while the recent guidance from the office of the
attending physician has made mask wearing optional at this
time, please know that we have in our midst at both member and
staff levels, individuals who are immunocompromised, and/or or
have immediate family members who are immunocompromised, as
well as who are not vaccinated either because of medical
reasons, or because the vaccine is not yet available for
children under the age of 5.
Therefore, the committee strongly recommends that masks
continue to be worn out of concern for the safety of
unvaccinated and immunocompromised committee members and staff
and their families.
Opening statements--pursuant to committee rule 8(c),
opening statements are limited to the chair and ranking member.
This allows us to hear from our witnesses sooner and provides
all members with the adequate time to ask questions. I
recognize myself now for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
Today's hearing will examine the policies and priorities of
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, EEOC, and the
Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, OFCCP. Thank
you, Chair Burrows and Director Yang, for being with us, and
for your commitment to protecting American's civil rights and
dignity at work.
As our workforce become increasingly diverse, the EEOC and
OFCCP are critical in making sure that every worker can earn a
living free from discrimination. Unfortunately, thousands of
women, people of color, older workers, workers with
disabilities, and LGBTQI+ workers still experience persistent
disparities in pay, opportunities, and workplace treatment.
In response to the Trump administration's erosion of worker
protections, congressional democrats and the Biden/Harris
administration have taken critical steps to restore and
strengthen workers' civil rights and expand equal employment
opportunities. Under Chair Burrows's leadership, the EEOC has
improved its enforcement efforts on challenging workplace
harassment and following the Supreme Court's historic Bostock
v. Clayton County decision, Chair Burrows approved guidance to
explain the prohibitions against discrimination based on sexual
orientation or gender identity.
Additionally in 2021, Congress passed a resolution to
nullify the EEOC's Trump-Era Conciliation Rule. This resolution
was a critical step in restoring EEOC's promise to support
victims of workplace discrimination, and to hold employers
accountable.
At OFCCP, Director Yang has made critical improvements to
protect applicants and employees who apply to, and work for
Federal contractors and subcontractors. In November 2021, OFCCP
issued a proposal to rescind a Trump-era rule that gave Federal
contractors the power to hire and fire workers for
discriminatory reasons under the guise of religious freedom.
By reversing the rule, OFCCP took a critical step to
restore protections for the civil rights of workers. I am also
pleased to see OFCCP preparing to support an increase in
workers in the contractor community. The bipartisan
Infrastructure Law will create up to 15 million new jobs, many
of which will be filled by workers on Federal contracts and
subcontracts.
I look forward to seeing how the agency's Mega Construction
Project Program will help more workers, especially historically
underrepresented workers in access to these new jobs, and also
to protect them against discrimination and harassment. The
EEOC's and OFCCP's progress under the Biden/Harris
administration is more important than ever, as our Nation works
to recover from the economic fallout of the COVID-19 pandemic.
As we all know, the pandemic spurred record unemployment,
especially among low-wage, older, and unrepresented workers.
Under President Biden's economic agenda, we have seen record
job growth, and the lowest unemployment claims since 1968.
Even still, we know we must do more, so all Americans can
re-enter the workforce and access a rewarding career. Though we
cannot achieve that goal if workers do not have the confidence
that workplaces will uphold and protect their civil rights.
Securing resources that the EEOC and OFCCP need to conduct
robust oversight is not only in the best interest of our
workers, but an essential step to full economic recovery.
I am pleased that the Biden/Harris administration's
proposed budget provides the resources for the EEOC and OFCCP
to advance racial justice, pay equity, and LGBTQI+ protections,
while strengthening workplace opportunities for all. Moving
forward, I remain committed to working with my colleagues to
advance legislative solutions such as the Paycheck Fairness
Act, and the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act to protect workers
from discrimination both in the hiring process, and on the job.
When we invest in worker's civil rights every American has
the opportunity to succeed. Thank you again to Chair Burrows
and Director Yang for your leadership. I look forward to
hearing how you will continue advancing your agency's mission.
I now yield to the Ranking Member Mr. Fulcher for his
opening statement.
[The statement of Chairwoman Bonamici follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
holding this hearing. Congressional oversight extends to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and the Office of
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, both of which are
currently struggling to meet the needs of American workers and
job creators.
The work of EEOC and OFCCP is important. It too often
becomes a weapon against job creators. American workers deserve
to be protected from unlawful discrimination and given an
unequal, excuse me, given an equal opportunity to succeed in
the workplace. The vast majority of job creators treat their
employees fairly and have their employees' best interests in
mind.
Federal agencies must stop treating our country's business
owners like predators. One of the most concerning things coming
out of the Biden administration's OFCCP is the decision to
rescind the Trump Era Rule protecting faith-based contractors.
It's ironic that an agency tasked with preventing and
combatting unlawful discrimination is pushing the door open for
faith-based organizations to be discriminated against.
The previous administration's Final Rule gave religious
organizations the opportunity to bid for Federal contracts
without fear of having to compromise their faith or religious
character. Without this explicit protection, many religious
Federal contractors will be left without clear guidance
regarding their rights and obligations.
This will keep many religious organizations from bidding
for Federal contracts. Protecting the constitutional principle
of free exercise of religion is crucial. OFCCP should uphold
and protect the First Amendment instead of undermining this
fundamental American principle.
The right of faith-based organizations to follow their
sincerely held religious beliefs should not be held up for
debate. OFCCP is also likely operating outside the law by
forcing Federal contractors to perform pay equity audits and
denying them the right to invoke attorney/client privilege.
There is no such audit requirement in existing law, so one has
to wonder where OFCCP believes its authority is coming from.
These actions will reduce clarity and transparency in the
audit process, especially where employee pay is concerned. EEOC
spends far too much of its time looking for discrimination
where there is not any, instead of processing the backlog of
claims from America's workers.
Even after EEOC added 450 employees, monetary recoveries
for workers decreased by 9.6 percent. Litigation recoveries for
workers decreased 67.9 percent, and compliance assistance
outreach efforts also declined sharply. These numbers represent
the hard-working Americans who came to the EEOC for help and
have been greeted with delay and inefficiencies, if they
received any help at all.
EEOC has yet to return its offices to in-person work, and
all 53 field offices are closed, even though most are located
in states and localities where private businesses, schools, and
other government offices are fully open. That is why on March
23, Republican Leaders Foxx and Comer sent a letter to Chair
Burrows raising concerns that EEOC does not have an immediately
executable plan to return to in-person work.
We know the lack of onsite EEOC personnel hinders the
ability of claimants to receive the help the agency was created
to provide. Chair Burrows, you State in your testimony that the
most vulnerable will probably be the ones who suffered most
from the closure of local offices, and yet your agency has yet
to reopen those facilities.
This committee deserves to know in your calculation of the
risk of COVID-19, even with widely available vaccines,
outweighs the cost to those vulnerable workers. It is not
surprising that the current party and leadership wants to throw
more money at this agency. The Biden administration is
requesting that Congress increase EEOC's budget by 44.7 million
to nearly 465 million.
Burdensome requirements added unnecessary costs to
businesses and the EEOC has seemingly did nothing with the data
collected. Besides costing job creators 325 million annually,
and doing nothing to prevent pay discrimination, these were
importantly confidential concerns regarding the EEOC's ability
to protect the collected data.
In conclusion, EEOC and OFCCP need to focus on protecting
workers without throwing employers under the bus. We all want
to see workers succeed, but over-regulating job creators is
counter-productive. These agencies need to get their own houses
in order before they throw more red tape on businesses. Madam
Chair, I yield back. Thank you.
[The statement of Ranking Member Fulcher follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Ranking Member Fulcher. I
note for the subcommittee that Mr. Grothman of Wisconsin is
permitted to participate in today's hearing with the
understanding that his questions will come only after all
members of the subcommittee on both sides of the aisle who are
present have had an opportunity to question the witnesses.
Without objection, all other members who wish to insert
written statements into the record may do so by submitting them
to the committee clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format
by 5 p.m. on May 11th.
I will now introduce the witnesses. Charlotte Burrows was
designated as the Chair of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, the EEOC, by President Biden on January 20, 2021.
She previously served as an EEOC Commissioner between 2015 and
2019, and in 2019 was re-nominated and unanimously confirmed
for a second Commissioner term ending in 2023. Before her
appointment to the EEOC, Ms. Burrows had an extensive career
advancing civil rights issues.
She served as Associate Deputy Attorney General at the DOJ
as General Counsel for civil and constitutional rights to
Senator Edward Kennedy on the Senate Judiciary Committee and
held several roles in the Civil Rights Division's Employment
Litigation Section at the DOJ, including Deputy Chief of the
section.
Jenny Yang joined the Department of Labor's Office of
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, OFCCP, as its Director on
January 20, 2021. From 2013 to 2018, she served as Chair, Vice
Chair, and Commissioner of the EEOC after unanimous Senate
confirmation.
After her service with the EEOC and before joining OFCCP,
Ms. Yang worked as a Senior Fellow at the Urban Institute
addressing workplace issues such as sexual harassment and
algorithmic fairness and the use of hiring technology. Ms. Yang
has a distinguished career advancing and defending the civil
rights of workers.
We appreciate the witnesses for participating today, and we
look forward to your testimony. Let me remind the witnesses
that we have read your written statements, and they will appear
in full in the hearing record. Pursuant to Committee Rule 8(d)
and committee practice, each of you is asked to limit your oral
presentation to a 5-minute summary of your written statement.
Before you begin your testimony, please remember to unmute your
microphone.
During your testimony staff will be keeping track of time,
and the timer should be visible to you at the witness table.
Please be attentive to the time and wrap up when your time is
over and re-mute your microphone. We will let all the witnesses
make their presentations before we move to member questions.
When answering the question please remember to unmute your
microphone. The witnesses are aware of the responsibility to
provide accurate information to the subcommittee, and therefore
we will proceed. I will first recognize Chair Charlotte
Burrows.

STATEMENT OF HON. CHARLOTTE BURROWS, CHAIR, EQUAL
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION

Ms. Burrows. Good morning subcommittee Chair Bonamici,
Ranking Member Fulcher, committee, and the distinguished
members of this subcommittee. I am so pleased to have the
chance to testify before you today about the important work of
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
The Commission was created in direct response to the call
for equality and basic human dignity at the historic 1963 March
on Washington for Jobs and Freedom. A call that is directly
tied to our basic founding beliefs of liberty and justice.
Today, as in 1963, the Nation faces both challenges and
opportunities in the area of civil rights, and I am so honored
to lead the agency at this very important time.
The EEOC is doing our part to respond to that universal
call for racial justice following the brutal murder of George
Floyd and so many others. This tragedy cast a national
spotlight on barriers to opportunity including in the area of
equal employment opportunity. We are also working to address
those significant civil rights challenges caused by the COVID-
19 pandemic. That has impacted all of us, but it has hit
especially hard for frontline workers, including many women,
older workers, persons with disabilities, people of color, and
caregivers.
The pandemic has also sparked an alarming rise in
harassment and violence against Asian Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders. This shameful discrimination
has spilled into American workplaces. As just one example an
Asian American worker reported to the EEOC that when he arrived
at work 1 day, he found a sign on his door marked with the
words, ``Coronavirus Danger,'' and a biohazard symbol, along
with the phrase ``Made in China.''
Indeed, workplace harassment on all bases remains a very
serious problem in this country. The Me-Too Movement brought
into stark focus the urgent issue of workplace sexual
harassment, and we continue to see egregious examples, like the
case we recently resolved involving a fast-food manager who
repeatedly propositioned female workers, mostly teenaged girls
for sex, and subjected them to other physical and verbal
harassments.
In 2021, we resolved a case in which managers and employees
used the N-word and referred to black workers as monkeys and
slaves. In recent years, we have seen over and over that we
were fortunately able to obtain relief, but these cases
involved black employees subjected to nooses, and racist slurs
on constructionsites, in shipyards, factories, and warehouses.
We brought cases on behalf of employees mocked for their
religion or taunted for their disability. That is why a key
goal for this term during my Chairmanship, Chair--term as Chair
rather, is to finally finish that workplace harassment guidance
that we have been working on for so long and update it with
lessons learned from Me-Too and this pandemic.
In addition to harassment, discrimination and hiring,
firing, promotion, pay, and denials of reasonable accommodation
for disability and religion remain substantial barriers to
opportunity. To meet the challenges of this moment the EEOC is
focused on four broad areas--advancing racial justice and
adjusting systemic discrimination on all protected bases,
tackling the pandemic's civil rights impact, advancing pay
equity, and increasing the agency's capacity.
The EEOC's Fiscal Year 2023 budget proposal of $464 million
would support much needed investment in additional frontline
staff to investigate charges of discrimination, advance equal
employment opportunity in the Federal sector, and provide
education, outreach, and guidance to the public. Thanks to
additional investments from Congress last year, we began
rebuilding the EEOC's workforce, which in Fiscal Year 2020 had
fallen to the lowest level in 40 years.
Through the efforts of our dedicated career staff, the EEOC
has helped thousands of workers and employers over the last
year. We secured more than 485 million dollars for survivors of
discrimination, resolved nearly 400 systemic investigations,
conducted over 2,300 outreach events, reaching over a quarter
of a million persons, and provided much-needed information on
emerging issues due to the pandemic.
We were also proud to join and launched a new initiative
called the Higher Initiative to Reimagine Equity to focus on
making sure that this is an equitable recovery. I look forward
to your questions at this hearing and appreciate very much the
committee's time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Burrows follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you for your testimony. Next, we
will hear from Director Jenny Yang. You are recognized for 5
minutes for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF JENNY YANG, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF
FEDERAL CONTRACT COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS

Ms. Yang. Good morning, Chair Bonamici, Ranking Member
Fulcher, Chair Scott, Ranking Member Foxx, and members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me to this important
hearing. DOL's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs
is charged with protecting America's workers by ensuring that
those who do business with the Federal Government fulfill the
promise of equal opportunity. Our dedicated staff works to
advance opportunity, promote diversity, and enforce the law.
Our jurisdiction covers about 20 percent of the American
workforce. As our country invests in its infrastructure and
rebuilds from the pandemic, OFCCP is redoubling our efforts to
enable all workers to access good jobs, free from
discrimination.
The historic $65 billion Congress authorized for
infrastructure projects will increase the number of contractors
under OFCCP's jurisdiction. This anticipated growth in the
contractor workforce underscores the agency's need for
resources after reaching its lowest levels of staffing in
decades, we are actively hiring over 100 people this fiscal
year.
Since the creation of OFCCP in 1965, our country has made
significant progress in expanding equal opportunity, yet
discrimination remains a substantial barrier. In the last
fiscal year, the agency recovered nearly 32 million dollars for
over 24,000 workers.
To support an inclusive recovery, OFCCP is working to
promote greater compliance, empower America's workers, and
rebuild our staff. As our Nation invests in its infrastructure,
OFCCP is reinvigorating its construction enforcement and has
scheduled over 100 construction evaluations. Through a renewed
mega construction project program, we will provide proactive
compliance assistance to expand access to jobs on some of the
most consequential projects.
Through DOL's Good Jobs Initiative, we assist Federal
agencies in promoting equal opportunity in their infrastructure
contracts. OFCCP is taking significant action to promote
greater compliance during this critical time. On equal pay day,
we issued a new directive to emphasize the importance of
contractors' long-standing responsibility to proactively audit
or pay equity.
Through OFCCP's review of pay data, and our interviews with
employees and compliance evaluations, we identify violations
that would not otherwise come to light. We found systemic pay
discrimination in over a third of discrimination resolutions
this administration.
For example, last December we resolved pay discrimination
allegations with Allied Barton Security Services, providing
$1,175,000.00 to over 2,200 female, black, and American Indian
security officers. In February 2021, in a settlement with
Google, we obtained 3.8 million dollars for more than 5,500
workers after finding pay disparities and hiring barriers for
female employees and Asian American applicants for software
engineering positions.
In January, OFCCP and EEOC launched HIRE, a hiring
initiative to reimagine equity, to expand access to good jobs.
The U.S. economy has added 7.9 million jobs since the start of
this administration, yet many workers from underrepresented
communities still face disproportionately high unemployment. At
a time where many employers are searching for talent, HIRE will
identify proven hiring practices that advance equal opportunity
and assist employers in finding the talent they need.
This includes removing barriers for workers with
disabilities and veterans. The pandemic has had an impact on
mental health for many Americans, and we have an opportunity to
transform how we address mental health at work. To promote
compliance, OFCCP recently launched an electronic contractor
portal to certify compliance with annual affirmative action
program requirements.
On March 31st, the agency issued a new directive to promote
consistent accountability and efficiency in compliance
valuations. We have long prioritized active compliance
assistance to contractors, and empowering workers through
outreach and engagement. To achieve greater progress, OFCCP
must rebuild our staff. Compliance officer levels are down more
than 50 percent from a decade ago.
President Biden's budget for 2023 requests over $147
million for OFCCP to support much-needed hiring to meet our
increased responsibilities. In closing, I thank you for your
support, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Yang follows.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you for your testimony. Under
Committee Rule 9(a), we will now question witnesses under the
5-minute rule. I will be recognizing subcommittee members in
seniority order. Staff will be keeping track of time, so the
members adhere to the 5-minute rule. Please be attentive to the
time, wrap up when your time is over, and re-mute your
microphone.
First, I will recognize the Chairman of the Full Committee,
Chairman Bobby Scott from Virginia for 5 minutes for your
questions.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I want to thank both
of our witnesses for their testimony and their lifelong
commitment to equal opportunity. First, Chair Burrows, during
the Trump administration there was a rule that was promulgated
that allowed faith-based organizations to discriminate in
employment. What was wrong with the rule and what did you do
about it?
Ms. Burrows. Well, thank you, Chair Scott, and I believe
that you are referring to the religious guidance that the EEOC
issued at the end of the last administration. That was a
guidance that addressed a really important issue of religious
discrimination across the board, and yet we--I was concerned
about the manner in which we approached that, that it was you
know rushed through in a very abbreviated period, I think
something like a 5-day formal vote for very lengthy documents.
Really thought that it would have been terrific if we could
have addressed some of the--taken the time first of all to
really delve into that issue, but also addressed some of the
very pressing problems that we have seen with respect to
religious discrimination during the pandemic. For instance, we
had heard from the Sikh community about issues regarding PPE
and those folks who for religious reasons may wear, have facial
hair, and how to balance those issues.
There were just a number of things that I thought we could
have done, and I had some concerns frankly about the race to
finish it in the time that we did.
Mr. Scott. Well, so there seems to be almost a redefinition
of the victim of discrimination. When I was growing up, we went
to a restaurant and we were not served because of your
ethnicity, you were the victim of discrimination. Now it seems
that the restaurant owner cannot discriminate against you, then
he is the victim of discrimination.
Why is it problematic to protect the right to discriminate,
rather than the right to be free from discrimination?
Ms. Burrows. Well, absolutely the Civil Rights Act of 1964
protects the right to be free from unlawful discrimination
based on race, color, national origin, religion, as well as
sex. At that time, as you I am sure are well aware, a lot of
the arguments about segregated lunch counters, et cetera, were
based in arguments about--religious arguments about the need to
segregate racial populations.
Absolutely under our statutes, race discrimination is
protected even if there is a religious argument for it, and
that is true with the other bases as well. There is not a
question about that with respect to our statutes.
Mr. Scott. The point is that the victim of discrimination
is entitled to be free from discrimination. We are not
protecting somebody's right to discriminate. Director Yang, the
Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs has a more
aggressive mission, and that is proactively required
affirmative action and with government contractors.
What kind of affirmative action will you require, and how
will you enforce compliance with the affirmative action
requirements in the law?
Ms. Yang. Thank you for that question, Chairman Scott.
Under the three authorities that OFCCP enforces, we enforce
both non-discrimination requirements, and affirmative action
requirements. Our requirements ask Federal contractors to
affirmatively recruit underrepresented workers in a variety of
ways to increase the qualified talent in the applicant pool.
We ask contractors to track metrics to measure progress and
diagnose concerns. Our requirements do not in any way impose
quotas, and in fact, prohibit them. We do enforce these
affirmative action requirements through our compliance
evaluations. We conduct routine evaluations through a mutually
scheduled compliance evaluation, where we have the opportunity
to work with contractors to provide compliance assistance, and
to identify opportunities for them to expand access to jobs, to
understand where they may have barriers to promotion, or
unequal pay.
That is the kind of work that OFCCP is focusing on in
Federal construction contracting, as well.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Madam Chair, if I can get both
witnesses to provide for the record an analysis of how their
budget requests will allow them to get their job done, I would
appreciate it.
Ms. Yang. Absolutely.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Without objection, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Scott. I yield back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I now
recognize Ranking Member Mr. Fulcher for 5 minutes for your
questions.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Madam Chair and I have a question
for Director Yang please. In November the OFCCP published a
proposed rule to rescind the previous administration's rule
protecting faith-based organizations that wish to bid on
Federal contracts. That rule ensured faith-based organizations
could apply for Federal contracts on equal footing with other
employers without having to compromise their religious beliefs.
Can you provide assurances to this committee that OFCCP
will not discriminate against faith-based organizations who
wish to participate in Federal contracting?
Ms. Yang. Thank you for that question. OFCCP is firmly
committed to protecting religious freedom as well as workers. I
can, I am happy to share our proposal. We are in the rulemaking
process, so I am limited in what I can say, but I can explain
the rationale. Our proposal to return to----
Mr. Fulcher. Director Yang, why propose the rule change if
that is what you believe?
Ms. Yang. Well, the reason we propose the rule change is we
would like to return to the practice in place for nearly 18
years under both Republican and Democratic administrations to
apply the text of the religious exemption to the case law as it
evolves, so that we can make sure to adhere faithfully to the
law.
Mr. Fulcher. Do you believe then that faith-based
organizations have a rightful place in competing for Federal
contracts on equal footing?
Ms. Yang. Absolutely.
Mr. Fulcher. Great, thank you very much. I appreciate that
comment. A followup question, if I may. March 15th, you issued
a directive requiring Federal contractors to perform a pay
equity study. That was not defined. To provide that study to
OFCCP when the contractor audit is under audit, excuse me,
contractor is under audit.
This directive further prohibits the contractor from
asserting the attorney/client privilege if an attorney prepared
that audit. This directive was issued without the required
notice and public comment. Can you please describe on what
authority that you issued this directive requiring a new major
obligation that appears to arbitrarily decree that the
contractor loses its right to assert attorney/client privilege,
and did it without notice or comment.
Ms. Yang. Thank you for that question. We issued a
directive to explain a long-standing regulation that requires
Federal contractors who are supply service contractors to
conduct in-depth analyses of all of their employment practices,
so that includes hiring, pay, promotion, and other areas. That
is conducting a proactive audit. What----
Mr. Fulcher. Director if I may then, why avoid the notice
of public comment?
Ms. Yang. Well, the regulation already exists, and so
simply what we did through the directive is highlight to
employers the importance of complying with that existing
regulation.
Mr. Fulcher. Do you see value in having that public
comment? Do you think that that rule should be there?
Ms. Yang. There was public comment on the regulation that
exists that does already require the pay equity audit.
Mr. Fulcher. You do not think there needs to be any public
comment for changes to that?
Ms. Yang. We will be actually looking at our whole supply
and service regulation, including this provision that I am
referring to.
Mr. Fulcher. With public comment?
Ms. Yang. We will have a full public comment process.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Director Yang. A followup question
if I may, I would like to go to Chair Burrows please. Chair
Burrows, more than a month ago Ranking Member Foxx wrote to you
requesting information about EEOC's plans to return to in-
person, onsite work. The fact remains we have 2,000 EEOC
bargaining unit workers that still have not returned to in-
person onsite work after more than 2 years.
Your written testimony admits that by keeping field offices
closed, EEOC has failed to reach some of its most vulnerable
workers. When will you put that back in place, the in-person
work?
Ms. Burrows. We are--right now we have returned our
directors to work in the physical offices. Everyone at the
EEOC, all 2,000 plus of us, have been fully working during this
pandemic period. The fact that our office is closed does not
mean that we have not been working.
Mr. Fulcher. Chairman Burrows, I am out of time, so forgive
me, but just to close that do you not see the value of having
your employees back at work?
Ms. Burrows. Absolutely, and we are currently in
negotiations to bring all of our bargaining unit folks back in
as well.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Chairman Burrows. Madam Chair, I
yield back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Ranking Member Fulcher. I
now recognize myself for 5 minutes. Director Yang, women,
particularly women of color are severely underrepresented in
construction apprenticeships and jobs. This is a result of
various factors, including inadequate recruitment, hostility,
sexual harassment, during apprenticeship programs and on the
job, is something I have had many conversations about over the
years, as well as pernicious gender bias.
Does OFCCP evaluate construction apprenticeship programs to
identify gender-based discriminatory barriers in recruitment
and hiring? If so, does OFCCP plan on using Fiscal Year 2023
funding to improve oversight and monitoring of construction
contractors to address these barriers?
Ms. Yang. Thank you for that question. OFCCP has made it a
top priority to strengthen our construction enforcement for the
reasons that you mentioned. Women, people of color, have
historically been under-represented in good jobs in the trades,
and we've been building our relationships with the contractor,
a community in the construction space, unions, worker advocacy
groups.
We understand some of these systemic barriers that we need
to overcome, and it will take all of us. OFCCP knows we cannot
do this alone, and we are here to help several contractors and
workers. Apprenticeship programs, which you mentioned, are a
critical part of creating the talent pool for the major
infrastructure projects that we have. OFCCP will go into some
of our most consequential projects, which we have called mega
projects.
We go into communities, even before the contractor is
selected. We form committees working with community-based
organizations, local governments, and Members of Congress to
ensure that everyone understands the job opportunities that are
available. People from all communities learn about the
apprenticeship programs and other job training opportunities so
that contractors interested in bidding can be competitive.
That is a very important opportunity. We have to help
ensure people from all communities have access to these
critical jobs and their communities. We have scheduled over 100
construction contractors for compliance evaluations, and during
those evaluations, we do review data to look at the hours
worked, so that is utilization across various demographic
groups.
We can help identify where in an apprenticeship program
women may not be getting sufficient training, or people of
color may be dropping out of the apprenticeship program and
assigned to lower-paying jobs, rather than the higher paying
jobs the apprenticeship program was designed to support them
in, so this is a key priority.
Chairman Bonamici. Thank you. You actually answered my
followup question about how OFCCP is supporting inclusivity in
those apprenticeships, so thank you for that information. Chair
Burrows, in the last administration there was a decrease in
EEOC staffing levels, but also a dramatic decline in the
pending charge backlog. I woud like you to talk about that.
Does this contradiction mean that the prior administration
implemented policies that elevated expedience over workers' due
process rights?
What has the current Commission done to address this issue?
Ms. Burrows. First of all, every single one of those
charges represents an individual who has been harmed and is
coming to us for help. Sometimes frankly people share with us
things they have not even told their own families. We have to
take that very seriously.
We also have to--part of that frankly is understanding that
we have to manage the charge inventory. We have about 250
charges coming in daily to give some sense of perspective for
those roughly just north of 2,000 workers. While looking, I am
not sure the answer with the respect to the past
administration, looking forward we are absolutely going to
treat those charges with the respect that they need to have,
but also is why we are so focused on getting more frontline
staff to address that issue.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Terrific thank you. I am going to go
back to Director Yang briefly, and go back to the problem of
the lack of women in the construction trades, and ask if you
are addressing the issue of once the people get to the worksite
and face discrimination, how does OFCCP address that issue of
discrimination at the workplace once women get through the
apprenticeship program and get to the jobsite?
Ms. Yang. Thank you for that question. When we do a
compliance evaluation we will go--typically go onsite to the
construction worksite, which is very critical. We will learn
things through those reviews. In one case for example, black
women were not allowed to use the restroom on premises.
Everyone else was. They were told they had to go a mile away to
use the restroom.
They found feces in their trucks, and no one was able to
help them with these issues until we came in, we conducted the
compliance evaluation, and we were able to ensure that the
employer took the steps necessary to stop that kind of
harassing behavior. We do a review, both of our people getting
the opportunity to work.
In other situations, black workers were told to show up
every day, but they were not assigned to any jobs, even though
all these other workers from all kinds of other backgrounds
were getting paid, getting assigned out. They had to wait all
day with no pay.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Dr. Yang. I am over my time
and yield back thank you. Next, I will recognize Representative
McClain from Michigan for 5 minutes for your questions.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you ladies
for being here. I appreciate your time and effort. I need to
get a little context in terms of the verbiage that we use. You
keep talking about systemic, systemic, systemic, can you give
me the definition of what you mean when you say systemic?
Ms. Burrows. Well, with respect to the EEOC's enforcement.
Mrs. McClain. Yes.
Ms. Burrows. What we mean is when we look at broad patterns
or practices, that is the language of our statute, patterns or
practices of discrimination that when you address them can
affect a large number of people. Sometimes, if you get a change
in that area, it can actually have an effect in an industry
because a lot of folks follow industry leaders, they follow you
know the news and so----
Mrs. McClain. You are not using systemic in the way that it
is blatant across all lines, and 100 percent? I just want to
make sure that although we have issues there is no question. I
mean, I am a woman. I am in the workplace. I have my own
business, right? When I hear systemic, I am thinking that it is
high volumes. I am thinking that it is everywhere.
It is more the norm than the abnorm. You are using systemic
in the sense that if we make a minor change we can have a
maximum effect on it. Am I correct in that understanding?
Ms. Burrows. Well, certainly we are not looking at it every
single--everything that an employer does is absolutely
discriminatory. That is not what I mean.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, thank you. I just wanted to make
sure because when we use words, our words are extremely
powerful, and those words resonate, so I just want to make sure
we are on the same sheet music. I want to switch a little bit.
Ms. Burrows, you State in your testimony that the EEOC works to
advance racial justice in the workplace by promoting merit-
based practices. Correct?
Ms. Burrows. That is right.
Mrs. McClain. Good. I mean, I would because merit--if we
are using merit as an outcome-based practice, we are taking a
look at the result. My question is do you believe that all
employees should have the ability to grant merit-based pay
raises?
Ms. Burrows. I think you mean all employers.
Mrs. McClain. I am sorry, all employers, yes. To me, let us
when we are making raises, when we are going to go and promote
raises, do you believe that the employer should look at the
outcomes, and base it on merit? That would probably be one of
the best non-discriminatory practices because if we look at the
output, we do not care if you are who you are, what you are,
what you identify, we are looking at the output, and that would
be merit-based.
Ms. Burrows. If an employer is making a merit-based
decision that does not violate our laws in any way.
Mrs. McClain. Good. I am glad. Will you commit to
supporting employer's ability to grant merit-based pay raises
regardless of negotiated wage scales in place of employment?
Ms. Burrows. We certainly work with employers and see them
as partners. Nothing that you have raised to me sounds as
though it would violate our laws.
Mrs. McClain. Good. No, that is good, and I think a lot of
times there is a misnomer on the easiest way to not
discriminate is to take a look at what the output is right? You
also mentioned in your testimony that the EEOC is working hard
to address pay discrimination in hiring and promotions, right?
We want to make sure that everyone is on a level playing
field, correct?
Ms. Burrows. That is right. We found a number of cases in
which women and persons of color have been discriminated
against in the sense that they were given lower pay for doing
exactly the same job.
Mrs. McClain. Right, right. We all know that that is not a
good thing right.
Ms. Burrows. That is right.
Mrs. McClain. Would you agree that if an employee has a
master's degree that they may be paid more than somebody maybe
who does not? Do you believe degree level matters? Education
matters in the hiring process?
Ms. Burrows. Well, it really depends on what the job is. If
it is relevant to the job, it certainly may, and if it is not
relevant to the job then there wouldn't be a basis to make that
distinction. One of the things that is really important is for
employers to be making that decision in a fact-based way what
are the skills needed----
Mrs. McClain. How do you determine relevancy?
Ms. Burrows. Well, it depends on what the jobs are, and
what the job is, and what is necessary to do the job.
Mrs. McClain. I think the definition since we are holding
these employers to a very high standard. I am out of time. I
think relevancy matters, and the criteria we use to make these
decisions need to be played out. Thank you for your time, I
appreciate it.
Chairwoman Bonamici. The representative yields back thank
you. Representative Adams from North Carolina, you are
recognized for 5 minutes for your questions.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Chair Bonamici, for convening this
important hearing. The EEOC and the OFCCP do critically
important work to protect our workers from employment
discrimination and I certainly appreciate the opportunity to
discuss that work today, so I want to thank all the witnesses.
Chair Burrows, I note that the EEOC's Fiscal Year 202023
budget justification mentions multiple ways that it plans to
increase diversity in employment and recruitment. This includes
plans to build strategic partnerships and alliances with
stakeholders such as HBCUs and MSIs for that recruitment.
Can you first talk about the importance of EEOC's outreach
to HBCUs and MSIs? Then can you speak to the outcomes and any
lessons learned from EEOC's Fiscal Year 202022 and current
HBCU/MSI engagement and outreach?
Ms. Burrows. Thank you so much for that question. As
someone whose--both my parents spent their entire careers
working for HBCUs--I am really passionate about this issue, and
we have been very pleased to work together with the
administration, the White House Initiative in this area, and
have been doing a number of things, and particularly do a great
deal of outreach every year to HBCUs.
We have you know obviously with respect to our own hiring
make sure to get our own information to them when we have a job
opening for internships as well as permanent positions. Really
are looking to strengthening that partnership as we lean into
the hiring initiative to reimagine equity.
I think that we can never in terms of lessons learned,
never do too much in terms of making sure that we are on the
radar screen for HBCUs in that area, and it has been enormously
helpful. I should also add that we have a lot of staff that are
alumni of HBCUs as well.
Ms. Adams. Great. Well, thank you. Turning to Fiscal Year
202023 can you provide more information about what the
Commission's HBCU outreach goals are for 2023, and how the EEOC
will use allocated funding to improve outreach in Fiscal Year
202023?
Ms. Burrows. Absolutely. Well, we will certainly continue
to do what we have been doing and have also looked at--we have
an equity plan to make sure that we are reaching as broadly as
possible to include as many of America's population as
possible. Part of that is doing that together with HBCUs. We
have a long-standing, very popular program called Youth at
Work, in which we partner with actually also high schools, but
also colleges, and want to increase our efforts with HBCUs in
that area because it has been enormously helpful to, as people
are just beginning their careers to make sure they understand
their rights, and that has paid dividends for sure.
Ms. Adams. Okay. EEOC's serve more than what a half a
million of my constituents in Charlotte, North Carolina. As you
know the Coronavirus pandemic has really challenged much of the
ways in which we thought about the workforce. Workers and
employers across the country tapped into creative and
innovative approaches to fulfill their day-to-day operations.
Can you talk a little bit about how or whether COVID-19
pandemic impacted the day-to-day work of EEOC, including its
investigations and education, and outreach efforts to relevant
stakeholders?
Ms. Burrows. Absolutely. Well like every other employer,
and every other frankly person in America, we were impacted
with that. The first impact was in March 2020, we moved to
practically complete you know had to close our offices for the
safety of the public, for the safety of our folks.
What we learned to do is conduct a lot of our business
remotely. We invested in remote you know sort of platforms, so
that we could continue to do that. We have had wild success
with our mediation program remotely. Folks liked it a lot, and
we have gotten good recoveries in that.
We have also done some trials remotely. We have done them
in person and remotely during COVID-19, you know, what the
courts wanted we were able to provide, and continue to look for
creative ways to do that. We have expanded our outreach as
well. I am though considering, you know, still concerned as I
said in my testimony that there are some folks that have
difficulty reaching us when we are not in person.
We are looking very closely at that issue and looking
forward to being able to reopen as well.
Ms. Adams. Well, thank you. I am out of time, just a few
seconds, but I do want to thank you, and let you know that I
look forward to the work that EEOC will do in fiscal years 1922
and 1923. Thank you, Madam Chair, I am going to yield back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you Representative and sticking
with North Carolina, I now recognize the Ranking Member of the
Full Committee Dr. Foxx for 5 minutes for your questions.
Ms. Foxx. Amen, Madam Chairwoman. Chair Burrows in a recent
case Amazon terminated an employee for making vulgar offensive
abusive remarks to a female employee through a bull horn. A
video of which was posted on the internet. NLRB General Counsel
Abruzzo sought a Court order that would require Amazon to
reinState the employee.
Last week, an NLRB Administrative Law Judge ordered Amazon
to reinState him with back pay. Committee majority staff has
indicated that the video is too offensive to play in the
committee hearing. If it is too offensive to play here, one
would think it is not appropriate for the workplace. His
behavior and remarks were clearly seen to constitute sexual
harassment under EEOC guidance.
Do you believe such conduct potentially violates Title VII
of the Civil Rights Act?
Ms. Burrows. Thank you. I am not familiar with the video
that you referenced. Our laws--Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act has a long interpretation with respect to what is
harassment, and as I said earlier, we take that very seriously.
If there were an instance of harassment that person could file
a charge and bring it to us, and we would evaluate.
With respect to the broader question of issues that arise
in that context, I would defer to the NLRA
[NLRB] as to the NLRA issues.
Ms. Foxx. You have not seen the video?
Ms. Burrows. I have not seen the video that you were
referencing, no.
Ms. Foxx. Okay. Do you believe the employee may have been
rightfully fired for such conduct?
Ms. Burrows. Without context, and it is a very fact-
specific undertaking, I am not able to comment on that.
Ms. Foxx. Is the EEOC prepared to address this case?
Ms. Burrows. I am not aware of whether, you know, we
certainly--will put it this way. We certainly will address any
allegations that are brought to us. We are not of course at
liberty to say, confirm or deny under the statute whether or
not we have received a particular charge because there is a
criminal penalty involved with revealing that.
Ms. Foxx. Okay. Chair Burrows in 2016 the EEOC issued a
requirement that employers provide their detailed compensation
data on a yearly basis for each of the employees, a requirement
that was abandoned after 2 years. EEOC apparently did nothing
with the data it collected. EEOC later showed that it was
extremely expensive for employers to collect this data.
Experts have also demonstrated the data would be of no use
to employers, or to EEOC for purposes of Title VII, or Equal
Pay Act enforcement. More importantly, they have shown that
EEOC has no ability to protect the confidentiality of this
highly sensitive data. You stated that you are considering re-
issuing this pay data requirement.
Given the requirements of nearly identical work under
nearly identical conditions that are necessary to support a
claim of unlawful pay discrimination. What practical value is
there in collecting this aggregation information at a
tremendous burden to employers? How would any of this
information be useful to EEOC in investigating or prosecuting a
Title VII or Equal Pay Act claim? Please be specific in your
answer.
Ms. Burrows. Thank you. The Equal Pay Act and the Title VII
of 1964 have been in effect almost 60 years, and in that time,
we have cut the pay gap almost in half. Part of the reason--but
only almost in half. Part of the reason it is taking so long is
that we need more information on the law enforcement side to be
able to effectively attack that very pernicious problem.
One of the frankly difficulties has been the lack of
specific pay data for the agency as we start to figure out how
to focus on our resources. Lily Ledbetter, for whom the Act is
named, received an anonymous note, and that is how she learned
about it.
The pay data collection is being studied now by the
National Academies of Sciences. We do have effective and very
talented folks who have checked the security for that, and also
are looking at the pay data, and are able to say that it would
be very useful to us. With respect to exactly how that will be
used, I do want to wait for the National Academy of Sciences to
give us their recommendations.
I think it would be unwise to get ahead of that.
Ms. Foxx. We will look forward to getting your specific
answers, and Madam Chair I am out of time, but I will be
submitting some questions, and we would like to have timely
responses. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Ranking Member. As the
Chair, I just want to clarify Ranking Member Foxx's statement
that the majority forbid somehow the use of a video. The
majority party simply asked the minority party to remove the
expletives, and they chose not to do so, but in any event, it
is my understanding that the matter that was discussed is
pending before the National Labor Relations Board, and not the
EEOC, so I struggle to understand how it was relevant.
Next, I recognize Representative Hayes from Connecticut for
5 minutes for your questions.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you, Chairwoman Bonamici for holding this
important hearing today. I would like to draw attention to the
needs of caregivers. Two out of every three American caregivers
are women. They are disproportionately women of color, and
often from low-income households.
Their work to care for children and spouses, parents and
loved ones is unpaid, and their contributions to our Nation's
economy is valued at over 470 billion dollars. These caregivers
face obstacles to upward economic mobility, and the COVID-19
pandemic has put the inequitable strain on full display as they
have tried to balance their obligations of essential work,
children, and their families.
From December 2021 to January 2022, nearly two million
women left a job, lost a job, or had not looked for a job
because of the need for care for their children, compared with
about 1.2 million men. For these caregivers that remain in the
workforce, 61 percent report potentially illegal discrimination
at work. The EEOC recently issued guidance with respect to
caregivers. In the guidance the Commission clarifies actions
that would constitute discrimination against employees who are
caregivers under EEO laws.
Chair Burrows, can you explain the EEOC's reasoning for
releasing this guidance, and the impact it will have on
caregivers' workplace experiences?
Ms. Burrows. Thank you. Yes. We feel so strongly that that
is really urgent now. We are fortunately, I hope, turning the
corner on the pandemic reopening, and as we do that though
there are many, many folks who are going back to the workplace,
or seeking to do so, who also have to juggle those caregiving
responsibilities for children, or for other--for ill family
members, elder care, et cetera.,
We thought it was really important in this moment as we are
all seeking to ensure that there is an equitable recovery. That
everyone has an opportunity to contribute, and to benefit from
that, that we make clear the needs of caregivers, and how our
statutes can be affected by that.
We do have a longer-term caregiver guidance, but we wanted
to have it in more accessible form and get it out now because
it seemed like exactly the right time.
Ms. Hayes. Well, I believe this guidance is a welcome
clarification from the EEOC. How does your office plan to
address potential increased reporting of caregiver
discrimination given the heighten backlog of private sector
charges? And do you believe the EEOC is adequately resourced to
handle a potential influx of reports caused by this guidance?
Ms. Burrows. It is no secret that we are working very hard
to manage an inventory that we stay ahead of I should add. We
get about 61,000 charges in the door, and we resolve about
62,000 charges in the door. This is every year, so we are a
little bit ahead of the curve here, but it is obviously a lot
to manage. We are focused on that.
Part of the end will be ready to respond to those issues. I
will say that part of the reason to have the guidance out there
is not just to let employees know about their rights, but also
for employers to have some understanding of the
responsibilities so that hopefully because most employers do
want to get this right, that we can help them make sure that
this is handled in the appropriate way so that we will get
fewer charges.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you. I want to shift focus a little bit
here. According to EEOC data, race-based discrimination charges
have consistently represented a third of the charges filed with
the EEOC since 1997. This is approximately 30,000 charges
alleging some form of racial discrimination, which indicates
that race-based discrimination is still a significant issue
within American workplaces, yet in recent reporting some EEOC
employees allege that the agency assigns low priority to race
discrimination charges, in particular, charges filed by black
workers.
Chairwoman Burrows, what is your response to these
allegations, and what specific actions has EEOC taken to
address them?
Ms. Burrows. Thank you. Well, we absolutely prioritize
ensuring that every single worker's charge is taken seriously
and decided on the merits. The response to our African American
charges somehow given lesser weight, and I can say for certain
not on my watch, we are not going to do that. I do not believe
that that has been a problem.
I do believe that we need more resources to focus so that
we can give that sort of service and those investigations can
be concluded more quickly, but that is something that we took a
look at, and are going to continue to focus on. Part of the
equity plan is making sure that those barriers that may be
there to folks reaching us, or getting through the process, are
things that we can really address directly.
Ms. Hayes. I am sorry, thank you. I am out of time. Madam
Chair, I apologize, I yield back, thank you.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Representative. Next, I
recognize Representative Fitzgerald from Wisconsin for 5
minutes for your questions.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Madam Chair. Chair Burrows,
thanks for being here. Two things that in my own estimate that
really suffered during the pandemic. One is I think there has
been a huge loss of credibility when it comes to the public
health system. The other thing I think that took a direct hit
was protection for religious beliefs. I think it was dismissed,
or it was negated by some of the policies.
With that being said, during height of the pandemic, EEOC
issued guidance on whether employees could require--whether
employers could require employees to become vaccinated. While
the guidance recognized Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, and
along with that the assertion on religious objections to the
vaccine requirement.
Your agency, and I do not know why, seemed to weaken the
right to use this to quite honestly kind of put up a wall to
those that were going to be vaccinated. I am just wondering do
you believe that that in fact happened, or can you explain some
of the changes in and around religious beliefs when it came to
the pandemic?
Ms. Burrows. If I understand the question Representative,
the EEOC strongly believes in protecting against religious
discrimination. We have done that with our own workforce, we
have provided information to the public about that, including
about folks who may have a religious objection to receiving a
COVID-19 vaccine.
That is on our website, and we are constantly updating as
new issues come up. We have also shared our own information
about how we treat our workforce as we have made that public,
and we certainly recognize those objections, and apply the law
when they are raised with us.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Do you believe that you changed the posture
on what really was a responsive measure to religious beliefs,
and took it a step further by saying listen, we are going to
kind of change the dynamics of what we consider legitimate, and
not legitimate when it comes to that exemption?
Ms. Burrows. I am not aware of what you are referring to, I
am sorry.
Mr. Fitzgerald. February 2021, you removed the report from
the EEOC website that was something that was put together by
General Counsel Sharon Fast Gustafson and Commissioner Andrea
Lucas. That was very specific and very comprehensive in saying
these are the types of things under religious exemption that
will remain acceptable.
It just seems that this is one other area during the
pandemic in which there were changes and shifts by the EEOC. I
am just wondering if that was intentional, was it revisited on
purpose, or was it something that simply was--that you believe
never really happened?
Ms. Burrows. I believe that you are referring to a document
that the former general counsel of the EEOC had included with
respect to some invitation-only listening sessions that she
had. After that, the full Commission voted on a religious
guidance document that we put on our website. The document that
you are referring to was with respect to a single--the general
counsel and I believe a single Commissioner.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Do you think it had anything to do with the
actual pandemic and what we were in the middle of experiencing
related to any of those policy changes?
Ms. Burrows. I do not believe there were policy changes set
forth in the document that you are referring to, but the
document that the full committee addressed, the religious
guidance, which is on our website, does look in a very
thoroughgoing way at a number of issues, and sets forth the
current position of the EEOC.
I did hope that there were additional things we could
include in that, including the specifics about the pandemic
frankly, but the pace at which the commission voted on that
document did not allow us to add some of the things that I
would have loved to address at that point.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Well, I guess my comment would be you know
I hope it was not some type of knee jerk reaction to the
pandemic, or that there was some type of conscious effort to
somehow you know, my word, water down, kind of where the EEOC
would be on this because that would be a great concern I think
that I would share with many other of my colleagues on the
committee so, but thank you for your time. I yield back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Representative. I now
recognize Representative Leger Fernandez from New Mexico for 5
minutes for your questions.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much, Chairwoman, and
thank you for coming and sharing the work that you are engaging
in on behalf of all of our workers. Director Yang, the OFCCP
recently launched a web page that provided information on the
employment rights of Indian and Native American workers.
The website also describes OFCCP's efforts to connect
Indian and Native American jobseekers with employment
opportunities on federally funded construction projects. As we
look forward to the many projects that are going to bring the
clean water, the broadband, the infrastructure that is sorely
needed throughout America, but especially within Native
American communities, I wanted to thank you for that resource.
I wanted to also ask you, how does the OFCCP plan to
increase its efforts to conduct education, outreach, and
compliance assistance activities to promote that recruitment,
hiring retention, and advancement of Indians and Native
Americans as well as protect their employment rights?
Ms. Yang. Well, thank you for that question. We are very
interested, particularly as the infrastructure, investments are
made in working with our Federal partners, so contracting
agencies to raise some of these issues. Not everyone is aware
of the hiring authorities that exist for American Indians and
Native Americans on projects located close to a reservation.
We are working to make sure both our partners across the
Federal Government who are interested in supporting equity in
their contracting process, understand those opportunities as
well. When we work on our construction enforcement, we are out
in the community in the field bringing together the key leaders
and organizations in those communities to make sure people
learn about apprenticeship programs, training opportunities,
and opportunities to work on the job.
Internships for students are a critical way also for
individuals to get into a field where they have been
historically underrepresented, and we reach out broadly to many
different educational institutions as well. This is a very
important priority for our office, and we have some very
dedicated staff leading those efforts.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much for that work
because I think it is key that we recognize that the
Infrastructure and Jobs Act, I love the second part of that,
the Jobs Act right, that it is bringing both what our
communities need to thrive, not just survive, but then to
create the jobs within those communities. I am very
appreciative of your mega construction project program that
will have contractors and subcontractors make sure they create
those jobs and invite our underrepresented workers, and that we
also protect those civil rights.
I wanted to turn now to Chair Burrows. There was a 2020 GAO
report that found that there was a limited nationwide data on
the prevalence and costs of workplace sexual harassment. We
know it takes place, and it saps our economy, right? It is bad.
It is bad for business, it is bad for women, it is bad for men
who suffer this discrimination and harassment.
I am interested in learning more about the prevalence of
workplace for sexual harassment experienced by Latinas, by
women of color, by Native Americans. In particular, whether
these women are more likely to experience sexual harassment,
while the 2020 GAO report acknowledged the data was limited, as
an example it pointed out that Native Americans were close to
three times as likely to report experiencing sexual harassment
as non-Hispanic whites.
This report also echoed the recommendations from the EEOC's
2016 select task force on the study of harassment in the
workplace are finding that the EEOC should work with Federal
and/or private partners to develop and conduct a national
survey that includes the sex-based harassment.
Can you tell us what steps the EEOC has taken in regard to
moving on these recommendations so that we have a better
understanding of what is happening in the workplace for
Latinas, women of color, and Native Americans?
Ms. Barrows. I just want to say quickly that this is such
an important issue, and such a top issue for us. One of the
things that we have done is to look at some of our data, which
to be clear, most people do not report. It is just the tip of
the iceberg. To look at our data and make sure that we could
also link it to those instances where there are charges of
retaliation, so that we can see, hey, is it connected?
We are also of course working very hard in our
investigations, and as to the issue of intersectional
harassment because harassment is a power first and foremost,
often when people have multiple issues they will be targeted
for those reasons.
We see that in our work on farmworker women, we have seen
that in our work on so many others, and I wish we had more
time, but I am happy to followup with you on that because it is
so important.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, my time has expired. I look
forward to hopefully providing the budget resources that you
need to conduct that data. Madam Chairman I yield back.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Representative. Next, I
recognize Representative Mrvan from Indiana for 5 minutes for
your questions.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chairwoman. In 2017 a report on
diversity technology sector, the GAO recommended that the OFCCP
evaluate its approach for identifying entities for compliance
reviews to better reflect workplace structures and location,
such as virtual sites, non-traditional forms of employment,
especially in the technology sector, and to include
subcontractors.
In OFCCP Fall's 2021 regulatory agenda, the agency proposed
adding a provision to Executive Order 11246, regulations that
would require contractors to provide notice to the OFCCP when
they award supply and service contracts. My question is how
will having information about the subcontractors advance the
agency's mission to ensure equal employment opportunities,
especially in rapid, expanding industries such as the tech
sector?
Ms. Yang. Thank you for that question. We have been working
to improve our scheduling methodology, and that's how we select
contractors for compliance evaluations. We use neutral criteria
to try to identify where there may likely to be problems that
are important for us to be looking at as an agency.
Specifically for subcontractors we have not had complete
data on the dates of the time period of the contract for
subcontractors. In the past, the agency had not scheduled a
large group of subcontractors for compliance reviews, and what
we are doing for our next scheduling list that will be issued
in May is we have included subcontractors by using the prime
contractor's contract dates.
That information is available in current data bases, but it
would be more helpful and accurate to have the dates of the
subcontract. The recommendation by GAO was that OFCCP explore
data sources to better schedule the full range of contractors
under our jurisdiction.
The agency is working more broadly to ensure that our
practices align with how workplaces operate today. We recognize
the point that you raised about many employers are not tied to
one physical location. The historic approach OFCCP has taken in
our regulations as to look at one establishment at a time, and
that, we recognize, may not align with how an organization
structures its practices.
For example, software engineers in a technology company may
not report directly to a leader within their physical location.
They may report to a leader in a different location, and that
leader may have authority over multiple establishments in
different locations, and particularly after the pandemic we
know that more and more workers are working remotely in a full-
time capacity, so one of the priorities we have in our supply
and service regulation update, which is on a regulatory agenda,
is really listening to contractors and understanding
opportunities we have to modernize those regulations to better
align with how businesses operate. Thank you.
Mr. Mrvan. I thank you very much, and I yield back my time.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Representative. I do not
see anymore subcommittee members on the minority side. Is Mr.
Mfume on the platform? Okay, then we are going to go to non-
subcommittee members and start with Mr. Grothman from
Wisconsin. You are recognized for 5 minutes for your questions.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I am going to look at little bit into
your enforcement of Executive Order 11246. Would that be more
appropriate to ask questions to you? Okay, very good. First
question I have you breakdown people by ethnicity and race
correct? What ethnicities or racial groups are you looking for?
Ms. Yang. Our regulations ask employers to track data on
demographic information by race, gender, ethnicity, for their
employment practices. That is a metric that can help employers
identify where there may be a problem in terms of a barrier to
equal opportunity, and how they are making progress.
Mr. Grothman. Sure. Can you define the difference between
race and ethnicity, or what groups you are looking for on the
form?
Ms. Yang. By ethnicity, typically we are talking about
Hispanic, non-Hispanic, and race you know, we are looking at
you know various racial categories.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. First of all, with regard to ethnicity,
Hispanic, non-Hispanic. What is the definition of Hispanic?
Ms. Yang. Well for our data collections we ask employees to
self-identify, and so we ask employers to invite their
workforce to identify for themselves what their ethnicity is or
race.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. To give an example, only because it is
so commented on, is it to say when Senator Warren was applying
for a job at wherever she went, Harvard Law School, if she is
1/64th Native American, if she says I am a Native American, you
put her down as Native American on the form, and she gets
preferences over other people. Is that what you are saying?
Ms. Yang. Let me be clear, OFCCP's regulations do not
promote or permit preferences for any workers. There are
separate congressionally authorized preferences for Native
American Indian workers near reservations, but apart from that
none of our regulations provide preferences.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Ms. Yang. All we ask is data collection, and we defer to
the employee's self-identification.
Mr. Grothman. Okay, but you realize of course that these
forms are used, or people feel they have to hit targets on
these forms, correct? Do you realize that?
Ms. Yang. Actually, what we are very clear about in our
work with the contractor community is that these are not
inflexible quotas, these are goals that help contractors
measure a project. Race and ethnicity are not to be considered
in any employment decision.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Are you not aware that people who
advise companies on these goals tell the employers that they
are goals that have to be met, or if they are not met, they
could be subject to some litigation?
Ms. Yang. Under our enforcement authorities we do not bring
an action against an entity simply because they are not
achieving those goals. Those, as I mentioned, are a diagnostic
tool. They are not used at all for an enforcement action.
Employers are asked to show good faith efforts to help reach
underrepresented populations.
What we are looking at is are you trying, not--we do not
bring enforcement actions based on that.
Mr. Grothman. Well, okay. We will give you another. You
have no problem if somebody says I am 1/64th Native American,
or 1/64th Hispanic, that the employer gets to check those off
as being a Hispanic or Native American?
Ms. Yang. Well, let me be clear for data collection
purposes, it is a diagnostic tool. If there was an actual case
or litigation focus that it was material as to somebody's
identity, you would have more you know fact-based sort of----
Mr. Grothman. Well, I am told by people who deal with this
that that is what you do. This open-ended that you self-
identify, and if you are 1/32d Hispanic, you can check off
Hispanic, and if the employer feels that helps them get to the
target they can hire you and get to the target.
Ms. Yang. Well, these things are not connected, so the
employer actually does not know how you identify when making a
hiring decision. Those are separate processes where the actual
hiring officials don't know the identification of the
individual, and that is very intentional to avoid the concern
that you are raising.
Mr. Grothman. You mean if I am an employer, and I am
filling out the form I have no idea who I am dealing with?
Ms. Yang. These are different people within the
organization, so you have a hiring manager charged with filling
a position. You have your H.R. department that would complete
the paperwork in a separate process.
Mr. Grothman. It is amazing that you do not realize how
this plays out in the real world, but thank you, I guess my
time is up.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you, Representative Grothman. We
have no further members in the queue to ask questions. I want
to remind my colleagues that pursuant to committee practice,
materials for submission to the hearing record must be
submitted to the committee clerk within 14 days following the
last day of the hearing, so by close of business on March 11,
March 11? That cannot be right. It must be May, May 11, 2022,
preferably in Microsoft Word format.
The materials submitted must address the subject matter of
the hearing. Only a member of the subcommittee or an invited
witness may submit materials for inclusion in the hearing
record. Documents are limited to 50 pages each, documents
longer than 50 pages will be incorporated into the record via
an internet link that you must provide to the committee clerk
within the required timeframe, but please recognize that in the
future that link may no longer work.
Pursuant to House rules and regulations, items for the
record should be submitted to the clerk electronically by
emailing submissions to
[emailprotected]
.
Again, I want to thank the witnesses for their
participation today. Members of the subcommittee may have some
additional questions for you. We ask the witnesses to please
respond to those questions in writing. The hearing record will
be held open for 14 days to receive those responses. I remind
my colleagues that pursuant to committee practice, witness
questions for the hearing record must be submitted to the
majority committee staff, or committee clerk within 7 days, and
the questions must address the subject matter of the hearing.
I now recognize the distinguished Ranking Member for a
closing statement.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Madam Chair for holding this
hearing, and Director and Chairman for being here today, and
for providing testimony. Just as a closing thought I do remain
concerned Director Yang of potential OFCCP discrimination
regarding faith-based organizations.
Just want to point out and serve as a reminder that that is
a critical and needed component to the system. I just ask that
you be mindful of that and see the value that they bring. Chair
Burrows, regarding EEOC, we are still not back to in person
work. That is a needed component to that situation.
I think all of us have allowed COVID to manage us too long.
It is time to manage it. I just ask that you accelerate that
process of bringing people back to in person work. This
situation where we appear to be looking to resurrect a defunct
annual pay data collection system that is quite onerous on
employees, and the people who turn those economic wheels for
us.
That takes me to my final thought, and that is just the
overall culture that we appear to--and I am saying the
collective we here. I am not being accusatory. The overall
culture that we seem to be manifesting here. The Federal
agencies versus the private sector. Too often we seem to take
this attitude that the private sector reports to the government
in some fashion, but that is just not true.
That is backward to the original intent, and that is
backward to how our systems work, and I think we all need to
remember we serve the American workforce. They are the boss
here, and yes, there are bad apples out there on both sides,
and so this is a system to try to provide some oversight and
help, but at the end it is the American people that we serve.
All of us need to be reminded of that, and I thank you for
your time and your work. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Bonamici. Thank you. Thank you, Ranking Member
Fulcher. I now recognize myself for the purpose of making a
closing statement. I want to again thank our witnesses for
being with us today. Under the leadership of Chair Burrows and
Director Yang, the EEOC and OFCCP have taken critical steps to
restore and strengthen worker's civil rights protections.
Unfortunately, our discussion and the testimony today
confirm that for far too many women, or people of color, or
older workers, workers with disabilities, LGBTQI+ workers, they
are still experiencing persistent discrimination in the
workplace. These persistent civil rights violations are
particularly concerning as Americans get back to work and
recover from the pandemic.
Moving forward, I am committing to advancing legislative
solutions and delivering the resources that the EEOC and OFCCP
need to protect our workers' civil rights, and to support our
Nation's economic recovery. Each of us should agree that now
more than ever we must take these steps to protect our Nation's
most vulnerable workers, and make sure that all workers can
succeed on the job free from discrimination.
Thank you again Director Yang and Chair Burrows for your
time, and your testimony. There is no further business, and
without objection the subcommittee stands adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
