- CLOSING THE COURTHOUSE DOORS: THE INJUSTICE OF FORCED ARBITRATION AGREEMENTS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CLOSING THE COURTHOUSE DOORS:
THE INJUSTICE OF FORCED
ARBITRATION AGREEMENTS

=======================================================================
HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
HEALTH, EMPLOYMENT,
LABOR, AND PENSIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, NOVEMBER 4, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-34

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and Labor

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edlabor.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-030                    WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR

ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia, Chairman

RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona            VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina,
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut              Ranking Member
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      JOE WILSON, South Carolina
Northern Mariana Islands           GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania
FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida         TIM WALBERG, Michigan
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
MARK TAKANO, California              ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina        RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
MARK DeSAULNIER, California          JIM BANKS, Indiana
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          JAMES COMER, Kentucky
PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington          RUSS FULCHER, Idaho
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          FRED KELLER, Pennsylvania
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             GREGORY F. MURPHY, North Carolina
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, Iowa
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut            BURGESS OWENS, Utah
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 BOB GOOD, Virginia
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota                LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan           DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico   MARY E. MILLER, Illinois
MONDAIRE JONES, New York             VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana
KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina     SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana              MADISON CAWTHORN, North Carolina
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York, Vice-Chair  MICHELLE STEEL, California
MARK POCAN, Wisconsin                JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas                Vacancy
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland

Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director
Cyrus Artz, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EMPLOYMENT, LABOR, AND PENSIONS

MARK De SAULNIER, California, Chairman

JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey            Ranking Member
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          JOE WILSON, South Carolina
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             TIM WALBERG, Michigan
LUCY McBATH, Georgia                 JIM BANKS, Indiana
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 DIANA HARSHBARGER, Tennessee
HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan           MARY E. MILLER, Illinois
FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana              SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia  VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina
(ex officio)                         (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Hearing held on November 4, 2021.................................     1

Statement of Members:
DeSaulnier, Hon. Mark, Chairman, Subcommittee on Health,
Employment, Labor, and Pensions............................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Allen, Hon. Rick, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Health,
Employment, Labor, and Pensions............................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     6

Statement of Witnesses:
Colvin, Alexander, JD, Ph.D., Kenneth F. Kahn 1969 Dean,
School of Industrial and Labor Relations,Cornell University     8
Prepared statement of....................................     9
King, Roger, Senior Labor and Employment Counsel, H.R. Policy
Association................................................    25
Prepared statement of....................................    28
Kotagal, Kalpana, JD, Partner, Cohen Milstein Sellers & Toll
PLLC.......................................................    54
Prepared statement of....................................    56
Perez, Glenda, Former Implementation Set-Up Representative,
CIGNA......................................................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22

Additional Submissions:
Mr. Allen:
Statement for the record from David Sherwyn..............    87
Letter dated November 17, 2021 from the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce...............................................    92
``Fairer, Faster, Better: An Empirical Assessment of
Employment Arbitration,'' ndp analytics, May 2019......    94
Letter dated November 3, 2021 from ndp analytics.........   116
Questions submitted for the record by:
Norcross, Hon. Donald, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New Jersey
McBath, Hon. Lucy, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Georgia
Levin, Hon. Andy, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Michigan

Response to question submitted for the record by:
Mr. Colvin...............................................   122
Ms. Kotagal..............................................   127

CLOSING THE COURTHOUSE DOORS:
THE INJUSTICE OF FORCED
ARBITRATION AGREEMENTS

----------

Thursday, November 4, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health, Employment,
Labor, and Pensions,
Committee on Education and Labor,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:17 a.m.,
via Zoom, Hon. Mark DeSaulnier (Chairman of the Subcommittee)
presiding.
Present: Representatives DeSaulnier, Norcross, Wild, Mrvan,
Allen, Walberg, Banks, Harshbarger, Miller, Fitzgerald, and
Foxx (ex officio).
Staff present: Kyle deCant, Labor Policy Counsel; Christian
Haines, General Counsel; Rasheedah Hasan, Chief Clerk; Sheila
Havenner, Director of Information Technology; Eli Hovland,
Policy Associate; Ariel Jona, Policy Associate; Andre Lindsay,
Policy Associate; Richard Miller, Director of Labor Policy; Max
Moore, Staff Assistant; Mariah Mowbray, Clerk/Special Assistant
to the Staff Director; Kayla Pennebecker, Staff Assistant;
Jessica Schieder, Economic Policy Advisor; Banyon Vassar,
Deputy Director of Information Technology; Cyrus Artz, Minority
Staff Director; Michael Davis, Minority Operations Assistant;
Rob Green, Minority Director of Workforce Policy; Georgie
Littlefair, Minority Legislative Assistant; John Martin,
Minority Deputy Director of Workforce Policy/Counsel; Hannah
Matesic, Minority Director of Member Services and Coalitions;
and John Witherspoon, Minority Professional Staff Member.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Good morning, everyone. We are ready
to begin. I will count down from five, and then we will start.
Five, four, three, two, one. The Subcommittee on Health,
Employment, Labor, and Pensions will come to order.
Welcome everyone. I note that a quorum is present. The
Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on ``Closing
the Courthouse Doors: The Injustice of Forced Arbitration
Agreements.'' This is an entirely remote hearing and as such
the Committee's hearing room is officially closed. All
microphones will be kept muted as a general rule to avoid
unnecessary background noise.
Members and witnesses will be responsible for unmuting
themselves when they are recognized to speak or when they wish
to seek recognition. If a Member or witness experiences
technical difficulties during the hearing please stay connected
on the platform, make sure you are muted, and use your phone to
immediately call the Committee's IT director whose number was
provided in advance. Should the Chair experience technical
difficulty, or need to step away, another majority Member is
hereby authorized to assume the gavel in the Chair's absence.
In order to ensure that the Committee's five-minute rule is
adhered to, staff will be keeping track of time using the
Committee's digital timer, which appears in its own thumbnail
picture. Members and witnesses are asked to wrap up promptly
when their time has expired, please.
Pursuant to Rule 8(c) opening statements are limited to the
Chair and Ranking Member. I'll now recognize myself now for the
purpose of making my opening statement. Today we meet to
discuss employers use of forced arbitration agreements and
collective action waivers, and how these arrangements affect
workers' ability to secure fair treatment.
On their first day of work employees flip through a stack
of papers, click a series of modules, and sign the terms and
conditions of their contract. Even before their first day
employees often skim through a dense job application. More
often than not, these documents include an arbitration clause.
In the fine print it states that an employee cannot take
the employer to Court. Instead the employees must bring their
claims to a closed-door meeting with an arbitrator who may not
even have a law degree, and the employee will have no right to
appeal the result.
Workers who carefully review these agreements are forced to
choose between signing or walking away from their job, but most
of the time employees sign these clauses and do not realize
until they have experienced workplace violations and seek
justice. Unfortunately, over the last three decades employers
have increasingly--some employers, have increasingly used
forced arbitration clauses to circumvent workers' right to due
process.
In 1990, 2.1 percent of non-union employees got an
arbitration clause in their employment contract, 2.1 percent in
1990. As of 2018, nearly 60 percent of all non-unionized
private sector employees were covered by forced arbitration
agreements. Once again, in 1990, 2.1. In 2018, 18 years later,
60 percent. That's 60 million American workers locked out of a
courtroom and forced to go through a process that often is
rigged against them.
While proponents of forced arbitration describe it as more
efficient litigating than in Court, we will hear from our
witnesses today on how it is not efficient, and often time less
efficient than normal litigation. When workers do enter into
the arbitration process, they rarely emerge victorious.
Research shows that employees have an overall win rate
around 19 percent. And when an arbitrator is paired repeatedly
with the same employer, that win rate reduces to nearly 11
percent. In contrast, employees are more than 30 percent likely
to win when they go to Federal Court.
As a result, arbitration has become a tool of employers--
some employers--to evade accountability for violating their
workers' rights. In the ten most populous states workers have
eight million dollars stolen from them in minimum wage
violations every year. This amounts to $3,300.00 in losses per
worker every year. The Federal minimum wage is inadequate as it
is, and without protections workers are left with even less
while the employers line their pockets and duck litigation.
Forced arbitration also makes it difficult for workers to
seek justice when they experience discrimination. Arbitrations
are private and allow the employers to be shielded from the
court of public opinion. Additionally, the ordinary rules of
discovery and evidence that come into the courtroom rarely
apply, so employers can control the evidence that is brought
into the room. These unfair practices allow employers to hide
abuse while stacking the cards against workers who experience
discrimination.
In recent years the Supreme Court has only worsened the
problem. In 2018 the Court's conservative majority ruled in the
Epic Systems v. Lewis case, that an employer can even require
employees to give up their right to join a joint, class, or
collective action. This leads the employees to try their cases
as individuals and prevents them from proving that their
experience is one of many.
Ultimately, this prevents employers from being held
accountable. As Justice Ginsburg wrote in her dissent,
``congressional correction of the Court's elevation of the FAA
over workers' rights to act in concert is urgently in order.''
That's why today's hearing will focus on the Restoring Justice
for Workers Act introduced by Chairs Nadler and Scott.
First the legislation reopens the Courthouse doors for
workers by prohibiting the use of forced arbitration clauses in
employment contracts prior to dispute. Second, it reverses the
Supreme Court's decision in Epic to ensure workers can ban
together to hold unscrupulous employers accountable.
And finally, it ensures that after an employment dispute
arises, employers cannot obtain arbitration agreements by
threat or coercion. I'd like to congratulate my colleagues on
the Judiciary Committee for their efforts to advance the Forced
Arbitration Injustice Repeal Act, or the FAIR Act, which ends
forced arbitration in many other contexts.
This legislation is crucial for empowering workers' rights
under the statutes this Committee oversees. The Restoring
Justice for Workers Act builds on the FAIR Act by including
essential provisions like making collective action labors
unfair labor practices under the National Labor Relations Act
and preventing forced post dispute arbitration.
If workers are shut out of the court system, they are not
protected under the law. This is an outcome we should not
accept. We cannot accept. I want to thank our witnesses for
joining us today. I now yield to the distinguished Ranking
Member Mr. Allen for purposes of him making his opening
statements. Mr. Allen.
[The statement of Chairman DeSaulnier follows:]

Statement of Hon. Mark DeSaulnier, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions

Today, we meet to discuss employers' use of forced arbitration
agreements and collective action waivers and how these arrangements
affect workers' ability to secure fair treatment.
On their first day of work, employees flip through a stack of
papers or click a series of modules and sign the terms and conditions
of their contract. Even before their first day, employees often skim
through a dense job application. More often than not, these documents
include an arbitration clause, hidden in the fine print, which states
that the employee cannot take the employer to court. Instead, the
employee must bring their claims to a closed-door meeting with an
arbitrator who may not even have a law degree, and the employee will
have no right to appeal the result.
Workers who carefully review these agreements are forced to choose
between signing or walking away from their job. But most of the time,
employees sign these clauses and do not realize it until they have
experienced workplace violations and seek justice.
Unfortunately, over the last three decades, employers--some
employers--have increasingly used forced arbitration clauses to
circumvent workers' right to due process. In 1990, 2.1 percent of non-
union employees had an arbitration clause in their employment contract.
2.1 percent in 1990. As of 2018, nearly 60 percent of all non-unionized
private sector employees were covered by forced arbitration agreements.
Once again, 1990 2.1 percent, 2018, 28 years later, 60 percent. That's
60 million American workers locked out of the courtroom and forced to
go through a process that is often rigged against them. While
proponents of forced arbitration describe it as more efficient than
litigating in court, we will hear from our witnesses today on how it is
not efficient, and oftentimes less efficient than normal litigation.
When workers do enter the arbitration process, they rarely emerge
victorious. Research shows that employees have an overall win rate of
around 19 percent, and when an arbitrator is paired repeatedly with the
same employer, that win rate reduces to nearly 11 percent. In contrast,
employees are more than 30 percent likely to win when they go to
Federal court.
As a result, arbitration has become a tool for employers, some
employers, to evade accountability for violating their workers' rights.
In the ten most populous states, workers have $8 billion stolen
from them in minimum wage violations every year. This amounts to $3,300
in losses per worker every year. The Federal minimum wage is inadequate
as it is, and without protections, workers are left with even less
while their employers line their pockets and duck litigation.
Forced arbitration also makes it difficult for workers to seek
justice when they experience discrimination. Arbitrations are private,
allowing employers to be shielded from the court of public opinion.
Additionally, the ordinary rules of discovery and evidence common to
the courtroom rarely apply, so employers can control the evidence that
is brought into the room. These unfair practices allow employers to
hide abuse, while stacking the cards against workers who experience
discrimination.
In recent years, the Supreme Court has only worsened the problem.
In 2018, the Court's conservative majority ruled in Epic Systems Corp.
v Lewis that an employer can even require employees to give up their
right to join a joint, class, or collective action. This leaves
employees to try their case as individuals and prevents them from
proving that their experience is one of many. Ultimately, this prevents
employers from being held accountable.
But as Justice Ginsburg wrote in her dissent, ``congressional
correction of the FAA over workers' rights to act in concert is
urgently in order.'' That's why today's hearing will focus on the
Restoring Justice for Workers Act introduced by Chairs Nadler and
Scott.

First, this legislation re-opens the courthouse doors for
workers by prohibiting the use of forced arbitration clauses in
employment contracts prior to a dispute;

Second, it reverses the Supreme Court's decision in Epic to
ensure workers can band together to hold unscrupulous employers
accountable;

And finally, it ensures that, after an employment dispute
arises, employers cannot obtain arbitration agreements by
threat or coercion.

I'd like to congratulate my colleagues on the Judiciary Committee
for their efforts to advance the Forced Arbitration Injustice Repeal
Act, or the FAIR Act, which ends forced arbitration in employment and
many other contexts. That legislation is crucial for empowering
workers' rights under the statutes this Committee oversees. The
Restoring Justice for Workers Act builds on the FAIR Act by including
essential provisions like making collective action waivers an unfair
labor practice under the National Labor Relations Act, and by
preventing forced post-dispute arbitration.
If workers are shut out of the court room, they are not protected
under the law. That is an outcome we cannot accept. I want to thank our
witnesses for joining us today. And I now yield to the distinguished
Ranking Member, Mr. Allen, for the purposes of him making his opening
statement.
______

Mr. Allen. Thank you, and good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Before coming to Congress I spent 40 years building a business,
creating hundreds of jobs for Georgians. From a business
standpoint I can say without a doubt that H.R. 4841, or the so-
called Restoring Justice for Workers Act will be devastating
for both employers and employees.
This is just another instance of a heavy-handed government
reaching way too far. One thing our economy doesn't need right
now is more burdensome regulations, but that's exactly what
H.R. 4841 is, it's a burden. By banning arbitration in
workplace matters, this law unfairly targets job creators and
American workers. Arbitration is known as an effective and
proven method for resolving workplace disputes, and the
American worker demands choice.
Arbitration provides practical and affordable legal
recourse for employees who believe their rights have been
violated. It also provides the necessary flexibility to address
workplace claims of all sizes. Banning the use of arbitration
unfairly penalizes individual employees and employers. This
bill would hurt workers by delaying justice and resolution to
disputes.
Instead of trying to tie the hands of workers and
employers, Democrats should be focused on getting our economy
back on track and combatting the rising prices that are caused
by inflation, and out of control spending. The only thing H.R.
4841 is good for is enriching our trial lawyers. The
legislation will result in a tsunami of class action lawsuits
leaving many workers claims unaddressed due to the costly and
time-consuming nature of litigation.
Outlawing arbitration and facilitating class action
lawsuits will funnel more money directly from the pockets of
workers and job creators into the wallets of trial lawyers. In
most cases arbitration is significantly less expensive, and
speedier than drawn out Court battles.
Democrats claim that arbitration gives employers an
advantage over employees, but in reality, costly court battles
only benefit trial lawyers. It is unfair to force workers into
judicial proceedings they may not be able to afford. This will
be another case of democrat legislation that will have
unintended consequences of hurting those it intended to help by
imposing a top down, big government solution.
Our judicial system is already stretched thin, and the
COVID-19 pandemic has already made things worse. Forcing all
workplace disputes into the courtroom won't just exacerbate
this backlog. It will clog our judicial system completely.
Democrats must be aware that this is bad legislation, why else
would they exempt the unions?
HR 4841 bans all arbitration except when it comes to
arbitration clauses and collective bargaining agreements.
Exempting big labor from this bill tells us everything we need
to know about how much it will disadvantage job creators.
Democrats also have a bad habit of trying to treat all
Americans the same, but our workers and businesses do not fit
into a one size fits all box.
The American workforce is diverse. It does not make sense
to treat independent contractors the same as salaried or hourly
employees, independent contractors set their own hours and
earnings, and are entrepreneurs in their own right, yet this
legislation unfairly targets independent contractors, and will
ultimately decrease, and disincentivize these growing
opportunities.
Everyone here wants to see our workers thrive. We also want
to see those who have been mistreated receive justice. The real
question in hand is what is the most effective and efficient
way to get justice for both workers and employers? I believe
outlawing arbitration as H.R. 4841 would do and shoving every
workplace dispute into an overwhelmed court system would delay
the very justice that mistreated workers need.
The last thing this economy needs is more control and
regulations from Washington. Forced lockdowns and supply chain
crisis, rising prices, and inflation and a worker shortage, are
already wrecking our economy. Legislation like this could be
the nail in the coffin for many struggling job creators.
In the end those who will suffer the most from H.R. 4841
are the workers that won't be able to have their cases heard,
and the employers that will be forced to tread water
continuously under the heavy weight of endless litigation. And
with that Mr. Chairman I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Allen follows:]

Statement of Hon. Rick W. Allen, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions

Before coming to Congress, I spent nearly 40 years building a
business creating hundreds of jobs for Georgians.
From a business standpoint, I can say without a doubt that H.R.
4841, or the so-called Restoring Justice for Workers Act, will be
devastating for both employers and employees.
This is just another instance of the heavy hand of government
reaching way too far. The one thing our economy doesn't need right now
is more burdensome regulations.
But that's exactly what H.R. 4841 is--a burden. By banning
arbitration in workplace matters, this law unfairly targets job
creators and American workers.
Arbitration is an effective and proven method for resolving
workplace disputes. And the American worker demands choice.
Arbitration provides practical and affordable legal recourse for
employees who believe their rights have been violated. It also provides
the necessary flexibility to address workplace claims of all sizes.
Banning the use of arbitration unfairly penalizes individual
employees and employers. This bill would hurt workers by delaying
justice and resolutions to disputes.
Instead of trying to tie the hands of workers and employers,
Democrats should be focused on getting our economy back on track and
combating the rising prices caused by inflation and out-of-control
spending.
The only thing H.R. 4841 is good for is enriching trial lawyers.
The legislation will result in a tsunami of class-action lawsuits,
leaving many workers' claims unaddressed due to the costly and time-
consuming nature of litigation.
Outlawing arbitration and facilitating class action lawsuits will
funnel more money directly from the pockets of workers and job creators
into the wallets of trial lawyers.
In most cases, arbitration is significantly less expensive and
speedier than drawn-out court battles.
Democrats claim that arbitration gives employers an advantage over
employees, but in reality, costly court battles only benefit trial
lawyers. It is unfair to force workers into judicial proceedings they
may not be able to afford.
This will be another case of Democrat legislation that will have
unintended consequences of hurting those it intended to help by
imposing a top-down, big government 'solution.'
Our judicial system is already stretched thin and the COVID-19
pandemic has only made things worse. Forcing all workplace disputes
into the courtroom won't just exacerbate this backlog-it will clog our
judicial system completely.
Democrats must be aware that this is bad legislation. Why else
would they exempt the unions?
H.R. 4841 bans all arbitration, except when it comes to arbitration
clauses in collective bargaining agreements. Exempting big labor from
this bill tells us everything we need to know about how much it will
disadvantage job creators.
Democrats also have a bad habit of trying to treat all Americans
the same, but our workers and businesses do not fit into a one-size-
fits all box.
The American workforce is diverse. It does not make sense to treat
independent contractors the same as salaried or hourly employees.
Independent contractors set their own hours and earnings and are
entrepreneurs in their own right. Yet this legislation unfairly targets
independent contractors and will ultimately decrease and disincentive
these growing opportunities.
Everyone here wants to see workers thrive. We also want to see
those who have been mistreated receive justice. The real question at
hand is-what is the most effective and efficient way to get justice for
both workers and employers?
I believe outlawing arbitration, as H.R. 4841 would do, and shoving
every workplace dispute into an overwhelmed court system will delay the
very justice that mistreated workers need.
The last thing this economy needs is more control and regulations
from Washington.
Forced lockdowns, a supply chain crisis, rising prices and
inflation, and a worker shortage are already wrecking our economy.
Legislation like this could be the nail in the coffin for many
struggling job creators.
In the end, those who will suffer the most from H.R. 4841 are the
workers who won't be able to have their cases heard and the employers
who will be forced to tread water continuously under the heavy weight
of endless litigation.
______

Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Allen. Without
objection all of the Members who wish to insert written
statements into the record may do so, submitting them to the
Committee Clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5
p.m. on November 18, 2021.
Now I'd like to go to our witnesses. Thank you all for
participating today, we look forward to all of your testimony.
I'd like to now introduce the witnesses. Professor Alexander
Colvin is the Kenneth F. Kahn Dean of the Cornell University
School of Industrial and Labor Relations.
Ms. Glenda Perez is a former Implementation Set-Up
Representative at Cigna.
Mr. Roger King is a Senior Labor and Employment Counsel at
the H.R. Policy Association.
And Ms. Kalpana Kotagal is a Partner in the law firm of
Cohen Milstein Sellers & Toll. I apologize for the
mispronunciation. As you can imagine with my name, I'm used to
people doing the same thing to my name, so I apologize.
Unfortunately, it hasn't made me better at pronunciations.
We appreciate the witnesses for participating today and
look forward to your testimony. Your written statement will
appear in full in the hearing record, and you are asked to
limit your oral presentation to five minutes, and your written
statement will appear in full in the hearing record, and you
are asked to limit your oral presentation to a five-minute
summary.
After your presentation we'll move to Member questions. The
witnesses are aware of their responsibility to provide accurate
information to the Subcommittee, and therefore we will proceed
right now with their testimony. I will first recognize
Professor Colvin, go ahead.

STATEMENT OF ALEXANDER COLVIN, JD, Ph.D., KENNETH F. KAHN 1969
DEAN, SCHOOL OF INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS, CORNELL
UNIVERSITY

Mr. Colvin. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman DeSaulnier,
Ranking Member Allen, and distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee. It's a pleasure to have the opportunity to
testify today about the impact of forced arbitration on
American workers.
My name is Alexander Colvin. I am the Kenneth Kahn Dean and
Martin Scheinman Professor of Conflict Resolution at Cornell
University. Most workers discover that they have entered into
forced arbitration after the fact. They are fired from their
job, and thought their rights are being violated, so they went
to see a lawyer.
After asking some questions, and reviewing documents the
lawyer explained that way back when they were hired amidst the
stack of paperwork, we all sign at the start of a job was a
document stating that the worker agreed to resolve any future
employment law claims against the employer through arbitration.
Now the worker might believe that private arbitration forum
established by a contract drafted by the employer, could not
govern claims under statute enacted by Congress or State
legislature, that they retained their right to their day in
Court. The worker might object that he or she was essentially
forced into agreeing because the employer stated that the
arbitration clause was a term and condition of employment. No
signature, no job.
But the Supreme Court has held that an arbitration clause
imposed as a term and condition of employment is enforceable.
That's the essence of forced arbitration. The worker is
required to agree to arbitration as a condition of getting or
keeping a job. This forced arbitration clause can cover the
vast majority of rights the worker might have from protection
against racial discrimination, sexual harassment, to rights of
returning veterans, to rights to be paid the minimum wage and
overtime.
The arbitration clause is drafted by the employer who is
effectively deciding who is administering arbitration, and what
the rules and procedures will be. An example of the rules that
many employers include in forced arbitration is privacy
provisions that prevent the worker from disclosing what
happened in arbitration.
The result is that employees and public regulators may be
unaware of systematic problems of discrimination or sexual
harassment at a company because individual cases are kept under
a veil of confidentiality in the private form of arbitration.
Under the recent the recent Epic Systems precedent of the
Supreme Court the rules of forced arbitration can also include
a ban on bringing a class action or a collective claim. The
worker is unable to pursue a class action in court because of
the forced arbitration clause, and unable to pursue a class
action arbitration because the rule as drafted by the employer
do not allow it, essentially a heads I win, tails you lose
situation. The inability to bring a class or collective action
leaves many with low value claims with no effective recourse at
all.
What do we know about how this system of forced arbitration
is operating? My own empirical research, and that of other
scholars in the area has yielded the following conclusions.
First, forced arbitration has become a widespread practice. In
my 2018 survey, I found that over half of all establishments in
the survey were imposing forced arbitration on their employees,
that's 60 million American workers subject to it.
Second, employees do worse in forced arbitration than in
litigation, winning fewer cases and recovering less damages. My
research found that taking into account the chance of winning,
and likely damages, the average recovery per case for employees
in forced arbitration was only $25,000.00 compared to
$143,000.00 in Federal court, and $328,000.00 in State court.
Similarly, a new 2021 study by Mark Gough of Penn State
University finds that employees receive 203 percent greater
damage in Federal court, and 165 percent greater damage in the
State court than in forced arbitration. And that's controlling
for differences in Plaintiff and case characteristics,
comparing apples to apples.
Third, employees are at a structural disadvantage in forced
arbitration procedures. There's evidence of a repeat clear
advantage to corporations that have multiple cases before the
same arbitrator where these employers tend to win more often
and have lower damages awarded against them.
Fourth, forced arbitration reduces access to due justice.
As a result of a less favorable outcome for employees in forced
arbitration, there's a reduced ability of plaintiff attorneys
to accept cases under the normal contingency fee basis, leading
to far fewer cases being filed. Research by Cynthia Estlund of
NYU finds that cases are being brought in forced arbitration at
only 1 to 2 percent the rate they are brought in court. If
cases are not being brought, this means that our employment
laws are going unenforced for much of the workforce that is
subject to forced arbitration.
After the problems be addressed, the provisions of H.R.
4841, Restoring Justice for Workers Act, would directly address
the more pernicious effects that we're seeing in forced
arbitration through ensuring that no pre-dispute agreements are
valid or enforceable, and restoring the ability to bring class
actions and collective claims.
It also appropriately preserves the beneficial use of
arbitration in the collective bargaining and voluntary post-
dispute context where it's been successfully used for many
years. By contrast, the current system of forced arbitration
imposed on workers by corporations, undermines employment
rights and should be eliminated. Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Colvin follows:]

Prepared Statement of Alexander Colvin
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you, Professor. Thank for being
on time. Now I would like to recognize Ms. Perez, your five
minutes are available.

STATEMENT OF MS. GLENDA PEREZ, FORMER IMPLEMENTATION SET-UP
REPRESENTATIVE, CIGNA

Ms. Perez. Thank you, Chairman. Chairman DeSaulnier,
Ranking Member Allen and Members of the Committee, thank you
for the opportunity to testify in support of important
legislation that would end forced arbitration for workers
across America. My husband I used to work for Cigna, a global
healthcare insurance company from October 2013 to July 2017.
I was an Implementation Set-Up Representative structuring
both national and commercial pharmacy benefits. I trained new
hires, and quickly became a subject matter expert. I won the
Cigna Champion Award 2 years in a row. Through Cigna I
volunteered for the Red Cross and Habitat for Humanity, and I
was featured on Cigna's Twitter page.
To say I was proud is an understatement. I was honored to
say I work for the company. In March 2017, meetings were held
with my team to address an ongoing issue related to pharmacy
benefits. The following month my manager singled me out as
being responsible for making errors and called me a risk to the
team.
My manager put me, apparently with other employees, on a
performance corrective action plan. I was shocked and confused,
as I was sure that I had not made any such errors. When I asked
to see the evidence of the errors, my manager refused.
I asked my husband who also work at Cigna if he could find
the report with the alleged errors. He found reports of other
individuals, specifically white women, who were making those
errors, however they were not participating in the performance
corrective plan. I filed a complaint with H.R. regarding my
manager's discrimination against me.
Normally, a full investigation takes around 60 days. My
investigation took 1 day, and H.R. simply agreed with my
manager. My manager then put me on a far more oppressive
performance plan.
Two months after reporting my manager to H.R. for
discrimination I was fired. When I wanted to file a complaint
for racial discrimination and retaliation, H.R. said it must be
handled in arbitration.
I didn't really understand what arbitration meant.
Apparently, I had e-signed an arbitration document in my
onboarding employee packet. I quickly learned that forced
arbitration wasn't an informal, internal process, but instead a
complicated, formal, and binding process that was nothing like
mediation or going to court.
I couldn't find any attorney willing to represent me in
forced arbitration. I don't have any legal background
whatsoever, so I tried to do my own research. We couldn't
afford internet at home, so I used the Wi-Fi of a local dentist
in the parking lot and struggled to pay for gas to drive to the
law library.
This was all when I was caring for my three children and
looking for a new job. I filed a complaint in forced
arbitration for claims of racial discrimination and
retaliation. Cigna chose the arbitration provider, and it took
several months just to choose an arbitrator.
I tried to get information from Cigna to prove my case,
including my employee personnel profile. Cigna's attorneys said
that discovery request would cost over one million, and the
arbitrator denied my request. Cigna filed a motion for summary
judgment, and a couple of days later the arbitrator rules in
Cigna's favor and canceled the hearing.
I was devastated, as I wanted to tell my side of the story
at the hearing. That night my husband found a photo on the
internet of the arbitrator, and the attorney for Cigna looking
very friendly, hugging each other at the arbitrator's 50th
birthday party. The arbitrator also used to work for the firm
representing Cigna, and even listed Cigna's attorney as a
reference on his CV.
To me this obviously showed that the arbitrator was not
impartial. Had I known of this personal relationship, I would
have moved to disqualify him, but it was never disclosed. I
filed the motion to vacate the arbitrator's award in court with
the help of my husband who hired a process server to deliver
Cigna my motion. After Cigna was served, they fired my husband.
It turned into a 4-year battle with no real opportunity to
have my voice heard. A person should be able to hold a
corporation accountable when they violate the law. Now I know
that's not the case because of forced arbitration. Forced
arbitration left us barely surviving. Little by little, the
things we worked so hard for were taken from us.
Our newly bought house is in foreclosure, our car was
repossessed, we had to empty our 401K's and sell all my
jewelry, including my wedding ring. We were on food stamps and
relied on family Members to help pay our bills, and for things
our kids needed. Not only were my kids robbed of their parents
for 4 years, but I was robbed of my dignity.
I'm in this fight to end forced arbitration because no one
should have to go through what I went through. Workers should
be able to protect their rights and have access to our civil
justice system.
I urge the Members of this Committee to support, and for
Congress to pass the Restoring Justice for Workers Act, and the
Forced Arbitration Injustice Repeal Act, a bill that I have
long advocated for, which would end forced arbitration for
workers and consumers. Thank you and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Perez follows:]

Prepared Statement of Glenda Perez
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you, Ms. Perez. We'll now go to
Mr. King. Mr. King the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF ROGER KING, SENIOR LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT COUNSEL,
H.R. POLICY ASSOCIATION

Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Allen,
and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. I've spent about
50 years of my professional life working in the arbitration
area. I've drafted arbitration agreements. I represented
clients in arbitration proceedings. I've been deeply involved
in policy discussions regarding the merits of arbitration.
I also have followed closely the FAIR Act, Mr. Chairman,
that you referenced earlier, and I had the opportunity to
testify before the House Judiciary Committee earlier this year
regarding the FAIR Act, and a copy of my testimony to that
Committee is included in my statement this morning.
I've also been involved in class action and collective
action matters. So my testimony today represents that
substantial professional and personal experience. This
legislation that we're considering today, H.R. 4841 has two
primary objectives. The first is to completely eliminate pre-
dispute arbitration.
I submit to you that is a serious mistake. The pre-dispute
arbitration has worked well. And indeed, the approach this
legislation is taking would prohibit Professor Colvin and I
just to sit down and work out a previous arbitration procedure
that we could agree upon, so nothing is available for pre-
dispute arbitration.
Second, the total prohibition on class action waivers is a
substantial overreach, and of course really the proof is in the
pudding here as Ranking Member Allen stated because labor
unions and employers are permitted to continue such
arrangements. That in and of itself shows a major deficiency in
this legislation.
Let me move through a few points that I have in my
testimony, but before I do that, I think we have a really
substantial misunderstanding here. Virtually everything that
goes on in an arbitration proceeding, at least the vast
majority of cases are what I would call standard workplace
issues.
Did I get the raise that I was entitled to? Was I properly
disciplined? Did I get the vacation when I should have gotten
it? Those are the kinds of day-to-day matters that are
addressed in previous arbitration. They're not complex, they
don't require expert witness. They don't require class action
litigation.
Those are what work. Those procedures are what work-related
matters address. So you're going way overboard on this whole
discussion. You're making everything into a very complex
matter. But to the extent statutory rights are involved in any
of these disputes, they are preserved.
It's improper to say that some of the testimony being
submitted today, that statutory rights are being eliminated.
That's a misstatement of the law. This legislation overrules
virtually or attempts to overrule virtually decades of Supreme
Court case law, and these are not just 5-4 decisions.
Justices Kennedy, White, Kagan, et cetera, were in the
majority in these cases. They can't all be wrong. And it's a
misstatement to say that the Federal Arbitration Act only is
applicable to disputes between merchants. That is just a simple
misstatement.
Now the proposed legislation and subsequent do away with
any incentive for employers, employees, and indeed even unions
to a certain extent, to work out a pre-dispute arbitration
procedures. The whole flow of our jurisprudence is going to a
different approach. We're trying to resolve disputes through
alternative dispute resolution, that's the way this process
should work.
With respect to union matters and the carve out, there's
some real misstatements here also, or misunderstandings. An
employee in a union environment doesn't get to decide whether
the matter goes to arbitration, the union makes that decision.
The employee doesn't decide who it's counsel is, the employee
doesn't decide who the arbitrator is, and in fact virtually
every arbitration proceeding between employers and employees is
subject to the American Arbitration rule.
So these are not complex negotiated agreements, et cetera,
they're standard of the mill agreements. With respect to our
court system, as Ranking Member Allen said, our court system is
simply overflowing today with issues that have been waiting
sometimes years for disposition. It is suggested cases are
being resolved in 8 months as one of the witnesses suggest, is
simply a misstatement of fact.
Finally, with respect to comparing apples and oranges, in
all due respect Professor, your stats are right, but the
comparisons are incorrect. You're comparing jury trials with
standard run of the mill arbitration settlements in most cases,
or awards. Those awards are much different in a jury trial than
they are in a standard I got disciplined incorrectly type of
arbitration.
You can't compare them. That's not just apples and oranges,
that's apples and zebras. One of the most recent studies that's
being articulated in the press, and apparently being used to
support this legislation are the Trial Lawyers Association
counts settlements as losses for the employee.
That's a misleading and inappropriate way to proceed. So
the stats in this area actually show just the opposite. When
you compare actual apples to apples cases, the claimants in
arbitration do much better. This arbitrable system also has
very distinguished and ethical people.
I really think it's a misstatement to characterize
arbitrators of having substantial conflicts of interest, or
somehow always siding with the corporation. The arbitrators I'm
aware of over my 50 years of practice are very ethical, and
they try to do the right thing.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Mr. King, if you can wrap up, please?
Mr. King. Yes, yes certainly, Mr. Chairman. They try to do
the right thing, and they don't play favorites. They have
enough business, and they do the right thing. Thank you very
much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. King follows:]

Prepared Statement of Roger King
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you. I appreciate it. Now we'll
go to our last witness Ms. Kotagal. How was that?
Ms. Kotagal. That was good thank you.
Chairman DeSaulnier. I'm a slow learner, but I'm not very
bright.
Ms. Kotagal. It's a hard name. I appreciate the effort.
It's Kalpana Kotagal. And my family is from India, so that's
where the name comes from.

STATEMENT OF KALPANA KOTAGAL, JD, PARTNER, COHEN MILSTEIN
SELLERS & TOLL PLLC

Ms. Kotagal. Chairman DeSaulnier, Ranking Member Allen, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me today. At the outset I want to just say that I and
my colleagues at Cohen Milstein have cases currently pending in
arbitration and I won't be talking about those cases today.
I am eager, however, to offer what I have learned from
litigating employment cases in forced arbitration for more than
a decade. If you take nothing else away from my remarks today,
please hear this. In my experience, forced arbitration in the
employment setting poses such a threat to a workers' ability to
vindicate their rights, and to our system of common law, that
congressional action is required.
The justification for forced arbitration is predicated on
myths, on fictions about how arbitration is a good thing for
workers, and we've heard many of those today. I want to address
a few of them. Myth No. 1 forced arbitration reflects actual
consent and is a negotiation between similarly positioned
parties. This is not true.
On the one side are well-resourced corporations. On the
other are individual workers who must commit to arbitration
before a dispute has arisen. Pre-dispute, workers often can't
appreciate that eventual claims will be decided in confidential
and individualized forums, with restricted discovery and
limited appellate review before a decisionmaker often selected
by the employer.
There are places that binding arbitration in the employment
setting may make sense--where it is the product of negotiation
between parties of equal bargaining power, and that's where
this piece about unions and employers, where the union wields
the authority of the collective of workers, as well as
substantial experience.
That's not the case in most forced arbitration, as Ms.
Perez's story tells us. Moreover, in my experience forced
arbitration burdens those who are already marginalized. Hourly
workers, women, black workers, and workers of color.
Myth No. 2 forced arbitration is speedy. Consider one of my
ongoing cases, a sexual harassment case filed in 2008. It has
already gone through four appeals of the arbitrator's
decisions, and we still haven't made it to trial. This is
because many arbitration rules permit appeals as a matter of
right where there would be no such option in court. In our
case, the appeals included challenging the arbitrator's
interpretation of the arbitration agreement to permit my
clients to even seek class certification, a step that doesn't
exist in court at all.
These years-long appeals are ironic. Arbitration was
heralded as an opportunity to free up the courts, but evidence
suggests that courts are increasingly dealing with litigation
about arbitration.
Finally myth No. 3. Forced arbitration does not impede the
effective mitigation of rights. The truth is that forced
arbitration does just the opposite, by deterring workers from
filing claims to vindicate the rights granted to them by
Congress. Forced arbitration provisions often include joint
action bans, or as employers like to call them class action
waivers, which prevent workers from being able to proceed
together, even when their claims challenge identical workplace
misconduct.
In my experience, the ability to conduct discovery and
distribute costs to advance the shared claims of many workers
at once makes those cases possible. Barring class and
collective actions makes it nearly impossible for workers with
smaller claims.
And while mandatory arbitration in employment with adequate
guardrails post-dispute may sometimes make sense, I cannot as I
sit here, envision a situation where bans on joint action ever
do. Employer's own statements confirm that their primary
concern is preventing workers from joining together. Indeed,
some companies have announced their decision to end forced
arbitration only for individual sexual harassment matters,
acknowledging that it impedes accountability. If ending forced
arbitration is the right thing to do, as one company put it,
for individual sexual harassment claims, why are systemic
discrimination claims any different?
Joint action bans also cause inefficiency and inconsistent
outcomes, whereas class and collective actions can only proceed
where a court agrees that the claims can be fairly and
efficiently adjudicated together, and that class counsel is
experienced.
Joint action bans apply categorically, requiring serial
litigation of the exact same issue. Claims that might have been
adjudicated together in a single action are instead decided
many times over, risking inconsistent outcomes. Finally, forced
arbitration undermines our system of common law, by which
judges offer opinions that are subject to scrutiny.
Forced arbitration is typically confidential. Matters of
public consequence are hidden from sight. I was heartened to
see in Mr. King's testimony that he agrees. The secrecy in
which forced arbitration is shrouded is alarming and should be
prohibited.
Moreover, arbitral decisions are not precedential. There is
no notion that today's decisions must flow from yesterday's.
The Supreme Court has described forced arbitration as nothing
more than a change of forum, in reality moving employment
claims from the Courthouse to a conference room fundamentally
changes the playing field, creating a system of secret
decisions that lack protections and undermine the integrity of
our legal system, and the atrophy of common law.
With that I thank you, and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Kotagal follows:]

Prepared Statement of Kalpana Kotagal
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you all, all the witnesses for
your testimony. Under Committee Rule 9(a) we will now question
witnesses under the five-minute rule. I'll be recognizing
Subcommittee Members in seniority order. As Chair, I now
recognize myself for five minutes.
Professor Colvin you discussed research by Cynthia Estlund
on how workers bring cases to forced arbitration only 1 or 2
percent. Many Americans don't look at the judicial system as
being as fair as we would like it to be. Some might use the
word ``rigged''. Can you talk a little about your research and
if you would like to respond to Mr. King's comments about your
research feel free to use some time for that as well.
Mr. Colvin. Sure. So I think one of the critical issues
here is, do we have a forum that allows workers effectively to
bring claims. And Cynthia Estlund's research, which builds on
some of my own work, has found that we really don't see very
many cases at all being brought in arbitration relative to the
large number of workers being covered by forced arbitration.
Now what's going on there. I think really the crucial thing
is that the outcomes are so much less in forced arbitration--
the damage awards, the win rates are lower, that it's really
hard to bring a case. One thing that we know from the research
is that it's really hard to do it by yourself.
Ms. Perez's testimony I think is very reflective of what we
see in the research. It's a huge hill to climb to do it by
yourself. You need a lawyer, but in practical terms the lawyers
can't bring the cases when the outcomes of the chances of
success are really low. And that's really the big barrier we're
seeing, why we don't see very many cases.
And you know the research we're trying to pull this out in
terms of controlling for all the different factors that may be
going in here, but we're really consistently seeing this large
barrier to bringing the cases.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thanks. Ms. Perez maybe you could
speak to your experience. You mentioned about how difficult it
was just to get the resources you needed, and an attorney given
your budget. If you could speak to that a little.
Ms. Perez. Yes. I have no legal background whatsoever, so
entering into arbitration, I didn't know what I was going into.
The company has all the rules because they're the ones that
hire the provider, so they know what to expect. When I entered
into the arbitration, I was told in the beginning that it would
be informal, however, it quickly became formal.
So I had to quickly learn the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure. Again, I have no legal background, so having to
learn and get my own discovery it was just a tug and pull, and
many trips to the law library, using their computers. It was
extremely difficult because not only did I have to learn this,
but I also had to write the motions, so it was extremely
difficult.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you. Ms. Kotagal maybe you can
talk a little bit about just the difficulty that employees have
with discovery. Ms. Perez talked a little bit about this.
Ms. Kotagal. Yes absolutely, thank you. So the thing about
proceeding along discovery and arbitration is that the rules,
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the Federal Rules of
Evidence, the tools that we use to shape the discovery that we
ask for are sometimes not present.
And then the second piece of it that I think is really
important is that where you are forced to proceed on an
individual basis, you have access to less discovery. You know
the rules of so-called proportionality in discovery mean that
even if Ms. Perez were the victim of a pattern of
discrimination at the company, she wouldn't have access to
evidence showing that.
And so those limits on what you can get as an individual
trying to understand where your situation fits into the
company's policies are tremendously significant.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thanks. Professor Colvin in the short
time I have left. I'm from the San Francisco Bay Area. Like Mr.
Allen I was an employer, I owned restaurants. I didn't have
these issues. Best not to have conflict with your employees,
but I understand how to make a payroll and manage people.
A lot of the criticism on these provisions in my area were
in tech companies, and these were fairly sophisticated
employees. The California legislature has moved to do what they
can under preemption to change that. Would you comment on that
at all, specifically in that industry?
Mr. Colvin. So assuming we see a lot of cases in the tech
industry, Uber famously has had a long-standing set of
conflicts involved forced arbitration clauses. So it's a
critical issue in that industry. California it's about two-
thirds of business in California using forced arbitration, so
it's having a massive impact there, and there's very little the
states can do under the Supreme Court's preemption doctrines.
This really needs to be regulated by Congress. Congress is
the one that has the ability to act in this area.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you. With that I will turn to
the Ranking Member, Mr. Allen go ahead.
Mr. Allen. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. King one
of the reasons Congress enacted the National Labor Relations
Act was to curtain certain private sector labor and management
practices which can harm workers, businesses, and the economy.
How did the Supreme Court's Epic System's ruling in 2018
protect the ability of workers and employers to resolve
disputes outside of Court?
And how would overturning that ruling as this bill would
do, affect workers, businesses, and the economy?
Mr. King. Well, Mr. Allen the Supreme Court and Epic
Systems followed what had been decades of Supreme Court case
law. As I mentioned earlier, both so-called conservative and
liberal justices agreed in many instances.
And what the Court did in Epic is to harmonize the Federal
Arbitration Act, and the National Relation's Act. And it's
improper to conclude that an employee has no regrets. An unfair
labor practice charge could be filed on any number of different
theories, but also an employee can file if it has a problem
outside of the arbitral system, complaints, charges with the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, with the National
Relations Board, State and Federal Agencies.
So what the Court in essence said in Epic, arbitration
should be encouraged, it's indeed the intent of the Congress.
It can be utilized in a way that's fair, and also in arbitrable
systems its statutory rights, whatever they may be, are
preserved, contrary to other suggestions, and there's nothing
that undermines the National Labor Relations Act in any way,
shape, or form.
And finally, the petitioners in the case, those that are
asking the Court to review the entire matter, laid out--I have
this in my testimony, any number of ways that workers in a non-
union environment can work together to pursue individual
claims, and bring them to the attention of the employer.
But let me just, Mr. Allen, finish this one point. This
issue of access, and filing. Here's what really happens,
contrary to the testimony you're hearing, and based on
practical real-world experience. Cases are settled, as the
Professor notes in his testimony. Employers have good counsel.
They settle matters out, and you have steps in the process,
just like in the union process, and during those steps--they're
called grievances generally in the union environment, employer
and employees reach agreement.
That's why you don't have these matters going to any type
of arbitration. That's what practically happens here.
Mr. Allen. Well, in talking about that further, you know,
the Constitution provides for equal protection under the law,
H.R. 4841 bans mandatory arbitration agreements that are used
to settle disputes between a worker and an employer.
Is the bill consistent without a dispute between a union
and an employer, and why does the bill treat workers and labor
unions unequally?
Mr. King. Well, its inherently inconsistent. I can't think
of a practical or logical reason to support that other than
intense lobbying pressure from organized labor. The fact of the
matter is what happens in a labor environment in arbitration,
is very similar to what happens in a non-union environment.
The American arbitration rules are followed in the union
environment. They're followed by and large, if not almost
exclusively, in the non-union environment. There's not much
difference if any. And this myth that in the employee and union
environment as I noted in my opening statement, has a lot of
control over the process.
That's just flat not correct. So there is no rationale that
I can think of that would support this differentiation, and the
suggestion that somehow these are sophisticated negotiations
between a union and employer to arrive at an arbitration
system. That's just not true. The standard arbitration clause
and effective bargaining agreement is generally no different
than a non-union environment.
Mr. Allen. Well, one of our testimoneys about the fact that
the appeals process was unfair in arbitration. But there's an
appeals process in the court system is there not? I mean I
don't quite--in other words, are they both equally unfair? The
appeals process? Or do they both apply to the same process?
Mr. King. Well, first of all the statement about appeals is
a misstatement. There may be certain arbitration cases, certain
arbitration clauses that appeal rights, but generally that's
not the case. Where appeals come in is in the court system as
you know. That takes literally years in the process. I don't
see appeals coming in through at least the many arbitrations
I've been involved in, they just don't happen.
Mr. Allen. Well, thank you so much Mr. King, and with that
Mr. Chairman I yield back.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Allen. I'll now
recognize Representative Wild for her five minutes.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, very much, Mr. Chairman. I first want
to address some things that you said Mr. King. I come at this
from a fairly unique perspective on this Committee. I was a
lawyer for 35 years before I came to Congress. I handled a lot
of employment cases, I've represented both plaintiffs, in other
words the employees, and I've represented employers as
defendants, and I've also served as an arbitrator.
So I was listening to your remarks very, very,--all of the
witnesses' remarks very, very carefully, and I have to tell you
Mr. King that I differ with your assessment of arbitrators and
arbitration generally.
First of all I have--I don't in any way mean to impugn the
reputation, or qualifications of arbitrators who preside over
these cases. But I do have to say that in my experience, which
is fairly extensive, arbitrators are very much dependent on
repeat business if they want to maintain arbitration as a full-
time practice, as opposed to practicing the other kind of law.
And that means the institutional clients, whether it be
hospitals, or employers, or you know, any kind of industry who
continually refer cases to them for arbitration, I believe have
undue influence and I don't again mean to suggest that they are
doing this intentionally.
But it is almost impossible, and I speak as somebody who
has been an arbitrator, to ignore the fact that a party who has
appeared before you on multiple occasions and likely will
again, doesn't have some sort of advantage over the lone
employee who has this one claim and will never again appear
before the arbitrator.
So I feel like that needs to be pointed out. In addition,
arbitration can be a very, very expensive process. The hourly
fees for most of the arbitrators that I used to retain through
the American Arbitration Association, were somewhere on the
order--and this was a few years ago now, of $600.00 per hour at
the low end.
So you know, to suggest that this is an inexpensive
process, or something that is within the reach of the
plaintiffs, I think is unfair. And keep in mind, as has already
been pointed out, that the number of damages recoverable is
often, although very significant to the plaintiff, the
litigant, not so significant in the whole scheme of things for
lawyers who are being asked to take on their cases.
And by the way, the lawyers who take on the cases for these
employees, are doing so nine times out of ten on a contingent
fee basis, meaning that lawyer is bearing all the expenses
while the case is proceeding, and it also means that they are
taking on the risk of whether the case will be successful or
not.
And so again, I don't think that we can in any way suggest
that an employer and an employee are on a level playing field
in the arbitration world. Honestly, I'm not sure that they're
on a level playing field in a courthouse either, but that is
largely due to jury bias and that kind of thing which is unique
to each jurisdiction and venue.
And finally, I think it's really important to note that
what we are talking about here today is forced arbitration.
There is nothing to stop an employee from agreeing to
arbitration when the time arises. If that employee and his or
her lawyer makes the determination that arbitration is the way
to go, that because of delays at the courthouse, because of
jury bias that's known in that venue, an employee and his or
her lawyer may very well make the decision to go forward with
arbitration.
But what we're talking about here is whether the employee
should be forced to go through arbitration. That is really the
salient issue, and they do not have equal negotiating power at
the time of commencing their employment. So I just felt that
those points needed to be made.
I'm going to move on to Dr. Colvin because I have a
question for you about wage theft. Dr. Colvin, your testimony
notes that almost 65 percent of businesses that pay less than
$13.00 per hour have forced arbitration clauses. So this would
apply without doubt to most fast-food workers, most retail
workers, and people who literally have no negotiating power
over their terms of their employment. Am I correct?
Mr. Colvin. That's correct yes.
Ms. Wild. According to the National Employment Law Project
in 2019 alone employees of these businesses lost 9.2 billion
dollars to wage theft. Can you comment on how mandatory
arbitration contributes to this issue of wage theft?
Mr. Colvin. So one thing we know in that area is that the
collective claims, class action claims, are one of the primary
ways of addressing those issues because they often apply to
many workers. Imagine in restaurant chains, if you have say a
minimum wage worker missing a 30 minute break, being paid a
day. If you take over 6 months that would only amount to about
$435.00 per worker. That's a pretty small amount, not enough
for an individual case, but if you aggregate that over 1,000
workers in a restaurant chain, that's $400,000.00. That's a
case you can bring, and you can move forward with that.
So the class action waivers really impact those low-wage
workers a lot.
Ms. Wild. So and the short version of that is that a single
employee who experiences wage theft is likely to be unable to
find a competent lawyer to handle his or her claim?
Mr. Colvin. That's exactly right. We just don't see those
cases being brought.
Ms. Wild. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman I thank you for
your indulgence, I see I am over time, and I apologize for
that.
Chairman DeSaulnier. That's quite all right. Thank you for
your comments. I do want to just mention that California law
was directed as Congresswoman Wild mentioned in her comments at
forced arbitration, and it's currently being litigated, but
it's been upheld in the 9th Circuit. Now we'll go to Mr.
Walberg. Mr. Walberg?
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to the
panel for being with us today. Mr. King, H.R. 4841, severely
limits the use of arbitration agreements, and encourages
litigation. We all know that litigation is expensive,
adversarial, and slow. Can you discuss the shortcomings of
litigation resolving disputes in the workplace as compared to
the benefits of arbitration, and additionally how would a
movement toward increased litigation impact low to middle
income worker's ability to have their complaints resolved?
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Walberg. It's nice to see you
again and thank you for the question. Let me start by the
expense issue. We just heard a comment that it's expensive to
go to arbitration. Let me concede that for just a moment, but
it's more expensive to go to court. And to somehow suggest that
court litigation is less expensive than arbitration is a non-
starter.
Second, by forcing workers to go to the court system,
they're going to be even more hard pressed to find attorneys.
As Professor Sam S. Recker said and it's noted in my testimony,
the House Judiciary Committee, many workers are going to be
without any form whatsoever. So just the opposite is going to
occur.
By having informal, pre-dispute systems in place that are
fair, and to suggest they are not is also a misnomer. Virtually
every arbitral system I know that employers have followed the
American Arbitration procedures and protocols. Yes, national
disclosure, or excuse me, non-disclosure agreements should be
examined. Secrecy should be taken out of the process, but the
process is fair Mr. Walberg, and it works.
And as I said earlier, the reason we don't have more of a
filing system here is that workers are arriving at settlements.
This is a system that ought to survive. It provides good
benefits. Back to your question. House Bill 4841 prohibits all
together any type of pre-dispute arbitration system period.
That makes absolutely no sense.
Mr. Walberg. Let me just add on to the question. In class
action lawsuits, do employees often see large financial awards
when they're claims are successful? And conversely, how do
class action lawyers fair?
Mr. King. Well, they go in opposite directions. The lawyers
always win, and the employer/consumer in most cases, in a
recent study that I just saw yesterday, even further emphasizes
this, do much worse. The only winners here really are the
plaintiff's trial lawyers. It's quite unfortunate.
Senator Ernest just introduced a bill last night that would
stop that process and prohibit the trial lawyer form receiving
any more than they award to the claimant. That's where we ought
to have this discussion. It's really interesting.
The consumer gets what the employee gets, the worker gets
very little unfortunately.
Mr. Walberg. It's an old story that we've heard. Mr. King,
according to the Director of the Administrative Office of the
U.S. Courts, as of March 2020, the number of civil cases
pending for more than 3 years is nearly 30,000.00 cases.
Mr. King. Right.
Mr. Walberg. And that statistic came before the worst of
the COVID-19 pandemic. What impact would H.R. 4841 have on the
current case backlog, and how would this impact workers?
Mr. King. It would increase that $30,000 figure many fold
Mr. Walberg. The court systems are absolutely overflowing at
the moment. I note that in one of the submitted testimoneys
today that the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure have an 8-month
target for civil litigation.
That's not being met, that's not even close to being met.
And in class actions it takes years, literally years often just
to litigate the procedural issue of whether we have
commonality, typicality, et cetera. Class action litigation is
a procedural morass. It's one of the absolute worst procedural
ways to do business in the courts.
So the short answer to your question is dumping hundreds of
thousands of worker complaints into our court system is a non-
starter. It's just not a practical solution, nor is it a
solution Mr. Walberg, to dump those types of cases in a class
matter into our arbitral system. That arbitral system can't
handle that influx either.
Mr. Walberg. I guess additional evidence why unions are
carved out of this, the cause of the outcomes.
Mr. King. Yes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, thank you for your testimony, and
Mr. Chairman I will yield back 11 seconds.
Chairman DeSaulnier. You're a generous man, Mr. Walberg. I
now recognize Mr. Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. California's AB5 law,
better known as the Gig Worker Law, may be one of the best-
known failures of a democratic attempt to regulate labor
standards. This law forced companies to classify independent
contractors as employees, placing a one size fits all chain
around their neck. Mr. King, what effect did this law have on
California businesses?
Mr. King. Very negative. And as you know the so-called
worker protections are not there. And the voters in California
resoundingly rejected it. So this also is a non-starter, and I
see it's woven--at least there's an attempt to weave it in
4841. Absolutely poor policy.
Mr. Banks. Agreed. Can you tell us more about how did this
law affect the shipping industry, and help create the supply
chain crisis that we're experiencing today?
Mr. King. Well, we literally have, the last I saw, hundreds
of ships outside of Santa Barbara, outside of Long Beach, the
entire industry of moving goods is in a State of flux. And it
just brought litigation into those areas. A lot of the
companies that move these goods as you know, are small and
medium-sized companies.
If they have to divert resources to litigate these matters,
they have less resources to pay workers and to improve
productivity. It's certainly an impediment in the supply chain.
Mr. Banks. Now, Mr. King I appreciate that explanation very
much. What's shocking to me is that despite how disruptive AB5
was, my democrat colleagues want to expand this law nationally
as you pointed out. The PRO Act, which unfortunately passed the
House back in March contains provisions similar to that of AB5.
Additionally, H.R. 4841, which is the topic of the
discussion today, would prohibit independent contractors from
engaging in arbitration if classified as an employee. Can you
speak on that? On the disastrous effects of that, and that the
PRO Act would have for labor standards if they're signed into
law.
Mr. King. It's an excellent question. The whole issue of
classification, independent contractor status is quite complex
in many scenarios, only to be dealt with separate hearings,
separate proposals, separate discussion.
Beyond that the Federal Arbitration Act, I would at least
concede in part was designed to settle disputes between
merchants, between third parties. Why should we take that well-
known, well-established procedure where an employer and a
third-party merchant or supplier or vendor cannot enter into
dispute resolution?
And certainly there even if you concede there's some uneven
bargaining power on how these agreements are established, which
has long since passed with procedural safeguards being adopted,
but even if you go there, this is an area where you certainly
ought to preserve arbitrable pre-dispute procedures.
And the funny thing I note here, our entire juris prudence
system is built on procedures being agreed upon in advance. I
can't go into Court and ask the Court well, let's change the
rules. We'd like to negotiate a different set of rules. The
Civil Rules of Procedure are there in place, so are the
American Arbitration Act Procedures.
So it's a misnomer to say these procedures shouldn't be
agreed upon in advance. That's the way the system has worked
and should work.
Mr. Banks. And finally Mr. King, can you elaborate more
with that on the effect that H.R. 4841 would have on
contractors?
Mr. King. Well, it turns upside down the whole definition
of independent contractor worker employee. As I read the bill
everybody is an employee. Everybody that even has an agreement
to supply goods and services at arms-length has to be brought
into an employee status, and therefore no pre-dispute
arbitration agreement ever could be entered into. That makes
absolutely no good policy sense or common sense.
As I said in the outset of my remarks. I'm sure I could sit
down with Professor Colvin at an arm's length and negotiate a
good, pre-dispute arbitration procedure that has procedural
safeguards, no secrecy. That's foreclosed. So whether it be
independent contractors or anyone else, this bill goes way too
far.
Mr. Banks. Agreed. It seems enormously dangerous. With that
Mr. Chairman I yield back.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Banks. I just want to
make, if anybody listening has a question, I was referring to a
separate bill, assembly bill AB51 that dealt directly with
arbitration. AB5 I'm very familiar with as a former Chair of
the Senate Labor Committee in California, but I just want to
clarify that. They are two separate bills, not that Mr. Banks
was inferring that, I just want to clarify for the record. Mrs.
Harshbarger you're next for five minutes.
Mrs. Harshbarger. OK. Thank you, Chairman and Ranking
Member, and thank you for the witnesses for being here today.
Mr. King I'm going to read part of your testimony. It says,
``Arbitration is usually less expensive and faster than
litigation. It can have similar procedural and evidentiary
rules. It normally minimizes hostility and is less disruptive
of ongoing and future business dealings among the parties.
It's more flexible in regard to scheduling of times and
places appearing in discovery devices.'' And you know I've been
a business owner for over 30 years, and you know if it were me,
I would absolutely want to sit down with an employee and have
an arbitrator because of the timeframe, the hostility factor is
huge.
Earlier this Congress, as Representative Banks said, House
democrats passed H.R. 842, and that's the Protecting the Right
to Organize after the PRO Act. And it is a bill which bans
arbitration agreements to settle disputes between workers and
employees, and it allows the NLRB to impose large, monetary
penalties, up to $100,000.00 on employers for unfair labor
practices, and that includes violations of the bill's
prohibition on arbitration agreements.
These huge financial penalties in the Pro Act are
consistent. I mean that would devaState a business sir is what
I'm trying to say. $100,000.00 fine would devaState a business,
and I guess what is your opinion on what would happen if these
were consistently applied because there wasn't arbitration?
Mr. King. Excellent question. The PRO Act contains many
toxic provisions for business, and you just identified one of
the central ones. That's apparently still pending in the so-
called budget reconciliation discussions. What as a practical
matter can happen, and will happen, is that unfair labor
practice charges without any foundation in many cases will be
filed against medium and small employers, particularly.
They don't have the financial ability to defend their
position. And if the National Labor Relations Board then finds
an objectionable conduct unfair labor practice has occurred,
then the business is subject to hundreds of thousands of
dollars of potential fines, including representatives on the
Board, Chief Human Resource Officers, owners of the business.
The Wagner Act, which is the predecessor of the National
Labor Relations Act passed in 1935, never envisioned the
National Labor Relations Act to be this type of statute. It's
been throughout its history a remedial statute. Both Democrat
and Republican Congresses have accepted that.
The PRO Act is a substantial unfortunately overreach and
the civil penalties you just mentioned are totally unneeded.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well, I don't think a small business
could stay in business very long if that happened, and you know
when you look at the Supreme Court case Epic Systems, and they
encourage arbitration initially. You know I'm assume once you
do the arbitration and you work everything out, what's the
timeframe generally that a case is dismissed, or penalties
taken care of?
I mean is that a reasonable amount of time during an
arbitration? Is there you know a standard amount of time?
Mr. King. Most arbitrations again in the workplace as I
note in my opening comments are generally involving relatively
minor disputes frankly.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Yes.
Mr. King. Was I paid properly? Did I get my vacation when I
should have? Did I get my job letting rights? Those can, and
are resolved quickly, in many cases less than 180 days from
time. The arbitrator is selected and tell her or his award.
Correspondingly in the judicial area, and I just saw stats
in this yesterday. You're talking 560 days at a minimum in many
cases, and if you are in a class action you don't even get to
the merits of the litigation until sometimes years because
procedural issues of technicality, numerosity, et cetera are
litigated.
So much quicker, absolutely no case that I can see out
there that's at least supportable would suggest that the court
system is more efficient, just the opposite.
Mrs. Harshbarger. Well I agree. If you have--in my
experience as a business owner you have 10 different attorneys,
you're going to get 10 different answers, but you're going to
be billed 10 times too. Just FYI. So I appreciate you, and I
have a little bit of time left, and I yield back.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you, Congresswoman. You're
learning from Mr. Walberg. Representative Fitzgerald your time
is here.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. King instead
of setting one standard and having everyone play by the same
rules, I think where my colleagues across the aisle are,
they've singled out the unions for favorable treatment.
Yesterday a very similar bill came forward in Judiciary, of
which I'm a Member, and I offered an amendment.
In that markup in the Judiciary Committee the amendment was
aimed directly at the FAIR Act that would remove the exemption
for unions in a bill that would otherwise ban the pre-dispute
arbitration. You know clearly, it's a union carve-out. The
legislation bans the pre-dispute arbitration for non-union
employees while preserving these benefits for the union
employees.
The discrepancy, it just doesn't make any sense other than
you know trying to appease the unions like I said. I mean but
legally this has to make this entire area of law, a little more
vulnerable I would say, and you know it's probably not a wise
move when you're talking about this area of statute. Would you
agree or disagree, or what are your thoughts on that?
Mr. King. Well, good points Mr. Fitzgerald. It's
intellectually insupportable. I don't know how one could say
that a union and a corporation, an employer, should be able to
negotiate pre-dispute arbitrable procedures and also ban class
actions if they so agree, but yet say no, that can't occur
anywhere else in the world.
If it's inherently illegal, unconscionable, unacceptable as
a general premise, why isn't that also applicable in the
unionized environment? You just can't reconcile those two
points of view. And to somehow suggest that, as I said earlier,
that a union and employer negotiate at arms-length
sophisticated complex, arbitrable agreements, that's just not
reality.
What those agreements look like are the same as we see in
the non-union deal. So there ought to be a level playing field
here. As noted by the previous questions, this whole attempt to
fine employers, to force employers into dealing against the
will often of their employees in a union environment is just a
pressure play to chill the rights of employers, and to cause
them to have all kinds of litigation and regulatory problems.
It's not a playing field that's fair.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. Thank you. Just one other quick
question. So the other thing about H.R. 4841 is it applies to
employees of the employer, as well as independent contractors.
And in my estimation, you know I think that this will have a
direct effect on for the most part, entrepreneurs, or people
that are trying to do a startup. And I was wondering I you
could make a brief comment on that part as well.
Mr. King. Oh absolutely. So it's an end around of an
intelligent thoughtful discussion about whether an individual
is an employee, or an independent contractor, a merchant, or a
third party. And those are all entirely separate issues. If you
foreclose merchant's third parties and other employers, the
user employer, from negotiating previous agreements, and you
prohibit them from carving out class actions, you're forcing
everybody into the Courts and primarily into class action
litigation.
That makes no policy sense, it's inefficient, it's the
wrong way to go to about that discussion.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
would yield back.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Fitzgerald. We'll now
recognize Congresswoman Miller for five minutes.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Chairman DeSaulnier, Ranking Member
Allen, and all the witnesses. While the Committee democrats and
those that object to arbitration agreements in general argue
that their intention is to get better outcomes for claimants
through litigation--that is not the answer.
Mr. King in your testimony you mentioned how proponents of
banning arbitration in this hearing are citing faulty studies.
You cite studies that show only 13 percent of class action
lawsuits result in payout, and the average award is about
$32.00, while plaintiff's attorneys got about 1 million. Would
you please elaborate on how the studies you cite are correct,
and how others that are cited are misleading?
Mr. King. Thank you, Congressman Miller. First of all as I
mentioned the recent student by the Plaintiff Trial Lawyers
Association counted all settlements as losses for workers.
That's inherently misleading. It's really a disservice to this
discussion.
Second, in some of the statistics we've seen, and I
certainly respect Cornell University. It's my alma mater, my
lawsuit, but in all due respect to the ROI studies, they're
comparing jury awards to standard, what I would call run of the
mill arbitral workplace settlements. You just can't do that.
That's as I said apples and zebras.
And the disparity Congressman Miller between what the
claimant is getting in court, compared to what the claimant is
getting in arbitration, the figures we are citing is as close
as possible to a real-world apples to apples study. And study
after study, indeed the updated study that I just saw
yesterday, refutes entirely this suggesting of that Plaintiffs
and workers are doing better in the court system.
And where the real reward in that court award is going, as
inherent in your question, is to the trial lawyer, not to the
consumer, not to the worker.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you that was interesting, especially in
light of the fact I'm reading a book called ``How to Lie with
Statistics.'' Mr. King your written statement quotes Supreme
Court Justice Breyer on the advantages of arbitration. Is
Justice Breyer's statement of support for the arbitration
process unusual? Have other judges across the ideological
spectrum made similar statements?
Mr. King. Absolutely. He's not alone. I would hardly label
Justice Breyer an outlier, but Justice White, Justice Kennedy,
Justice Kagan, and many other Justices of varying philosophies
have clearly articulated in their written decisions that
arbitration is the preferable way to proceed and is the
congressional intent behind the Federal Arbitration Act. It is
the law of the land.
But even if you rejected those very thoughtful opinions by
very intelligent people, and even if you reject decades of
court case law as Mr. Allen said at the outset--our court
system and arbitration system is not equipped to handle
hundreds of thousands of disputes that would be put into that
system. That's not workable. So let's do a reality check here.
If you really want to get to the heart of this issue let's
encourage employers, workers, even unions to have alternative
dispute resolution procedures, settle these matters in the
workplace, informally, thoughtfully, and expeditiously.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. That's good information to know.
And finally Mr. King as I speak with my constituents, the most
frequent thing that I hear is that they're having a hard time
retaining and finding new employees. If we were to ban
arbitration agreements, how would this harm employment?
Mr. King. Well, you know it's interesting. We hear this
disparity of bargaining argument that workers are being forced
to accept these agreements. Well first of all, more and more
companies are making them optional, and they're not being
forced as suggested in testimony, on workers.
Second, workers in this economy particularly will go
somewhere else if they find the system to be inherently unfair.
And third, given our platform economy, if word is out on the
street that employer access unfairly treating its workers in
so-called forced arbitrations, they'll go somewhere else to
work.
So this worker shortage is having a very interesting impact
upon this entire discussion. But in our whole system, I mean
workers don't have an opportunity to renegotiate the Civil
Rules of Procedure in the courts, they don't have the ability
to renegotiate arbitration rules and regulations by the
American Arbitration Association. So this whole discussion is
off kilter in that regard.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. Thank you again to all of our
witnesses, and I yield back.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you, Congresswoman Miller. I now
recognize Congressman Mrvan for five minutes.
Mr. Mrvan. Congressman, if I could I just if I could be
recognized for five minutes in about 2 minutes, I'd greatly
appreciate it.
Chairman DeSaulnier. I'm sure the Ranking Member of the
Full Committee would love to go now if that's appropriate, Ms.
Foxx get ready to go. Your five minutes are here. I always want
to show you the deference you so richly deserve, Ranking
Member.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, so much Mr. Chairman. I always love
seeing you on the screen. I'd like to see you in person better,
but I love seeing you on the screen. Thank you so much. Mr.
King for over 80 years Congress has struck a careful balance in
Federal labor law with respect to the interest of workers,
employers, and labor organizations, however H.R. 4841
encourages adversary class action lawsuits between workers and
employers, while preserving labor union access to arbitration.
Is H.R. 4841 consistent with the balanced approach of the
National Labor Relations Act?
Mr. King. Dr. Foxx, very nice to see you again, albeit
virtually.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you.
Mr. King. There is no balance as we just discussed, but I
don't know how you intellectually or classically defend a carve
out for union agreements in this area. If you accept the
premise of 4841 that previous arbitration is completely bad and
should never be utilized, then the same ought to be applicable
in the union environment, but of course that's a misnomer and a
false premise to start out with.
And to say that you can never have a class action
abridgement or prohibition in the non-union sector, but yet you
could have it in the union sector, that's again inherently
inconsistent and not intellectually supportable.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. King in the Epic
System's decision in 2018, Supreme Court found that the NLRA
and the Federal Arbitration Act are not in conflict and that
workers ability to organize unions and collectively bargain
does not guarantee the ability to litigate as a collective
entity.
In your view is this finding, correct? And what
implications does it have for the NLRA?
Mr. King. Well, I think it's an absolutely correct
decision. It codified decades of the Supreme Court case law
that as we just established had various judicial philosophies
in those previous decisions. The Wagner Act, the predecessor of
the National Relations Act was passed in 1925, excuse me 1935.
The Federal Arbitration Act was 1925, so the authors of the
NLRA and the Wagner Act in 35, they knew of the Federal
Arbitration Act. If they had wished to include class action
protection in the National Relations Act, they certainty could
have done so. They did not do so. The National Relations Act as
the Supreme Court said in Epic, doesn't have any provision that
guarantees class action litigation.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. You mentioned in your testimony H.R.
4841 creates new unfair labor practice charges against
employers, and that this is even more troubling in view of the
democrats impending budget reconciliation bill. When this
legislative monstrosity was considered by the Education and
Labor Committee in September, the Democrats included an
appalling provision which for the first time, even under the
NLRA creates massive civil, monetary penalties against
employers and corporate officers.
Can you elaborate quickly please on why this combination is
so unprecedented and dangerous?
Mr. King. The National Relations Act in its many decades of
history never has included fines against employers. This is an
attempt to chill employers, to exercise their rights, it's also
an attempt to chill employers to respond to unfounded unfair
labor practice charges. Small and medium-sized businesses are
going to be put in a very difficult position. It is inherently
not fair. It's certainly not needed. It's an overreach.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. Mr. King when Congress considers a
piece of legislation, we should be absolutely clear about how
the legislation would affect the American people. Your
testimony states that arbitration is an effective and proven
method for resolving workplace disputes.
Would you elaborate on the advantages of arbitration for
workers any more than you might need to based on your previous
testimony?
Mr. King. It's quicker. It's more informal as we discussed
earlier. It forces the employer and the employee to sit down
with one another. And you know what Dr. Foxx as a practical
matter what really happens here, let's put aside all this
philosophical approach. It forces the parties to come to an
agreement.
And in my experience over 50 years, there's a very high
sell of the break, not only an arbitrable system, but also in
the Courts. The particularly informal arbitration procedures,
pre-dispute arbitrations lead to settlements. And that's what
we all ought to strive for here.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you. And Mr. Chairman thank you again for
letting me help out Mr. Mrvan as he was walking over. I see the
technique he used. I thought I was going to be in that position
too of running over here. He and I were just on the floor, so I
ran like crazy to get over here. I move a lot faster than he
does by the way, so anyway, I'm glad we're able to--I like him,
and I like you, thank you Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you, Congresswoman Foxx, the
most charming Member. Mr. King I would agree with you on this.
Congresswoman Foxx is always best in person. Congressman Mrvan,
five minutes is yours.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chairman. And Congresswoman Foxx I
played in the football game yesterday. I can barely blink
without being in pain, so that's why you beat me. But
respectfully I thank you, everyone, for the opportunity.
Professor Colvin can you explain the difference between
individual forced arbitration and the forms of arbitration that
many unions require through collective bargaining? Why is
arbitration more appropriate when it is a part of collective
bargaining agreements?
Mr. Colvin. It's a great question. There's a fundamental
difference to how arbitration operates in the collective
bargain contracts, what we call labor arbitration. It's a
system that's been around since the 30's, 40's, that has been
very successful for ensuring collective agreements are
enforced, and as an alternative to strikes in the workplace.
What's really different there is that the system operates
with two sophisticated parties--two repeat players, one on each
side. What that means is that the arbitrators are responsible
to both parties. The cadre of labor arbitrators who decide
these cases are widely respected by both sides, that's why the
system works. That's what's different on the forced arbitration
side where you have on one side large, sophisticated
corporations, and on the other side individual employees who
are not repeat players.
They don't have the same engagement, same ability to hold
the system to account, and what we see is much more variation
across arbitrators in making decisions on the forced
arbitration aside, it's not consistent the way it is in labor
arbitration.
The other major difference, and here I have to disagree
with what Mr. King's testimony suggested, is that the types of
cases are really different. Labor arbitration is dealing with
regular workplace, day to day disputes about scheduling, about
job assignments, those kinds of things. Forced arbitration, we
did a study where we spent time reading through a whole year's
worth of all the forced arbitration cases decided under the
administration of the American Arbitration Association.
And what we found is half of them are discrimination cases,
another 10 percent are wage an hour cases, and the rest are
other statutes and common law claims. They're not typically
workplace day to day problems, they're legal issues, much like
the kinds of cases that you see in the Court system. So it's
really different from what goes on in labor arbitration.
The labor arbitration works well with two repeat player
parties, and a well-established group of labor arbitrators who
are trusted by both sides. They're really different systems.
Mr. Mrvan. Professor Colvin in your testimony you cite
research by Cynthia Estlund that suggests the cases are brought
in forced arbitration at a rate of only 1 to 2 percent when
compared with cases brought in Court. Gives the rates of forced
arbitration you describe, is it fair to say that this means for
a large percentage of the workforce our employment laws are
going unenforced?
Mr. Colvin. That's exactly right. In theory you could
create a new dispute resolution system that was accessible to
all workers and have a lot of claims. Professor Estlund, who
was mentioned earlier, made this argument made this argument
about 20 years ago, maybe we can have an arbitration system
that looks like that.
However, when we do the empirical research, we don't find
that forced arbitration produces that system. There's hardly
any cases that are small. Three quarters of the claims filed
are over $60,000.00 claims. These are similar to the kind of
claims that are filed in Court. They're not small claims. We
don't see the accessibility, and the reality is if you don't
have the accessibility, then for most American workers, you're
not seeing their employment rights being enforced.
Mr. Mrvan. Can you lay out the facts that make claims so
much less likely to be brought in the forced arbitration than
they would be if the worker had access to the Courts?
Mr. Colvin. So one thing I think that has to be recognized
is some of what you heard in Ms. Perez's testimony, that
there's procedural complexity in arbitration that gets
unrecognized. She is an individual worker without legal
representation. It's not really possible to easily navigate
this system. It's more complex, and it's become more complex
over time.
It's also the case that what you see successful in
arbitration systems is sort of larger, higher income, you know,
sophisticated parties with substantial resources. Those are the
ones that succeed. By contrast, our employment laws are really
there to try to protect the typical American worker without
large scale resources, or sophisticated legal representation.
You've got to protect those workers and that's the
challenge.
Mr. Mrvan. I thank you. With that I yield back.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you, Congressman. I don't see
any other Members, so I want to thank all the witnesses. I
didn't imagine being so dominated by Cornell. I felt like all
of a sudden singing Hail, Hail, Cornell, so thank you, far
above Cayuga's waters--I have some friends who attended.
But I do want to thank all the witnesses. You are terrific.
Pursuant to Committee practice materials for submission for the
hearing record must be submitted to the Committee Clerk within
14 days following the last day of the hearing, so by close of
business on November 18, preferably in Microsoft Word format.
Only a Member of the Subcommittee, or an invited witness
may submit materials for inclusion in the hearing record, and
the materials must address the subject matter of today's
hearing. Please submit materials to the Committee Clerk
electronically by emailing submissions to the

[emailprotected]
.
Again I want to thank the witnesses. I did want to mention
that unfortunately some Members, particularly on our side
weren't able to attend because they were attending memorial
services to former Congressman Kildee from Michigan, the uncle
of our colleague Representative Kildee who served for many
years on this Committee, so I just wanted to let people know
that you know that many of us wished we could have been there.
And again, one last time thank you all. Even the people who
aren't affiliated with Cornell for participating as witnesses
today. If we have other additional questions for you, we may
ask that you please respond to those questions in writing. The
hearing record will be held open for 14 days in order to
receive those responses.
I want to remind my colleagues that pursuant to Committee
practice witness questions for the hearing record must be
submitted to the Majority Committee Staff or Committee Clerk
within 7 days. The questions submitted must address the subject
matter of the hearing.
I now want to recognize our distinguished Ranking Member
for a closing statement.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and my condolences to
Dan and the entire Kildee family as I heard also about the
memorial service this morning at our prayer breakfast. As we
heard today, H.R. 4841 will only add to the challenges that job
creators and American workers are already facing in this
struggling economy.
We've had great testimony by our witnesses, and I thank all
of our witnesses for participating today in this important
hearing. Based on my experience as a business owner, I know
that banning the use of arbitration will unfairly penalize
individual employees, and employers, by delaying resolutions to
their workplace disputes.
Arbitration is a proven method for solving employment
issues. It is often a lot quicker and less expensive than Court
battles resulting in swifter justice for proven incidents of
wrongdoing. H.R. 4841 is contradictory in its effort to ban
pre-dispute arbitration and class action waivers between
employees and employers because the bill still allows employers
and unions to continue negotiating agreements through the same
process.
It's blatantly a one-sided approach, it allows unions a
huge advantage which is in conflict with principles of equal
treatment. H.R. 4841 also unfairly penalizes independent
contractors and fails to recognize that they are entrepreneurs
who set their own hours and earnings.
By putting independent contractors in the same category as
salaried or hourly employees, H.R. 4841 will decrease
opportunities for these American workers at the very same time
that flexible employment options are needed the most. Forced
lockdowns, the supply chain crisis, rising inflation and worker
shortages are already wrecking our economy.
This legislation if signed into law could be the nail in
the coffin for many struggling job creators. As I stated in my
opening statement the only thing H.R. 4841 is good for is
enriching trial lawyers. The legislation will result in ongoing
class action lawsuits, leaving many worker's claims unresolved
due to the costly and time-consuming nature of litigation.
I'd like to again thank our witnesses for participating
today, and with that Mr. Chairman I yield back.
Chairman DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Allen. I really
appreciate that. Again, I want to thank all my colleagues,
thank you for adhering to the five-minute rule, and the
witnesses, and as a former employer for many, many years,
meeting a payroll as Mr. Allen and others have said, what I
hope for is a structure that's balanced, and I think we all
agree on that.
Our perspectives may be different, and on one of those
occasions I agree with the Hoover Institute person, Francis
Fukuyama, that it's best if we avoid this in the employer/
employee relationship if both sides treat each other with
respect, and not get into those situations as he enumerated in
his book Trust, that's probably the most efficient way.
But knowing human nature that's not always possible, and
that's why I believe strongly in this bill, but value the
perspectives, and hope to continue the conversation. Now I'd
like to recognize myself for a closing statement.
Today we highlighted the importance of passing legislative
solutions to end forced arbitration and ensure that workers
have a fair shot at securing justice. Access to the American
legal system is an essential pillar to our democracy.
Unfortunately for decades employees have been forced, often
times, into signing arbitration clauses that close the doors to
the Courtroom.
As a result, employers--some employers duck litigation, and
evade accountability at the expense of worker's rights.
Congress must pass, in my view, the Restoring Justice for
Workers Act to ensure that workers can ban together to hold
employers accountable for wage theft, harassment,
discrimination, and other violations of essential workplace
positions.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on both sides
of the aisle to better protect workers. Thank you again for our
witnesses. If there's no further business without objection the
Subcommittee stands adjourned. Thanks again.
[Additional submissions by Mr. Allen follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Questions submitted for the record and the responses by
Mr. Colvin follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Questions submitted for the record and the responses by
Ms. Kotegal follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 11:56 a.m., the Subcommittee adjourned.]

[all]
