- EXAMINING BIDEN'S WAR ON INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING BIDEN'S WAR ON
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WORKFORCE PROTECTIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, APRIL 19, 2023

----------

Serial No. 118-6

----------

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
51-523                       WASHINGTON : 2024

EXAMINING BIDEN'S WAR ON INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS

______

EXAMINING BIDEN'S WAR ON
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WORKFORCE PROTECTIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, APRIL 19, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-6

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WORKFORCE PROTECTIONS

KEVIN KILEY, California, Chairman

GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina,
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York            Ranking Member
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
MARY MILLER, Illinois                HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              MARK TAKANO, California

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on April 19, 2023...................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Kiley, Hon. Kevin, Chairman, Subcommittee on Workforce
Protections................................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Adams, Hon. Alma, Ranking Member, Subcommittee Workforce
Protections................................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7

WITNESSES

Anderson, Karen, Founder, Freelancers Against AB 5...........     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11
McCutchen, Tammy, Senior Affiliate, Resolution Economics.....    19
Prepared statement of....................................    21
Long, David, Chief Executive Officer, National Electrical
Contractors Association....................................    40
Prepared statement of....................................    42
Palagashvili, Liya, Senior Research Fellow, Mercatus Center
at George Mason University.................................    50
Prepared statement of....................................    52
Padin, Laura, Director of Work Structures, National
Employment Law Project.....................................    65
Prepared statement of....................................    67
Kavin, Kim, Freelance Writer and Editor......................    78
Prepared statement of....................................    80

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Chairman Kiley:
Statement dated April 19, 2023, from the Coalition for
Workforce Innovation...................................   157
Letter dated April 19, 2023, from the Direct Selling
Association............................................   161
Statement dated April 19, 2023, from the Financial
Services Institute.....................................   164
Letter dated April 19, 2023, from Flex...................   193
Submitted Fact Sheet from Flex...........................   196
Submitted Flex Comments..................................   198
Testimony dated April 19, 2023, from The Intermodal
Association of North America...........................   237
Letter dated December 13, 2022, from Leading Financial
Services Trade Associations............................   241
Letter dated April 17, 2023, from Modern Economy Project.   243
Letter dated December 13, 2023, from Modern Economy
Project................................................   244
Letter dated December 13, 2022, National Association of
Home Builders..........................................   255
Letter dated April 18, 2023, National Association of Home
Builders...............................................   263
Letter dated December 5, 2022, from National Association
of Insurance and Financial Advisors....................   265
Letter dated December 13, 2022, National Association of
Insurance and Financial Advisors.......................   269
Statement dated April 19, 2023, from National Association
of Small Trucking Companies............................   274
Letter dated April 17, 2023, from National Retail
Federation.............................................   277
Statement dated April 18, 2023, from The Transportation
Alliance...............................................   279
Letter dated April 18, 2023, from Truckers Integral to
Our Economy............................................   281
Research Brief by MBO Partners, State of Independence in
America................................................   284
Ranking Member Adams:
Letter dated March 23, 2023, from the Construction
Employers of America...................................   100
Norcross, Hon. Donald, a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey:
Letter dated April 18, 2023 from Sheet Metal and Air
Conditioning Contractors...............................   137
Testimony dated April 19, 2023 from Sheet Metal and Air
Conditioning Contractors...............................   138
Letter dated April 18, 2023 from The Association of Union
Constructors...........................................   153
Takano, Hon. Mark, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California:
Tweet on AB 5 dated April 12, 2023, from Rep. Kevin Kiley   107
Letter dated February 17, 2023, to President Biden.......   109
Statement dated March 9, 2023, from Los Angeles Chamber
of Commerce............................................   115
Letter dated March 7, 2023, from National Electrical
Contractors Association................................   118
Letter dated April 18, 2023, from National Employment Law
Project................................................   120

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Response to question submitted for the record by:
Laura Padin..............................................   316

EXAMINING BIDEN'S WAR ON

INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS

----------

Wednesday, April 19, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Workforce Protections,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:16 a.m., in
Room 2175, Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, DC, Hon.
Kevin Kiley [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Kiley, Grothman, Miller, Burlison,
Adams, Omar, Stevens, Takano, Scott, and Norcross.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Mindy Barry,
General Counsel; Jackson Berryman, Speechwriter; Michael Davis,
Legislative Assistant; Christina Delmont-Small, Investigator;
Cate Dillon, Director of Operations; Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff
Assistant; Trey Kovacs, Professional Staff Member; Andrew Kuzy,
Press Assistant; Marek Laco, Professional Staff Member; John
Martin, Deputy Director of Workplace Policy/Counsel; Hannah
Matesic, Director of Member Services and Coalitions; Kelly
Tyroler, Professional Staff Member; Veronique Pluviose,
Minority Staff Director; Banyon Vassar, Minority IT
Administrator; Stephanie Lalle, Minority Communications
Director; Kota Mizutani, Minority Deputy Communication
Director; Ilana Brunner, Minority General Counsel; Kevin
McDermott Minority Director of Labor Policy; Robert Shull,
Minority Labor Policy Staff; Jessica Schieder, Minority
Economic Policy Advisor; Kyle deCant, Minority Labor Policy
Counsel; and Dhrtvan Sherman, Minority Staff Assistant.
Chairman Kiley. The Subcommittee on Workforce Protections
will come to order. I note that a quorum is present. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to call a recess at any
time. The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
Examining Biden's War on Independent Contractors.
Good morning everyone, and welcome to today's hearing.
Today's hearing is about the right to earn a living. The right
to practice your profession and pursue your calling. To be a
maker, a builder, a creator. To take your God given talents,
nurture them with heart and soul, and offer them to the world.
In a free society, few rights are more fundamental or more
essential for a dynamic and prosperous economy. At this moment,
that right is in peril. The current administration has launched
a multi-pronged assault on the right to earn a living in
America. It is a concerted strategy designed to limit or
eliminate the gig economy, freelancing, independent
contracting, self-employment, alternate work arrangements that
entire careers are based on, and entire industries have been
built around.
The livelihoods of millions of Americans are at risk.
Today, we will examine the devastating consequences of this
anti-worker agenda. Those consequences are not a matter of
speculation. They are already an established reality. A bitter,
unfair, unnecessary reality for many residents of my own State.
You see, in California, the war on independent contractors
has been underway for years. The Biden administration is simply
following the model of Governor Gavin Newsom and the California
legislature. At this point, the administration's governing
motto might as well be as California goes, so goes the Nation.
Now I should say as a Californian that we used to look upon
that expression with pride. Over decades, the Golden State
forged an identity of historic significance and was at the
leading edge of social, political and technological progress.
Ronald Reagan, in his inaugural address as Governor, said
California should never take second place.
We were the State where anyone could get ahead. Now, sadly,
we have become the State many cannot wait to leave behind. We
do lead the Nation but in all the wrong ways. Poverty,
inequality, taxes, regulations, income stagnation and yes,
departures.
In 2022, for the third straight year, California ranked
first among the 50 states in U-Haul rentals. In its current
condition, California is the last place that should be a bell
weather for political change in America. That is exactly how
President Biden seems to see it as his administration attempts
to nationalize California's most damaging policies, exporting
our state's failures to every State in the union.
In nationalizing the war on workers, Biden has opened three
distinct fronts. The first is the PRO Act, which passed the
House in the last Congress and has been reintroduced this year
by the Ranking Member of this committee. This legislation takes
a specific California law, known as AB 5, and makes it into
Federal policy. President Biden is supporting the PRO Act, and
when running for President, he voiced support for California's
AB 5 and cited it as his model, even after the law received
bipartisan condemnation of a kind without precedent in recent
history.
For example, Governor Newsom's own former Deputy Chief of
Staff, Yashar Ali, called AB 5 one of the most destructive
pieces of legislation in the last 20 years, adding that it is
truly horrific how many people are negatively affected by it.
Former State Assembly Speaker, San Francisco Mayor, Willie
Brown, said the law made him want to ``picket'' against the
``bastards at the capitol,'' and the special interests that
took advantage of them.
Andrew Cuomo rejected a similar law in New York, saying he
did not want to ``make the same mistake as California.'' The
Daily Co's likewise warned other states to not make the same
mistake California's Gavin Newsome did, with the site's founder
calling the law disastrous and asinine and its supporters
shameful.
The head of the California NAACP assailed AB 5 as a
terrible law, and a gut punch to our community. The CEO of the
Black Chamber of Commerce called it a catastrophe, responsible
for enabling, defending and propagating systemic racism. 200
Ph.D. economists, including a Nobel Laureate, reported the law
as doing substantial and avoidable harm to the very people who
now have the fewest resources, and the worst alternatives
available to them. One commentator called it the most malicious
and harmful law ever passed in California.
AB 5 rendered countless independent professionals unable to
earn a living in our State. Writers, interpreters, court
reporters, musicians, language pathologists, photographers,
forensic nurses, and people in literally hundreds of other
industries were told they were no longer allowed to practice
their profession and serve their clients as they have been
doing their whole careers.
Instead, their only option was to find a single hiring
entity to monopolize their services and make them a W-2
employee. For many, that was simply not possible. I have
compiled their stories in this book. Personal testimonials of
Californians who lost their livelihoods after AB 5 was passed.
Turning AB 5 into national policy would multiply these
losses. The Chamber of Progress published an economic analysis,
which shows that implementing AB 5's rigid ABC test as a
national rule would cost the full-time or part-time jobs of
between 3.2 and 3.8 million independent contractors, equivalent
to roughly half the jobs lost in the Great Recession.
Even where it is possible to convert independent
contractors into employees by legal command, it is not what
they want. 79 percent of independent contractors prefer their
current worker status. It lets them set their own schedules and
be their own boss. Only 10 percent say they would prefer a
traditional job.
The people most devastated by AB 5 are the most vulnerable,
seniors, caregivers, students, single mothers, people with
disabilities or health issues, or mental health needs who rely
on independent contracting to balance work with their personal
life circumstances.
AB 5 has not only been rejected by the very people it is
supposedly meant to help, it has also been rejected by
California voters, and by the courts. In 2020, voters
overwhelmingly passed a proposition overturning the law for
app-based drivers. The Ninth Circuit recently held that AB 5
may violate the equal protection clause of the U.S.
Constitution, as over 100 professions have now been exempted
from the law, while hundreds of others remain ensnared by it,
with no rational basis for who is allowed to work, and who is
not.
Fortunately, the PRO Act, the national legislation inspired
by AB 5, has not become law. The Biden administration has now
opened another front on the war on independent contractors to
achieve the same goal. A proposed rule of the Department of
Labor would implement the core elements of AB 5 without so much
as a vote of Congress.
In other words, in a matter of months, the Biden
administration is planning to nationalize AB 5 all on its own.
To aggressively enforce the new regime, Biden has selected a
new Secretary of Labor. This is the final front. The nomination
of AB 5's architect and lead enforcer, former California Labor
Secretary, Julie Su to the highest labor position in America.
It is a direct and literal transfer of California's failures to
Washington.
Tellingly, with Su's confirmation for U.S. Secretary of
Labor now faltering, her backers are making a last-ditch
attempt to save her nomination by absurdly trying to
disassociate her from AB 5. None other than the author of AB 5,
a major Su backer who now leads the California Labor
Federation, just told the L.A. Times that Su was not involved
with the bill at all.
Su, in her own words, described in detail her plans for
enforcing AB 5 as California Labor Secretary. We will be doing
investigations and audits, she said, threatening fines and
penalties, to those who want to comply with the need to
reclassify can do so, and those who do not will understand
that's not the kind of economy we want in California.
Not the kind of economy we want in California. That is what
she said. Julie Su did not want an economy in California where
you can pursue your calling, support your family on your own
terms, and thrive. She does not want this for America either.
That is why Joe Biden has selected her for Labor Secretary, to
wage his war on independent contractors.
Our committee has a very different vision for the American
workforce. We believe in promoting work and supporting workers.
We believe independent contractors are critical to the 21st
Century economy. We will protect the freedom of Americans to
earn a living as they choose, and we will fight every effort to
take that right away.
With that, I look forward to the hearing today and yield to
the Ranking Member.
[The statement of Chairman Kiley follows:]

Statement of Hon. Kevin Kiley, Chairman, Subcommittee on Workforce
Protections

Today's hearing is about the Right to Earn a Living: the right to
practice your profession and pursue your calling; to be a maker, a
builder, a creator; to take your God-given talents, nurture them with
heart and soul, and offer them to the world.
In a free society, few rights are more fundamental--or more
essential to a dynamic and prosperous economy.
At this moment, that right is in peril. The current Administration
has launched a multi-pronged assault on the right to earn a living in
America. It is a concerted strategy designed to limit or eliminate the
gig economy, freelancing, independent contracting, self-employment--
alternate work arrangements that entire careers are based on, and
entire industries have been built around.
The livelihoods of millions of Americans are at risk. Today, we
will examine the devastating consequences of this anti-worker agenda.
Those consequences are not a matter of speculation. They are
already an established reality--a bitter, unfair, unnecessary reality--
for many residents of my own state.You see, in California, the war on
independent workers has been underway for years.
The Biden Administration is simply following the model of Governor
Gavin Newsom and the California Legislature. At this point, the
Administration's governing motto might as well be: As California goes,
so goes the nation.
I should say, as a Californian, that we used to look upon that
expression with pride. Over decades, the Golden State forged an
identity of historic significance and was at the leading edge of
social, political, and technological progress. Ronald Reagan, in his
Inaugural Address as Governor, said California should never take second
place. We were the state where anyone could get ahead.
Now, sadly, we have become the state many cannot wait to leave
behind. We do lead the nation--but in all the wrong ways: poverty,
inequality, taxes, regulations, income stagnation, and yes, departures.
In 2022, for the third straight year, California ranked first among the
fifty states in U-Haul rentals.
In its current condition, California is the last place that should
be a bellwether for political change in America. That is exactly how
President Biden seems to see it, as his Administration attempts to
nationalize California's most damaging policies, exporting our state's
failures to every state in the union.
In nationalizing the war on workers, Biden has opened three
distinct fronts. The first is the PRO Act, which passed the House in
the last Congress and has been reintroduced this year by the Ranking
Member of this Committee. This legislation takes a specific California
law known as AB 5 and makes it into federal policy.
President Biden is supporting the PRO Act, and when running for
President, he voiced support for California's AB 5--even after the law
received bipartisan condemnation of a kind without precedent in recent
history:
 For example, Governor Newsom's own former deputy chief of staff
Yoshar Ali called AB 5 ``one of the most destructive pieces of
legislation in the past 20 years,'' adding, ``It is truly horrific how
many people are negatively impacted by it.''
 Former State Assembly Speaker and San Francisco Mayor Willie
Brown said the law made him want to ``picket'' against the ``bastards''
at the Capitol and the special interests that ``took advantage'' of
them.
 Andrew Cuomo rejected a similar law in New York, saying he didn
not want to ``make the same mistake" as California.
 The Daily Kos likewise warned other states, ``Don't make the
mistake California's Gavin Newsom did,'' with the site's founder
calling the law ``disastrous'' and ``asinine'' and its supporters
``shameful.''
 The head of the California NAACP assailed AB 5 as a ``terrible
law'' and a ``gut punch to our community.''
 The CEO of the Black Chamber of Commerce called it a
``catastrophe'' responsible for ``enabling, defending, and propagating
systemic racism.''
 Two hundred Ph.D. economists, including a Nobel Laureate,
reported the law is ``doing substantial, and avoidable, harm to the
very people who now have the fewest resources and the worst
alternatives available to them.''
 One commentator called it ``the most malicious and harmful law
ever passedin California.''
With a single stroke of Newsom's pen in 2019, AB 5 rendered
countless independent professionals unable to earn a living in our
state. Writers, interpreters, court reporters, musicians, language
pathologists, photographers, forensic nurses, and people in literally
hundreds of other industries were told they were no longer allowed to
practice their profession and serve their clients as they had been
doing their whole careers; instead, their only option was to find a
single hiring entity to monopolize their services and make them a W-2
employee. For many, that was simply not possible.
I have compiled their stories in this book--personal testimonials
of Californians who lost their livelihoods after AB 5 was passed.
Turning AB 5 into national policy would multiply these losses. The
Chamber of Progress published an economic analysis which shows that
implementing AB 5's rigid ``ABC Test'' as a national rule would cost
the full-time or part-time jobs of between3.2 and 3.8 million
independent contractors--equivalent to roughly half the jobs lost in
the Great Recession.
Even where it is possible to convert independent contractors into
employees by legal command, it is not what they want. Seventy-nine
percent of independent contractors prefer their current worker status.
It lets them set their own schedules and be their own boss. Only 10
percent say they had prefered a traditional job.
The people most devastated by AB 5 are the most vulnerable:
seniors, caregivers, students, single mothers, people with disabilities
or health issues or mental health needs--who rely on independent
contracting to balance work with their personal life circumstances.
AB 5 has not only been rejected by the very people it is supposedly
meant to help, but also by California voters and by the courts. In
2020, voters overwhelmingly passed a proposition overturning the law
for app-based drivers. The Ninth Circuit recently held that AB 5 may
violate the Equal Protection Cause of the U.S. Constitution, as over
100 professions have now been exempted from the law while hundreds of
others remain ensnared by it, with no rational basis for who is allowed
to work and who is not.
Fortunately, the PRO Act, the national legislation inspired by AB
5, has not become law. The Biden Administration has now opened another
front in the war on independent contractors to achieve the same goal. A
proposed rule at the Department of Labor would implement the core
elements of AB 5 without so much as a vote of Congress. In other words,
in a matter of months the Biden Administration is planning to
nationalize AB 5 all on its own.
To aggressively enforce the new regime, Biden has selected a new
Secretary of Labor. This is the final front: the nomination of AB 5's
architect and lead enforcer, former California Labor Secretary Julie
Su, to the highest Labor position in America. It is a direct and
literal transfer of California failures to Washington.
Tellingly, with Su's confirmation for U.S. Secretary of Labor now
faltering, her backers are making a last-ditch attempt to save her
nomination by absurdly trying to dissociate her from AB 5. None other
than the author of AB 5, a major Su backer who now leads the California
Labor Federation, just told the LA Times that Su ``was not involved
with the bill at all.''
Su, in her own words, described in detail her plans for enforcing
AB 5 as California Labor Secretary: ``We will be doing investigations
and audits,'' she said, threatening fines and penalties, ``so that
those who want to comply with the need to reclassify can do so and
those who do not will understand that is not the kind of economy we
want in California.''
Not the kind of economy we want in California: Julie Su did not
want an economy in California where you can pursue your calling,
support your family on your own terms, and thrive. She does not want
this for America, either. That is why Joe Biden has selected her for
Labor Secretary: to wage his war on independent contractors.
Our committee has a very different vision for the American
workforce. We believe in promoting work and supporting workers. We
believe independent contractors are critical to the 21st century
economy. We will protect the freedom of Americans to earn a living as
they choose and will fight every effort to take that right away.
______

Ms. Adams. Thank you, Chairman Kiley, and good morning. I
want to thank our witnesses first of all for being here for our
first Workforce Protections Subcommittee hearing this Congress.
One of the Subcommittee's most important responsibilities is to
protect workers by ensuring relevant Federal laws are followed.
Chairman Kiley, I hope we can work together in good faith
to fulfill this responsibility. Under Federal law, employees
have a wide range of basic workforce protections, including
minimum wage, overtime, collective bargaining, and health and
safety protections.
When workers who should be employees under the law are
instead misclassified as independent contractors, they lose out
on these protections. This can mean a significant loss of
income and benefits. For example, the typical misclassified
construction worker loses up to $16,000.00 per year.
It is not just workers who are harmed by misclassification.
For decades, unscrupulous employers have used misclassification
as a strategy to cut down on labor costs and both exploit
insufficient penalties and the limited capacity of underfunded
enforcement agencies.
In fact, as many as 30 percent of employers are currently
misclassifying their employees. As Mr. Long of the National
Electrical Contractors Association noted in his written
testimony, low-road employers who misclassify workers gain an
unfair competitive disadvantage.
They have no incentive to invest in training their
workforce to be safer and more efficient. They create hazardous
situations on the jobsites. Finally, worker misclassification
harms our economy by depriving our government of billions of
dollars in badly needed tax revenue that could be spent on
improving our communities.
The reality is that the misclassification of workers as
independent contractors is a pervasive problem for workers, for
law abiding businesses, for taxpayers, and our economy. This is
why the Biden administration has proposed a responsible rule to
fix this problem. Committee Democrats strongly support this
proposed rule.
Let me be clear, the proposed rule is not California's
State law entitled AB 5, which adapts what is known as the ABC
test. The Biden administration clearly noted that it is, and I
quote, ``legally constrained from adopting the ABC test, and
could only implement it if the Supreme Court revisits its
precedent, or if Congress passes legislation to amend the Fair
Labor Standards Act, or the FLSA.''
That should be the end of the story, but Republicans appear
intent on kicking up as much dust as they can in trying their
hardest to undermine Acting Secretary Su's nomination to be
Secretary of Labor. Republicans are putting politics over the
people.
My Republican colleagues may also wish to turn back the
clock to when the previous administration moved to make it
easier for employers to misclassify workers. This would have
been an upending of the long-standing standard for determining
whether someone is an employee, or an independent contractor.
According to the Economic Policy Institute, it would have
cost workers nearly 4 billion dollars each year in lost wages.
The Biden administration was right to rescind this proposal,
and to push to restore the full standard for determining
workers status as employees or independent contractors.
In doing so, the Biden/Harris administration, and
congressional Democrats are standing with those cooks and
dishwashers, and home healthcare workers, the electricians, the
carpenters, and many others who are being denied minimum wage
and overtime protections because their employers wrongly
classified them as independent contractors and not as
employees.
We are standing with high-road employers who play by the
rules and deserve a level playing field when competing for
work. It is very clear that committee Republicans are standing
for something else, and they want this hearing to be about one
person, Acting Secretary Su.
Committee Democrats remain focused on all American workers
and ensuring that they are not wrongly denied protections
guaranteed under the law. I hope that my colleagues will put
politics aside, and take concrete steps to protect workers, and
to help our workers succeed.
I want to thank our witnesses again for the testimony that
they are going to give, and Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Adams follows:]

Statement of Hon. Alma Adams, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Workforce
Protections

Thank you, Chairman Kiley, and good morning. I want to thank our
witnesses, first of all, for being with us for our first Workforce
Protections Subcommittee hearing this Congress.
One of the Subcommittee's most important responsibilities is to
protect workers by ensuring relevant federal laws are followed.
Chairman Kiley, I hope we can work together in good faith to fulfill
this responsibility.
Under federal law, employees have a wide range of basic workforce
protections, including minimum wage, overtime, collective bargaining,
and health and safety protections. When workers, who should be
employees under the law, are instead misclassified as independent
contractors, they lose out on these protections. This can mean a
significant loss of income and benefits. For example, the typical
misclassified construction worker loses up to $16,000 per year.
It is not just workers who are harmed by misclassification.
For decades, unscrupulous employers have used misclassification as
a strategy to cut down on labor costs and exploit both insufficient
penalties and the limited capacity of underfunded enforcement agencies.
In fact, as many as 30 percent of employers are currently
misclassifying their employees.
As Mr. Long of the National Electrical Contractors Association
noted in his written testimony, low-road employers who misclassify
workers gain an unfair competitive disadvantage; they have no incentive
to invest in training their workforce to be safer and more efficient;
and they create hazardous situations on the job sites.
Finally, worker misclassification harms our economy by depriving
our government of billions of dollars in badly needed tax revenue that
could be spent on improving our communities.
The reality is that the misclassification of workers as independent
contractors is a pervasive problem for workers, law-abiding businesses,
taxpayers, and our economy.
This is why the Biden administration has proposed a responsible
rule to fix this problem. Committee Democrats strongly support this
proposed rule.
Let me be clear, the proposed rule is not California's state law,
entitled AB-5, which adopts what is known as the ABC test.
The Biden administration clearly noted that it is--quote--``legally
constrained from adopting the ABC test'' and could only implement it if
``the Supreme Court revisits its precedent or if Congress passes
legislation to amend the Fair Labor Standards Act, or the F-L-S-A.''
That should be the end of the story--but Republicans appear intent
on kicking up as much dust as they can and trying their hardest to
undermine Acting Secretary Su's nomination to be Secretary of Labor.
Again, Republicans are putting politics over the people.
My Republican colleagues may also wish to turn back the clock to
when the previous administration moved to make it easier for employers
to misclassify workers.
This would have upended the long-standing standard for determining
whether someone is an employee or an independent contractor. According
to the Economic Policy Institute, it would have cost workers nearly $4
billion each year in lost wages.
The Biden administration was right to rescind this proposal and
push to restore the prior standard for determining workers' status as
employees or independent contractors. In doing so, the Biden-Harris
administration and Congressional Democrats are standing with those
cooks, dishwashers, home health care workers, electricians, carpenters,
and many others who are being denied minimum wage and overtime
protections because their employers wrongly classified them as
independent contractors and not as employees.
We are standing with high-road employers who play by the rules and
deserve a level playing field when competing for work.
It is very clear that Committee Republicans are standing for
something else, and they want this hearing to be about one person:
Acting Secretary Su.
Committee Democrats remain focused on all American workers and
ensuring that they are not wrongly denied protections guaranteed under
law.
I hope my colleagues will put politics aside and take concrete
steps to protect workers and help our workers succeed.
I want to thank our witnesses for the testimony they are going to
give, and I yield back.
______

Chairman Kiley. Thank you, Ms. Adams. Pursuant to Committee
Rule 8(c), all members who wish to insert written statements
into the record may do so by submitting them to the committee
clerk electronically, in Microsoft Word format by 5 p.m., after
14 days from the date of this hearing, which is May 4, 2023.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days after the date of this hearing to allow such statements
and other extraneous material referenced during the hearing to
be submitted for the official hearing record.
I will now turn to the introduction of our distinguished
witnesses. The first witness is Karen Anderson, who is the
Founder of Freelancers Against AB 5, an ad hoc, all volunteer
group with 18,500 members, comprised of independent
contractors, small business owners, non-profits and others,
representing 600 categories of professions and sectors.
She is a third generation Southern Californian, with a 25-
year career as a freelance writer, managing editor, and
photographer.
The second witness is Tammy McCutchen, who is a Senior
Affiliate with Resolution Economics, and who previously has
served as the administrator of the wage and hour division at
the Department of Labor.
The third witness is David Long, who is the Chief Executive
Officer of the National Electrical Contractors Association, and
previously served as President of Miller Electric Company where
he first started as a construction wireman.
The fourth witness is Liya Palagashvili, who is a Senior
Research Fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason
University and is a research Fellow at the Classical Liberal
Institute at New York University Law.
The fifth witness is Laura Padin, who is Director of Work
Structures at the National Employment Law Project, where her
work focuses on workplace standard, economic security, and
temporary and gig economy workers.
The sixth witness is Kim Kavin, who is the co-Founder for
Fight for Freelancers USA and is a freelance editor and writer.
We thank all the witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to your testimony.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 8(d) and Committee practice, I
ask that you each limit your oral presentations to a 5-minute
summary of your written statement.
I also would like to remind the witnesses to be aware of
their responsibility to provide accurate information to the
Subcommittee. I will first recognize Ms. Anderson.

THE STATEMENT OF MS. KAREN ANDERSON, FOUNDER OF FREELANCERS
AGAINST AB 5

Ms. Anderson. Good morning. Thank you Chairman Kiley,
Ranking Member Adams, and distinguished members for having me
here today. After AB 5 was signed into law in September 2019, I
knew it was an existential threat to my career. Soon
thereafter, I launched the public Facebook group called
Freelancers Against AB 5, so that I could connect with other
people to find out how AB 5 was affecting everyone, be it nurse
practitioners, videographers, golf caddies, or whoever else
might see my page and want to share their experiences.
Little did I know, I would have a front-row seat to
hundreds and hundreds of negative stories pouring in from all
income levels, demographics, political affiliations, and the
vast swath of professions, trades, non-profits and sectors, as
well as small business owners being put out of business for
alleged misclassification violations, be it music store owners,
audio tech installers, videography platforms or architectural
designers. Even before the law went into effect in January
2020, I heard from hundreds of individuals who had lost their
careers overnight, after being given notice by their clients
that they could no longer legally utilize independent
contractors from California.
I received stories about children's theaters closing, local
bar bands unable to perform, interpreters sidelined by the law,
and court reporters suddenly without assignments, to name a
few. Entire sectors that have been negatively impacted by AB 5
include small and regional theaters, indie film makers, the spa
and wellness community, wedding planners, non-profit arts
groups, and the freelance transcription profession, which is
now all but extinct in California due to AB 5.
Speech language pathologists had to abandon their elderly
patients who they were teaching how to learn how to swallow
after recovering from a stroke. The sign language interpreters
told me they could not provide ADA mandated services to the
deaf and hard of hearing after AB 5 was passed.
Seniors who had thrived with their self-employment
opportunities were suddenly unemployable due to ageism in the
workplace. Forensic nurses told me that AB 5 is detrimental to
rape victims, especially at rural hospital where without
forensic nurses to perform forensic, evidentiary medical exams,
victims of sexual assault are subject to long wait times or
substandard exams by untrained medical personnel.
All told within my group have identified more than 600
categories of professions impacted in some way by AB 5 and its
ABC test. Despite the so-called exemptions for certain
professions added in September 2020, the law continues to wreak
havoc on legitimate independent contractors, entrepreneurs and
small business owners.
Many exemptions come with caveats and fine print that make
them nearly impossible to take advantage of. The law also
creates a chilling effect in which businesses do not want to
utilize independent contractors from California at all, even if
there is a pathway to an exemption, because there are so many
potential landmines.
Authored by former Assembly Woman Lorena Gonzales, who now
leads California Labor Federation, AB 5 represents a scorched
earth approach to policymaking. Recently, on March 17, 2023,
the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals validated what we have known
all along about the arbitrary exemptions process that picks
winners or losers with no rhyme or reason.
The decision was in response to a lawsuit from 2019, filed
by rideshare and delivery drivers against AB 5, called Olsen
versus California. The case was dismissed in February 2020,
before even being heard. The 9th Circuit decision last month, a
three-judge panel, rebuked Lorena Gonzales for her blatant
animus not based in reason against the Plaintiff and for
engaging in back room dealing.
The court stated that the counsel for the State, during
oral arguments, was unable to articulate any conceivable
rational for the exemptions of AB 5 as amended, and the court
stated it is plausible that AB 5 violates the equal protection
clause as alleged by the Plaintiffs, and that the bill borders
on corruption, ``pure spite, and naked favoritism.'' The case
is being sent back to the lower court for review.
It is not speculation in California what can happen with a
law like AB 5 and the ABC test. We are literally the canaries
in a coal mine. On behalf of the independent professionals in
California, I ask that the cautionary tale of AB 5 and the ABC
test be a warning to the Nation, so that these types of
destructive policies do not spread nationwide. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Karen Anderson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you for your testimony, Ms. Anderson.
I will next recognize Ms. McCutchen.

STATEMENT OF TAMMY MCCUTCHEN, SENIOR AFFILIATE, RESOLUTION
ECONOMICS

Ms. McCutchen. Thank you, Chairman Kiley and Ranking Member
Adams, and members of the committee. Thank you for inviting me
to speak to you today. This is an important topic for me
personally, not only as a former wage and hour administrator
but as a gig worker myself, and for my brother who drives for
Uber Eats and Grubhub.
The independent workforce is growing, and it is here to
stay. Almost 65 million Americans take part in the independent
workforce. Most because they want to, not because they must.
Half are women, half are under the age of 42. 25 percent are
minorities.
Most are happier, healthier, more secure, and more
optimistic about the future than traditional employees. The
independent workforce is the right choice for many workers. Too
many regulators want to take that choice off the table for
most, or even all the workers, by expanding the definition of
employee and restricting the independent contractor standards.
There is a war on independent contracting. Why? Many have
the misperception that independent workers are exploited
because they are not eligible for overtime, do not have access
to employer provided healthcare, and are not covered by other
employment protections.
Of course, this assumes that 65 million workers (or a large
part of them) are unaware that they are not protected by
employment laws or somehow have been coerced into working
independently. Even with the tradeoffs, choosing the freedom
and flexibility of independent work over being controlled by an
employer is a rational choice.
Now the war is fueled by the chaos of legal standards for
determining who is an employee, and who is an independent
contractor. In my written testimony, I have provided an
overview of Federal and State laws. I cannot summarize the
legal morass in 5 minutes, perhaps not even in 5 hours.
Short version, it is a mess. Theoretically, most Federal
statutes define the term employee using a common law test, but
they are all different. The IRS used a 20-factor test, although
they have now grouped those factors under three main
categories. The EEOC has a 16-factor test, and the NLRB has a
ten-factor test. Now the Supreme Court says that the DOL must
use an economic reality test under the FLSA.
How is that defined? Well, more multi-factor balancing
tests of course. The courts and the DOL have all used different
factors at different times. Five factors, six factors, seven
factors, and even similar factors are not quite the same from
court to court. Different courts balance the factors
differently. That is just the Federal Government. By my last
count, there are no less than 100 State statutes regulating
independent contractors under six different types of employment
and tax laws.
Within a single State, as under Federal law, one person can
be an employee under the wage and hour laws but an independent
contractor under the tax laws. Now this chaos opens the door to
abuse. Regulators can choose at will from a menu of different
factors and facts to reach whatever result they want.
There is no predictability, and that is what businesses
fear. Alas, the DOL's proposed changes to its independent
contractor regulation would just increase the chaos. Prior to
2021, DOL had no regulations, only a few scattered opinion
letters and fact sheets. The 2021 regulations established two
core factors for the economic reality test; who controls the
work, and whether the worker had an opportunity for profit or a
loss.
If those factors pointed in different directions, then an
additional three factors could be considered. Still complex but
an improvement. Theoretically, these regulations are enforced
now because the Biden administration's attempt to withdraw them
was found to be illegal. Despite this, the DOL does not seem to
be following them.
The DOL has proposed to replace the 2021 regulations with
another six-factor test but also adds these six factors are not
exhaustive, additional factors may be relevant, and the weight
to give each factor depend on the particular circumstances in
the case.
In other words, as proposed, the DOL can consider any fact
it wants or refuse to consider any fact it wants. The Biden
administration, with no notice and no rule changes, could
implement California AB 5, the unpassed PRO Act, or use a Ouija
Board to determine who is an employee, and who is an
independent contractor.
The definition of an employee needs to be the same under
every Federal statute, and in fact State law. We need one clear
and simple rule. Thank you.
[The Statement of Tammy McCutchen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you, Ms. McCutchen. Our next witness
is Mr. Long.

STATEMENT OF MR. DAVID LONG, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NATIONAL
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS ASSOCIATION

Mr. Long. Good morning, Chairman Kiley, and Ranking member
Adams and the members of the Subcommittee. My name is David
Long. I am the Chief Executive Officer of the National
Electrical Contractors Association. The National Electrical
Contractors Association is a leading voice in a half a trillion
dollar electrical contracting industry in America.
It brings power, light, communications, and technology for
critical facilities and homes across America. In NECA, we
collectively represent over 4,000 electrical contracting firms
across America. We spend millions of dollars on training,
healthcare, insurance, and retirement funds for our critical
workers.
We thank you for holding this hearing, allowing us the
opportunity to explain that the threat of worker
misclassification and the confusion around this process poses
the ability of law abiding, entrepreneur employers in the
construction industry to compete, innovate, create jobs for the
critical infrastructure of America.
In the construction industry, misclassification is a choice
to disregard the legal responsibilities of being an employer or
an employee. It provides a competitive advantage by failing to
ensure the financial obligations are met, that responsible
businesses do every day.
This effect is not just on NECA contractors, but thousands
and thousands of small construction businesses who abide by the
law, and try to compete into a free market economy, in which
they embrace labor abiding advantages, or such as the
following.
Construction contractor industry members pursue their work
through the cost competitive bidding process every day. Minimum
wage, overtime, FICA taxes, unemployment insurance, workers
compensation, liability insurance to the customer. These
misclassification schemes these contractors are allowed to
submit lowers bids, because they do not have to worry about the
list that I just mentioned above.
The burden will ultimately fall upon the taxpayer, or the
customer, or even the individual to make up the difference.
Cost to the taxpayers, the U.S. Government study over 20 years
ago, found that misclassified workers resulted in a loss of
overall unemployment insurance revenue of over 200 million
dollars annually, as well as unpaid Federal Government.
There was more than 2.75 billion dollars of unpaid social
security, unemployment insurance, and income taxes. In fact, in
the State of D.C., in the city of D.C. alone, construction
companies who elect to go with independent contracting can
receive an advantage of between 16 and 40 percent on
competitive engagement in various areas.
The State of Ohio Attorney General estimated that
misclassification worker is at least a 20 to 30 percent
competitive cost advantage against responsible entrepreneur,
small business construction companies.
The Department of Labor and their attorney counterparts put
a press release of the good work that they are doing but,
however, it is very clear that competitive advantage to 1099
workers compared to entrepreneurs who are trying to build
businesses in our communities is at a complete disadvantage
because of these breaks that they are allowed.
Conclusion from our viewpoint. Responsible contractors want
an open and fair marketplace. We have done it for decades and
centuries. On projects where fellow competitors are playing on
an uneven playing field, but trying to compete with folks who
can absolutely cut their bid on bid day by 40 percent is a race
to the bottom.
Let me reconfirm, this is a major impact to our small
contractor entrepreneurs across America in the construction
industry, and it eventually will affect the contractor worker
in every community. Thank you for holding this hearing. I hope
that it will result in some concrete proposals.
I am anxious to address the rampant use of the
misclassification of the worker. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of David Long follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kylie. Thank you, Mr. Long. Our next witness is
Ms. Palagashvili.

STATEMENT OF DR. LIYA PALAGASHVILI, SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW,
MERCATUS CENTER AT GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY

Ms. Palagashvili. Good morning, Chairman Kiley, Ranking
Member Adams, and members of the Subcommittee Workforce
Protections. It is an honor to testify before you. My name is
Liya Palagashvili, and I am an Economist at the Mercatus Center
at George Mason University.
My research focus is on the independent workforce and the
evolving nature of work. Today, my testimony focuses on the
Department of Labor's proposed rule that impacts about 60
million independent workers nationwide. I would like to present
three considerations in evaluating the proposed restrictions.
One, the diverse and growing workforce. Two, the expected
job losses from the DOL's rule. Three, the adverse impact on
women. One out of every 3 Americans work outside of traditional
employment today, either for their primary or secondary sources
of income.
These independent workers span across industries, skills
and educational attainment. For example, they can be musicians,
ride sharing and delivery drivers, software developers, graphic
designers, landscapers, Instagram influencers, and self-
employed online merchants.
According to IRS tax data professional, scientific and
technical services make up the largest share of independent
contractors and have seen the fastest growth in independent
contractors since 2001. While Uber, Lyft, and Door Dash are
ubiquitous in our everyday lives, according to the tax data,
these workers amount to fewer than 10 percent of the overall
independent contractor workforce.
Beyond that, the tax data shows that at base workers are
primarily supplemental earners who have full-time jobs
elsewhere. One part of the DOL's proposed independent
contractor rule adds new considerations that significantly
limit the circumstances under which a worker can be legally
classified as an independent contractor.
The DOL is doing this in the hopes that organizations will
hire workers as employees instead. Now at first glance, it
seems like a win for those who might be reclassified as
employees and receive benefits. However, that is unlikely to be
the case for the majority of workers. That is because it is
impossible for every single, independent work opportunity to
turn into a full-time employment offer.
A recent example to demonstrate this point is when
California passed AB 5, which is a similar law that restricts
independent work opportunities, and supporters applauded it as
a win for workers, but some of those same supporters changed
their minds later when news outlets like the New York Times and
the L.A. Times highlighted how difficulty in compliance,
complexity, and confusion with the law had led to job losses,
especially among freelance musicians, truck drivers, and
writers.
For many organizations like newspapers, theaters, music
venues, and small businesses, it was now all of a sudden to
work, and it was all of a sudden illegal to work with their
freelancers. Those freelancers lost their jobs. Following this
backlash, California later exempted these professions and many
others from AB 5.
I would like to emphasize here that jobs were saved in
California where more than 100 professions and industries were
exempted from AB 5, but the DOL's rule cannot exempt any
professions or industries, which means that its rule will have
far more significant and wide-reaching consequences across our
economy and all our jobs.
These job losses are especially problematic as the Fed
announced last week that a recession is expected in the coming
months. Several decades of economics research shows that
workers turned to independent work after they have faced a loss
of income or unemployment.
Recent reports using IRS tax data also found that
independent work opportunities are critical for financially
strained workers when they face economic hardship. At a time
when employment opportunities are likely to become scarcer, it
is unwise for the DOL to also limit independent work
opportunities.
Eliminating independent work will mean that workers will be
unemployed for longer periods, thereby risking a far more
severe recession. Perhaps the most unfortunate consequences of
the DOL's rule is how it will adversely impact women.
Across a nationwide survey, women who are primary
caregivers have indicated that they engage in independent work
because they require flexible work arrangements. Indeed, one
survey found that a quarter of women left their employment job
to take on independent work because they wanted flexibility, or
needed more time to care for a child, parent, or other
relative.
Restricting independent work opportunities and
reclassifying them into traditional employment would
disadvantage many women who turned specifically to independent
work for the flexibility that they need in their work
schedules.
There are far better ways to address the challenges of
independent work without DOL regulations making women their
collateral damage. Thank you. I welcome your questions.
[The Statement of Lila Palagashvili follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you for your testimony. Our next
witness is Ms. Padin.

STATEMENT OF MS. LAURA PADIN, DIRECTOR OF WORK STRUCTURES,
NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT LAW PROJECT

Ms. Padin. Chair Kiley, Ranking Member Adams, and members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to testify
today. My name is Laura Padin, and I am the Director of Work
Structures at the National Employment Law Project, a non-profit
organization that promotes policies and programs that create
good jobs and strengthen upward mobility.
True independent contractors are people who are in business
for themselves. They determine what goods or services to sell
and at what prices, make capital investments to grow their
business, and build a customer base. At NELP, we support
policies that ensure these small business owners are treated
fairly.
What we take issue with is when corporations mislabel the
workers powering their businesses as independent contractors,
or gig workers, or freelancers, even though these workers are
not in business for themselves. Employers that engage in these
sham practices depress wages and working conditions, and shed
responsibility for their workers, while maintaining control
over key decisions, such as where, how, and for how much money
workers perform their jobs.
Congress passed our bedrock labor and employment laws,
because it recognized there is a profound imbalance of power in
most employment relationships, and that absent government
regulation, employers can force substandard working conditions
on their workers under threat of poverty and loss of
livelihood.
As you know, because independent contractors are in
business for themselves, they are not covered by our labor and
employment protections, like the right to minimum wage and
overtime, and the right to our harassment and discrimination
free workplace. They do not have access to employment based
social insurance programs like unemployment insurance and
workers' comp.
In addition to losing out on these rights and benefits, a
majority of so-called independent contractors earn little
money. I say so-called, because by and large, those in lower
earning professions like janitors, nail salon workers, delivery
workers, and home care workers are not actually running their
own businesses, but rather accepting working conditions imposed
on them by the businesses misclassifying them.
A growing body of research, which I cite in my written
testimony, also shows that middle and low-earning independent
contractors are making less money than employees in the same
industries. Several studies have also found that app-based
drivers and delivery workers are making just at, or under the
minimum wage for the localities where they live.
It is important to emphasize that these jobs are dangerous
and difficult. Car and bike accidents are really common for
folks doing this work. They have no workers compensation, no
paid time off, no employer provided health insurance if they
get sick or injured on the job. No unemployment insurance if
they lose work.
For many independent contractors, their poverty level
incomes and lack of benefits and protections mean that their
lives, and the lives of their families are incredibly
precarious. They live paycheck to paycheck, one accident or
illness away from financial disaster, and without the means to
ever take a break from work or retire.
Misclassification is especially prevalent in labor
intensive, low wage sectors, where employers can gain a
competitive advantage by driving down payroll costs. People of
color and women are overrepresented in many of these sectors,
shunted into jobs that are insecure, underpaid, and have no
workplace protections or benefits.
When regulators do not crack down on employers that
misclassify their workers, and when policymakers interpret
independent contractor to encompass low-wage, precarious
occupations, where people of color and other vulnerable
populations are overrepresented, we at NELP worry that we are
recreating racist carve outs from our laws, and allowing the
creation of a second tier class of workers who are
predominantly people of color and women making poverty wages
and excluded from basic employment rights and protections.
I want to briefly raise four other issues. First,
misclassification is hurting businesses that play by the rules.
Employers who misclassify their workers pocket between 20 to 40
percent of payroll costs. Businesses that are doing the right
thing, and classifying their workers as employees, are at an
unfair disadvantage.
Second, misclassification is hurting Federal and State
government coffers with billions in unpaid taxes and
contributions to social insurance programs. Third, the issue of
scheduling flexibility is a red herring. Employees can enjoy
scheduling flexibility, and they need not trade bedrock labor
protections to get it.
Many employees, including shift workers, are now getting
the scheduling flexibility they need, including choosing their
hours, working shorter schedules, and signing up for shifts on
apps. Last, I want to address something Ms. McCutchen said. She
said the DOL could unilaterally impose any test it wants for
determining who is an independent contractor, and who is an
employee, including the ABC test if it wants. That is simply
untrue.
The test the DOL uses must be based on Supreme Court
precedent, and indeed the six-factor test the DOL has proposed
is based on Supreme Court and Circuit Court precedent. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Laura Padin follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you very much. Our final witness is
Ms. Kavin.

STATEMENT OF MS. KIM KAVIN, FREELANCE WRITER AND EDITOR

Ms. Kavin. Thank you, Chairman Kiley and Ranking Member
Adams, for the opportunity to address the committee today. I am
a 50-year-old freelance writer and editor for New Jersey. After
10 years as a staff editor for newspapers and magazines, I
decided to freelance.
I have been successful and happy in this career for 20
years. Being an independent contractor is my chosen way of
working, as it is for tens of millions of Americans. A few
years ago, I could not have even told you who all my elected
officials were, but then in 2019, California passed Assembly
Bill 5.
That law snowballed into a shocking series of events that
included me testifying here today. California's law used
language called the ABC test to strictly redefine who can and
cannot earn income as an independent contractor. This ABC test
is quite frankly, impossible for many legitimate independent
contractors to pass.
Freelancers in California immediately began losing their
income and their careers, and yet almost overnight my own State
of New Jersey tried to fast track a copycat of the California
bill. Several of us freelance writers created Fight for
Freelancers, to protect our careers. We blanketed the media
with op eds and interviews, and in a matter of weeks our group
swelled to thousands of members from many professions.
We then packed our State House to standing room only
capacity, and we testified for more than 4 hours until law
makers understood that our careers as legitimate independent
contractors need protection. Thankfully, the New Jersey bill
died.
Then Members of Congress ignored the chaos on the West
Coast and the outcry on the East Coast and began work to
advance this same ABC test nationwide, with the Protecting the
Right to Organize Act. At that point, every independent
contractor in America, tens of millions of us, had our
livelihoods in the crosshairs.
It has been more than 3 years now since California's law
went into effect, and the lesson could not be clearer. Attempts
to restrict the choice of self-employment do not create lots of
new jobs. When you rewrite the rules to misclassify legitimate
independent contractors, you destroy our income and careers.
I am here today to ask for your help in stopping these
attacks on Americans like me. We are grateful that a few Senate
Democrats joined with Republicans in the last term and refused
to pass the PRO Act, but we remain deeply concerned that the
same ABC test language remains in that bill now.
We are also disturbed by recent actions at the U.S. Labor
Department, which is rewriting its independent contractor
standard in a way that will misclassify legitimate independent
contractors. The current nominee to lead that department, Julie
Su, supported and enforced the California law. It is remarkable
to me that such a freelance busting idealogue would even be
considered for the Nation's top workforce protection job.
In the face of all these threats to our livelihoods, our
grass roots, the nonpartisan Fight for Freelancers Coalition
only keeps growing. We are now a national force. Our recent
amicus briefs, including one that we wrote for the U.S. Supreme
Court, were cosigned on behalf of hundreds of thousands of
Americans.
Make no mistake about who we are. Our members have voted
for everybody from Bernie Sanders to Donald Trump. All our co-
Founders and about 80 percent of our members are women. Our
members include senior citizens, generation Z, people of color,
people with disabilities, union supporters, and just about
every other demographic you can imagine.
All of us are united on this issue. American citizens have
had the right to hang out a shingle and go into business for
ourselves since the day this Nation was founded. It is a right
that a third of the workforce, including me, exercises every
day. Please fight for freelancers and protect our right to
choose self-employment.
I see that I have 30 seconds left. I would like to speak
directly to you, Ranking Member Adams. You said something that
was correct in your opening statement. You said
misclassification harms our economy. I agree with you ma'am. I
hope we can have a conversation today about just how much harm
it is going to do our economy if you misclassify tens of
millions of Americans like me. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Kim Kavin follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you, Ms. Kavin. Under Committee Rule
9, we will now question witnesses under the 5-minute rule
starting with Mr. Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. It is great being at this
Subcommittee today. We have two American flags in the room. I
always kind of liked to look at the American flag. You know, to
me it signifies freedom. I would like to apologize to Ms.
Kavin, we are so close here to taking away your freedom to make
a living the way you want to make a living.
It is too bad, there are so many arrogant people who think
they know better how you should live your life than you want to
live your life, and it is just so unamerican that it is
sickening to me, but they are in positions of power, so we have
got to look out.
Was it Ronald Reagan who said freedom is only one
generation from extinction? That is what we have here in these
people. Okay. Now I would like--we are going to give it a go
here, we think she is so wonderful, we are going to try to
pronounce her name. Ms. Palagashvili. The Department of Labor
only acknowledges one category of costs, what it calls one-time
regulatory familiarization rules in its independent contractor
proposed rule.
Labor also implausibly asserts that the proposed rule is
not expected to impose costs after the first year. Department
of Labor is suggesting that somehow reclassifying a large
number of workers who choose and prefer to be independent
contractors would only impose costs in the first year of the
rule.
Do you find labor's cost assessment of its rule to be
realistic?
Ms. Palagashvili. Thank you for your question. It is a
great question. The Department of labor did not provide a
reason for its determination of the cost and benefits of this
rule, and as you have stated, they provided only one cost of
the rule, but they miss a very, very, very important cost.
They actually implicitly assumed in their analysis that 100
percent of impacted jobs, contracting jobs, would automatically
turn into employment jobs, and that is really unrealistic, and
it is not grounded in any economics research. The economic
research that we do have show that jobs will actually be lost.
We also have anecdotal evidence from California's AB 5, but
one study did a simulation that said this type of rule would be
equivalent to losing 58 percent of these earning opportunities
to 87 percent of earning opportunities. Now, this is a pretty
important aspect the Department of Labor missed, and it does
not allow them to do a proper cost/benefit analysis of the
rule.
They were able to treat everything as mere transfers, and
there was no real cost analysis in this rule.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. The California experiment with the ABC
worker classification test has shown it is economically
disruptive. Do you know percentage wise? Can you take a wild
stab, or somebody else up here, on the number of people? This
is the way they currently earn their money, or as a practical
matter, it is not really their job, it is their business, kind
of a hybrid of a job or a business, self-employed people?
How many are going to, in essence, have to lose their
income?
Ms. Palagashvili. Could you clarify your question? How many
in California lost their income?
Mr. Grothman. If you are an independent contractor, you
know you are getting, I guess, a 1099, right? Percentage wise,
some people will wind up being traditional employees. A lot of
people, this new way of classifying people, or forbidding
people to be classified as independent contractors means they
will, in essence, be out of work.
Can anybody take a guess how many people will wind up, in
essence, losing their income stream because of this high-handed
proposal?
Ms. Palagashvili. There is not a great economic research
study on this. There is a simulation that was done, and as I
mentioned, it is about 58 percent to 87 percent of job losses
with this, and so essentially, what is happening is that a
majority of these workers from this estimate will neither
become employees, nor be able to work in their independent
contracting roles because you make that role illegal.
Mr. Grothman. We take a wild stab. We can say two-thirds of
the people who are currently independent contractors are going
to be out of work, and some are forced to become employees,
which they do not want to, which is a punishment in its own
right, but 65 percent are going to have to find something else
to do, huh?
Ms. Palagashvili. That is an estimate that we do have. It
is not the best, but it is one of the only ones that we do have
that show that. By the way, I just want to highlight again that
there are hundreds of news stories about AB 5 job losses. It
was not one, two, or three, it was hundreds.
Mr. Grothman. I think a lot of women, and this was kind of
mentioned by one of the other witnesses, but a lot of women,
kind of because of their position, would rather have the
flexibility that a independent contractor role has. Would you
say this role disproportionately punishes women?
Ms. Palagashvili. I have written about how this rule does
disproportionately impact women, and that is because for a lot
of--the majority of women who choose independent work, we see
this across surveys, they say they voluntarily leave employment
to go into independent work opportunities.
This is especially true for women who are primary
caregivers in their homes. From that, in that regard, yes, this
rule will disproportionately harm women who are primary
caregivers.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired. I will now recognize the Ranking Member Ms. Adams.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks to our witnesses
again for joining us this morning. I request unanimous consent
to enter into the record a letter from the Construction
Employers of America, expressing support for the proposed rule
on independent contractors.
Chairman Kiley. Without objection.

[The information of Ms. Adams follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Adams. Thank you. I am addressing my questions to Ms.
Padin. We hear a lot of mentions of flexibility when it comes
to employee misclassification. Employers claim that in being
classified as employees, workers will not have access to
flexible work conditions. As a mother and a grandmother, I am
sensitive to the fact that our workers need flexibility to care
for loved ones, be it a child who has not yet started school,
or someone who has fallen ill, or even to care for themselves.
I want to ask a few questions to ensure that we have the
facts here. Ms. Padin first, does employee status necessarily
mean that workers cannot enjoy flexibility?
Ms. Padin. No, it does not.
Ms. Adams. Mr. Long, do you agree? Is that a yes?
Mr. Long. Yes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you. Thank you, Ms. Padin, for confirming
that there are opportunities whereby employees can be properly
classified and access a flexible career choice. As a follow up
to that point, I am interested in having a robust conversation
with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle about how we can
cultivate and nurture a workforce that protects and benefits
all workers.
Ms. Padin, if our colleagues on the other side of the aisle
are fully interested in helping America's workers enjoy more
flexibility, what are some policies that we could adopt that
would give employees more flexibility in their day to day
lives?
Ms. Padin. Thank you, Representative Adams. I would say
there is the Schedules at Work Act, Federal legislation that
would ensure that workers have the right to request scheduling
changes, and it would also include anti-retaliation protections
for making such requests for flexibility, and schedules in
pay--ensure schedules in pay that are stable and predictable.
There is also the Healthy Families Act, legislation that
would establish a Federal guarantee of 1 hour of earned sick
time for every 30 hours worked. I think it is really important
to note that true flexibility has to include financial
stability. It has to include the ability to take paid time off,
to have some compensation.
For so many workers, they are balancing their income
against every hour they are earning, right? They either work,
or they do not get paid, so really these two pieces of
legislation would do that.
Ms. Adams. Great. Thank you. You know, I have been a long-
time supporter of many of the measures that you mentioned and
look forward to continuing conversations with my colleagues
throughout the 118th Congress on these important issues, but
Ms. Padin, the Economic Policy Institute estimates that
housekeeping cleaners lose about more than $5,000.00 a year in
home health and personal care aides lose about $6,000.00 per
year when they are misclassified.
They lose access to legal protections, unemployment
insurance, worker's compensation, and so for these workers, and
many others, the way they are classified is not something
within their control, is it?
Ms. Padin. That is correct. It is not in their control.
Ms. Adams. Okay. If the balance of power to make that
determination lies with their employers. Is that correct?
Ms. Padin. With their employers, yes. That is correct.
Ms. Adams. Well thank you very much for your responses.
Thank you very much, and Mr. Chairman I yield back.
Chairman Kiley. I now recognize Ms. Miller.
Ms. Miller. Thank you. The independent contracting model
benefits workers and job creators. Independent contractors have
advantages over traditional employees. They have the
flexibility to choose their own hours, projects and clients,
giving them the freedom to control their own careers and work-
life balances.
It is no wonder that 80 percent of self-employed
independent contractors prefer their current status. This is
why President Biden's attack on them is so egregious. We need
independent contractors, especially in the trucking industry,
where they are so vital to our national supply chain.
Again, I want to thank the committee for holding this
hearing, and I yield my remaining time to Chair Kiley.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you, Ms. Miller. Ms. Anderson, you
have worked with many, many freelancers, independent
contractors, entrepreneurs in California who have been
negatively impacted by AB 5, which President Biden has cited as
his model for labor relations in the United States.
I believe AB 5 has now created over 100 different
exemptions of one kind or another. Is that correct?
Ms. Anderson. It is debatable whether all of those
exemptions are actually--can practically be taken advantage of,
but technically yes, 100.
Chairman Kiley. In practice, the way this worked was you
had after the law was signed, you had all of these massive job
losses that were occurring, and so it set off this lobbying
frenzy where industries tried to get themselves out of the law.
You know, as chaotic as that process was, as was noted in the
testimony, it did end up saving some jobs at least.
Ms. Kavin, does the Department of Labor rule that is being
proposed have any of those exemptions?
Ms. Kavin. No, sir. Nor does the PRO Act.
Chairman Kiley. In other words, even those industries that
were spared by AB 5 would be ensnared by the PRO Act, or the
Department of Labor rule?
Ms. Kavin. That is the goal of the way these regulations
are being written, their purpose is to then capture as many
legitimate independent contractors as they can, simply to force
us out of work.
Chairman Kiley. As I mentioned at the outset, you know,
because we have the AB 5 experience, it is not like we need to
sit here and hypothesize about what the impact of these new
legal standards being proposed are going to be. I thought I
would give you an opportunity, Ms. Anderson, if you had a few
stories you would like to share of independent contractors who
have lost their livelihoods in California?
Ms. Anderson. Yes. Thank you so much for allowing me to
share some of these stories. Nancy Hall is a licensed
pharmacist in her 60's, and she has a doctorate degree. Her
long-time freelance career of performing compliance inspections
of pharmacies up and down the State was destroyed overnight by
AB 5.
Now this is somebody that, you know, why is it that
licensed psychologists have an exemption, but a licensed
pharmacist does not? We have an independent filmmaker,
Margarita Reyes. She faces restrictions with hosting youth
mentoring programs in marginalized communities.
We have lots of stories of people that have had to flee the
State because of life-threatening situations. One gal, she was
a freelance bookkeeper, and she had to flee the State with her
autistic son, and her very ill husband who had stage four colon
cancer when she lost her freelance bookkeeping career
overnight, that solely supported her family.
Gale Gordon is a--she founded a non-profit opera company in
honor of her mother who was a Holocaust survivor, and her opera
company presented music by Jewish composers suppressed by the
Nazi's. Well, she got audited. She passed her audit. I do not
know how, but she had to shutter her opera because it is not
possible for these performing arts companies to operate under
AB 5.
They were--a lot of the theaters, and children's theaters,
and small performing arts groups, they were closing their doors
long before the COVID shutdowns happened. We have an RN, Laurie
Blanc. She's a nurse educator, and she's legally disabled with
35 benign bone tumors on her body. She lost her career to AB 5
because nurse educators are not exempt, but yet doctors are.
We have a gal named Judith Flexhela, who shared with our
group that AB 5 has killed the concert dance scene in Los
Angeles. A lot of what we are hearing from these performing
arts communities is that they could survive COVID eventually,
but they cannot survive AB 5. They cannot afford to convert
every single person into an employee because it is going to
raise the cost of a single production by almost up to 40 to 50
percent.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you, Ms. Anderson. Those are such
heartbreaking and compelling stories. I hope we can return to
some more of them later in the hearing, and we know that there
would be millions more like this if these new proposals went
into effect. I will now recognize Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think it is
important to begin by stressing the Workforce Protections
Subcommittee does not have jurisdiction over State laws, such
as AB 5, or cabinet nominations such as Acting Secretary Su's.
I find it perplexing, but not surprising by the Committee
Republicans' very first Workforce Protections Subcommittee
hearing that's conveniently scheduled to take place just 1 day
before the Senate confirmation hearing of Ms. Julie Su.
I was proud to lead 14 of my other House Democratic
colleagues in a letter supporting her for the top position at
DOL back in 2020, and in my mind there is no one more qualified
for the position than Ms. Su. As we have seen, this committee
under Republican control is far more focused on gearing
attention toward stopping one woman from getting a job, instead
of helping all Americans receive the wages that they have
earned.
The Chairman of this very Subcommittee has gone so far as
to send out this Tweet claiming that Ms. Su was the architect
of legislation, of AB 5, and I would like to ask unanimous
consent to include a copy of this tweet in the official record.
Chairman Kiley. Without objection.
[The letter of Mr. Takano follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Takano. As someone who has the honor of representing
California here in Congress, and someone who knows Julie Su,
and strongly supports her confirmation as Secretary of Labor, I
want to set the record straight on a couple of things. First,
my question is for Ms. Padin. Does the proposed rule from the
Biden administration on misclassification adopt the ABC test?
Ms. Padin. It does not.
Mr. Takano. In fact, the proposed rule even says, does it
not, on page 62,230 of the Federal Register Notice that ``the
Department continues to believe that legal limitations prevent
the Department from adopting'' the ABC test. Is that right?
Ms. Padin. That is correct.
Mr. Takano. A final rule must in accordance with the
Administrative Procedure Act, be a logical outgrowth of what
was put out in the proposed rule. Is that correct?
Ms. Padin. That is correct.
Mr. Takano. We are not going to see DOL using the ABC test
for Fair Labor Standards Act cases are we?
Ms. Padin. That is correct.
Mr. Takano. This is a misleading--the committee is--the
Republicans are pursuing a misleading conflation of issues here
are they not?
Ms. Padin. That is correct. The DOL rule is a six-factor
test. It is not the ABC test.
Mr. Takano. The DOL rule is a six-factor test, not the ABC
test.
Ms. Padin. Correct.
Mr. Takano. It seems to me, you know, there is a lot of
conflation obfuscating the real issue here, what the
administration is attempting to do. Do you wish to respond?
Ms. Padin. Yes. I agree with you. This DOL rule adopts six
factors that get at the kind of central issue of whether a
worker is in business for themselves, or in the business of
someone else. Six common sense factors that are based on
Supreme Court precedent. It does not use the ABC test.
Mr. Takano. In my time remaining, I would like to speak
directly about Ms. Su, who is the daughter of immigrants. Her
mother came to the United States on a cargo ship because she
could not afford a passenger ticket. She has spent her whole
career fighting to improve the lives of working people, and I
believe she represents the best of America.
That is why in February the congressional Asian Pacific
American Caucus sent a letter to President Biden, urging him to
nominate Julie Su as Labor Secretary. I ask unanimous consent
to enter that letter into the record Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Kiley. Without objection.
[The letter of Mr. Takano follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Takano. Since the President nominated Ms. Su, a diverse
coalition of folks have come forward to endorse her. For
instance, the Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce has voiced
support for Ms. Su's nomination as Labor Secretary, and I ask
unanimous consent to enter their statement into the record, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Kiley. Without objection.
[The letter of Mr. Takano follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Takano. This question I have is for Mr. Long. Mr. Long,
I understand that the National Electrical Contractors
Association endorsed Julie Su. Is that correct?
Mr. Long. That is correct.
Mr. Takano. Did your organization send a letter in support
of her nomination?
Mr. Long. Yes.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to enter
into the record the National Electrical Contractors Association
letter in support of Ms. Julie Su into the record.
Mr. Kiley. Without objection.
[The letter of Mr. Takano follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Takano. Ms. Padin, I understand that the National
Employment Law Project endorsed Julie Su as well. Is that
correct?
Ms. Padin. That is correct.
Mr. Takano. I wish Mr. Chairman to ask unanimous consent to
enter into the record the National Employment Law Project
letter.
Chairman Kiley. Without objection.
[The letter of Mr. Takano follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Takano. Committee Republicans are wrong about the
Biden/Harris administration's rule, and they are wrong about
Julie Su. They are unfairly smearing her in this committee. I
am proud to support both the rule, and Acting Secretary Julie
Su's nomination, and I yield back my time.
Chairman Kiley. I will now recognize the Chair of the
Education and Workforce Committee, Dr. Virginia Foxx.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Chairman Kiley. I appreciate it, and
I thank our witnesses for being here today. Ms. McCutchen, a
Federal district court overturned the Biden Department of
Labor's first attempt to withdraw the Trump administration's
independent contractor rule, and therefore the Trump DOL's
independent contractor rule is still in effect.
In spite of this, are you aware of any instances where DOL
has ignored the independent contractor rule that is still on
the books and determined the worker's classification using a
different test than what the law required?
Ms. McCutchen. Yes. Two things. One, you cannot find those
regulations anywhere on the DOL's website. Their
misclassification page instead links to fact sheet 13, which
lists the six factors that have not been the law for over 2
years. They are misleading the public about what the actual law
is.
Second, I actually represent a nurse registry business in
Florida in a current DOL investigation. We had a closing
conference not a month ago, and in that closing conference,
despite the fact that the Trump regulations are in effect, the
solicitor and the investigator again went through the six
factors and did not at all apply or attempt to apply the 2021
regulations.
Mrs. Foxx. That is a very serious situation, and I intend
to followup on it. Ms. Kavin, you have spent the last few years
volunteering your time to advocate against restrictive worker
classification tests at the State and Federal levels. During
this time, what has been your experience interacting with
Federal and State lawmakers and regulators who are seeking to
implement policies that would destroy your career?
Ms. Kavin. I have had lawmakers laugh in my face. They have
ignored us by the dozens in public hearings. They have refused
to give us a seat at the table when they are writing
regulations about us. Perhaps most egregiously, we have been
told that if we want to see any changes in the language of the
legislation that we are questioning and challenging, that we
cannot even discuss it with our elected officials, we have to
discuss it with the AFL-CIO.
I have numerous examples in my written testimony of things
that we have endured these past few years. I will share one
brief story with you here now. We did a phone call with the top
aid on the PRO Act to U.S. Senator Patty Murray. It was the
four co-leaders of Fight for Freelancers, all of us women. One
of them is a working mom named Karen Warren, from Georgia.
Karen explained to this aide that in the previous year as a
freelance writer she had about 30 different clients, and she
was able to manage her couple of kids, the car pools, the Girl
Scout cookies, all the things that she does because she was her
own boss, and she could work with those people as she pleased.
Karen then explained to this aide that the best-case
scenario--forget about her income being wiped out, but the best
case scenario if this ABC test goes nationwide, is she now has
30 part-time bosses. She asked this aide, how is a human being
supposed to do anything with 30 part-time bosses?
How could you schedule so much as a bathroom break, yet
alone function? This aide said to us, I have no problem with
that outcome.
Mrs. Foxx. Well, thank you very much. Ms. Palagashvili,
excuse me, in your comment letter on DOL's proposed independent
contractor rule you wrote that, ``DOL implicitly assumes that
100 percent of potential contracting jobs will be turned into
employment jobs.'' This seems hard to believe. Are you aware of
any economic research that supports DOL's assumptions?
Ms. Palagashvili. Thank you for your question. No. There is
no economic research that supports the DOL's implicit
assumption that there will be zero contracting losses.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I only have
30 seconds, but if you can use them, you are welcome to them.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you, Dr. Foxx. Ms. Kavin, did
President Biden cite AB 5's ABC test as his model for labor
relations?
Ms. Kavin. He ran on it. If you go to joebiden.com/
empowered workers, it is right there on his website. He said he
plans to work with Congress to make the ABC test the basis for
all labor, employment and tax law.
Chairman Kiley. Is the ABC test in the PRO Act?
Ms. Kavin. Yes it is. It is right at the top.
Chairman Kiley. Do you believe that the practical impact of
the Department of Labor rule will be similar to the ABC test?
Ms. Kavin. They have made clear in their own words that
they think the ABC test is great, and they are trying to get as
close to it as they can without the Supreme Court stopping
them.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you very much. I will now recognize
Ms. Stevens.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to all of
our witnesses for appearing before our Subcommittee today. The
misclassification of workers as independent contractors is
certainly a pervasive issue affecting a host of workers and
their families with national implications. Fortunately, the
Michigan State legislature, I am a Representative from the
Great Lake State, is taking concrete action to address this
problem.
This month they are taking up a series of bills, one of
which cracks down on this type of payroll fraud, by prohibiting
the misclassification of employees as independent contractors,
in addition to shifting the burden of proof to employers facing
complaints that they have misclassified workers. Let us be
clear when it comes to worker misclassification, there are many
losers and only one winner.
That winner is the employer who adopts misclassification as
a business model to gain an unfair competitive advantage over
other law-abiding businesses, costing billions in lost tax
revenue each year by short-changing workers and what they are
owed. This lost revenue, which our Republican colleagues appear
wholly satisfied to see continue, corrodes key programs like
Social Security and Medicare.
An interesting point as we are heading into budget debates
and negotiations. This should not come as a surprise however,
that our House Republican members right now are making this
argument. Ms. Padin, from your testimony, it appears data has
been spotty over the years as to the extent of
misclassification.
What are we able to glean from this data on the prevalence
of misclassification?
Ms. Padin. Thank you for your question. Most of the recent
data on the prevalence of misclassification is coming from
states that have created interagency task forces to study this
issue. They have shown that the prevalence is vast. Studies in
Illinois estimate over 350,000 workers are misclassified. In
New York, it is over a quarter of a million. In Pennsylvania,
it is a half a million.
It is important to emphasize these State level studies are
usually based on unemployment insurance tax audits of employers
registered in the UI program, but these UI audits are rarely
identifying employers who fail to report any worker payments to
State authorities or workers paid completely off the books.
The critical point here is that they are missing a large
portion of the misclassified workforce. The studies are showing
that misclassification is a huge problem, but they are still
very likely understating the scope of the problem.
Ms. Stevens. So how would more current and comprehensive
national data help us combat employee misclassification?
Ms. Padin. We absolutely need more data here. It would be
useful in so many ways, including giving us insight into the
occupations and industries where misclassification is
prevalent, so agencies know where to focus their attention and
resources. It would provide information on what
misclassification is costing.
What it is costing in terms of cost to transfer to
misclassified workers, what it costs to law abiding businesses,
and what it costs to the government in terms of lost social
insurance contributions.
Ms. Stevens. You touched on this briefly in your testimony,
but could you extrapolate further, what are consequences for
workers when they are misclassified?
Ms. Padin. They are vast. I mean in addition to losing out
on almost--on all employment-based rights and protections,
right to minimum wage, right to collectively bargain, social
insurance programs like worker's comp and unemployment
insurance, there is a growing body of research showing that low
and middle earning independent contractors are even making less
money than employees in the system.
Ms. Stevens. Are there impacts to retirement?
Ms. Padin. Yes. That is huge. These folks, if they have to
pay into Social Security themselves, they are paying both the
employer and the employee's share of Social Security, and they
do not have access to any employer provided benefits.
Ms. Stevens. Yes. Costing them money.
Ms. Padin. It is huge.
Ms. Stevens. Recently, Bloomberg News had an article that a
good chunk of people 59 and older do not have anything saved
for retirement. I think the number was close to 60 percent. By
putting into place some of the better labor practices, do you
think we better position people for retirement if we start
classifying workers properly?
Ms. Padin. We absolutely better position people for
retirement. Yes.
Ms. Stevens. Yes. Thank you so much. With that Mr. Chair, I
yield back.
Chairman Kiley. I recognize Mr. Burlison.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Ms. Kavin, I believe I
am pronouncing that right. I want to applaud, you know, your
effort, and you have a great resume here, but as the Founder of
the Fight for Freelancers, especially in telling your story, it
appears to me in listening to some of these hearings, and I am
going to ask you a rhetorical question.
It appears that the people testifying, and the position of
the Biden administration, is that you just simply are not
making good decisions for yourself in choosing to be a
contractor. Is that the case?
Ms. Kavin. Not only that, but I think it is noteworthy that
in literally every hearing I have attended, whether at the
State levels, in New Jersey or California, or at the Federal
levels, the U.S. DOL hearings last summer, or the U.S. Small
Business Administration Office of Advocacy hearings last
summer, the vast majority of participants who are actual
independent contractors are screaming no and saying stop.
The people who are showing up to push this on us are people
like union lawyers, like the woman sitting next to me.
Mr. Burlison. I have got to think in your position it would
be extremely demeaning to be told that you are not intelligent
enough, basically is what is being told, to make the decision
that is best for you.
Ms. Kavin. What we see among the members of our group, they
tend to go through something like the stages of grief. When
they first find out what is going on, their first response is
disbelief. There is no way the government could be trying to
take away my income. Who am I bothering? I am not doing
anything wrong.
Then they go and try to talk to their lawmakers, and they
get the door slammed in their face. Then it turns to shock,
then it turns to anger. If they voted in the past for a lot of
Democrats their next emotion is betrayal. We see it all the
time. At that point, they are ready to fight. They are ready to
stand up and fight for their careers.
Yes, sir, we do feel quite disturbed by this whole thing,
and we do intend to continue fighting for our rights to choose
self-employment.
Mr. Burlison. I do not know if you can see this from where
you are at, but this is a photo and a website about a new
constituent of mine. Her name is Dee Sova. She was a resident
of California, and she has an amazing record. She has 27 years
of experience as a truck driver, all of which there are no
accidents involved, millions of miles without having an
accident.
She is a member of Mothers Against Drunk Driving. She
established an organization called Trucking Divas Rock. Okay.
This is a community leader. This is someone that any State
would be proud to have as a constituent. I am happy to be the
lucky community that got her because of the failed policies
that California implemented.
To me, the idea that she is not capable of making good
decisions for her and her family is what is ridiculous. I think
it is demeaning to this woman, who is a minority business
owner, who is successful, has been extremely successful, for us
to basically jerk her around, make her up her family and move
to an entirely new State, because we want to get more people on
union dues? Right?
Ms. Kavin. Not only that sir, UCLA Health put out a study
less than a year ago; self-employed women have 43 percent lower
risk of high blood pressure, 34 percent lower risk of reporting
obesity, and 30 percent lower risk of reporting diabetes
compared to women who work for salaries and wages. Self-
employed women were also more likely to report exercising and
having a lower body mass index.
I do not think that is a shock to anybody, right? You get
to be your own boss. You get to be in charge of your own life.
You get to choose what happens to you every day, day in and day
out. You feel a lot better, and you do a lot better.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you. I am going to butcher your name.
Ms. Palagashvili. Okay.
Mr. Burlison. Ms. Palagashvili.
Ms. Palagashvili. That is good. That is great.
Mr. Burlison. Okay. As an economist, you talked about the
impact on the economy. Can you elaborate? Especially when we
are you there is a 64 percent chance, according to the people
that are studying the economy, that we are facing a recession.
Can you describe the impact of if we get into a recession, and
jobs are hard to find now there is not an option for people to
become independent contractors.
Ms. Palagashvili. Thank you for your question. I just want
to add a little note here that the DOL rule will lead to
significantly fewer independent work opportunities, and the way
it will do that is two ways. One, it makes it illegal for some
freelancers to continue being freelancers because of the way
that the DOL has written the law.
The second way it does that is even if an independent
contractor is properly classified under the new DOL rule, it
adds--the rule itself adds so much confusion, complexity, that
it would deter small organizations from working with
independent contractors all together, because they do not have
extensive legal counsel to rely on to say hey, is this person,
you know, properly classified or not.
That is exactly why the Small Business Administration wrote
a letter to the Department of Labor saying we have grave
concerns about this rule for small business owners. Now what
that means is----
Chairman Kiley. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
Ms. Palagashvili. Oh, I am sorry. Excuse me.
Chairman Kiley. I now recognize Ms. Omar.
Ms. Omar. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you all for being
here. Ms. Padin, are you a union lawyer, and is there anything
that you would like to respond if I gave you a few minutes?
Ms. Padin. No. I will just correct the record on that. I am
not a union lawyer. I work for a non-profit. I am a union
member though.
Ms. Omar. I was as well. I just want to say, you know,
Michigan is considering updating its laws. Minnesota is too,
and we have had so many gig workers out rallying to get
protection, so I really do not know when it is being said here
in this hearing that there are only people with a special
interest, or unions that are advocating for this.
We hear it from constituents regularly. You cited DOL data
that showed up to 95 percent of workers who claim to be
misclassified should have legally been considered employees. I
agree with you. Misclassification is a widely spread problem in
our country, likely affecting millions of workers, and it is a
shame that our Republican colleagues are not taking it
seriously.
According to the Minnesota Attorney General's Office, as
many as 20 percent of employers misclassify at least one
employee. Last October, Minnesota's AG filed a lawsuit against
gig economy company Shipt, for misclassifying delivery workers
to avoid fair wage and hour laws.
Ms. Padin, could you explain what industries are
particularly liable for independent contractor
misclassification, and how it harms these workers?
Ms. Padin. Yes. I would be happy to. Misclassification
rates are disproportionately high in low-wage, labor-intensive
industries. That includes construction, home care, trucking,
janitorial work and app-based work, like ride hailing delivery.
Many of these jobs are known for being again, and many of these
jobs are low-wage, labor intensive jobs, where the work is
disproportionately being done by people of color and women.
Ms. Omar. Thank you. I know that in this committee we like
to vilify unions, and union members, but union membership is
vital to supporting better wages and safer workplace for all
workers. It is also beneficial to small businesses who see an
impact in employee retention and improvement in their ability
to compete with large corporations.
Sadly, a decline in unionization has cost the average full-
time worker over $3,000.00 in lost earnings per year according
to the Economic Policy Institute. Workers should be given the
freedom to unionize and receive the full wages and benefits
they deserve.
Attacks on organizing workers are only putting good faith
employers at a competitive disadvantage and taking money out of
taxpayer's pockets. Can you explain how union benefits workers
and employers alike? Why would the PRO Act and the proposed DOL
rulemaking help cut down the economic cost of
misclassification?
Ms. Padin. Sure. There are many studies showing that union
members make more money than non-unionized workers, that they
have better benefits, and they have more economic security.
They have healthcare, they have pensions, they have retirement
benefits. The benefits to workers of unionization are quite
large.
Now I would also just say here a lot has been said about AB
5, and conflating it with the PRO Act. Yes, they both use the
ABC test for purposes of determining who is covered, but they
are very different laws. PRO Act would use the ABC test for
determining who is covered under the National Labor Relations
Act, our Federal law that provides a right for employees to get
engaged in concerted action.
It is the right to band together with your fellow coworkers
to advocate for improvements in the terms and conditions of
employment. Adopting the ABC test would ensure that more people
have this right. It is your choice whether to exercise that
right. If you do not want to engage in concerted action with
your fellow coworkers to improve your workplace, then do not.
If you do not want to join a union, then do not organize
your workplace. This is all about expanding the choices
available to workers. Not the obligations.
Ms. Omar. I appreciate you. Thank you for your testimony
and for your time. I yield back.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you. I would like to use my time
today to look more closely at President Biden's selection of
Julie Su, an architect and a lead enforcer of AB 5, to be his
next Secretary of Labor. This nomination truly boggles the
mind. It would be hard to find a State official with a greater
record of mismanagement than Julie Su had in California.
The work of Su and her department were subject to scathing
bipartisan criticism in California by the Democrat super
majority in that State. During the COVID shutdowns you had
many, many people who were unable to get their unemployment
checks.
I was a State lawmaker. It was the No. 1 thing that
occupied my office, the folks who were told they were not able
to work, who were entitled to unemployment benefits, and who
had to wait weeks, months, sometimes indefinitely just to get
those benefits because of the mismanagement of the EDD,
California's unemployment office, which fell within Julie Su's
department.
At the same time, you had her department, that agency, the
EDD, that was sending out checks to hardened criminals in the
largest fraud of taxpayers' dollars in State history, amounting
to what is estimated to be 32 billion dollars in fraud, and
this too has been subject to scathing reports by the
independent State auditor in California, and has been subject
to harsh bipartisan criticism.
There is really no predicting what the consequences would
be if that level of mismanagement was brought to the top post
at the United States Department of Labor. There is predicting
what would happen if her approach to AB 5 were nationalized.
One of the things that we saw in California, Ms. Anderson, is
that as bad as AB 5 is on its face, Ms. Su was able to use her
role as the enforcer of the law, to make it even more
destructing.
Can you tell us a little bit about what the folks that you
have worked with in California experienced?
Ms. Anderson. Well, during the pandemic, they doubled down
on these audits on small businesses that were already
struggling or actually dead in the water from the shutdowns.
Instead of suspending audits, these ruthless, aggressive audits
on moms and pops and single business people, she doubled down
on these audits, and a lot of people actually, you know, were
dragged through the mud for a year and ended up passing their
audit.
It put them out--the whole process put them out of business
anyway. All you have to do is read the scathing report from the
State auditor from 2021 about Julie Su's unprecedented
mismanagement of the EDD and the fraud fiasco that she oversaw.
It is inexplicable that she would be worthy of a promotion.
It is also inexplicable that she said, ``AB 5 is a model
for the Nation.'' I mean anybody, Democrat, Republican, or
Independent, or anyone in between, who has been a victim of AB
5 in California, and there are hundreds of thousands of us, if
not millions, would just find that to be a disqualifying
statement.
She was Labor Commissioner from 2011 to 2018, and then she
became the head of the EDD from 2019 to 2022. She is all about
enforcement. That is going to be her focus if she were to be
made the top Labor Secretary. She tried to entrap independent
contractors into applying for unemployment insurance benefits,
even though they are not qualified traditionally for that.
If they were to do that and name their client as their
employer, it would trigger an automatic audit on these
businesses and these hiring entities, and that is what started
to play out in our group when I started getting stories and
calls from small business owners and moms and pops, who were
being audited aggressively by the EDD during the pandemic.
Chairman Kiley. I just want to get this straight. We all
remember the lockdowns that happened in California and across
the country. We had millions of people put out of work, and at
this very moment Julie Su decides it is her priority to devote
resources to enforcing a law that is going to put even more
people out of work. Is that what happened?
Ms. Anderson. Well beginning of 2020, after AB 5 went into
effect, there were 20 million dollars allocated by Governor
Newsom to the enforcement of AB 5.
Chairman Kiley. Small businesses who were on their last
legs were subject to audits. These audits were done, by the
way, by EDD personnel. Is that right?
Ms. Anderson. That is correct. I have an example of a
single woman of color who owned a platform in San Diego that
connected independent contractor referees and umpires with
local schools and referees. I mean local schools and sports
leagues. The lawyer fees alone put her out of business.
Before referees and umpires received a last-minute
exemption in the clean-up bill in September 2020. It was too
late for her and her business, and she was dragged through the
mud during the entirety of the pandemic. That audit went on for
over a year, and she actually ended up passing it.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you very much, and these are the
personnel that could have been used to get people their
unemployment checks, or to stop fraud from happening, were
instead used to conduct harassing audits, and put even more
people out of work. I will now recognize Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Padin, let us just
get back to what we were talking about. The independent
contractors, as opposed to employees. Are independent
contractors guaranteed minimum wage and overtime?
Ms. Padin. They are not.
Mr. Scott. Employees are?
Ms. Padin. Yes.
Mr. Scott. What about if you lose your job through no fault
of your own, are independent contractors covered by
unemployment insurance?
Ms. Padin. They are not.
Mr. Scott. Employees are?
Ms. Padin. Yes.
Mr. Scott. What about if you are hurt on the job? Do you
get workers compensation if you are an independent contractor?
Ms. Padin. No.
Mr. Scott. Are employees?
Ms. Padin. Yes, they can.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Now are independent contractors entitled
to benefits awarded to other employees of the business in terms
of healthcare, pensions and sick leave?
Ms. Padin. No.
Mr. Scott. The employees of the business are entitled to
those benefits?
Ms. Padin. Yes.
Mr. Scott. In states that require paid sick days, are
independent contractors covered?
Ms. Padin. No.
Mr. Scott. Are independent contractors covered by paid
family leave if that is passed on a State level?
Ms. Padin. No.
Mr. Scott. What about health and safety protections under
OSHA? Are independent contractors covered?
Ms. Padin. No. I do not believe so.
Mr. Scott. Now are employers required to pay the employer
portion of Social Security for independent contractors?
Ms. Padin. No.
Mr. Scott. Independent contractors, they have a right to
join a union?
Ms. Padin. No.
Mr. Scott. If the employees are relieved of all that, how
much money can the business save by misclassifying a worker as
an independent contractor, rather than employee?
Ms. Padin. Estimates put it at about 20 to 40 percent of
payroll costs, employers can pocket if they misclassify
workers.
Mr. Scott. Mr. Long, how does that give a business an
unfair competitive advantage if they misclassify employees?
Mr. Long. Well, I want to start off by saying the National
Electrical Contractors is a pro-business organization. That we
have educational programs that help new entrepreneurs start a
contracting firm, and we have educational programs to help our
smaller firms.
You know, a person who wants to be an independent
contractor and create a business, we support that 1,000
percent. The construction firm who may use a term independent
contractor to build a workforce, that is a huge negative impact
on the financial burden of our contractors, is something
completely different.
You know a construction worker, our workers back during
COVID was deemed essential. I do not want us to confuse
flexibility with independent contracting. Our workforce works
24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Here in America, keeping our
industry running.
However, I am very concerned about the inability for
independent contracting to allow the bypassing of OSHA
regulations and Federal and State compensation laws that become
very much different on the bottom line of not only the
taxpayers, but our contractor members and our workers.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Why would somebody lose their job if
they are classified as an employee?
Mr. Long. To get worker benefits, unemployment benefits.
Mr. Scott. The employer decides not to hire them just
because they do not want to pay minimum wage, overtime,
unemployment compensation and the rest, and that is why they
might lose their job?
Mr. Long. That is correct.
Mr. Scott. Is there any restriction on flexibility? Can you
get flexibility as an employee?
Mr. Long. In our model, we are, like I say, we are
absolutely at workforce working 7 days a week, 24 hours a day.
Our flexibility many times depends on the end user or the
customer. However, our workers have the ability to work any
time on any working day. What is not avoided in that is
deductions that are paid to the Federal Government in the State
taxes that would allow that worker to have workers compensation
if they are injured, or unemployment benefits if they are
unemployed.
Not only that, it gives us an opportunity to train our
workforce in a more comprehensive manner.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Ms. Padin, is there a difference
between AB 5 in California as implemented and the ABC test in
general?
Ms. Padin. I am sorry, can you repeat that question?
Mr. Scott. Is there a difference between California law AB
5 as it was implemented and the ABC test in general?
Ms. Padin. Is there a difference between AB 5 and the ABC
test?
Mr. Scott. Right.
Ms. Padin. AB 5 created the--used the ABC test.
Mr. Scott. It is implemented. Were there differences that
made life difficult in California that are not necessary by the
ABC test?
Ms. Padin. I am not sure if I understand that question. Can
you say it one more time?
Mr. Scott. Are there things that were done in California
that were not required by an ABC test.
Ms. Padin. I do not know. I am not aware of that. I can get
back to you on that.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Kiley. I will now recognize Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
panel for being here. This is deja vu all over again. It has
gone on for years. Chairing this Subcommittee myself for 6
years, this is a warm and fuzzy producing, debate issue that
goes on here. I think it will continue, just coming from a
hearing dealing with rural broadband and trying to mobilize
that and get a workforce out there, in many cases, independent
contractors, et cetera, is a real challenge that we have.
This is an important hearing to deal with. We have to come
to a conclusion, and not do wood sawing back and forth. Ms.
McCutchen, you State in your--and good to see you again. You
State in your testimony that the war on the independent
workforce is perpetuated by the chaos of the legal standards
for determining who is an employee, and who is an independent
contractor.
I have long supported legislation to provide certainty in
our laws for entrepreneurs. Specifically, last Congress, I
offered bipartisan legislation to clearly define direct sellers
as independent contractors under the Fair Labor Standards Act,
consistent with the Internal Revenue Service code.
I look forward to reintroducing this legislation this
Congress as well to include the entirety of the IRS code
section, which includes real estate agents as well. Ms.
McCutchen, how would harmonizing our Federal laws help curb the
legal attacks on independent contractors?
Ms. McCutchen. Well, because both workers and businesses
would know exactly, and have much better predictability of who
is an independent contractor, and who is an employee. That can
only be done by Congress to adopt a single rule under every
Federal statute, including the FLSA which uses the reality
test, which was created by the Supreme Court. Congress can take
us back to a common law test, which focuses on who controls the
work, which is the key distinction between an independent
contractor, and an employee is control and that flexibility.
Mr. Walberg. It is a key distinction, is it not? Maybe not
simple to understand, but it seems like a key distinction, yes.
Moving on, Ms. McCutchen and Ms. Palagashvili.
Ms. Palagashvili. Palagashvili.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Vili. Forgive me for that. Yesterday,
the Wall Street Journal published how nursing shortages are
driving innovation and digital platforms that enable nurses to
work independently on their own terms, specifically the Wall
Street Journal cites that many nurses across the country are
not practicing because a traditional hospital and healthcare
facility schedule does not fit their lives.
Unfortunately, my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
continue to support policies to codify a broad and vague
standard for joint employment that would stifle this type of
innovation and flexibility that workers are seeking and
healthcare needs. What are your primary concerns with the
Democrat joint employer standard as it pertains to business and
workers alike, and should not we be facilitating innovation
promoting flexibility?
Ms. Palagashvili. Thank you for your question. My expertise
is on the independent workforce, and I am here to testify about
the independent contractor rule from the Department of Labor.
There are similarities, and one thing that is helpful to note
here is that the healthcare workers who are independent workers
would also be impacted by the Department of Labor independent
contractor rule adversely.
Actually, according to IRS tax, healthcare is a second
industry that is seen the greatest growth in independent
contractors since 2001, and we have seen a lot of individuals
go into healthcare as independent workers. That sector in
particular I have looked at that would be adversely impacted by
the Department of Labor rule.
Mr. Walberg. Ms. McCutchen.
Ms. McCutchen. Especially in healthcare. What happens is
nurses who want to be independent contractors take jobs in a
hospital, and then the DOL finds that the hospital is a joint
employer with whatever, like, market app they have. First, you
get into are they an employee, or yes, they are an employee.
By the way, the hospital is not the employer, right? That
means that hospitals trying to, you know, meet their staffing
levels, are----
Mr. Walberg. Are frustrated.
Ms. McCutchen. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Walberg. The patients are hurt?
Ms. McCutchen. Correct.
Mr. Walberg. Thanks for your answers, my time is expired. I
yield back.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you. Finally, I recognize Mr.
Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman. I ask unanimous consent
to enter into the record two letters. One from the Sheet Metal
and Air-Conditioning Contractors National Association. One from
the TAUC.
Chairman Kiley. Without objection.
[The letters of Mr. Norcross follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Norcross. Thank you. Thank you for holding this
hearing. Something that I know quite a bit about from my
previous life as an electrician out in the field, and it is in
many ways the difference between a contractor being selected as
low bidder, the low qualified bidder, and the difference
between somebody losing out.
There is time after time, particularly in the construction
industry, where by deviating and going around the rules of what
an independent contractor is, that gives them an unfair,
illegal advantage. This is something that is not designed, it
is not helping the employee.
It is skirting around the rules and creating an unfair,
illegal advantage. New Jersey, where I am from, our
Commissioner of Labor, Rob Angelo, had instituted an ABC test
that has worked quite well, frankly, in fact we get virtually
zero complaints from the employee, but hear much from employers
who traditionally would operate within that gray zone.
I think like any of us, doing an examination of what
actually is happening. Audits are generally something that
everybody in Congress likes, because it cuts through the BS,
and finds out what are the facts. It is extraordinary to hear
that audits are now the bad thing that we should be doing.
I hear this day after day, we need to find out facts. I
agree with that. In 2019, they put together this task force on
employee misclassification. Remarkably, they found in New
Jersey, that over 12,000 were misclassified with the equivalent
of 462 million dollars of wages underreported.
Now I do not suggest anybody who is an independent
contractor is not following the rules. In fact, I would guess
that most of them are. Remarkably, during the pandemic,
remarkably, independent contractors were able to get
unemployment. That does not happen normally. They were self-
reporting, and they got unemployment because they needed it.
We all understand that. There is a difference between
playing by the rules and taking unfair advantage to illegally
lower the wages. Mr. Long, coming from the construction
industry, you see time after time low bid going in if it is not
a negotiated job. You see what can and cannot be done, what
your contractors do versus others.
Can you kind of just walk us through how misclassification
would give a contractor an unfair advantage?
Mr. Long. Well in our industry, especially in this market,
50 percent of our cost is labor. If you have a firm that can
take advantage of the independent contracting and reduce their
burden of costs on those workers, anywhere from 20 to 40
percent, you can see the magnitude on the balance sheet. That
is one.
No. 2, we as contractors, are trying to develop training
programs and advancement placement for our workers, and on top
of that we have to ensure a safe worker at OSHA. We have to
live by the State regulations. Every one of our contractors are
masters of their trade. They have taken license certification
examinations; they have to pay the cost for liability and
operating insurance.99 percent of them have a place of address.
They are paying local taxes. They are developing the community.
In the process they are raising the worker as they go. Our
organization spends hundreds of millions of dollars on
technical training. Your colleague was just talking about
broadband. We are ramping up all the training with broadband
because we know that that is going to be as essential as
electricity and water.
Those are the kind of things. When we have a situation and
it really affects, Congressman Norcross, our small business
owners that are getting started, because they need that bid,
and 20 to 40 percent difference puts them in business or out of
business. They do not have an opportunity to expand and to
grow, hire four more people, do more work, buy more trucks, pay
more taxes, and build a community from a broad base.
That is what the American dream is, to own a business and
move forward. We are not for people not starting businesses and
being independent and doing the things they want to do. We just
want them to make sure that there is an even playing field for
our contractors.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. Chairman I yield back.
Chairman Kiley. Without objection before we close, I enter
into the record letters opposing the Biden administration's
proposed independent contractor rule from the Coalition for
Workforce Innovation, the Direct Selling Association, the
Financial Services Institute, Flex Association, the Intermodal
Association of North America, Leading Financial Services Trade
Associations, the Modern Economy Project, the National
Association of Home Builders, the National Association of
Insurance and Financial Advisors, The National Association of
Small Trucking Companies, the National Retail Federation, the
Transportation Alliance, and Truckers Integral to our Economy.

[The letters of Chairman Kiley follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. I would like to again thank our witnesses
for taking the time to testify before the Subcommittee today.
Without objection, there being no further business, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:08 p.m., the Subcommittee adjourned.]
