- EXPOSING THE DANGERS OF THE INFLUENCE OF FOREIGN ADVERSARIES ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXPOSING THE DANGERS OF THE
INFLUENCE OF FOREIGN ADVERSARIES
ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JULY 13, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-17

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-758 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

BURGESS, OWENS, UTAH, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         FREDERICA WILSON, Florida,
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin              Ranking Member
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          MARK TAKANO, California
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   PRAMILA, JAYAPAL, Washington
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               LUCY McBATH, Georgia
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Northern Mariana Islands
VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina        SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on July 13, 2023....................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Owens, Hon. Burgess, Chairman, Subcommittee on Higher
Education and Workforce Development........................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Wilson, Hon. Frederica, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Higher Education and Workforce Development.................     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10

WITNESSES

Moore, Paul R., Senior Counsel, Defense of Freedom Institute.    11
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Yang, John C., President and Executive Director, Asian
Americans Advancing Justice--AAJC..........................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    24
Singleton, Craig, China Program Deputy Director and Senior
Fellow, Foundation for Defense of Democracies..............    36
Prepared statement of....................................    38

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Takano, Hon. Mark, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California:
Article dated April 15, 2020, from Politico..............    58
Jayapal, Hon. Pramila, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington:
Article dated January 18, 2023 from The Daily
Pennsylvanian..........................................    76

EXPOSING THE DANGERS OF THE
INFLUENCE OF FOREIGN ADVERSARIES
ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES

----------

Thursday, July 13, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Higher Education and Workforce
Development,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:16 a.m.,
Rayburn House Office Building, Room 2175, Hon. Burgess Owens
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Owens, Thompson, Grothman, Banks,
Good, Moran, James, Foxx, Wilson, Takano, Jayapal, Manning,
Courtney, Sablan, Bonamici, Adams, and Scott.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Mindy Barry,
General Counsel; Hans Bjontegard, Legislative Assistant;
Solomon Chen, Professional Staff Member; Isabel Foster, Press
Assistant; Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant; Sheila Havenner,
Director of Information Technology; Meghan Heckelman, Intern;
Claire Houchin, Intern; Amy Raaf Jones, Director of Education
and Human Services Policy; Hannah Matesic, Deputy Staff
Director; Audra McGeorge, Communications Director; Gabriella
Pistone, Legislative Assistant Oversight; Rebecca Powell, Staff
Assistant; Mary Christina Riley, Professional Staff Member;
Chance Russell, Professional Staff Member; Kent Talbert,
Investigative Counsel; Brad Thomas, Senior Education Policy
Advisor; Sapna Rampersaud, Legal Intern; Savoy Adams, Minority
Intern; Brittany Alston, Minority Operations Assistant; Amaris
Benavidez, Minority Professional Staff; Rashage Green, Minority
Director of Education Policy & Counsel; Christian Haines,
Minority General Counsel; Kristion Jackson, Minority Intern;
Emanual Kimble, Minority Fellow; Stephanie Lalle, Minority
Communications Director; Raiyana Malone, Minority Press
Secretary; Kota Mizutani, Minority Deputy Communication
Director; Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director; Banyon
Vassar, Minority IT Administrator.
Chairman Owens. The Subcommittee on Higher Education and
Workforce Development will come to order. I note there is a
quorum present. Without objection, the Chair is recognized to
call a recess at any time. Today's hearing addresses the
growing threat of foreign influence in American Education.
The father of this Nation, George Washington, was acutely
aware of this threat, and has offered sage advice to future
generations upon leaving office. In his farewell address
Washington warned history and experience prove that foreign
influence is one of the most painful foes of Republican
government.
In the year 2023, Washington would look upon the foreign
entanglements with disfavor and disappointment. China, and
other foreign adversaries are determined to undermine America's
national interest and affect our political discourse. The
modern battleground now includes college universities,
campuses, and now student's young minds.
In April, I took to the floor to condemn the foreign
influence in our post-secondary academic institutions. I said
then what I will repeat today. The manipulation of our children
on America soil, paid for by American taxpayer is unacceptable.
For those who facilitate and undermine our institutions, it is
traitorous. We are now in an era with too many American college
and university administrators, due to financial incentives or
bribes, from adversarial regimes, choose to allow
indoctrination on our American campuses.
I call it profitable patriotism. Adversaries, monarchs,
bureaucracies, dictatorships, and anti-American Chinese
Communist party pay for influence in our universities through
foreign gifts and funding. It is the height of disloyalty. If
the Biden administration will do nothing about it, we have a
Republican party in Congress, I promise we will.
Under Section 117 the Higher Education Act, colleges and
universities must, and must is not an option. Must disclose any
foreign funding to their institutions exceeding $225,000.00. In
2019, the Senate report found 70 percent of colleges choose to
skirt, hide, and cheat, so as not to be compliant with this
law.
We are now at a time when only 30 percent of the college
administrations overseeing our educational institutions gain it
important to follow a law put in place by Congress with
oversight authority. To make matters worse, the Trump
administration found 6.5 billion dollars in previously
undisclosed foreign funds.
Once again, profit over patriotism, profit over love of
country, and profit over love of freedom. Our adversaries, and
America's enemies, some guilty of absolutely the worst human
right abuses, did not pay these dollars to educational
institutions because of some pie in the sky wish of
humanitarian goodness.
No, these dollars come with strings attached, which are
then used to leverage against American faculty and students.
Meanwhile, the American taxpayer is left supporting
institutions that sacrifice our national values, our freedom
and our future for money. For example, foreign funds are used
to set up State backed cultural exchange centers that operate
as cultural indoctrination centers.
China, for instance, donates money to American universities
to fund Confucius institutions, renown campus hubs known for
pushing propaganda like the denial of the Tenement Square
massacre. These institutions also monitor and threaten Chinese
international students here in the United States if they speak
out against the CCP.
Political pressure has caused many of these institutions to
close on paper, but in reality, they simply evolve and rebrand
under a different name. These problematic relationships still
pose a direct threat to students and academic freedom.
Moreover, the foreign funding creates inroads for intellectual
property theft.
In this arena again, China posed a serious threat for our
80 percent of economic espionage crimes are prosecuted by the
Department of Justice are committed by Communist Chinese
actors. The theft of trade secrets costs Americans an estimated
600 billion dollars annually.
How many of these American universities are inadvertently
sponsoring CCP backed espionage? There are 70 percent--70
percent of college administrators who are not compliant, opting
not to be transparent to congressional oversight. Far too long,
educational institutions have reaped financial benefits while
our enemies have undermined our culture.
Ultimately, too many of these college administrators feel
they are above the accountability and oversight. What else can
we conclude other than there is a systemic sense of arrogance
within these institutions. Once again, 6.5 billion dollars
funneled in secrecy, undisclosed foreign finances to 70 percent
of American institutions and learning.
For a regime that is anti-capitalist, the CCP seems to have
found a remarkable return on investment in our taxpayer funded
colleges and universities. It is time we take these foreign
threats seriously, beginning with foreign influence on
America's campuses. We should disentangle from China, as
Washington would have preferred, but requires--this requires a
serious executive.
The Biden administration does not seem to get it. Recently,
Secretary Janet Yellen called the coupling from China a big
mistake. National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan echoed her a
week later. Biden's reckless Department of Education has yet to
open up one single section 117 investigation.
Department talks on both sides of his mouth on this
particular issue. Their department blames Congress, saying that
they are overwhelmed and lack funding. And yet the DOE
transferred this authority to investigate these violations from
a well-equipped Office of General Counsel to an underwater FSA.
The FSA is ill suited for enforcement that online portal to
report these violations were broken for months, with no
communication. We also have no indication the Department is
conducting substantial reviews of any submitted disclosures.
For those who are curious, what is the FSA? The Federal student
aid. What do the student loans have to do with the CCP
infiltrating, bribing our institutions and stealing our
intellectual properties? Absolutely nothing.
It is a total sham that the Department of Education thinks
they did away with this, and I think it's pure arrogance.
Rather than enforce the law, President Biden has cozied up with
Beijing. Thanks to congressional oversight, we now know that
the Penn Biden Center received tens of millions of dollars in
anonymous Chinese funding, and then paid the future President a
handsome salary of $900,000.00.
Moreover, we know that the Penn Biden Center employed 10
future senior administrative offices officials, with salaries
up to $280,000.00. Does this have anything to do with the
administration's unwillingness to enforce Section 8, 117? We're
waiting to see how that works out.
It appears that the Biden administration has purposely
chose to turn a blind eye. I can promise you this Committee
with the Republican majority will not. Freedom can only survive
with transparency. The next reporting deadline for Section 117
disclosures is at the end of this month.
This administration has just under 20 days to ensure that
the American's colleges and universities, taxpayer funded
institutions, are not hiding foreign donations from public eye.
For the sake of our republic, and the millions of taxpaying
Americans, we look for full transparency from these
institutions.
With that, I yield to the Ranking Member for her opening
statement.
[The statement of Chairman Owens follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.004

Ms. Wilson. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Owens, and good
morning. I want to express my gratitude to our witnesses for
their testimoneys this morning. I would also like to
acknowledge Dr. Moss, my former educational advisor, and all of
the students in attendance for today's hearing. Your dedication
to promoting inclusivity and innovation in our education system
inspires all of the members of this Committee, so welcome.
It is so important that this Committee recognizes that we
are here to serve you, and to address your needs. We are the
Education Committee. Global collaborations and Federal research
investments are vital for the investment of our society.
Through collaboration with global partners and strategic
Federal investments in research, universities across the world
have made bold, forward-thinking strides in health, science,
and technology.
The benefits of global partnerships undoubtedly help drive
intellectual and campus diversity while bolstering our economy.
However, as the Federal Government provides roughly $30 billion
annually to colleges and universities to support research and
development efforts, we must ensure that colleges and
universities are transparent about their ties to foreign
entities.
Section 117 of the Higher Education Act requires the
Department of Education to collect and publicly disclose
certain information about foreign gifts and contracts involving
institutions of higher education. This crucial process aims to
promote public transparency regarding the role of foreign
funding on higher education, and safeguard government funded
activities against undue, foreign influence.
Unfortunately, I fear that my Republican colleagues have
over-emphasized enforcement, rather than providing guidance
regarding Section 117. The lack of clear guidance hinders
institutions' ability to comply with the law effectively. We
should focus on streamlining the oversight mechanisms in place
to ensure Section 117 compliance.
It should provide clear guidance for institutions to engage
in international collaboration. Finally, it would be so
careless if we did not remind my Republican colleagues that
asking for accountability and compliance in this hearing can
occur without scapegoating our Asian American community.
When discussing foreign influence on campus it is
imperative that we do not fuel prevailing anti-Asian
sentiments. Congress, and this administration, have raised
valid concerns regarding the Chinese Communist Party, and their
agenda against the United States.
These worries should not be twisted into an excuse to push
anti-Asian rhetoric, and we must safeguard our interest without
adopting an extreme isolationist position. Thank you, and I
yield back, Mr. Chair.
[The statement of Ranking Member Wilson follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.006

Chairman Owens. Thank you, Ms. Wilson. Pursuant to
Committee Rule 8(c), all members who wish to insert written
statements into the record may do so by submitting them to the
Committee Clerk electronically by Microsoft Word format by 5
p.m., 14 days after the date of this hearing, which is July 27,
2023.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open 14
days to allow such statements and other materials referenced
during this hearing to be submitted for the official hearing
record. I now turn to the introduction of our three
distinguished witnesses.
The first witness is Mr. Paul Moore, who is a Senior
Counsel for the Defense of Freedom Institution, which is
located here in Washington, DC. Our second witness is John C.
Yang, who is President and Executive Director of Asian
Americans Advancing Justice, which is also located here in
Washington, DC.
Our final witness is Craig Singleton, who is the China
Program Public Deputy Director and Senior Fellow at the
Foundation of Defense of Democracies, which again is here in
Washington, DC. Thank you so much for you guys being here.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here today and look
forward to your testimony. Pursuant to Committee rules, I would
ask that you each limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute
summary of your written statement. I would also like to remind
the witnesses to be aware of their responsibility to provide
accurate information to the Subcommittee. I want to first
recognize Mr. Moore.

STATEMENT OF PAUL MOORE, J.D., SENIOR COUNSEL, DEFENSE OF
FREEDOM INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Moore. Good morning, Chairman Owens, Ranking Member
Wilson, and members of the Committee. My name is Paul Moore. I
am Senior Counsel of the Defense of Freedom Institute for
Policy Studies, and I previously served as Chief Investigative
Counsel for the U.S. Department of Education and as an
Assistant U.S. Attorney and in other roles of the Department of
Justice.
As Chief Investigative Counsel, much of my role involved
investigating compliance by America's colleges and universities
with Section 117, the statutory requirement that America's
colleges and universities timely report qualifying foreign
gifts and contracts to the Department.
Section 117 reporting requirements are not complicated or
burdensome, they merely require the universities accurately and
timely report those foreign gifts and contracts valued at
$250,000.00 or more to the Department twice a year.
Unfortunately, the Department's enforcement efforts have
historically been very uneven. For example, in 2004, the
Department began permitting institutions to provide donor
anonymity when reporting foreign gifts and contracts.
This practice called anonymizing directly undermined
congressional intent that foreign donor identities be revealed.
This led to a dramatic increase in the flow of foreign money to
higher education, beginning around 2009, particularly from
China, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and other countries.
Many of our great universities have since become addicted
to that foreign money. In April 2011, the FBI issued a white
paper warning that foreign adversaries seek to take advantage
of America's higher education research enterprise to gain
military and economic advantages over the United States.
In February 2019, the U.S. Senate Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations issued a bipartisan report warning that foreign
government spending at U.S. schools is effectively a black hole
because up to 70 percent of all colleges and universities were
failing to report foreign gifts and contracts.
This began to change in November 2019, when at the
Direction of Secretary Betsy DeVos, the Department's Office of
the General Counsel initiated multiple civil investigations of
non-compliance by some of America's leading universities. The
Department found that Section 117 reporting had been generally
under inclusive and inaccurate, and found that many colleges
and universities even appeared to conceal foreign funding.
These compliance failures occurred despite those same
colleges and universities having extremely sophisticated
foreign financial tracking capabilities. In October 2020, the
Department published a report revealing that its enforcement
efforts had resulted in disclosure of more than 200, excuse me,
6.5 billion dollars in previously undisclosed foreign gifts and
contracts. The report revealed that historically fewer than 300
of the approximately 6,000 U.S. higher educational institutions
actually self-report foreign money each year as required by
Section 117. The Department found that foreign adversaries are
likely targeting specific institutions for their research and
development technologies.
In April 2021 testimony before the Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence, FBI Director Wray warned that China presents a
severe threat to our academic institutions. Despite these clear
threats and warnings, the Biden Administration's Section 117
enforcement efforts have taken a very different direction.
The Department now appears to have largely ceded control
over its Section 117 enforcement policies to a higher education
industry group known as the American Council on Education, or
ACE, which has long objected to nearly any serious efforts by
the Department to enforce Section 117.
This puts America's national security at risk. Since
January 2021, reporting foreign gifts and contracts by
universities has declined dramatically even as the threat to
America has increased. In August 2022, ACE's Senior Vice
President announced the Department's closure of its remaining
Section 117 investigations, and that Section 117 management
would be transferred back to Federal student aid.
Normally, such a significant announcement should have come
from the Department, not higher education's chief lobbyist. FSA
is unsuited to the Section 117 enforcement task, which may
explain why the Department has chosen to shift Section 117
enforcement responsibilities to FSA.
Section 117 is a very simple, straightforward statutory
disclosure requirement that the Department is required to
enforce. To do so, it should immediately return enforcement
responsibilities to the Office of the General Counsel. Congress
should ban the practice of anonymizing donors and Section 117
disclosures.
Congress should tie Section 117 compliance by America's
colleges and universities with their eligibility to participate
in Title 4 Federal Student Loan Grant and Work Study Programs.
Congress may wish to require that prominent college and
university administrators certify under oath the accuracy and
completeness of their Sections 117 disclosures to the
Department.
The American people generously fund significant portions of
the operations in most of our colleges and universities and
deserve awareness enforcement efforts by the Department. Thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you. I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moore follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.014

Chairman Owens. Thank you, Mr. Moore. I would like to next
recognize Mr. Yang.

STATEMENT OF MR. JOHN C. YANG, PRESIDENT AND EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, ASIAN AMERICANS ADVANCING JUSTICE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Yang. Thank you, Chairman Owens, Ranking Member Wilson,
and the other members of this Committee. My name is John C.
Yang. I am the President and Executive Director of Asian
Americans Advancing Justice, AAJC, based in Washington, DC. I
previously served in the Department of Commerce, as well as
Shanghai-based legal director for the American company of
Illinois Tool Works.
Look, the American university system is the enemy of the
world, and the United States has benefited from the talent that
has come to the United States. Many of the most significant,
scientific advances have come from immigrants such as Enrico
Fermi, and such as Albert Einstein.
Let us also remember that many of the scientists and
students that we are talking about today chose to come here
because of the Democratic ideals that we represent, and because
they prefer our system of government rather than Communist and
autocratic systems. We should be embracing that community,
learning from this community, and celebrating that they chose
to be here, and to contribute to our American democracy.
Unfortunately, xenophobic and anti-immigrant and racist
rhetoric used by policymakers and officials at the highest
level of our government fueled resurgent xenophobia against
immigrants, especially of Chinese and Asian descent.
One need not look further than the recent attacks against
Congresswoman Judy Chu, whose loyalty to the United States was
questioned simply because of her race and ethnicity. Public and
government officials must be cautious of engaging in anti-
Chinese rhetoric and must challenge colleagues and peers who do
so. The cost of the Asian American community is clear.
Surveys by Pew and the Asian American Foundation
demonstrate that one in two Asian Americans no longer feel safe
because of their race and ethnicity, and shockingly, one in
four Americans believe that Asian Americans are somehow more
loyal to their country ethnicity rather than the United States.
That narrative has to change.
There is currently a widespread suspicion of scientists,
university researchers and students who are Chinese or of Asian
descent. Then President Trump in 2018 wildly and irresponsibly
stated that ``Almost every student that comes over to this
country from China is a spy.''
As another example, the now abandoned China initiative
created a mandate and increased pressure on the FBI to
scrutinize and target Asian Americans and Asian immigrants in
the research community, based seemingly only on their
ethnicity, rather than criminal activity. Indeed, FBI Director
Wray suggested that there should be a case opened at every
single U.S. Attorney's district on the China initiative.
This led to the prosecution of many Asian Americans and
immigrants for conduct that is minor, unrelated to espionage,
and typically would not support criminal prosecution. Several
cases over the last 2 years demonstrate that this approach was
flawed, leading to dismissals and acquittals in cases like Gang
Chen, Anming Hu, and Franklin Tao.
Fortunately, the administration looked at this initiative,
recognized that it is wrong headed, and decided to abandon that
approach. These entailments and investigations have led to the
dismissal, resignation and termination of Asian American
scientists, as well as a growing fear among Asian Americans and
Asian immigrants of being targeted and scapegoated based on
their race, ethnicity and national origin.
Look, to be clear we do have legitimate differences with
the Chinese government and the Xi Jinping regime presents a
unique national security challenge. If we are not careful, and
we do not use the proper language and engage in the proper
nuance about these policies and actions, there are communities
that will suffer.
I am not theorizing about this here. We saw the
incarceration of Americans of Japanese descent based on
fictionalized evidence of espionage. We saw the murder of Sikh
Americans, and hate crimes against the Arab, Middle East, and
Muslim and South Asian American community after 9/11. We saw
the murder of Vincent Chin because of a trade war with Japan
that we had in the early 1980's.
Look, these are legitimate disputes that we had with these
foreign nations, and in each of these cases our domestic
community, our Americans suffered. When approaching these
issues we need to use a scalpel, not a sledgehammer. We need to
approach these issues with facts, precision, and expertise, so
that we can be effective and efficient with our solutions.
We need to define our terms carefully to avoid overreach,
and to allow universities, professors, and students to
understand their obligations and to comply. We need to train
investigators to avoid misunderstandings, stereotyping and
overreach. Universities have been perfect places to facilitate
effective, long-standing, meaningful intellectual exchanges.
Those exchanges bring so many different benefits that are
critical to helping individuals understand each other, their
culture and their shared humanity. Open research and
collaboration is critical to addressing some of our world's
most difficult problems, such as climate change and technology.
I ask that all of us avoid Jingoism to avoid stereotyping.
Let us engage in a thoughtful, specific discussion necessary to
celebrate the strength of the American education system, while
recognizing the challenges that we face. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Yang follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.026

Chairman Owens. Thank you, Mr. Yang. I would like now--I
would like to recognize Mr. Singleton.

STATEMENT OF MR. CRAIG SINGLETON, CHINA PROGRAM DEPUTY DIRECTOR
AND SENIOR FELLOW, FOUNDATION FOR DEFENSE OF DEMOCRACIES,
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Singleton. Chairman Owens, Ranking Member Wilson, and
distinguished members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify about foreign adversary influence on
U.S. college campuses. I am pleased to provide relevant
research and policy insights from the Foundation for Defense of
Democracies, a non-partisan research institution where I serve
as a senior fellow.
Foreign adversary nations are engaged in far-reaching
campaigns to exploit the United States's open, collaborative
nature and furtherance of their strategic military and economic
goals. Nowhere is this threat more acute than on U.S. college
campuses today. These complicated challenges extend well beyond
technology transfer and intellectual property theft.
Increasingly, America's adversaries, but particularly
China, are leveraging their almost unfettered access to U.S.
universities to stifle free speech protections, monitor student
activities, and promote false narratives. No doubt, openness,
freedom and diversity represent fundamental pillars of our
democracy, and serve as intrinsic strength on the United States
and our way of life.
Maintaining America's competitive edge hinges on a
commitment to open academic and scientific exchange, but so too
must we embrace common sense measures to protect our
intellectual capital and discourage its misappropriation, as
well as to counter authoritarian attempts to promote on campus
censorship and intimidation.
In doing so, we must take serious steps to avoid inflaming
anti-Asian rhetoric for the unjustly blaming of Chinese
students as spies. Indeed, by encouraging dialog, and
respectful engagement, Congress stands to promote a clear-eyed
understanding of the complex geo-political issues at play,
while still respecting diverse perspectives.
Responding to this evolving threat requires the
establishment of new legislative and regulatory guardrails
centered around enhanced transparency requirements, mandatory
due diligence and vetting protocols, and in some cases funding
and gift prohibitions to protect academic freedom and
integrity.
Some of those measures should include a Federal ban on
Confucius institutes, and their rebranded successors, which are
proliferating across college campuses, lowering Section 117's
foreign gift reporting threshold from $250,000.00 to $5,000.00,
and empowering the U.S. Department of Education to better
investigate and enforce Section 117 non-compliance, mandating
that U.S. universities make publicly available details
regarding all academic and research partnership agreements,
both active and inactive, with entities located in countries of
concern, such as China.
Establishing formal mechanisms so the Department of
Education in coordination with other agencies to share relevant
insight, best practices and trends with select foreign
partners, similarly working to confront maligned, adversarial
influence throughout their higher education systems.
We should not view these new measures as limitations on
academic freedom, but rather as necessary safeguards to
preserve the integrity of our higher education system.
Transparency and oversight do not stifle collaboration, but
instead ensure that partnerships are built on a foundation of
trust, accountability, and shared values.
Moreover, by better scrutinizing financial ties,
legislators can prevent undue influence, and ensure that
research and educational activities remain independent and free
from adversarial pressure. On these issues, policymakers here
in Washington stand to learn from leaders of the State level,
including in places like Florida.
This year Democrats and Republicans in Tallahassee, working
closely with university representatives, and higher education
stakeholders unanimously passed the first of its kind
legislation, enhancing transparency requirements, foreign
influence disclosure rules, and targeted to gift bans to
protect the state's post-secondary institutions and their
students from the evolving threat posed by adversarial
countries of concern.
These, and other State level initiatives can and should
serve as models for Federal level legislation. No doubt,
efforts to neutralize the threat facing by China, Russia, and
other adversarial nations transcends political lines, even as
they present a myriad of cross-jurisdictional challenges in
Congress.
Legislators must therefore work together to leverage their
diverse backgrounds and experiences across congressional
committees, to effectively tackle this issue, and produce
lasting legislative outcomes. On behalf of the Foundation for
Defense of Democracies I thank you again for inviting me to
testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Singleton follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.041

Chairman Owens. Thank you, Mr. Singleton, appreciate that.
Okay. Under Committee Rule Number 9, we will now question the
witnesses under the 5-minute rule. I will begin the process.
Mr. Moore, one excuse we hear from schools is that tracking
foreign funds seems to be too difficult. Hearing how well
universities seem to track athletic booster contributions, or
which students without outstanding tuition and fees are due, we
find that response somewhat hard to believe.
During your investigations did you find that it was truly
difficult for schools to identify and track foreign
contributions?
Mr. Moore. Mr. Chairman, our investigations found that the
universities had the information we wanted readily in hand, but
they were extremely reluctant to provide it to us.
The idea that it presented an additional burden to them,
they were already--our investigations revealed that they were
already very systematically tracking foreign contracts, foreign
gifts, and of course pursuing donors around the world with
great vigor as you might expect.
It was not an issue where the universities would have had
to have set up new mechanisms. They could simply have made an
effort to tap the information they were already collecting and
producing, and provide that accurately to the Department as
required by Section 117.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. Actually, I am going to ask both
you and Mr. Singleton this question. I think you kind of
addressed this somewhat in your opening statement, but I want
to just make sure we have this.
We are engaged with the battle against foreign bad actors
whose goals are to undermine our American culture of freedom.
It turned our students against a free market system and steal
our intellectual properties, but there are also domestic actors
in our educational system willing to grant these foreign actors
safe harbor on our college campuses.
What suggestions--I think you highlighted some of these
things before, would you say to hold these domestic actors
accountable when the Department of Education refuses to take
action?
Mr. Moore. Well, I think that the Office for Civil Rights
at the Department of Education ought to be very cognizant of
pressure from the Chinese Communist Party that's applied in the
United States to students particularly of Chinese descent.
That's a big issue, and an ongoing issue.
It has been an issue at Fordham and other universities, and
frankly the university, excuse me, the Department ought to be
extremely aware, and ought to have a way to facilitate
investigations of that sort of pressure from entities acting on
behalf of the CCP.
Chairman Owens. Mr. Singleton, do you have any suggestions
on that also?
Mr. Singleton. Sure. I mean collaboration is vital, but
China has proven adept at exploiting America's academic
openness and dynamism to advance its intertwined industrial
policies and military expansion. Passing legislation to prevent
potential conflicts of interest on campus is essential, hiking
student screening, and in some cases outright denials for
individuals in certain state-run institutions in China's
military.
In particular, holding hearings like this, but establishing
Federal Government office, and American State and local
governments and non-governmental organizations can approach for
advice on how to best manage some of these requests, and how to
manage and learn from the experiences of other universities
across the country.
Chairman Owens. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Singleton, now one of
the loopholes we have seen abused is the 501(c)(3) system to
circumvent their foreign rules. Foreign regimes can prop up
non-profits, use them to funnel money to college campuses. On
the other side, colleges will sometimes see foreign donations
through an affiliated university foundation, and then not
report those contributions. Can these loopholes be addressed?
Mr. Singleton. Absolutely. I mean non-profits and mirky
corporate donations are a big threat, and so are gifts and
donations from State backed, or state-owned companies, and
state-owned enterprises in China, not to mention individuals
acting as cut-outs for authoritarian regimes.
The current law only requires disclosure if the donor is a
foreign government. This is a loophole that invites
authoritarian governments to make gifts through third parties,
and the CCP, the Chinese Communist Party uses third-party
intermediaries for these types of operations, including
espionage efforts. That is why they documented it. It is a
staple of their political and economic force abroad. Increased
transparency is the answer.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I am going to now recognize the
Ranking Member for purposes of questioning the witnesses.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chair. This question is for you,
Mr. Yang. In 1960, America's Federal funding represented 45
percent of all global research and development funding across
the world. Today, that funding is only 10 percent of global
funding. Why is Federal funding of research important? What can
the Federal Government do to continue supporting that research?
Mr. Yang. Thank you very much for that question. Federal
funding is critical to advance in all of the fields that we are
talking about. Let us be clear. The vast majority of the
funding goes to open research. Open research leads to the
discoveries that we see, whether it is in science, whether it
is mathematics, whether it is even in literature or history.
If we are trying to really advance the American system, we
need to continue that open and collaborative process. I agree
that transparency is necessary, but we need to make sure that
transparency is narrowly tailored to the issues at hand. Make
sure that our universities are able to comply in a simple
manner.
The other thing that I am concerned about is as we are
moving along in this, if we are going to be changing standards,
we need to make sure not to have retroactive application of
those standards so that universities or individuals get caught
up in the process.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you. Can you discuss the economic and
social value of bringing in scholars from across the globe into
the American higher education system?
Mr. Yang. Thank you very much. Certainly, there is a huge
economic value in the neighborhood of tens of billions of
dollars that goes into our U.S. economy from international
students as whole. Then beyond that is the soft value that we
have of introducing them to our American system.
I am challenged, and I would posit that our universities
are still succeeding in that. Frankly, if anything, the numbers
tell us that the sentiment against Asian Americans, Chinese
Americans, is at an all-time low. To the extent that propaganda
is trying to cause American students to look against the United
States, or look toward China, that propaganda is failing.
The fact that one in four Americans believe that Asian
Americans hold a dual loyalty is very problematic, and so we
must continue to encourage those cultural exchanges, so that
the next generation beyond us can find ways to find the common
humanity in all of us.
Ms. Wilson. Can you tell us what impact does harmful
rhetoric and misinformation have on collaborations with
international educational institutions?
Mr. Yang. Literally, my organization and sister
organizations of ours hear almost every day about professors
and students that are no longer willing to come to the United
States. These are professors and students that have so much to
offer to our country. Again, I am not even necessarily talking
about sensitive areas, like nuclear secrets, or military
industrial complex issues, but basic collaboration that is
being lost.
They are going to other countries. If we are talking about
a potential brain drain to this country, that is something that
we have to solve as well.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you. Mr. Moore, in my home State of
Florida the University of Florida's agroecology program
partners with several international schools including the
Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
These research partnerships are crucial to promoting
mutually beneficial research at higher education institutions,
but the calls in your testimony to increase enforcement of
Section 117 has the potential to foster a hostile environment
for future international research.
Can you please explain to this Committee how these
draconian enforcement measures will not discourage
collaboration with international research partners?
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Congresswoman. I think Section 117,
and anything that I have mentioned today to strengthen it
would--it is simply again, disclosure. It would not do anything
to inhibit money from China, money from Israel, money from
anywhere. Those relationships can continue. Contracts can
continue, new ones can be made. Billions of dollars can
continue to come in.
There is no limitation on that in anything that I have
said, or anything that Section 117 currently says. It simply
has to be disclosed. My view is that the American people are
entitled to that information, and policymakers should be
informed by that information too.
That should not be any kind of threat to collaborations if
there is a nefarious donor, or collaborator, and it scares off
that collaboration, then I think that is probably a very good
thing. In the case that you mentioned, I do not think that
would be an issue. Thank you.
Ms. Wilson. I yield back, thank you.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would now like to recognize
Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Yes. Mr. Chairman, I just would like to begin
with a bit of a pushback on some of your opening comments in
regards to the statements you made about Biden, and he just
does not get it. We have heard that you all believe that the
Department of Education is lax in its enforcement of Section
117.
In reality, though it is the Department's most recent data
and contains tens of thousands of entries from hundreds of
colleges and universities. It seems to me that the Department
is communicating with colleges and universities about how
important it is to report any grants and contracts from foreign
sources.
In addition, colleges and universities have gotten the
message that they are making great strides in reporting this
information in accordance with the law. While the prior
administration was focused on a few bad actors, this
administration is providing guidance and support to colleges
and universities to help ensure compliance with the law, which
is what everyone wants.
Mr. Moore, you said in your testimony you cited a
bipartisan Senate report that 70 percent of all colleges in
U.S.--of all U.S. colleges and universities failed to report.
Do you still believe that to be true?
Mr. Moore. Congressman, that was according to the report
from that we----
Mr. Takano. You just are repeating a report that was issued
in 2017?
Mr. Moore. That was in 2020.
Mr. Takano. 2020.
Mr. Moore. October 2020.
Mr. Takano. 2020.
Mr. Moore. I do not know what the current figures are. I do
not have access to them.
Mr. Takano. Okay. In fact, that number could be misleading.
It could not be accurate. It might not be accurate right now.
Mr. Moore. I cited the data in my testimony, but it may
have changed, absolutely.
Mr. Takano. It could be changed. That 70 percent, is that
just in reference to reporting on, you know, grants and
contributions from China, or might other authoritarian nations
also be a part of a concern of ours?
Mr. Moore. Many, Congressman. You are right to mention
that, and I mentioned in my testimony Russia, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, there are many nations. This is not an Asian focus, or
a China focus concern. This is all the world.
Mr. Takano. Might it be productive for us to have a
hearing, not just on China, but on the influence of all
maligned potential nations out there that are authoritarian and
might have an interest in influencing our universities?
Mr. Moore. I think that is a wonderful idea, Congressman.
Mr. Takano. Great. Mr. Singleton, is this third-party
entity loophole only a problem for China, or do other nations
potentially contribute or find ways to get money to
universities through these mechanisms of third parties?
Mr. Singleton. Sure. I mean friends and foes alike take
advantage of those sorts of loopholes, which is why we should
apply the standard evenly across.
Mr. Takano. I am curious about this sole focus on China of
this hearing when we have other authoritarian nations that pose
these issues. Mind you, I am concerned about China's
authoritarianism, but I am also concerned about
authoritarianism in general.
I am going to suspect that it has something to do with how
the previous administration dealt with China, and I think in a
very clumsy way. Mr. Chairman, I would seek unanimous consent
to enter into the record a political article entitled, 15 Times
Trump Praised China as Coronavirus was Spreading Across the
Globe.
Just to give you a flavor, there are 15 entries here from
January 22 through February when the virus was clearly a posing
problem, but under appreciated by the President then.
He says one of the great many things about our just-signed
giant trade deal with China is that it will bring both USA and
China closer together in so many ways. Terrific working with
President Xi, a man who truly loves his country. More to come.
January 24th, China has been working very hard to contain
the virus. The United States greatly appreciates their efforts
in transparency. It will all work out well. It goes on and on
and on. Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter this into the
record.
Chairman Owens. No objection.
[The information of Mr. Takano follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.050

Mr. Takano. Several months later, when it was not going so
well in the United States to manage it, he starts saying things
like Kung Flu, the China virus, which tremendous boomerang
effects on Asian Americans because as an Asian American, I know
what it feels like when one of the Asian ethnicities is singled
out for scapegoating.
Then there is a generalized hatred that spreads throughout
all Asian Americans. Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to make that
point. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you so much. I just want to make sure
we also clarify that the hearing is really about the
infiltration of bad actors throughout college systems, and also
the transparency for funding of that, so kind of have to be one
of them, but there are others, and we are going to make sure we
address them all. I would like to have Mr. Good, please.
Mr. Good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, a couple of
questions would be for Mr. Moore here. Mr. Moore, the
University of Pennsylvania, you know where this is going, which
runs the Penn Biden Center in Washington, DC. reportedly
received 14 million from unnamed contributors in China and Hong
Kong, and 2.4 million form unnamed contributors in Saudi
Arabia. There is another country, Saudi Arabia since 2021.
The names of these donors are concealed by the Department
of Education, which is required to report donations to
universities that have funds with Federal dollars, but the
agency has reportedly declined every request to provide the
names. Mr. Moore, according to these reports, again the Penn
Biden Center having received millions of dollars from unnamed
foreign influence, should the American public be concerned
about that?
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Congressman. I think that the
American public should be very concerned about the undisclosed
donor identities to UPenn particularly leading up to the
Presidential election in 2020. It was after the establishment
of the Biden Center that there was a very dramatic increase, so
I think reportable gifts and contracts were up 389 percent
between 2018 and 19.
Meanwhile, I think 9 of the current administration
officials were on the payroll of the UPenn Biden Center.
UPenn--this goes in my opinion to the question of requiring the
donor identities be made available as part of disclosure.
Disclosure is somewhat meaningless if the donor identities are
not provided, so the American people and policymakers can know
who is giving what to whom.
UPenn is not alone. There are many other universities with
similar patterns where it appears that there is an attempt to
influence policymakers, but this was a rather startling one
with UPenn. That is why I think that donor identity should be
disclosed.
Mr. Good. Just one of the offices where classified
documents have been found that belong to Mr. Biden, by the way.
Mr. Singleton, the reports are that 6.5 billion in previously
unreported foreign money has went to universities from
adversarial countries--6.5 billion. 8.4 billion anonymously
reported foreign money over the last decade, 800 billion is the
total endowment of the market value of the endowment of the
United States institutions of higher learning, by the way.
807 billion is the endowment, and yet we have got 1.6
trillion outstanding student loans with exorbitant increase in
college tuition. In your testimony you mentioned how university
endowments are increasingly under foreign influence. Could you
speak to that a little more, or elaborate on that please?
Mr. Singleton. Absolutely. Currently there are no
restrictions whatever on U.S. university endowments from
investing in Chinese companies that are directly involved in
Chinese military civil fusion.
There are numerous examples of endowment funds being
injected and capitalized into Chinese companies that are
directly involved in developing advanced technologies that are
used to propagate the weaker genocide, for example. It is very
little insight in accountability into how these endowment funds
are being managed, what is their exposure to China, and
certainly what linkages and dependencies are created as a
result of those endowment relationships that do create undue
burdens and adversarial pressure, not just on the endowment
funds themselves, but the universities.
Mr. Good. Why do you think that universities with the
largest endowments tend to be the worst offenders with
complying with Section 117, the reporting of the foreign
donations?
Mr. Singleton. Well, I would say that you know, the key
rate is updating and expanding mandatory reporting requirements
because it will simply conform with the realities that foreign
influence plays on the university system, including endowments.
Universities run the risk of entanglement with the Chinese
Communist Party in large part because they rely on these opaque
funding and endowment systems from party connected sources that
includes gifts, donations, investments, Confucius institutes,
and research partnerships.
Mr. Good. Staying with you, Mr. Singleton. In one of his
first national security related acts, President Biden a year
and a half ago withdrew--or two and a half years ago I should
say, withdrew a Trump era rule requiring universities to
disclose their terms of agreements with Confucius institutes,
which of course act as Chinese Communist Party outposts on
college campuses. Why do you think he would do that?
Mr. Singleton. I am not sure.
Mr. Good. Can you think of any good reason to do that?
Mr. Singleton. I am not sure. I think it is worth of
pursuit in terms of investigation and hearing simply because we
know that Confucius institutes operate as outposts for China's
united front work department, which plays a key role in its
political warfare.
They have also, and there are numerous examples of
Confucius institutes and their follow-on successors, sometimes
referred to as Confucius classrooms being harnessed to
intimidate Asian American students studying here in the United
States, to control curricula that are used and propagated on
U.S. college campuses, and to control how research initiatives
that are developed as a result of these funds.
I think that while the number of Confucius institutes has
dropped precipitously from 113 to about 10 today, the problem
is that we have seen this proliferation of Confucius institute
like agreements, and frankly no one has been able to sort of
understand the scale and scope of that problem because there is
no information.
Mr. Good. Mr. Singleton, my time has run out. I am getting
tapped out here, so thank you for your time. I appreciate you
being here today. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I now recognize Dr. Adams.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
Ranking Member as well, and to the witnesses. Thank you for
your testimony, and Mr. Singleton, as I was listening to you
talk about the endowments, et cetera, I am not going to ask you
a question, but if there is data available, I sure would like
to get copies of it.
Let me just begin when establishing foreign influence
compliance that protocol, institutions of higher education have
to balance compliance and create a welcoming campus climate. I
am a retired 40-year college professor, so I do have an
interest in that, but I am pleased at seeing how many
institutions take this dual responsibility seriously.
At Florida International University, for example,
established a university-wide task force on foreign influence
and global risk. Mr. Yang, can you discuss briefly the value of
incorporating community stakeholders when developing policies
around foreign influence and international research
collaboration?
Mr. Yang. Thank you for that question. It is absolutely
vital for the community to be involved. Right now, what we are
seeing is the community is scared to speak up about issues such
as this because they feel like they are being targeted, whether
it is scientists in the university space, whether it is
students that are thinking about applying to universities here
in the United States, there is a clear chilling effect that is
happening because of this rhetoric that is being used.
I respect what Mr. Singleton is saying, but I must take
issue a little bit with the focus again on China. It is yes,
there are issues with respect to transparency, but if we are
focusing just on what the Chinese government is doing, what the
Xi Jinping government is doing, then we are missing the forest
for the trees.
Yes, we should be talking about transparency. We should
talk about accountability, but it should be the accountability
for all countries, all different foreign influence.
Ms. Adams. Okay. Thank you, sir. Can you discuss best
practices for engaging within international academics in a way
that maintains relationships and protects international
scholars from racial discrimination?
Mr. Yang. Thank you for that. Part of this is setting clear
standards, and I see with respect to NSP M33, which was
promulgated by the OSTP, trying to standardize guidance with
respect to research grants, what is necessary to be reported. I
agree with Mr. Moore that Section 117 could be a very useful
vehicle, but make sure that we have standard forms that should
be used.
One thing I would want to be careful about is the
enforcement mechanism, whether investigators are trained on how
to investigate these issues, and what the enforcement actually
is. Too often we have seen Asian American scientists have
basically paperwork errors turn into criminal prosecutions when
they should be handled as an administrative matter.
Ms. Adams. We know that maintaining academic openness and
collaboration in academia allows us to engage with bright
individuals from all over the world, and if there are threats
against national academics, it prevents amazing talents from
working with our universities.
Let me ask you, Mr. Yang, in what ways has the Asian
Americans Advancing Justice worked to combat issues of racial
discrimination?
Mr. Yang. While combating racial discrimination as a whole,
it is really an all effort. First, is making sure that we are
teaching history in our schoolrooms on Asian American history,
and making sure that all of the different communities are
represented, whether they are African American, Latino
American, LGBTQ Americans.
Part of this is making sure that everyone is comfortable
telling their own stories. Part of this is making sure that
scientists and researchers of students are comfortable talking
to law enforcement. Even if they make an administrative error
like Sherrie Chen did, in saying that she had a contact with a
Chinese person in 2011, rather than 2012.
That does not become criminalized behavior. Making sure
that we are specific about how we are engaging with the
community, consistent engagement, not only from the law
enforcement end, but from the get-go in terms of creating these
standards that we're talking about.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, sir. You mentioned in your testimony
that MIT, Yale University, Stanford for example, and at least
eight other institutions have issued statements detailing their
concerns with the targeting of Chinese scientists, and
academics. Can you just explain briefly, we just have about 20
seconds, on the investigations against people of Asian descent
and how they may affect the number of academics that engage
with our universities?
Mr. Yang. For those universities, some of them are afraid
of hiring them, and some of them are afraid of engaging with
them and collaborating with them because they fear that they're
going to have additional burdens imposed upon them, or have
their behavior be criminalized.
Ms. Adams. Great. Well, thank you. Mr. Chairman, I am right
on time. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Mr. Thompson from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
holding this important hearing, and thanks to all of our
witnesses for your testimony. The research and innovation in
American universities is clearly the envy of the rest of the
world, and for good reason.
From developing groundbreaking treatments for cancer, to
advancements in precision agriculture that help feed the world.
American institutions of higher education are truly on the
cutting edge. As the old saying goes, however, with great power
comes great responsibility.
The foreign adversaries like China and Russia increasingly
falling behind in certain sectors, they are looking to steal
American research and innovation to help make up those losses.
It is imperative upon all of us to ensure that does not happen.
Mr. Moore, in your testimony you noted the extensive issues the
Department of Education has had in processing, investigating,
and enforcing Section 117 reporting requirements.
There is an awful lot of data coming into the Department
under these requirements, and especially given your experience
as Chief Investigative Counsel at the Department, do you think
the Department has the capacity to properly process all this
incoming information?
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Congressman. I think that is a very
good question. First, I want to say there are some career folks
at the Department of Education and the Office of General
Counsel, particularly that do a superb job in American, that
can be proud of them. Having said that, most of the Department
of Education is not suited to review financial records coming
in from departments, or to engage in the necessary vetting of
collaborations, or to advise other Federal agencies on those
fronts.
I think that it may be something, particularly if the
department cannot show that it is serious about enforcing the
Section 117 that Congress may want to look at whether or not
enforcement of these disclosures needs to go to an agency that
has actually got America's national security interests as one
of its tasks, and also has the competency to study financial
relationships between universities and the documents they
report, and in our other countries and entities acting on
behalf of other countries.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you for that. In your testimony, you
noted that the Department should immediately return enforcement
obligations to the Office of General Counsel. How do you
believe that that would improve enforcement and processing
capabilities?
Mr. Moore. In a word, the Office of the General Counsel is
full of attorneys, and so universities take that a little bit
more seriously because they have huge staffs, I mean Harvard--
the other universities that we investigated have massive staffs
full of very able counsel.
At a minimum, to have moved enforcement to the Federal
student aid where they do not have attorneys, they are not
suited for that. They are not armed to do battle with counsel
for the university, or they will offer them to the university
it pertains. It is just that universities have no reason to
take it seriously when they are facing Federal student aid,
instead of at least the office of the General Counsel.
Mr. Thompson. Given the current challenges, Mr. Moore, do
you think expanding reporting requirements would yield any
different results than the current requirements, or are there
other ways we can target the kinds of malicious activities
their adversaries are engaging in, or would it be more
effective to limit new actions to just countries of concern?
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Congressman. I think there should be
heightened concern about the countries that have all but
declared war against the United States. The CCP certainly is
one of them, and I think that simply enforcing what is
currently on the books, particularly with regard to prohibiting
the anonymizing of donors is critically important because then
we can at least know who made that 14.8-million-dollar
contribution, in May 2018 to UPenn from China. Who was that?
Do they have an interest in the People's Liberation Army,
or other CCP entities that are very unfriendly to the United
States. I mean, I think right now it is very important to
enforce Section 117 as it is and tighten it up. The Department
could tighten it up tomorrow and say no anonymizing of donors.
They could do that in a heartbeat if they chose, and I hope
that Congress can act at least on that.
Mr. Thompson. Well, thank you. I look forward to working
with all of you to ensure we protect American innovation and
keep our competitive edge on the global stage, so I thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Yang, in the
1950's Congress participated in a shameful episode known as the
second Red Scare when fear of foreign Communists infiltrating
our society and our government resulted in many unfounded
accusations and prosecutions, but in part, by Republican
Senator Joseph McCarthy that led to the ruin of countless
American lives.
That is a part of our history that kept coming to my mind
last night as I was reading the briefing materials for today's
hearings. As we know, we have a long history in this country of
anti-Asian discrimination, which was exacerbated by the way our
former President talked about the COVID pandemic and much of
the China bashing that was normalized by his colleagues, and
resulted in horrifying attacks on Asian Americans, including
our highly valued colleague, Congresswoman Judy Chu.
Mr. Yang, how can we address real risks to our intellectual
capital and our national security without allowing anti-Asian
discrimination that should be an anathema to all Americans, and
is contrary to the fundamental foundations of our democracy.
Mr. Yang. Thank you very much for that question. Narrative
is key in the first instance. Once we engage in overblown
narrative that results in bad policies. As one example would be
the discriminatory land laws that have passed in Florida
recently.
Yes again, we do have national security concerns with the
Chinese government, but to result in land laws where Chinese
citizens are not allowed to own property in this country just
solely on this baseless fear is the type of sledgehammer that I
am talking about, rather than using a scalpel. We should be
thinking about what precisely are the policy risks that we are
talking about, whether it is with respect to solar energy,
whether it is in respect to artificial intelligence.
Whether it is just with respect to semiconductors, and
address those policy issues, and not just engage in a broader
narrative of the Chinese are declaring war against us. The
broader narrative that we are in an existential threat with
China. The other thing that strikes me about your analogy to
the 1950's that is striking, is that even if in the 1950's
where we had the Red Scare, average Russian citizens were not
generally targeted.
Average Asian Americans are being targeted right now, and
that is what we are seeing. Whereas during the height of the
Communist era, we still refer to it as a communist regime. We
talked about the Putin regime. Now we just talk about the
Chinese, or maybe we talk about the Chinese government, or the
CCP.
Yes, Xi Jinping is an autocrat. We can talk about that. We
can talk about those specific policies. Let us talk about those
policies and not a society and not a people.
Ms. Manning. Mr. Yang, as we look to the future and
increasing economic and potential military competition with
China, many experts say that the most important thing we can do
is continue to invest in our people, our education, and our
ability to innovate, which has long been the envy of the world.
I believe one of our superpowers is our ability to attract the
best and the brightest from around the world to come study in
the U.S. and oftentimes live and work in the U.S.
What impact do you believe it will have on our country if
we fail to attract the best and the brightest from around the
world to come study and work in the U.S.?
Mr. Yang. Thank you for that. It is absolutely correct that
there are Asian Americans, not just Chinese Americans, but
Asian Americans, and frankly people from around the country,
around the world that no longer see the United States as the
open society that it used to be, the society that would value
that innovation, value having open discussions, and that is
what we need to get back to, to understand that that is how we
become stronger.
The fact that I could represent the American government and
the Department of Commerce when I am negotiating against
Chinese people on the other side and represent our country.
That is the strength of our country. That is what makes us
special, and we should celebrate that.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. Let me just mention that I was
recently on a congressional trip to Japan, and one of the
issues that was raised was the fact that Japanese students are
no longer coming here to study in our universities, and that is
a loss to our country, but it is also a loss to the strong
relationship that is currently so important between the U.S.
and Japan, and with that I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would just like to also remind
my friends on the other side of the aisle that we are talking
in this hearing about the infiltration of bad actors into our
system, $6.5 billion of undisclosed funds, that is something
that America should know about. Where would that money go? That
is what we are trying to find out. Then I would like to
introduce or acknowledge Mr. James.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Singleton, it is
clear that CCP is aggressively expanding its military presence,
but even more so, it is influence throughout the globe. What is
even more concerning is its reach within the United States and
on our borders. That is why I introduced the No American Tax
Dollars to the CCP Act, which prevents the CCP from profiting
off of us.
From building their middle class on the backs of ours and
building their military on the backs of ours. Unfortunately,
higher education seems to be a tougher mountain to climb.
Without checks--reasonable checks, checks that apply to the
people who are sitting in this room, my colleagues as well who
have to report all of our financial disclosures and cannot
accept foreign donations, there are lower standards.
Lower standards for those who have the public trust and
taxpayer money in our university. Our top universities continue
to send hundreds of millions of dollars-worth of valuable
military and scientific research straight into the CCP's hands.
This will only be used to undermine our stature and influence
around the world.
Now this should not be conflated or confused with our great
need to be that beacon of hope, that light, that shining
sitting on the hill, that destination for innovation and
education goes around the world. At the same time, we cannot be
taken advantage of. We have an obligation to protect the
American people and our interests at home and abroad.
Americans cannot own property in China, so why then is the
CCP taking advantage of Americans? Mr. Singleton, your opinion
sir, how does stolen research from our universities negatively
affect America's effort internationally?
Mr. Singleton. Sure. Absolutely. I would agree with Mr.
Yang that targeted and tailored enforcement is essentially.
Make no mistake, China is the worst offender in terms of
intellectual property theft and tech transfer threat in the
world. Now collaboration between the U.S. and China based on
transparency and shared values can be incredibly valuable.
China has not been transparent about its military buildup,
and it has harnessed technology specifically developed by U.S.
universities to subjugate and persecute its ethnic minorities.
What is more, China's civilian university system plays a major
role in China's military industrial complex, including its
nuclear and cyber espionage programs.
The CCP has specifically ordered civilian universities and
their students to integrate into ``the military civil fusion
system, and to advance the two-way transfer and transformation
of military and civilian technological achievements.'' These
types of collaborations simply require enhanced due diligence
above and beyond standard practices.
On this front, there is ample opportunity for Congress.
Mr. James. Thank you for that. For my colleagues across the
aisle who took great pains to educate all of us and took great
offense to all lives matter over the past few years, our
failing to give the American people enough credit to recognize
that we can nuance the argument between CCP, who are
adversaries, and Asian Americans who are our brothers.
In your testimony you mentioned the need for our programs
not funded by the CCP to equip future generations with key
international skills like language learning and global
expertise. How do you envision these programs, and how can a
district like mine, a No. 1 manufacturing district in the
Nation, a blue-collar district whose schooling focuses heavily
on CTE and STEM.
How can we keep pace with some of these expectations?
Mr. Singleton. Absolutely. China has made absolutely and
abundantly clear its focus on obtaining cutting edge
information, both through illicit means, but also through
routine exchanges in the academic and research space to advance
its great power ambitions. The good news, if there is any here,
is that there are tremendous opportunities and tremendous
resources available to local stakeholders to freely
investigate, and sort of conduct routine due diligence on their
Chinese partners.
The best one is the Australian Strategic Policy Institute
has a Chinese university tracker that is entirely free. It is a
free tool that helps universities and researchers understand
the length between Chinese universities and China's military.
Local FBI offices are also heavily involved in monitoring this
threat.
Think tanks like mine, and other research institutes
collaborate with universities on a regular basis to help
develop repeatable vetting models that allow them to evaluate
whether a research partnership is a true threat, or whether you
know, it is going to enhance American competitiveness, and
deepen person to person ties.
Mr. James. Thank you. I am sorry to cut you off. I
appreciate that. My last few seconds I want anyone else on this
panel to give us a to do list, homework on how we can help
restore America's competitive edge, and this includes
continuing to be that destination for Chinese, for Indian, for
anyone who wants to come and contribute to America's
competitiveness and not advantage our adversaries.
I want places like Warren, Sterling Heights, and Rochester
Hills in my 10th congressional District in Michigan to help
America elevate its game. Thanks a lot. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize Ms.
Jayapal.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before turning to my
questions, I just want to correct the record regarding
statements around allegations of the Penn Biden Center.
Republicans have suggested that the current administration is
not taking its responsibility seriously to address allegations
regarding the Penn Biden Center.
The University of Pennsylvania has publicly stated that the
Center ``Has never solicited or received any gifts from any
Chinese or other foreign entity, as the university has never
solicited any gifts for the Center. Since its inception in
2017, there have been three unsolicited gifts from two donors,
which combine to a total of $1,100.00. Both donors are
American.
I also want to remind my colleagues that the previous
administration declined to investigate claims surrounding the
Penn Center, stating that an investigation with respect to
Section 117 compliance was unwarranted. I would like to enter
into the record an article from the Daily Pennsylvanian from
January of this year, outlining these facts.
Chairman Owens. No objection.
[The information of Ms. Jayapal follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3758.054

Ms. Jayapal. Thank you. I want to start by saying that I am
deeply disturbed by the topic of this hearing, and I say that
as one of just a dozen naturalized citizens to serve in the
U.S. Congress, and the first South Asian American woman elected
to the House.
My parents sent me to the United States when I was 16 years
old by myself because they believed that this was the country
where opportunity was possible, that was not possible anywhere
else. They sent me with the believe that America was a
welcoming place, a place where I could thrive and reach my
highest potential, and I have.
This hearing today, reading the memo, listening to the
comments today, talking about people as threats just because
they were born in another country is just plain wrong. It is
just wrong. It undercuts our ability to attract the best and
the brightest. Frankly, it is hateful rhetoric that is a
distraction from meaningfully addressing real national security
threats, which we absolutely should do.
Just in my district alone, I have got 11,000 international
students who contribute $456 million to our economy. That is
just my district. Imagine what the contributions are across the
country. Mr. Yang, I want to thank you for being here today,
and really for your decades of work to advance the civil rights
of Asian Americans and Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders.
I want you to just briefly, because I have a couple of
questions for you, but briefly tell us the dangers of the
escalating rhetoric about China and the proposed legislative
actions in this space. The history that we' have gone through
in this country where we have seen over and over again how that
rhetoric hurts our Asian American people across the country.
Mr. Yang. Thank you. I will try to be brief. The dangers
are real. We have seen murders. Literally we have seen murders
because of anti--Asian sentiment, and that will continue if we
continue to have hyperbolic rhetoric. We have seen people that
do not want to come to the United States. Part of this is
making sure that we--in addition to preventing bad actors from
coming in, we have got to keep the good actors that want to be
here, here.
That includes so many Asian Americans, Chinese Americans,
students that come here for all of the reasons that we talked
about that want to stay here, are being precluded from staying
here because of this anti-Asian sentiment, because of
restrictive laws regarding ownership of land or other things.
Ms. Jayapal. One piece that I think is really important to
talk about is the real value of international students, of
researchers and professors, not just to increase campus
diversity, which is of course great and wonderful. We support
that. The benefits of U.S. foreign policy, and to our standing
in the world.
You touched on this briefly, but please elaborate a little
bit on why it is so important to have this engagement with
Chinese students, and how it helps us with our diplomatic
strategy.
Mr. Yang. There is so much misunderstanding right now
between United States and China. I recognize that there are
geopolitical challenges, but if you talk to the average
American, and the average Chinese student, whether in China, or
that are studying here, they find so much in common.
If they--if we are setting up a situation where they are no
longer talking to each other, they do not feel welcome here,
then our divisions will just get further. Minds will harden
even more, and foreign relations will become even more
difficult.
Ms. Jayapal. I do believe that there are legitimate
security concerns that we have to address with protecting
federally funded research. How would a precise response for
preventing actual cases of espionage and intellectual property
theft better serve our Nation. What does that look like?
Mr. Yang. What it looks like is very specific definitions
of what it means to have, for example, government control. What
it means to have foreign influence. What it means is very
understandable terms that universities and administrators can
administer. What it means is making sure we have investigators
that are trained to avoid bias, avoid stereotypes, and what it
means also is to make sure that universities feel like if they
make an innocent mistake, they will not get criminalized for
that behavior.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you so much for your testimony.
Demonizing communities for their country of origin breeds hate
and discrimination. I hope we stop doing it. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize Mr.
Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad my colleague
brought up the Penn Biden Center because I want to ask some
more questions about it. When President Biden opened the Penn
Biden Center think tank at the University of Pennsylvania in
2017, Chinese gifts to UPenn spiked. Chinese donors gave 105
million dollars from mid-2018 to mid-2022, which is nearly
double the known previous donations.
The current Secretary of State Anthony Blinken served as
the Center's Director. Many of its former employees now work in
the White House. Then Vice President Biden illegally stored
classified documents in his office at the Center. Mr. Moore,
was the Department of Education aware of the spike in Chinese
donations to UPenn after the Penn Biden Center opened?
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Congressman. If I could begin by
saying the reason that we knew about the money to UPenn, and
the spike in the foreign contributions to UPenn was because of
the reporting portal that we had created under Secretary Devos.
We were also aware of the same pattern at many other
universities.
It was particularly startling to see with UPenn what they
had received. That was very notable. Unfortunately, under
Section 117 once that information had been reported we really
could not do anything with it, and that is why I wrote that we
were not going to open an investigation. It was not warranted,
but that information should be public.
The donors should not have been anonymized.
Mr. Banks. You did look into opening an investigation, but
Section 117 did not give you the authority to do so? Is that
what you are explaining?
Mr. Moore. Congressman, there were a number of public
interest groups who accessed the information on the portal that
the public can access, Congressman accessed, who became aware
of that information that was being provided by UPenn. Some of
them wrote to us, and I think Members of Congress wrote to us
urging us to open an investigation.
It would have been a very political thing, inappropriate
frankly, for the Office of General Counsel if after UPenn had
reported, in compliance with Section 117, which is a very bare
reporting requirement. If we had then opened an investigation
into UPenn, frankly, that would have been an act we should not
have engaged in, and so we did not.
Mr. Banks. You do admit that you did find it abnormal?
Mr. Moore. Absolutely.
Mr. Banks. The sheer amount of Chinese donations to the
Penn Biden Center was not, that was not normal.
Mr. Moore. It was extraordinary.
Mr. Banks. What did you make of it?
Mr. Moore. I can only speculate, but our job frankly in the
Department of Education was to ensure that policymakers,
Congressmen and women and the American people could see for
themselves all that money going to UPenn from China and other
universities to access our technology, and perhaps influence
future policymakers.
Mr. Banks. Yes. I mean we are talking about well over 100
million dollars just to this one think tank center that
obviously had deep connections to the Biden family, and now to
the Biden administration, and yet you talk about you can only
speculate, but what would the Chinese donors get out of that
type of access?
Mr. Moore. I think that is a very fair question,
Congressman. If I might also point out it is I think the Biden
Center has stated, or UPenn has stated repeatedly that they
never solicited funds anywhere for the Biden Center. Instead,
those funds came in, all their solicitations. They actually had
the international fundraising operations that our current
Ambassador to Germany Gutman to collect contributions--foreign
contributions, but all those funds went into the general
operating fund for UPenn.
They did not go to the Biden Center. They were certain
those funds were comingled, and certainly went to the general
operations, and may have gone to the Biden Center, and that is
something that I think is worthy of.
Mr. Banks. I only got a minute left, but you were aware of
it. You admit that it was abnormal. You said that the Chinese
donations were flowing to other universities too. They were
reported because of the strict Trump administration guidelines,
but can you think of anything else? Any other think tank or
university that received a comparable amount of Chinese
donations to the Penn Biden Center?
Mr. Moore. Not in that timeframe, absolutely not. I am
unaware of them. The public did investigate on the portal to
see if it occurred. I am not aware of it occurring.
Mr. Banks. Really. It is wild. I mean you could not make it
up. Now he is the President, Blinken is the Secretary of State,
and they had these deep relationships. As you transitioned and
prepared for the transition to the Biden administration did you
keep files, documents, turn it over to them in hopes that they
would do something about it?
Mr. Moore. I mean I worked daily with the career people in
the department, and certainly did not destroy anything. Our
response was made public. We did not make any recommendations
beyond what we made at the time that are public.
Mr. Banks. Really crazy. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Mr. Sablan.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
witnesses. As we saw during the previous administration,
carelessness and wrongful targeting when discussing global
perspectives in higher education can have a chilling effect on
academic freedom. At best, it limits the ability of faculty
members from other countries to advance groundbreaking research
in their fields, and at worst it leads to unjust investigations
and surveillance and prosecution of individuals.
Callous and xenophobic rhetoric, particularly when it fails
to distinguish between Chinese or other AAPI immigrants and the
CCP has also led to a rise in hate crimes and intolerance
toward Asian Americans and Asian immigrants, and I have seen
that in the district I represent in Northwest Oregon.
We have a lot of international companies, and a lot of
people that are from around the world, and I have seen it
firsthand in the district I represent. Many college campuses
today include students, faculty and scholars who represent a
diversity of backgrounds, perspectives, and life experiences.
Portland State University, for example, in the district I
represent is a testament to the power of value and global
perspective and representation in American colleges. PSU
enrolls more than 2,000 international students from 63
countries, provides them with support, advising and career
opportunities. In Oregon a couple of years ago in the district
I represent, international students brought almost $41 million,
and that was 1,555 students in the First congressional
District.
Or University of Oregon, my alma mater close to 1,300.
Oregon State has more than 2,800 international students. At
Portland State, again they establish a groundbreaking 3-year
partnership with Seoul Welfare Foundation in South Korea, and
they allowed PSU Master of Social Work and Ph.D. students to
study Seoul's programs and delivery systems, and by forging
those fruitful partnerships, this can benefit Oregonians and
Americans.
By supporting the well-being in academic achievement of
international students, Portland State is leading the way and
demonstrating how higher education broadly can be a global
enterprise.
Mr. Yang, I have a two-part question. What is the benefit
to students, colleges, and the country to incorporate those
global perspectives into college campuses, and how can we
continue to uplift the importance of international engagements
in higher education?
Mr. Yang. No. Thank you very much for that question.
Certainly, the cultural exchanges are absolutely vital if we
want to avoid thinking in a zero-sum manner about the United
States and China relations in particular. One thing that
troubles me also is we are asking university officials often
times asking them to be the watchdogs for espionage, or
intellectual property theft, where they do not have the proper
tools to do it.
What happens in these situations is they over-correct, so
even student organizations encounter frustrations in hosting
events because there is a concern that that might be seen as a
propaganda tool for the Chinese government. We need to continue
to foster those exchanges. We need to continue to recognize
that there is a common humanity in all of this, and if we
continue to have exchanges between Chinese students and
American students, I think the American ideals will actually
clearly win in the end, such that the Chinese students as we
have demonstrated throughout history, will want to come to the
United States, learn from the United States, and stay in the
United States and contribute to our economy.
Ms. Bonamici. Right. Which I think is a reminder that we
desperately need some good, comprehensive immigration reform
because too often people come here and study, earn advanced
degrees, and then end up having to go back and often times work
for competing companies. I just want to put that word out
there. It is not within this Committee's jurisdiction, but it
is a critical issue.
I also want to discuss the Biden administration's approach
to enforcing the gift reporting requirements for colleges and
universities under Section 117 of the Higher Education Act. The
Department of Education under this administration has made it
easier for universities to report gifts of more than $250,000
as is required under the law.
They streamline the reporting process through the Office of
Federal Student Aid in conjunction with the Department's Office
of General Counsel. Mr. Yang, why is it important for
universities to be transparent about potential undue foreign
influence, and of course we want to find the right balance, but
be aware of and crack down on security concerns.
How can the Department of Education strike the right
balance to promote oversight and reporting without increasing
institutional burden?
Mr. Yang. Yes. Transparency is key, and I agree with all of
my fellow panelists there. Part of that is simplicity, making
sure that universities that are tasked with so much, so many
different responsibilities, are able to understand those. Part
of it is making sure that if they do make an honest mistake
that they will not be criminalized for that.
Part of this is ensuring that part of this process is that
they will be able to work actually with our government
officials, and foster some of these exchanges. I think if we do
all of that right, then again whether it is with respect to
research, whether it is with respect to education, cultural
exchanges, I believe that our ideals will win.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, as I yield back, I
want to note that as a representative of the Pacific Northwest,
we saw firsthand the horrific effects of the Japanese
internment. That is an awful part of this country's history. We
need to tread very carefully in this area.
I agree with my colleague, Congresswoman Jayapal, that the
title of this hearing is unnecessarily inflammatory, and I
yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize Mr.
Moran.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
panelists here today for your information and your testimony.
It is extremely important. I was concerned when I read through
the briefing papers and began to prepare for this hearing. When
I read through some of the examples of the censorship, direct
and indirect, that the Chinese Communist Party is having in our
colleges and universities today.
Censorship in the form of direct censorship where the
materials and discussions and research topics are being
curtailed because folks are afraid, frankly, of the Chinese
government, and then self-censorship from students that are
here from China, and some China focused scholars that have
expressed that they are refraining from making certain comments
and participating in events, or engaging in debates that were
critical of the Chinese government because they were afraid of
retaliation.
Then third, surveillance. That there are examples of campus
discussions or activities where the Chinese authorities have
surveilled those activities and come down hard on those
students that have participated in them. Fourth, harassments
and threats.
Scholars, particularly ones from China, but also students
have described being threatened by the Chinese government
officials or others who seek to silence criticism toward the
Chinese government. This is all very concerning to me. Aside
from the Confucius institutes that we have talked about today,
and aside from the money that is flowing into colleges and
universities. It is not being reported back.
It is significant. Mr. Singleton, I would just like to give
you the first opportunity to talk about this, and tell me do
these heavy-handed tactics by the CCP to chill free speech, and
freedom of association concern you?
Mr. Singleton. Absolutely. I mean I think we spent a
tremendous amount of that conversation today talking about
harmful rhetoric from American audiences, and I wholeheartedly
agree with Mr. Yang's comments on that front. We do so at the
detriment of talking about the Chinese Communist's Party's
direct role and access on U.S. college campuses.
Chinese students and scholars associations are a vignette
of what we see across the United States. These are united front
directed and funded organizations that operate at more than 150
college campuses. They have been directly implicated in the
harassment and intimidation of university administrators, but
also Chinese students studying here in the United States, if
and when they express political views that diverge from the
preferred political narratives of the Chinese Communist Party.
They have been involved in the suppression of free speech.
The disruption of events involving the Uyghurs genocide in
particular. They are wholly unregulated. These are
organizations that receive, as I mentioned, funding and
direction from the Chinese Communist Party. They report to
Chinese consulates and the Chinese Embassy here in Washington,
DC, and yet they are wholly unregulated with unfettered access
to U.S. college campuses.
Mr. Moran. Yes. I agree. I am really careful, I do my best
to use the language Chinese Communist Party instead of talking
about a nationality or an ethnicity because I recognize some of
the issues that are presented when we do not do that correctly.
I firmly believe that every person in this room was created by
God with equal and eternal value, regardless of where they were
created.
I am real careful about that, but I am concerned about the
Chinese Communist Party's influence in our colleges and
universities. Not just what we brought up so far, but looking
back at how they have influenced the Chinese Students and
Scholars Associations, Mr. Yang, I want to turn to you and get
some opinion about this from you.
In 2017, the CSSA at the University of California San Diego
protested against an invitation to the Dalai Lama to give that
year's commencement address, and they said that they consulted
with the Chinese consulate in 2019 about that issue. In 2019
Columbia University canceled a planned panel on Chinese human
rights violations, due to pressures from a ``Chinese student
group''.
Similar protests occurred in 2021 at the University of
Chicago against the campus that with Hong Kong activist Nathan
Long. These all seemed to go back to the Chinese Communist
Party where the Chinese Students and Scholars Association, at
least on some of these campuses were interfacing and
interacting with the Chinese Communist Party to understand who
they should protest and who they should not. What is your
reaction to that?
Mr. Yang. Thank you for that question. I agree that we
should be looking at specific issues and there may be specific
associations that are problematic. Where I have a concern is if
we paint with a broad brush that all student associations or
scholarship associations are problematic.
The other thing that I would agree with you on is that we
need to take a different law enforcement approach. Chinese
students and professors right now feel caught between a rock
and a hard place. They feel like on one hand that the Americans
feel like they're not American enough.
On the other hand the Chinese Communist Party is targeting
them. We in our American communities, should be embracing many
of them, and understand that we should be helping to protect
them, to protect their rights here on campus or at their homes.
Mr. Moran. Well, let me just be clear about my concern. It
is not about Chinese people. It is about the Chinese Communist
Party. That is where my concern lies. It is about the decisions
made by a totalitarian regime to try to influence free speech
and free association in this country. I thank you for your
time.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize Mr.
Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before turning to my
questions I want to first address the concerns around Section
117 compliance, the House and the Office of Federal Student
Aid, there were comments made to argue the Department's move of
Education Department's move of Section 117 compliance back to
the Office of Federal Student Aid is a poor decision, but in
fact the Office of General Counsel, where it was, is in no way
equipped to evaluate financial statements and provide resources
in the same manner as FSA is.
Unfortunately, we continue to buck enhanced transparency
and implementation of Section 117 by failing to increase
funding for FSA, so I just wanted to make that point. Mr.
Moore, exactly can you just for the record explain how
compliance with Section 117 enhances our national security?
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Congressman. I think that it enhances
national security by providing full disclosure of information
about possible foreign influences at universities, particularly
universities with significant research institutions on campus
where STEM technology is funded by the taxpayers.
I think having knowledge about the relationships between
foreign donors, especially from some countries that do not wish
us well is extremely important for you as Members of Congress
and for the American people.
Mr. Scott. Mr. Singleton, does Section 117 compliance
affect investment decisions made by university endowments?
Mr. Singleton. No, it does not.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Mr. Yang, the conversation about
foreign influence in higher education can often lead to over
sensitization and an irrational fear of harm of foreign
nationals. The title of this hearing is somewhat problematic,
and it seems to instill fear into our minds.
Can you say a word about how this kind of rhetoric can lead
to the rise of incidents of bias, violence and discrimination
against Asian American students and scholars?
Mr. Yang. Thank you very much for that question. Certainly,
whenever we talk about foreign influence it is an appropriate
topic to talk about. When we start talking about whether it is
the Chinese as a whole, even talking about it just in terms of
the CCP, it can lead to over generalizations.
One of the other analogies that I referred to the cold war
earlier, was certainly during the cold war, and even now, we
always referred to the Putin regime. We always referred to the
authoritarianism in Russia. During World War II, we always
referred to as Hitler's Germany or Nazi Germany.
When it comes to Asia, we do not have that same nuance.
During World War II, we referred to it at best as the Japanese.
No one knows who Kara Zito was. Here now, we should be more
specific if we are concerned about the autocratic regime in
China, names the autocratic regime, whether it's Xi Jinping and
his policies or the like.
If we start to get to that level of nuance, that level of
specificity, then we start to reduce the likelihood of
violence, repercussion, or collateral damage against the Asian
American community.
Mr. Scott. I thank you. Can you remind us of the comments
made by AAJC in the affirmative action cases recently decided
by the Supreme Court?
Mr. Yang. By who? Sorry.
Mr. Scott. The comments by AAJC on the affirmative action
cases.
Mr. Yang. Sure. With respect to affirmative action, this is
again recognizing that our community is very diverse. We have
been supportive of affirmative action. We think it is important
for the narrative of America to make sure that we understand
that America includes all of our different communities, whether
they are Asian Americans, African Americans, Latino Americans.
Too often our community has been used as a wedge to drive
again that narrative of we are somehow a model minority that is
set apart from other communities. It is important to recognize
that race still matters in this country. One message that I
have for college students, when we are talking about
universities, is that they should still be talking about race,
their upbringing in their college essays.
That is something that was explicitly allowed by Chief
Justice Roberts, and our university officials need to recognize
that diversity plays a critical role in our education system.
That diversity will only strengthen our education system.
Mr. Scott. Can you say a word about diversity within the
Asian community?
Mr. Yang. The Asian American community is exceptionally
diverse, and sometimes you think of people like me, an East
Asian Chinese American male. Obviously it includes Filipino
Americans, Vietnamese Americans, South Asian Americans, Indian
Americans, Pakistani Americans, and we need to recognize that
diversity.
When we talk about affirmative action, affirmative action
benefits many of those communities that otherwise would not
have a chance.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Dr. Foxx.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank our
witnesses for being here today. Mr. Moore, the current
administration has given no indication that any existing
section 117 investigations are being continued. In fact, in
August 2022, the American Council on Education wrote a thank
you letter to the Department of Education for its ``plans to
close'' all investigations.
Why is it crucial for the Department to follow through with
these investigations instead of quietly closing them based on
requests from post-secondary education stakeholders?
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Chairwoman. I think it is very
important that closure of any investigation be fact based, and
I was rather shocked to see the Vice President of ACE announce
last August in that thank you letter that he had been told by
Department officials that every investigation was going to be
closed, and that responsibility for Section 117 investigations
would be transferred to FSA.
If the Department actually closes them, all the
investigations in kind of one fell swoop without doing it in a
fact-based way, I do not understand that. It seems like merit
has been tossed out the window, other than let us get rid of
these.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Moore, the Biden administration
nearly finished its plan to transfer enforcement of Section 117
away from the Office of General Counsel, and into the Office of
Federal Student Aid, FSA. Given FSA's skillset and current
workload to implement the President's illegal student loan
cancellation schemes, is FSA well equipped to handle Section
117 enforcement?
Mr. Moore. Congresswoman, I do not believe that they are
equipped at all to handle Section 117 enforcement, especially
if everything was running smoothly with Section 117, and there
was not a history going back many years of massive violations
and lack of compliance, then you know, maybe it would be
something to say okay, this can go on auto pilot to, you know,
a less aggressive component of the Department.
That is not the case. It is an extremely strange time to
more or less downgrade the investigative potential that the
Department has when they are looking at these investigations,
so it does not make any sense at all.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Singleton, you mentioned the
State of Florida passing bipartisan unanimous legislation to
protect Florida universities. I also understand many Florida
universities publicly supported that bill. Can you elaborate on
how this coalition formed to promote common sense foreign
influence reforms?
Mr. Singleton. Absolutely. Yes, it did pass unanimously in
both the Florida House and Florida Senate before being signed
into law by the Florida Governor. It really was a whole of
society approach. There was collaborative debate between
universities, administrators, investigators from the Florida
Governor's. What the law does is it prohibits the universities,
their employees and representatives from soliciting or
accepting grants from entities located in China, Russia, Iran,
North Korea, Venezuela and I believe Cuba.
It also mandates that State universities obtain approval
from the Board of Governors before entering into contracts or
partnerships with entities located in these countries of
concern. They have to demonstrate that there is value to
students, and that the agreements do not pose risks to the
research enterprise.
The third part is that the State of Florida Governors is
now authorized to withhold performance funding for any
university or college that has not met these requirements, or
elects to enter into an un-authorized agreement, or partnership
with a country of concern.
There is both a carrot and stick approach. At the end of
the day, university administrators, community stakeholders, and
members of the Florida legislature all came together and passed
this unanimously.
Mrs. Foxx. I am glad to know that there is such enlightened
people in the colleges and universities there in Florida, and
that they saw the wisdom in coming together in this. I think
protecting our students and national security should be a
bipartisan issue. It should be something that all our citizens
care about, and I urge my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle to join Republicans in these efforts. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize Mr.
Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. We will go for Mr. Singleton here.
In your testimony, you talked of the goals of things like the
Communist Party would be to invest in American universities, to
A, stifle free speech, which is something we have kind of seen
in this administration, and otherwise monitor activities or
propagate disinformation and false narratives. Could you please
elaborate on that and tell us what type of disinformation and
false narratives people might want to propagate?
Mr. Singleton. Sure. The Chinese Communist Party is waging
what it calls a discourse war against the United States.
Mr. Grothman. Can you speak up?
Mr. Singleton. Sure. The Chinese Communist Party is waging
its discourse power against the United States and other allied
democracies around the world. It seeks to----
Mr. Grothman. We are not a democracy, but go ahead.
Mr. Singleton. Yes. To seek and to set and shape global
narratives about China's rise in ways by comparing,
contrasting, and consistently misrepresenting the benefits of
authoritarianism and the deficiencies, so-called, of democracy.
On U.S. college campuses one of the things that they do is sow
social division on college campuses, the Chinese Students and
Scholars Associations that we've mentioned are specifically
funded to best disrupt free speech protections, academic
integrity.
All the goal of presenting a particular political narrative
around China's so-called peaceful rise.
Mr. Grothman. Maybe I did not hear you. I want you to
specifically tell us what type of narratives, and by the way
when the Soviet Union was still around there was a KGB agent
who left, and he felt that most of the money being spent by the
KGB in the United States was not doing spying, it was in
essence to spread disinformation in America to cause America to
collapse from within.
Could you give us examples, specific examples, of false
narratives that representatives of the CCP might try to promote
in American universities?
Mr. Singleton. Sure. Absolutely. The first and foremost is
that the United States is in decline, that the Chinese
Communist Party does not represent the risk to U.S. national
security or to the world order. They also propagate maligned
narratives about Chinese human rights abuses seeking to
neutralize the legitimate claims made against genocide in
Chinese Communist Party directed genocide activities against
the Uyghurs.
This is all designed in many respects, like I said, the
social division here, but to help propagate false Chinese
Communist Party narratives across the United States, and to
undermine our----
Mr. Grothman. Could you give me those false narratives
about the United States? What do they want our students to
think about the U.S.?
Mr. Singleton. Sure. They tend to want us to believe that
the U.S. is a declining power, and that we should embrace the
narratives and the lack of universal values that the Chinese
Communist Party propagates, and the development of a new
international order that reflects China's values, interests,
that rejects human rights, that rejects universal values, and
that seeks to in many ways divide the United States population
against each other.
Mr. Grothman. How would you divide the U.S.? How are we
trying to divide the U.S. population?
Mr. Singleton. Well, the Chinese call it cognitive domain
warfare, and it is not the United States is certainly not the
only target of the Chinese Communist Party's activities. We see
them actively in places like Taiwan where they are seeking to
divide the population against itself, but also convince----
Mr. Grothman. Give me an example of how they are trying to
divide Americans against themselves?
Mr. Singleton. Sure. I mean simply propagating narratives
that the U.S. Government is anti-Asian or seeking to perhaps
put I think it is sort of been referenced here, Chinese
Americans.
Mr. Grothman. You mean they are trying to say the Americans
are anti-Asian?
Mr. Singleton. They see the U.S. Government as going
against Chinese citizens, China, Chinese Diaspora communities.
In fact, the new Chinese Ambassador here to Washington, DC. The
first message that he sent out upon arriving in Washington, DC.
was to communicate to all Chinese students across the United
States saying the party is here to protect you.
Mr. Grothman. I mean to me people who come here Asian, this
is wonderful. I have some wonderful Asian friends. They are
doing better than any other ethnic group in America. People
from India, people from China, people from Philippines. Who in
the world would--what possible narrative would they spread that
would tell Asian students that America is anti-Asian? It seems
just almost beyond belief you could even find something like
that.
Mr. Singleton. There is no doubt many instances in which
there has been, you know, quantifiable rising anti-Asian
rhetoric, or attacks--unacceptable attacks on Chinese students.
What the Chinese State media and Chinese State actors do is
they amplify those messages and that dialog in that discourse,
seeking to portray the United States as a racist country.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Any specific groups that you can think
of that may be funding or be behind--that might spread this
divisive narrative?
Mr. Singleton. The Chinese Students and Scholars
Association is by far one of the most important.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like now to recognize
Ms. Wilson for her closing remarks.
Ms. Wilson. Again, I want to thank the witnesses for their
testimoneys in today's hearing. We all agree that keeping
America at the forefront of innovation and progress requires
transparency in our academic and research ecosystems.
I am glad to see the current administration amplifying
compliance and returning oversight responsibility to the
Federal Student Aaid office. FSA professionals are very
experienced in this arena, consistently gathering data from the
roughly 6,000 institutions that take part in student financial
aid programs. This move has facilitated the reporting of on
average over 3,000 transactions and 1.5 billion more per year
under the administration compared to the previous
administrations.
Last, our effort to promote transparency and accountability
should never be subject to politics or partisanship. Instead,
we should focus on building sustainable, institutionalized
oversight. We can and should strike a balance between ensuring
compliance and keeping campuses safe for our students, our
scholars, and our faculty, and I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you so much. I will just wrap up by
saying I was very blessed to have been raised around the
academic arena. My dad was a college professor for 40 years at
Florida A&M, a World War II vet. It was interesting in that
time when my community was taught certain things that really
helped to be successful.
We talked about faith, family, free market education in
this community because we believe in that because we believed
education was our gateway. We were hopeful, we were faithful,
and we were tenacious enough to succeed. That community that I
grew up in the 50's and 60's led the country to growth in the
middle class, men matriculated from college, men committed to
marriage and a percentage of entrepreneurs.
That is the American way. We were also taught about the
evil of Communism. We were not going to conflate an ideology
with a race of people like we are doing today. We understood
that the ideology was the most harmful for those who had to
live under their oppression.
Probably the people who are in the worst shape in our world
today are people living on Communist China because of the
ideology of misery that they have to live in for their freedom
to be taken away from them. I am excited about the fact we now
have these kind of conversations.
For way too long with set back and talk fluff talk,
thinking there is some kind of way we can convert Communist's
evil, Marxism to our way of thinking. We need to understand
this is our enemy. I think you would understand the reason why
we know our college today that we do not have the same concerns
because we now have Communists and Marxists impacting our
colleges curriculum, 6.5 billion dollars of funds not being
acknowledged says a whole lot about what type of influence they
are having on our country today.
I am proud of states like Florida and Utah. In the State of
Utah, we have a bill called H.B. 346, which prohibits higher
education institutions from seeking or accepting funding
support from restricted foreign entities that shut down in Utah
the Confucius institute.
We also have a bill that prohibits all elementary and
secondary schools in Utah from seeking or accepting funds from
restricted foreign entities. That means they can no longer have
the impact on Utah schools that they have across our country. I
want to thank again the witnesses today for this very
educational conversation. We need to keep this up. We need to
understand that we are truly in a war against an ideology, not
people.
An ideology that hates our country, that hates our American
way, and all we do is look around and see the impact of young
people coming out of college with debt and still hating our
Nation because we have an ideology being taught to them as our
way. I am excited about what we are going to be doing as a
Congress here.
Just know for those institutions out there that 70 percent
is not being upfront and transparent. We have a Congress in
place now that is going to hold you accountable, but we expect
you to really take your funds to let us know where it is,
disclosure, full disclosure so the American people know where
their tax dollars are going.
Thank you so much for your participation, for your
expertise, and with that being said, I would like to thank the
witnesses and without objection, with no further business, the
subcommittee stands adjourned. Thank you so much.
[Whereupon at 12:09 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
