- ERISA'S 50TH ANNIVERSARY: THE PATH TO HIGHER QUALITY, LOWER COST HEALTHCARE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ERISA'S 50TH ANNIVERSARY: THE PATH TO
HIGHER QUALITY, LOWER COST HEALTHCARE

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH,
EMPLOYMENT, LABOR, AND PENSIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE
WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, APRIL 16, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-45
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-782 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania           Ranking Member
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia                 Northern Mariana Islands
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          MARK TAKANO, California
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   MARK DeSAULNIER, California
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MARY MILLER, Illinois                PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
MICHELLE STEEL, California           SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RON ESTES, Kansas                    LUCY McBATH, Georgia
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
KEVIN KILEY, California              ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
AARON BEAN, Florida                  HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
VACANCY

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EMPLOYMENT, LABOR, AND PENSIONS

BOB GOOD, Virginia, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           MARK DeSAULNIER, California
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
RICK ALLEN, Georgia                  JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA, JAYAPAL, Washington
AARON BEAN, Florida                  LUCY McBATH, Georgia
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                KATHY MANNING, North Carolina

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on April 16, 2024...................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Good, Hon. Bob, Chairman, Subcommittee on Health, Employment,
Labor, and Pensions........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
DeSaulnier, Hon. Mark, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions....................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     7

WITNESSES

DuBose, Russell, Vice President of Human Resources, Phifer
Inc........................................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Mancino, Mairin, Senior Advisor, Policy, Peterson Center on
Healthcare.................................................    23
Prepared statement of....................................    25
Handorf, Karen L., Senior Counsel, Berger Montague...........    31
Prepared statement of....................................    33
Behrens, Scott, Senior Vice President, Lockton Companies.....    54
Prepared statement of....................................    56

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Ranking Member DeSaulnier:
Letter dated April 15, 2024 to the Department of Labor...    90
Statement dated December 13, 2023 from Sun Life..........    93
Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Connecticut:
Statement dated March 22, 2024 from Alliance to Fight for
Health Care............................................    69
Foxx, Hon. Virginia, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina:
Letter dated April 16, 2024 from the American Benefits
Council................................................    98
Statement dated April 16, 2024 from AHIP.................   101
Testimony dated April 30, 2024 from Business Group on
Health.................................................   104
Statement dated March 15, 2024 from The ERISA Industry
Committee..............................................   109
Testimony dated April 16, 2024 from the National
Association of Benefits and Insurance Professionals
(NABIP)................................................   125
Statement dated April 16, 2024 from Pharmaceutical Care
Management Association (PCMA)..........................   132
Statement dated April 12, 2024 from Society of
Professional Benefit Administrators (SPBA).............   150
Statement dated April 16, 2024 from the American Hospital
Association (AHA)......................................   156

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record by:
Ms. Karen Handorf........................................   160
Mr. Russell DuBose.......................................   184
Mr. Scott Behrens........................................   188

ERISA'S 50TH ANNIVERSARY: THE PATH TO
HIGHER QUALITY, LOWER COST
HEALTHCARE

----------

Tuesday, April 16, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health, Employment, Labor, and
Pensions,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2175 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Good
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Good, Walberg, Allen, Bean,
Burlison, Chavez-DeRemer, Houchin, Foxx, DeSaulnier, Courtney,
Norcross, Jayapal, McBath, Hayes, Manning, and Scott.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Nick Barley,
Deputy Communications Director; Mindy Barry, General Counsel;
Jackson Berryman, Speechwriter; Isabel Foster, Press Assistant;
Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant; Sheila Havenner, Director
of Information Technology; Taylor Hittle, Professional Staff
Member; Alex Knorr, Legislative Assistant; Andrew Kuzy, Press
Assistant; Georgie Littlefair, Clerk; CJ Mahler, John Martin,
Deputy Director of Workforce Policy/Counsel; Hannah Matesic,
Deputy Staff Director; Audra McGeorge, Communications Director;
Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Seth Waugh, Director of
Workforce Policy; Joe Wheeler, Professional Staff Member; Maura
Williams, Director of Operations; Brittany Alston, Minority
Operations Assistant; Ilana Brunner, Minority General Counsel;
Daniel Foster, Minority Senior Health and Labor Counsel; Carrie
Hughes, Minority Director of Health & Human Services Policy;
Suyoung Kwon, Minority AAAS Fellow; Stephanie Lalle, Minority
Communications Director; Raiyana Malone, Minority Press
Secretary; Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director; Dhrtvan
Sherman, Minority Committee Research Assistant; Maile Sit,
Minority Intern; Banyon Vassar, Minority IT Administrator;
Natalia Wilson, Minority Intern.
Chairman Good. The hearing on the Subcommittee on Health,
Employment Labor and Pensions will come to order. I note that a
quorum is present. Without objection, the Chair is authorized
to call a recess at any time. Fifty years ago President Ford
signed into law the Employee Retirement Security Act of 1974,
or better known as ERISA.
For half a century ERISA has stood as the cornerstone of
our Nation's commitment to safeguarding the benefits of hard-
working Americans. Congress has a responsibility to not merely
create laws, but to conduct genuine oversight, and better
understand how the laws we pass impact the lives of our
constituents.
Today's hearing is a response to feedback from nearly 100
stakeholders on ERISA's implementation. As we prepare to
discuss ways to improve the law, we should first recognize the
vital rule ERISA plays in ensuring access to employer sponsored
benefits, especially as it relates to health care.
ERISA's strength lies in its preemption provisions, which
provide employers to offer consistent and comprehensive
benefits across State lines. Without ERISA, multi-State
employers would be left to navigate a patchwork of State
mandates and onerous regulations.
Efforts to undermine ERISA preemption threaten the
stability of employer-sponsored health insurance. Without it,
costs could rise for employers and employees alike.
Unfortunately, a single payer health care system is the actual
goal of many democrats on the other side of the aisle.
Because ERISA reduces regulatory burdens, it allows
employers to innovate to meet the needs of their employees and
adapt the evolving health care landscape. For example, when
telehealth exploded overnight because of COVID, employers were
able to respond quickly by creating new telehealth coverage
options.
Business owners drive American ingenuity, and almost
anything the government does, the private sector can do better,
and this especially applies to health care. ERISA allows
employers to purchase new avenues for improving health care
delivery and outcomes. ERISA fosters an environment where free
markets can work and expand access to new cutting edge
treatments and benefits.
However, the health care system of 2024 is vastly different
than that of 1974, and it is clear from responsive stakeholders
that there are ways to strengthen and improve current law.
Clarifying fiduciary responsibilities for employers, promoting
competition by preventing self-dealing, and facilitating
greater data sharing are just a few of the steps we can take to
empower job creators with the tools they need to lower health
care costs and improve the quality of coverage for their
employees.
For too long, Congress has allowed the Medicare for all
mentality to dominate our health care conversations, ignoring
the fact that majority of Americans do not have, and do not
want, government health care. In fact, 153 million Americans
have employer sponsored health benefits. The private health
care system is not perfect, but a 2021 survey by Employee
Benefits Research Institute and Greenwald Research showed that
63 percent of employees are satisfied with their coverage.
I believe that more employer driven flexibility, innovation
and competition will do far more to decrease health care costs
than government-controlled price setting ever will. That is
because competition, the free market, drives down costs while
government subsidized health care places a greater burden on
American taxpayers.
I look forward to today's discussion, and I yield to the
Ranking Member for his opening statement.
[The Statement of Chairman Good follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding today's hearing on how we can improve upon the
protection afforded to American workers and their families
through the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, or ERISA.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here as well.
When ERISA was enacted in 1974, Congress stated clearly
that the fundamental purpose of the law was to ``Protect the
interests of participants in employee benefit plans and their
beneficiaries.'' Accordingly, the law establishes consumer
protection standards and provides remedies and access to the
courts for workers whose plans are mismanaged.
Critically, it ensures that those who serve as fiduciaries
must administer plans for the exclusive purpose of providing
benefits and may pay only reasonable expenses when they do so.
While I expect that we will hear a lot today about the issues
employers face, it is important that we not forget the
fundamental purpose of the law.
Any conversation about ERISA that does not put workers and
their families at its very center misses the mark. Today's
hearing is crucial. ERISA's impact on health care in the United
States is substantial. The vast majority of people under the
age of 65 rely on job-based plans for access to essential
medical services.
With over 164 million workers and their families benefiting
from these arrangements, the significance of ERISA in
regulating many of these plans cannot be overstated. However,
our workforce and health care landscape has transformed
considerably since ERISA was first passed in 1974.
The law originally included huge, substantive standards
relating to health benefits when it was enacted. Over the past
50 years policymakers have found that, as a result, ERISA has
failed to live up to its promise. There are still significant
gaps in health care coverage for millions of Americans.
Secrecy and excessive fees paid to third party
administrators, and pharmacy benefit managers, and exorbitant
prices charged for medical care and prescription medication all
of which who squeeze workers through higher premiums and out-
of-pocket costs. While many challenges remain, it is important
to note the progress we have made, in improving the
affordability of health care for workers and their families in
recent years.
For example, thanks to the Affordable Care Act, workers
enjoy preventive health care services free of charge.
Dependents can stay on their parents' health policy until age
26. Additionally, in 2021, congressional Democrats passed the
American Rescue Plan Act, which enhanced the ACA tax credits to
lower monthly costs for low-income individuals and eliminated
the subsidy cliff so that more low-and moderate-income
individuals could get coverage.
These reforms strengthened access to benefits for millions
of Americans, but there is still room for further improvement.
I hope we can work together in a bipartisan way on these
issues. For example, there is much work to be done to ensure
that job-based benefits, including long-term disability
insurance are available to people who need behavioral health
care.
Access to disability insurance is critical to ensuring
workers have the financial security they need once they
experience a physical disability or illness that makes it
impossible for them to work. Unfortunately, a recent report by
the ERISA Advisory Council found that long-term disability
benefit plans often place discriminatory limitations on
coverage based on mental health and substance abuse disorders.
The report contains several thoughtful recommendations on
how to address these issues, including by applying parity for
behavioral health to long-term disability benefits. I hope we
can discuss this issue and others that will help ensure that
ERISA lives up to its promise for workers and families. I look
forward to a productive discussion, and yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
[The Statement of Ranking Member DeSaulnier follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. DeSaulnier. Pursuant to
Committee Rule 8-C, all members who wish to insert written
statements into the record may do so by submitting them to the
Committee Clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5
p.m., 14 days after the date of this hearing, which is April
30, 2024.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days to allow such statements and other extraneous material
referenced during the hearing to be submitted for the official
hearing record.
We will now turn to the introduction of our distinguished
witnesses. Our first witness is Mr. Russell DuBose, who is the
Vice President of Human Resources, for Phifer, Incorporated,
which is located in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. Welcome, sir.
Our next witness is Ms. Mairin Mancino, who is the Senior
Advisor for at the Peterson Center on Healthcare, which is
located in New York, New York, New York City, and welcome, Ms.
Mancino.
Our third witness is Ms. Karen Handorf, who is a Senior
Counsel for Berger Montague, which is located in Washington,
DC, welcome.
Our final witness is Mr. Scott Behrens, who is Senior Vice
President and Director of Government Relations at the Lockton
Companies, which is located in Kansas City, Missouri. Thank
you, sir.
We thank the witnesses for being here today. We look
forward to your testimony. Pursuant to Committee Rules, I would
ask that you limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute summary
of your written statement. I would like to remind the witnesses
also to be aware of your responsibility to provide accurate
information to the Committee. We will now recognize Mr. DuBose
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. RUSSELL DUBOSE, VICE PRESIDENT OF
HUMAN RESOURCES, PHIFER, INC., TUSCALOOSA, ALABAMA

Mr. DuBose. Chairman Good, Ranking Member DeSaulnier, and
members of the Subcommittee. My name is Russell DuBose, and I
have the privilege of serving as the Vice President of Human
Resources for Phifer, Incorporated, a mid-sized manufacturing
corporation headquartered in Tuscaloosa, Alabama.
I am also the Chair of the Alabama Health Consortium, a
coalition of employers in my home State. Today I am testifying
on behalf of the National Alliance of Healthcare Purchaser
Coalitions, its more than 40 regional employer purchaser
coalition members, who representative public and private
sector, nonprofit, union organizations and more than 45 million
Americans that spend more than 400 billion annually on health
care.
I am here to advocate for the critical role that ERISA
plays in enabling employers like us to provide high-quality,
uniform health coverages to our employees across State lines.
To do that, I would like to tell you the story about how Phifer
has leveraged the flexibility of ERISA to relentlessly push for
health care value for our roughly 2,700 employees and
dependents spread across Alabama, California and Pennsylvania.
Throughout the 1990's and 2000's maintaining competitive
wages and benefits remained relatively stable, however, post-
2010 we saw a notable increase in benefit costs, particularly
health care. By 2015, it became evident that our current path
was unsustainable, threatening both the affordability of our
plan, and the well-being of our members.
Recognizing the urgent need for change we enacted a
transformative approach guided by our corporate motto, which is
the golden rule. Inspired by the work of Dave Chase, the
founder of Health Rosetta, an organization dedicated to
transforming health care, and using the principles of Lean Six
Sigma, we undertook dedicated efforts to reimagine how to
deliver value for our families.
Our flagship initiative is the PhiferCares Clinic, an
onsite advanced primary care health center designed to provide
comprehensive and zero cost share health care services by
integrating elements such as enhanced access, and contracting
with high-quality providers, the clinic became a trusted health
care partner for our plan members.
Not only have we achieved significant cost savings, but we
have also seen improvements in health outcomes, which reduce
hospital admissions, and better chronic disease management.
Over the years, Phifer is continuing to expand our initiatives
to include optimizing our pharmacy benefits by selecting a
transparent mid-size PBM, direct contracting with high-quality
providers, onsite nurses, patient care navigators, and the
development of specialty programs like weight loss management.
In 2023, amidst health care inflation, we pivoted our
approach to focus on health care advocacy and wellness
enhancement. This shift led to the launch of our zero-cost
share by Phifer's pharmacy, further enhancing accessibility and
adherence to medication.
Our commitment to innovation has allowed us to maintain a
relatively flat net health care spend for the last 4 years.
Year over year, we invested the savings from our health care
back into our workforce and community through an annual health
care dividend. These dividends have created a virtual cycle of
positive impact by repurposing previously squandered dollars to
support meaningful initiatives.
To date, more than 100 dependents have received
transformative college scholarships to local Universities,
including University of Alabama, Roll Tide. Hundreds more have
benefited from our summer enrichment program. In 2022, our
dividend was used to end copays for our onsite pharmacy,
sparing 1,700 families from cost-sharing for prescription
drugs.
Our success at Phifer is not an isolated case. Employees
across the country are reshaping the health care landscape,
driving toward better value and outcome for their employees.
However, the foundation of our efforts, ERISA, is under threat.
If ERISA preemption were weakened, employers would face a
patchwork of State regulations, jeopardizing our ability to
offer uniform, affordable coverage across State lines.
This would undermine the progress we have made and force
many employers to revert to fully insured plans, limiting
innovation and driving up costs. Much of that threat comes from
State legislation designed to regulate PBM's, which is itself
driven by the lack of meaningful Federal regulation to reign in
anti-competitive practices.
We strongly urge Congress to pass the Lower Cost More
Transparent Act this year and go further by enacting
legislation coming out of the Senate that would ban spread
pricing, and mandate full rebate pass routes to plan sponsors.
My written testimony includes additional recommendations to
help self-insured plan sponsors meet their fiduciary
obligations under ERISA.
ERISA has served as a cornerstone of employer sponsored
health coverage for five decades, enabling employers like
Phifer to provide quality cares to our employees and their
families. Thank you for this opportunity to share our
perspective, and I welcome your questions.
[The Statement of Mr. DuBose follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. DuBose. Now Ms. Mancino is
recognized for 5 minutes.

THE STATEMENT OF MS. MAIRIN MANCINO, SENIOR ADVISOR,
POLICY,  PETERSON CENTER ON HEALTHCARE,  NEW YORK,
NEW YORK

Ms. Mancino. Chairman Good, Ranking Member DeSaulnier, and
distinguished members of the Committee. My name is Mairin
Mancino. I am the Senior Advisor for Policy at the Peterson
Center on Healthcare, a division of the nonpartisan Peter G.
Peterson Foundation.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, as you
examine ways to buildupon and strengthen ERISA and employer
sponsored health care. Founded in 2014, the Center is a
nonprofit organization dedicated to making higher quality, more
affordable health care a reality for all Americans.
We seek to transform health care in the United States into
a more efficient and cost-effective system by finding
innovative solutions that improve quality and lower costs and
accelerate their adoption at scale.
My written testimony today contains a number of detailed
recommendations we have identified through our work, including
through a recent convening of employers and purchasing groups
regarding data access and market challenges. Today I will
highlight a few of the key recommendations from my written
testimony.
First, Congress should strengthen an employer's ability to
access their own data. As this Committee knows well, Congress
has prohibited gag clauses in ERISA, yet third party
administrators continue to hinder access to claims data.
Congress should act to fix this problem or direct the
Department of Labor to issue guidance that expressly prohibits
TPAs from restricting employer plan access to their members
claims data.
Second, Congress should increase the utility of data
available to employers. Even in its limited form to date, we
have seen price transparency efforts motivate employers to use
data in ways to promote competition, yet more work is needed.
Congressional actions to codify payer and provider transparency
rules into law will send a clear message.
Price transparency is vital to competitive purchasing.
Employers also need utilization information to increase their
understanding of cost and quality drivers within their own
plans, and how that compares to others when they design their
health care benefits.
To achieve this, Congress could create incentives to
encourage employers and health plans to contribute to multi-
payer claims data bases. The information available through
these data bases can support employer negotiations, and
decisionmaking about health benefit design.
Third, data needs to be made available to patients, so they
can make informed decisions about their care. The bipartisan No
Surprises Act contained a provision called the advanced
explanation of benefits, which makes personalized cost
estimates available to patients before they receive scheduled
care. This provision was scheduled to go into effect at the
start of 2022.
However, the administration has delayed implementation.
Congress should work to ensure the administration remains
focused on implementing these requirements, so that consumers
have access to this actionable information.
Fourth, lawmakers should promote greater competition within
the employer health care market by addressing anti-competitive
practices. We understand through our work that dominant
hospitals and payers are exerting their market power via
contracting terms that inhibit competition.
For example, all or nothing clauses require insurers to
include all of a health system's network--excuse me, a health
system's providers and facilities in their network, regardless
of cost or quality differences. Most favored nation clauses
also limit competition by guaranteeing that an insurer received
terms from a provider that are at least as favorable as those
provided to any other insurer, which prevents them from
contracting with others at lower rates.
These clauses give dominant organizations an unfair
advantage over competitors and prevents new benefit designs and
innovative contracting. Finally, Congress should expand the
role of the ERISA Advisory Council or create a new advisory
council to provide annual recommendations to Congress. Congress
should ensure that this council is representative, balanced,
adequately funded and empowered to contribute ideas and topics
for review.
Specific topics for the council could include employer
market costs, prices and utilization trends. Transparency,
including price transparency, billing or location transparency,
health care ownership transparency, data sharing compliance,
issues around network adequacy, as well as benefit design
trends.
In closing, policy reforms that seek to improve employers
purchasing leverage and access to better data will bolster
competition, equipping employers with the tools necessary to
negotiate confidently in the health care market, and meet
fiduciary responsibilities.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I look
forward to your questions.
[The Statement of Ms. Mancino follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you very much. Ms. Handorf, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. KAREN L. HANDORF, SENIOR COUNSEL,
BERGER MONTAGUE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Ms. Handorf. Chairperson Good, Ranking Members of the
Committee, and Ranking Member DeSaulnier, and the other members
of the Committee. Thank you for giving me this opportunity to
testify. I have represented participants and beneficiaries and
employee benefit plans for the last 40 years, both in the
government and in private sector.
Congress passed ERISA to protect the interests of
participants and beneficiaries by imposing standards of conduct
on plan fiduciaries, and for providing for appropriate
remedies, sanctions, and ready access to the Federal courts.
Plans were to be administered for the exclusive purpose of
providing benefits and defraying reasonable costs and expenses
of administering the plan.
Those purposes are not being served. Those hired to
administer plans operate under a veil of secrecy and charge
undisclosed fees that have inflated the cost of care, defeating
congressional intent that plan money be used primarily to pay
for benefits.
Plan participants seeking access to the courts to protect
their benefits are increasingly faced with barriers and limited
remedies. 65 percent of American workers are now in self-funded
health plans that contract with large insurance companies for
access to their provider networks, and for claims
administration. These large insurers are not directly regulated
by ERISA and operate under a veil of secrecy.
They will not give plan fiduciaries access to their claims
data, necessary to determine how claims are priced, and whether
their compensation is reasonable. They assert that they are not
subject to the requirements in 408(b)(2) to disclose their
fees, thus leaving plans making it virtually impossible for
plans to monitor the fees of their largest service providers.
The CAA's enforcement mechanisms, terminating contracts, is
not practical where there are no alternative service providers
in the geographic region, or the alternative providers engage
in the same practices. When plans can obtain data, they find
multiple mistakes that are revealed.
They find that the prices paid by the plans does not line
up with the provider's posted negotiated rates, and they find
that there are fees that have not been disclosed to them. A
recent New York Times article reported how TPAs reprice out-of-
network claims and charge a percentage of the difference
between the build and repriced amount of it as a fee.
The participants are harmed because they are providers who
have not agreed to the priced amount, directly bill the patient
for the remaining amount, in one case $100,000.00. The plan is
harmed because it pays a significant and undisclosed
percentage-based fee for the savings. In one case $50,000.00
for processing a single hospital bill.
All of this increases the cost to workers who contribute to
the cost through wage concessions, premium payments, copayments
and deductibles. These costs make it difficult for workers and
their families to get the care they need. A 2019 survey found
that 33 percent of people with employer-sponsored insurance put
off or postponed needed care due to cost.
18 percent did not fill prescriptions, rationed doses, or
skipped doses of medicine. Significant numbers of workers carry
substantial medical debt. It will not help if cost savings are
achieved, but there are no consequences if plan fiduciaries do
not follow the rules designed to protect workers and their
families.
In a recent case, doctors for a 27-year-old patient were
unable to obtain prior authorization for an immediate heart
transplant that would have saved the patient's life. They
sought a 72-hour expedited external review, which they were
entitled to under the law, but it was treated as a 45-day
standard review.
The patient died 5 days after the decision that eventually
reversed the client's denial should have been rendered. The
patient's estate sued for disgorgement of the amount the
defendant saved by mismanaging the claim, but the court said
they were not entitled to that remedy.
Workers attempting to protect their rights are faced with
constant barriers. Their lawyers cannot get attorney's fees for
handling their internal appeals. Workers are denied claims
files, plan venue provisions prevent them from suing where it
is convenient. Arbitration agreements, and class action waivers
significantly hurt their opportunity to protect their benefits.
Congress should consider this.
[The Statement of Ms. Kandorf follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, Ms. Handorf. Then finally, we
will recognize Mr. Behrens for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. SCOTT BEHRENS, SENIOR VICE PRESI-
DENT, DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT RELATIONS,  LOCKTON
COMPANIES, KANSAS CITY, MISSOURI

Mr. Behrens. Chairman Good, Ranking Member DeSaulnier, and
members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. More importantly, thank you for taking the time
to celebrate my friend, ERISA, leading to its 50th anniversary.
My perspective comes from 16 years as an attorney
specializing in ERISA law. I began my career at a national law
firm and have spent the last 10 years at Lockton, the world's
largest privately held independent insurance brokerage firm.
Lockton works with nearly 5,000 employer and union health plan
sponsors across all industries, geographies and sizes.
Our role as a broker gives us a unique vantage point to
objectively observe the health care landscape. We help our
clients design and operate their health plans in a way that is
consistent with their workforce well-being goals, and of
course, compliance with ERISA.
This includes evaluating and providing accountability for
insurers, TTAs, PBMs, and others. Enough about me, and enough
about Lockton. The real hero today is employer sponsored health
care, and the plan sponsors who work diligently to ensure high-
quality and affordable benefits for their workers and families.
Like Hans Solo has Chewy, and Barbie has Ken, our hero is
supported by an indispensable sidekick, ERISA. Employer
sponsored insurance is the bedrock of the American health
insurance system, providing health coverage to over half of all
Americans.
As described in my written testimony, polling data shows
ESI is well liked, and it provides significant benefits to
workers and their families, employers and unions, and the
Federal Government.
ESI would not be nearly as popular and effective without
ERISA. Still, health plan sponsors face a three headed monster,
ever rising health care costs, burdensome administrative
requirements, and increasingly complex compliance obligations
and litigation risks.
Today, you have the opportunity to support the dynamic duo
of ESI and ERISA, but it is crucial that you keep two guiding
principles before you at all times. First, do not harm. Second,
make it easier to provide high-quality and affordable benefits.
First, do no harm.
According to ERISA's drafters, the crowning achievement of
ERISA is its preemption provision. ERISA preemption allows plan
sponsors to offer uniform and equitable benefits, innovate and
respond to the unique health care needs of their workers and
families. Sadly, we have seen states pass laws subverting ERISA
preemption, and even the Departments of Labor and Justice have
pushed a harmful theory undermining ERISA.
The Committee should stand firm against any attempts to
weaken ERISA preemption, including calling into account wayward
administrative agencies. Second, making it easier to provide
high-quality and affordable benefits. This will benefit both
workers and employers.
We praise the Committee for its work to increase quality
and reduce costs, most recently with passage of the lower cost
More Transparency Act. We support that legislation, but we
think additional modifications will prove even more beneficial.
First, strengthen the prohibition on gag clauses to affirmative
require data sharing with both the plan sponsor and business
associates supporting the plan sponsor.
Allow data to be used in any manner and for any purpose
permitting by HIPAA. Second, ensure timely and ongoing
disclosures of transparency data in a consistent format. Third,
require TPAs, PBMs, pharmacy purchasing coalitions and other
service providers to disclose their direct and indirect
compensation.
Fourth, hold TPAs, PBMs and others accountable for
compliance and reporting obligations related to their services.
Fifth, allow for disclosures electronically, and take other
steps to streamline reporting and disclosure obligations.
Sixth, work with the Department of Labor to help plan sponsors
better understand and comply with their fiduciary obligations,
especially their duty to monitor.
Seventh, prohibit anti-competitive contract terms and
downstream agreements with hospitals and providers. Eighth,
consider ways to reduce pharmacy costs. Again, I thank you for
the time, and I thank you for the opportunity to work with you
as we join forces to support ERISA and ESI.
[The Statement of Mr. Behrens follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. Behrens. Under Committee Rule
9, we will now question witnesses under the 5-minute rule. I
will wait to ask my questions, and therefore I recognize Mr.
Walberg from Michigan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the panel
for being here, and happy anniversary, Mr. Behrens. I am about
ready to celebrate my 50th wedding anniversary and it has been
wonderful, as long as we did the things that were necessary,
even reforms of me, during those 50 years to make it continue
working.
ERISA, as you have said, is a very popular tool for
employer sponsored insurance, and I guess the question I would
ask subsequent to what you, I think, very clearly stated, how
we as Congress protect it, and continue the opportunity;
What parts of the law do you believe are most crucial to
maintaining the success and popularity?
Mr. Behrens. I think the most important one starts with
ERISA preemption. The preemption provision, as we see in the
legislative history, is considered its crowning achievement.
One of the key reasons why ERISA was developed in the first
place was the disparate rules and patchwork of State
regulation, and allowing ERISA preemption to stand will
encourage employers to be able to be responsive to their
workforce needs in the areas that the--as we talked about, the
data show.
I also think the ability to access and utilize data as
outlined in HIPAA is incredibly important. In addition, I think
the fiduciary obligations are incredibly important, that as
employers work to administer their health plans, they are doing
so in the best interest of their participants and
beneficiaries.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Thank you. Mr. DuBose, this Committee
has championed legislation to increase transparency, lower
costs, and encourage innovation in the health care market. Last
year the Committee passed my legislation, the Telehealth
Benefit Expansion for Workers Act, which allows employers to
offer a standalone accepted telehealth benefit to all
employees, which they were able to do during the COVID-19
pandemic successfully.
What current barriers do employers face in offering
telehealth services, and how would a separate telehealth
benefit help your company and your employees?
Mr. DuBose. Thank you, Representative Walberg. The barriers
employers face with telehealth is--I believe the issues we face
is with our providers. We have employees that live in multi-
states. Our salespeople travel from State to State when they
visit with clients, and when we are using our telehealth
resources, our providers may not be licensed in the states in
which our members either are living or traveling in.
We take the approach that to solve that barrier perhaps we
should flip the script, and the provider--the State licensure
should be based on where that provider is located. For example,
if we change the licensure in Alabama, where our provider is
located, and then that licensure would actually cover those
plan members regardless of their domicile, or their traveling
status. That would alleviate the gaps that are created by the
provider not having proper State licensure in other states.
To support our facilities in California, for example, we
had to license our providers in Alabama in the other states
just to access our own employees, as an example, sir.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. A number of responses to the Committee's
request for information cited burdensome State regulations of
telehealth. What can be done under ERISA to lessen that burden
in a greater way?
Mr. DuBose. We believe that ERISA provides the proper
framework to allow us to be flexible. I would say threats to
ERISA at the State level, our ability to have ERISA preemption
is paramount to having that success and to be able to improve
on the offerings that we already have. Thank you.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Ms. Mancino, in your research you have
convened panels of employers who are struggling to offer good
health benefits to their employees in this market. Undoubtedly,
you have heard many complaints and concerns from them. What is
the top concern you heard from employers and how would Congress
address it?
Ms. Mancino. Thank you for your question, Representative, I
appreciate the opportunity to give this answer. I think through
our research the top concern has to do with access to data and
information in order to make the choices that they need in
designing a health benefit plan. As we heard from other
witnesses, TPAs are placing restrictions on access to
employer's data, which prohibits and inhibits, employer's
ability to understand cost and quality drivers within their own
populations.
Then they then struggle to compare that to other like-
sized, like-situated employers. Without Congress stepping in to
provide access to that data, I think that there is--employers
will remain challenged in designing benefits that will meet the
needs of their populations.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. I have gone way over, and I
apologize Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. Walberg, because I do not
have to say remember to stay within your time for everybody.
Thank you, Mr. Walberg, and now I yield to Mr. Courtney from
California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Actually, coming
from a district which is home to the Yukon Huskies, I would
just note that I am not from California. I represent Storrs,
Connecticut where the men's--that is right. Yes. Anyway, thank
you to the witnesses for being here, and I am again also
pleased that we are--taking a moment to reflect on the 50 years
that ERISA has been on the books, and ways that we can build on
it and improve it.
During my time here, I think the most striking reform was
in 2010 when we passed the Affordable Care Act, which via the
Public Health Service Act amended ERISA to put in really some
of the most powerful patient protections, eliminating
preexisting condition exclusions, ending the practice of
lifetime limits, allowing the children of covered employees to
stay on their parents' health plan until age 26. All of that
was because Congress had the boldness to resist all the
negative pressure to get those measures through.
Today, I mean, I think they are just sort of viewed as a
given in terms of the way plans operate. I also would just note
that a few weeks ago the Republican Study Committee released
their 2025, sort of budget alternative, and included in it was
a proposal to cap the tax exclusion for--employer-sponsored
health plans.
Again, we are not the Ways and Means Committee. We are
talking about other issues here today, but you know, we went
through the Cadillac tax fight, which was a bad part of the
ACA. We managed to keep pushing it off before it actually took
effect, and in 2019 a bill, which I was the lead sponsor on,
passed the House 419 to 6, to strip the Cadillac tax from the
tax code.
To this day, it still remains a tax-excluded benefit.
Again, for some of you who are in the business, can you sort of
comment in terms of what the impact of capping the tax
exclusion would have in terms of creating really unfair and
inequitable and, you know, outcomes by region where costs are
different, health care costs are different.
I see you nodding your head, Mr. Behrens, maybe you can
comment.
Mr. Behrens. Yes. First of all, thank you very much for
your leadership on helping eliminate the Cadillac tax. It was
rather problematic, and it is simply the other side of the coin
of limiting the exclusion. We believe that when you look at the
health care landscape, one of the things you alluded to is that
a lot of the cost differentials, a lot of the high costs are
driven by geography.
A lot of the high costs are driven by certain care
conditions. Yes. In the data it shows that costs for women tend
to be higher than costs for men. If your plan population is
such that you have certain characteristics in it, your costs
are going to be more. That is not necessarily because you are
providing excess benefits, or anything extemporaneous that does
not need to be in there, it is just a matter of fact.
Changes to the exclusion could have a very negative impact,
similar to what we expected to see if the Cadillac tax would
have gone.
Mr. Courtney. Right. Thank you. Again, when that proposal
was released a couple weeks ago, the Alliance to Fight for
Healthcare, which was a really interesting coalition of
employers, as well as other fiduciaries and beneficiaries,
whether it is Taft-Hartley plans, others all have actually
stayed together since the Cadillac tax repealed, immediately
issued a statement saying we do not want to go down this
pathway. Mr. Chairman, I would ask again, that their statement
be entered for the record.
Chairman Good. Without objection.
[The Information of Mr. Courtney follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Courtney. In my remaining time again, just to go back
to the question in terms of the disclosure and transparency
issue, Ms. Handorf, I think again, you have heard the exchange
here before in terms of just how, you know, particularly third-
party entities, there is a need for more transparency in terms
of helping with the way plans operate and cost.
Maybe you could just comment on that in my remaining 40
seconds.
Ms. Handorf. Yes. I think that one of the real problems
right now with health care is that there is a veil of secrecy.
Most of the PBMs and the TPAs will not give employers
information that they need. When you do find out information,
you find out that there are no rules, really that they are
playing by.
Until you get transparency and some ability for plans to be
able to get that information, we will not be able to fix the
cost of care.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. Courtney. I will now
recognize myself for 5 minutes. I will remind the witnesses to
pull the microphones a little bit closer if you would. Mr.
DuBose, I found your testimony most interesting as you
described some of the great work that Phifer has done to
provide outstanding benefits, a quality work life experience
for your team members.
You have taken great efforts and steps for the mutual
benefit, well-being and cost savings of the organization and
your team members, and the government did not make you do any
of it. You guys did it on your own, so you are to be commended
for that. More specifically, your written testimony notes the
ways that your company has used telehealth, so that patients
across the country, particularly in rural areas have access to
important health care services.
Can you discuss this a little further, how telehealth has
helped you expand access to care, while also delivering lower
cost and lower premiums to your plan participants?
Mr. DuBose. During the pandemic we noticed many of our
rural families suffered from a lack of transportation and
access, as providers were inundated with patients. We developed
an internal telehealth solution with our own onsite health care
clinic and offered 24/7 telemedicine to all of our family
members, so we were able to provide additional access from
their homes and created opportunities to improve their well-
being.
The framework that ERISA allows us to be innovative, it is
foundational for us to where we can create new policies and new
techniques to protect our plan members, so the protections
afforded by ERISA allow us to be innovative and expand.
Now, we provide telemedicine to all of our plan members. We
found, for example, prior to that Sunday afternoons we had the
highest emergency department use. Then, since we adopted
telehealth, we eliminated many admits to emergency departments
on Sunday afternoon. We found actual, tangible benefits by
expanding telehealth to our plan members.
Chairman Good. Very good. Are there any barriers you are
facing now, any obstacles to continue to provide telehealth
benefits to your employees since COVID expired? The pandemic
has expired. What obstacles are you facing now?
Mr. DuBose. The current system is working well, as some of
those provisions that are up for expiration, we are opposed to
that. We want to see telehealth continue. We have found that
telehealth has a very remarkable place in providing support for
medical management, chronic disease management.
There is a sweet spot for telemedicine, so we find that
threats to ERISA allow us to--create harm for our telemedicine
benefits because it would limit access that are plan members
currently enjoy.
Chairman Good. Very good. Thank you. Mr. Behrens, despite
efforts by democrats and many on the left to try to force
single payer health care over the last 15 years or so, more
Americans have private health insurance than Medicare or
Medicaid, or other Obamacare plans.
Over half of Americans, I think you might have been the one
who noted, have employer-sponsored health insurance. ERISA's
preemption clause allows multi-State employers to follow ERISA
rather than all states laws, and this provides the regulatory
framework to maintain competition, the free market.
If ERISA preemption is eroded, how would this impact
employer-sponsored benefits?
Mr. Behrens. I think there are several ways that it would
impact employers. I mean one of the first ways is additional
costs, and additional plan administration, especially in the
workforce that we have with a lot of remote workers now
consider a small employer.
Employer in Kansas City, you have got a grocery store that
has employees in Kansas, in Missouri, and you might have some
administrative employees elsewhere. If you were required to
comply with a whole bunch of different State laws, that would
make things much more difficult for employers.
It would also tie their hands on innovation, and the
ability to be flexible and make changes quickly. For instance,
in the pandemic we saw that employers were able to quickly
adapt more telehealth benefits, were able to quickly amend
their plans to provide more benefits for behavioral health care
as well as testing and treatment, and so those flexibilities
would be gone.
Chairman Good. Would you be concerned if ERISA preemption
was eliminated or faded away, that our country would move more
closely toward a single payer system?
Mr. Behrens. Absolutely.
Chairman Good. Thank you very much. With that, I yield back
and recognize Mr. Norcross from New Jersey for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman and to the witnesses for
coming here today to talk about ERISA, which few people outside
this room really understand, and certainly from what it has
done for both workers and employers over the years, I think it
is a job well done, but also it means that there are some
things that we can do to certainly improve it.
One of those, and I know the Ranking Member talked about
mental health illnesses and some of the impact. It is common
today. It is probably as common as it was before, but now it is
out in the open that we can have this discussion about that,
and the stigma surrounding mental health is dropping, certainly
not to where it needs to be, but it's going on.
The numbers are 1 in 5 adults have some form of mental
illness. ERISA's Advisory Council issued a report examining the
barriers that workers face to accessing their long-term
disability or LTD. Ms. Handorf, could you briefly talk about
the impact of not offering adequate long-term disability
coverage for those dealing with mental health or substance use
disorder, on workers and their family?
Ms. Handorf. I do not believe that mental health is treated
the same way with disabilities as it is with health care. Many
disability plans limit disability benefits if you are suffering
from mental health problems to 24 months, which and on the
other hand, it is endless for other types of health care
disabilities.
Well, mental health disabilities are no different than
health care disabilities. They both make it impossible for the
worker to work. If we really want parity in mental health, we
need to make it apply to mental health, to long-term disability
plans, as well as to health plans, and that would serve a very
important purpose.
Mr. Norcross. Certainly, the Parity Act, which talks about
the enforcement mechanism that the Department of Labor could
use because right now we have the speed limits, but nobody is
obeying them, and there is no real recourse, so we want to make
sure we do that.
Let me just switch gears here a little bit, and the
discussion on whether or not we tax our benefits, particularly
in health benefits, has been around for years. There has
unfortunately been some more discussion. I say unfortunately
because I believe it would have a negative impact on what
employers and employees would do.
Mr. Behrens, if this happens, and that is a huge if, that
we take away the tax status for our health plans, what do you
think happens to the market? Not so much going to the single
employer, or do they just turn it over to the employees and say
go find your own?
Mr. Behrens. I think one of the first things that happens,
obviously if you change the rules around the exclusion, you're
raising taxes. Workers will have less money in their paycheck.
I think the idea is that it would change health care, reduce
health care costs, but we do not envision that happening based
on the information that we have, the plans that we work with.
We think employers are actively working on behalf of their
employers to provide good benefits that are in alignment with
what the workers need. If the exclusion goes away, some of
those benefits will go away, and so plans will get skinnier and
narrower, and be less beneficial to workers and their families.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, and it is, I think, worth noting
that when we look at tax breaks in general, the vast majority
goes to those in a higher income bracket. This is what I call
the working man's tax break. It helps in two ways. It helps
them in their health care, mental health care, because they
will now be covered.
If thrown back to an employee, they have to make those
tough choices each and every day, do I pay for sneakers for my
kid going to school, or do I keep my health benefits? Those are
decisions unfortunately that are very real.
We believe that the idea of that exemption is the core for
ordinary working men and women. Keep that. Let them have their
tax break while you take your zillion dollar tax breaks on the
other side. This is the working man's tax break. With that, I
yield back.
Mr. Allen [presiding]. Alright. The gentleman yields. I now
recognize myself to ask questions. Over 40 years ago my wife
and I took our savings and started a construction company. As
the company grew, we were able to offer employee health
insurance, which was not only a great benefit to our employees,
but it was certainly critical to recruiting and retaining
talent.
This year we commemorate the 50th anniversary of the
Employment Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, also known
as ERISA. I am pleased that we are convening today's hearing to
explore avenues to continue to enable small and large
businesses alike to offer consistent and high-quality health
care plans to employees nationwide.
However, there is more that Congress can do to expand and
strengthen this law, such as allowing self-employed individuals
to be covered under ERISA. Helping small businesses ban
together to offer insurance to their employees, like we passed
in the House, passed the Choice Act last year, and reforming
stem therapy.
Right now, the government is running all of health care.
Mr. DuBose, what would it look like if under the Affordable
Care Act unions and the faith-based community were given
waivers to run their own health care plans without--basically
privately, without government interference.
What would it look like if ERISA, along with folks, self-
employed folks able to participate in ERISA, what would it look
like if ERISA got the same waivers, and companies like yours
were able to run your programs without having to answer to HHS
and CMS?
Mr. Dubose. Thank you, Representative Allen. We believe
ERISA provides a minimum set of protections through its
framework that allows us to innovate consistently in our multi-
State plan. That is very important to us. If those guardrails
were to change, then I believe that would create risk for our
plan design, and ultimately would harm our working families.
We support that. If we no longer had to report to CMS on
our pharmacy data, and those type things, I would suspect we
would even be more innovative in the way that we craft our
plans to further lower cost for all of our plan members.
Mr. Allen. Well, that is the idea is to lower costs, and
that is what at least we know the faith-based community better
known Medi Share offers to folks. We passed the Lower Cost More
Transparency Act in December, which was intended to improve
transparency in PBMs, so what is your opinion of the bill and
proposals to improve the transparency?
Mr. DuBose. It is a fantastic bill. We support the
transparency aspects. I will say that we do urge Congress to go
further. There needs to be PBM reform, especially in regard to
spread pricing, and rebate pass through. There are practices
within those industries that ultimately create higher costs for
our working families, and we urge Congress to consider
addressing those issues.
Mr. Allen. Thank you. Mr. Behrens, as employees look for
ways to control health care costs, it is amazing that people
who benefit by selling new tactics in the name of cost savings,
like alternative funding programs, or AFPs, or taking advantage
of employers by not giving them the full picture. In your
opinion, should plan sponsors be required to clearly inform
enrollees of the existence of an AFP, and the specific
conditions the program impacts?
Mr. Behrens. When it comes to AFPs or any of the
prescription drug models, I believe ERISA's disclosure
requirements already require that information be provided about
that. I will tell you from our experience, employers tend to
shy away from those types of programs simply because of the
challenges that employees face with having to comply with
those, and some of the risks related to them.
Mr. Allen. I want to thank you also, Ms. Mancino, for
sharing the--your thoughts on telehealth and Mr. DuBose, so
that is critical to health care. I am out of time, and so I
yield back. Ms. Jayapal, you are recognized for questions.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our health care
system is broken, and the high costs are crushing workers.
Meanwhile, CEOs of big insurance companies rake in billions of
dollars in profits, and their executives make tens of millions.
When Democrats held the majority in the House, we worked to
improve regulation of big insurance, and lower health care
costs for workers.
In the Affordable Care Act, we capped the total out of
pocket costs allowed in health insurance plans, and in the
Inflation Reduction Act we went further, and capped the out-of-
pocket costs for prescriptions at $2,000.00 for people on
Medicare, and that will begin in just a few months.
Now, President Biden has called for extending that cap to
everyone who has insurance to make big insurance pay its fair
share of medical costs. My colleagues across the aisle have
advocated for repealing many of these health insurance laws and
decreasing regulation of big insurance.
Ms. Handorf, in your testimony you discovered how current
law allows insurance companies that administer group health
plans to avoid the regulations in the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act. Can you provide examples of how this has
affected workers in their real lives?
Ms. Handorf. Yes. I think that by not providing the
information that is necessary for fiduciaries to control costs
and find out how things are actually being run, it has caused--
I represent two Taft-Hartley plans in Connecticut, who tried to
get their plan data from Elevance, and were not given the data.
They wanted it because in one of the plans the plan had to
increase the deductible so high that their members were not
going to the doctor. They were not taking the medications
because they could not afford it. That is why they wanted to
find out what was happening.
They reached a stone wall. We actually had to file a case
in Federal court to get that information, which has not yet
been resolved. When you do find out what happens, you find out
that the claims are not being paid in accordance with the
negotiated rates. That there are fees that are being hidden
from the plans, and that there is just no rhyme, no reason how
these plans are being operated.
Unless ERISA makes it clear that these TPAs are
fiduciaries, or at least gives access to employers the
information they need, and somehow is able to balance the
bargaining power between the insurer and the plans, it is just
going to continue the way it has been.
Ms. Jayapal. And given the lack of regulation of big
insurance, can you tell me how health care costs for employers
and for employees have changed over the past decade?
Ms. Handorf. Yes. Well, as costs have gone up, and there is
no question the costs have gone up, employers are finding ways
in which to share those costs with employees, who already have
given up some of their wages in order to get health insurance.
You see in a lot of instances, the deductibles going up
very high, to the point where if you have a huge deductible,
you are not going to go to the doctor.
It immediately affects them. Then when you have things like
what the New York Times reported, it also affects employees in
the sense that they get stuck with bills that they should not
be stuck with because the insurers are claiming 30 percent of
the savings by repricing the claims. All of these practices
hurt participants, and I do not think we know the extent of
them without more information.
Ms. Jayapal. What recourse do workers have if their medical
care is denied by their group health plan? Is it easy to
navigate the appeals process under ERISA?
Ms. Handorf. Unfortunately, no. No. 1, it is very hard for
participants to get health care lawyers to take their claims
because they are big claims. The lawyer will not be compensated
for the work in the internal appeals procedure where the record
is made, and so there is a limit to what the record can be.
Then sometimes they ask for records, and the plan will not
give it to them, so it makes it very difficult for them to
assert their rights to benefits. Their doctors usually know
what is happening, but their doctors cannot bring a claim
because there are anti-assignment provisions in the plan
documents. There are all kinds of barriers.
Ms. Jayapal. Of barriers, yes. It does not sound like with
these increased costs that they are getting better care or
benefits.
Ms. Handorf. No. I do not believe so.
Ms. Jayapal. When left unregulated big insurance increases
costs and decreases care for people. That is what I am seeing
from my constituents every single day, and it is really
important that we continue to pass policies that reign in big
insurance, and work toward affordable health care for everyone,
like my Medicare-for-All Act. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Foxx [presiding]. Thank you. Mr. Bean, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bean. Madam Chair, very good morning to you, and good
morning HELP Committee, to our witnesses. We are glad to have
you in our Nation's capital. We are talking health insurance,
and the efficient delivery thereof. Mr. Behrens, you said do
not do any harm, and I understand that.
Here is our first question. Earlier this year a bipartisan
group, 39 State Attorney Generals, including Attorney General
Ashley Moody of my free State of Florida, wrote to Congress,
urging us to take action on pharmacy benefit managers, PBMs.
Their letter outlined several PBM practices, such as spread
pricing and tying compensation to the list pricing of a
medicine. According to these AGs, the practices affect patients
and important stakeholders, employers, and community
pharmacists, and also could increase the cost of health care
delivery.
Ms. Mancino, what say you? What should we be doing? Is
there a problem with PBMs, and what are your thoughts on it.
Ms. Mancino. Thank you so much for your question. I think
it is really important that Congress do two things in this
area. Based on our research, we feel as though Congress needs
to provide vendors, and clarify that vendors such as PBMs have
clear obligations to current ERISA fiduciaries.
If you provide that type of guidance, I think that the
market can take that information and will--it will improve the
visibility and the understanding of contracting terms that
exist in that market. I also think that it is important that
Congress provide additional clarification and tools to current
fiduciaries, including empowering them with access to
meaningful data to carry out their roles.
Mr. Bean. Mr. Behrens, Ms. Mancino says action is needed
first of all. Is there a PBM problem? Two, what should we do
about it if there is?
Mr. Behrens. I think one of the--I think she is exactly
right. Additional transparency will be very helpful, and so
we----
Mr. Bean. There is a problem. There is a problem.
Mr. Behrens. There is a problem with the lack of
transparency, with the opaqueness, and many times we also see,
as Ms. Handorf has mentioned, as well, lack of transparency
around fees. In addition, and so holding them to account to
provide that fee information under 408(b) 2 of ERICA, the
indirect and direct compensation would be beneficial.
Mr. Bean. More sunshine is the answer. Is that the answer,
Mr. Behrens?
Mr. Behrens. It is part of the answer.
Mr. Bean. Very good. When you leave your job, if you were
to leave your job, and now I think it is an average of seven
times that millennials leave their job, even more than that,
that the average as of a few years ago was seven times. Do you
know when you leave your job you always have to find new health
insurance, but you do not have to find new house insurance. You
do not have to find new car insurance.
Is it time that we create a market out there where people
can be responsible for their own health care? How great would
it be to see a commercial saying 15 minutes could save you 15
percent on your health insurance, or so easy a caveman can do
it, and let people make their own decisions.
Is that a good idea? Is it past time that we start our own
health care market where people can make their own decisions,
and have their own health insurance without going through their
employer? I throw that out as a toss-up question. Mr. DuBose,
jump in.
Mr. DuBose. In practice, I do not think it is applicable
yet because the players in health care, even if it is a new
insurer, a new provider, those actors, the simple matter of
fact is many of the goods and services are just overpriced, so
those same problems are going to creep up.
Mr. Bean. If we had a free market, a free market with some
of the same protections that ERISA has given employers, would
that be just a better way to go? It is kicking our tail right
now. The health care costs are eating our lunch financially,
and so is it time to do something different? We have done it
this way for so long, but what can we do different?
Mr. Behrens, what do you think about this new concept where
people control their own health care?
Mr. Behrens. I think there are a lot of ways people are
able to. They have the choice. If you are leaving employment,
you have the choice of continuing.
Mr. Bean. Your choice is to take the company plan, or not
take the company plan?
Mr. Behrens. You have got the choice of enrolling on the
ACA marketplaces; you have got the choice of enrolling
potentially in a short-term limited duration plan. You have got
the opportunity, depending on your eligibility, to enroll in
Medicare or Medicaid. I think there are options out there, and
I think fundamentally there are still challenges with each one
of those options.
Mr. Bean. Yes. You are saying go to Baskin Robbins and just
take vanilla, and that is it. Hopefully we can have a general
discussion, keep going forward and think differently. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back. Thank you very much. Great Discussion.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Bean. Ms. Manning, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to our
witnesses, and Mr. Bean, I just must say I love your
enthusiasm. I agree with you that people should be able to get
their own health care, and that is why we passed the Affordable
Care Act, and that is why in my State, I am so thrilled that we
finally, after all these years, decided to take Medicaid
expansion, so that people could afford their own health care.
I just want to use this to say Mr. Behrens, thank you for
mentioning the Affordable Care Act, because it is such a
critically important component of what people can now use to
get their own health care.
Ms. Handorf, the Biden administration finalized an
important rule that would roll back the Trump administration's
expansion of short-term limited duration insurance. Some would
call it junk health insurance.
I have recently had an experience with a constituent in my
district who thought she had good health insurance, because she
had gotten one of those short-term limited duration insurance
plans, and then when she got sick, she learned it did not cover
anything.
I know that these plans serve as a stopgap but were
expanded far beyond the purpose by the Trump administration.
Can you talk to us about how these plans differ from ACA-
compliant coverage?
Ms. Handorf. Well, one of the things they do is they do not
cover pre-existing conditions, so that if you have a pre-
existing condition you are not going to be able to get care for
that. It also limits the type of benefits that you can get. I
believe mental health benefits are limited. Pregnancy benefits
are limited.
You are not getting the same quality that you would get
otherwise. I think there are a lot of marketing techniques that
make it sound like you are getting a lot more than what you are
actually getting, so the value does not add up to what the cost
is.
Ms. Manning. In many circumstances these plans offer false
promise to consumers?
Ms. Handorf. Yes. They offer false promise.
Ms. Manning. An important protection that was established
by the Affordable Care Act is that it allows consumers to seek
an external review of the adverse benefits determinations by
their health plan or insurer. This is important because it gets
people access to an independent review of their situation while
avoiding having to go through the court system.
I think, as you noted in your testimony, the time it takes
for an external review can have tragic results. How can this
process be improved?
Ms. Handorf. Well, the process can be improved. The law is
there to give you a prompt external review, but if people do
not follow it, there are no consequences, as the case I pointed
out in the Rose case where----
Ms. Manning. There are actually no penalties if the rules
are not followed?
Ms. Handorf. Exactly, because there are no penalties, and
the participant is limited in what relief they can get.
Ms. Manning. Do you believe that independent review
organizations for self-insured plans have the potential for a
conflict of interest?
Ms. Handorf. They do if you leave them in the hands of--I
think that with any review process in ERISA, when you have the
same reviewers over and over again, who want to be employed,
they tend to give a decision that is going to make sure that
they get chosen the next time.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. Ms. Mancino, you mentioned that the
lack of competition resulting from the consolidation of
hospital systems can have an impact on costs. I know that in my
own district, the pressure on our major hospital system to
merge with a larger system is enormous, so that they can get
more leverage to negotiate to achieve lower costs.
I am concerned that mergers and consolidations actually
provide worse care for my constituents. Can you talk about how
we should be addressing that difficult balance?
Ms. Mancino. Thank you very much for this important
question. I think that the role that Congress can play here
today and in the future is to address anti-competitive behavior
that exists in concentrated markets.
We would really like this Committee to focus on continuing
to advance data transparency, codify price transparency, make
it clear that TPAs cannot hinder access to employer claims
data.
Encourage the administration to implement the bipartisan
advanced explanation of benefits requirement and incentivize
employers and health plans to contribute their health care
claims data to multi-employer claims data bases to help drive
better purchasing and benefit design choices in concentrated
markets, and we think you should address anti-competitive
contracting practices like prohibiting all or nothing, or anti-
tiering contracting practices.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Manning. Mr. Burlison, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. DuBose, you know
when I think about how messed up the health care system is, and
how expensive it is, I cannot help but think about how this
place has totally taken an industry and turned it into a
Frankenstein.
That you have got a scenario that first when people used to
have choice, then as my colleague was mentioning, at one point,
you know, people do not go and shop for health insurance today
because it is being done by their employer, and why? The
employer gets the tax benefit, and the employer is required to
provide that.
We have consolidated and taken away the choice for
employees at a company and said, if you are going to get
insurance that is subsidized, and you do not have to pay taxes
on it, it is going to be through whoever the employer picks. Is
that correct?
Mr. DuBose. In a self-insured plan that we have, we have
providers. We do offer centers of excellence, and high-quality
providers based on quality.
Mr. Burlison. I am not talking about the providers. I am
talking about the network. The insurance network. You pick the
network.
Mr. DuBose. Yes. In Alabama we do have essentially one
network, and we do add to that network through direct
contracting, but in Alabama our network does cover all the
providers in the State with our carrier, so we have a different
choice proposition in our State.
Mr. Burlison. Right. At the end of the day, in order for
the sake of providing this tax benefit, we have eliminated
choice to the two individual insurers, right? Individual
covered lives no longer have the same choice that they once
did.
Mr. DuBose. I do not agree. We have a lot of good----
Mr. Burlison. Not if they are going to get the same tax
benefits.
Mr. DuBose. In Alabama the way our market works, the choice
that we provide to our plan members is to go to the providers
of their choice within the totality of the network based on
quality, so we are able to navigate through innovation to those
best of class providers.
Mr. Burlison. Right.
Mr. DuBose. Let the plan members make that conscious
choice, and informed decision to see the provider that they
feel the most comfortable with, that has the best outcome, best
quality, best cost, so it is a decision that the plan member
needs to make, but it needs to be an informed decision.
It is not in our State, the network itself is not what is
in play, because all of our providers are in the same network.
Mr. Burlison. You understand that is not the way it is
across America.
Mr. DuBose. It is not. It is different from State to State.
Mr. Burlison. Okay. In communities like mine there are
basically two networks, and if you are a member of one, and
your employer decides to go to the other, you have to leave
doctors from one to the other. You are lucky. You are in a
Goldilocks community in that regard.
OK, so my other question has to do with the difference
between the ERISA plans and the State regulated plans. What are
the benefits that an employer receives to use an ERISA plan
over what is regulated by the state?
Mr. DuBose. The benefits for us for an ERISA plan is the
fact that we are able to offer our plans multi-State, and
remove variance, and make sure we have high quality plans that
are consistent with all of our plan members, regardless of
their location.
Mr. Burlison. Right.
Mr. DuBose. We create innovative, high-performing plans
because ERISA allows us that framework to excel as opposed to a
State plan that does not have those same luxuries.
Mr. Burlinson. Right. I am hearing that while the ERISA
plan is preferrable, really what you are avoiding is a lot of
State mandates on insurance. Is that accurate?
Mr. DuBose. In Alabama, what we offer in our ERISA
preemption, in our ERISA covered plans, we believe we far--we
excel. We far out-provide State provided plans.
Mr. Burlison. Oh, I am sure it could be better than just
saying you have got one size fits all mandates, that sometimes
a State implements that can be the tail that wags the dog.
Mr. DuBose. In the State of Alabama we do use our ERISA
preemption, so when the State does pass laws or policies, that
are unique to providers within the State, those are generally
for State covered entities that are not ERISA covered plans.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Burlison. Ms. McBath, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. McBath. Thank you so much, Chairwoman and Ranking
Member DeSaulnier, and your staff, and our witnesses that are
here with us today. Thank you so much for making this hearing
possible for us. As I have shared with the Committee before, I
am a two-time breast cancer survivor, and the daughter of two
health care professionals.
My father was a dentist, and my mother taught nursing at
Howard University Hospital. Health care, as you can see, is
very, very personal to me, and I have seen this industry not
only as a patient, and from the perspective also of a provider.
I know that there is still so much work that we can do together
to really ensure access to affordable health care for our
constituents.
I am glad to be here today as we look toward ERISA's 50th
anniversary and reflect on ways to improve health care delivery
for the folks that are counting on us back at home. Step
therapy is an insurer, or pharmacy benefit manager, mandated
protocol that requires patients to fail other treatments before
they could take advantage of the actual medication recommended
by their doctors, that in most cases really is the best
medication, but they have got work their way to get to that
medication.
Often failing medication can result in debilitating side
effects and irreversible disease progression. I will say that I
actually have gone through this with my own husband, who has
been diagnosed with a very rare autoimmune disease.
Last time we gathered here to discuss employer-sponsored
health care, I shared how my husband was actually being stepped
through the wrong medication in order to obtain coverage for a
therapy that our doctors knew would be better suited for his
treatment.
I am really proud to be working with Representatives
Wenstrup, and Chavez-DeRemer on the Safe Step Act. Our bill
would actually offer a streamlined procedure for processing
step therapy exemption requests, and return these personal
decisions to where they belong, with the patient, and with
their family and their health care provider.
I know what it feels like to walk hand in hand with a sick
loved one. To see them go through the fear and the uncertainty
of their diagnosis. When someone you love is sick, all you want
to do is see them get the care, the medication, and the
services and the support that they need to get better.
The last thing anyone wants to hear is that their husband
or their sister or their child, their care is being jeopardized
in order to just kind of like check a box. Some patients simply
do not have that luxury to wait, and I know in the case even
with my husband, it was a matter of days really actually had we
not been able to ascertain what disease he had, his disease can
be fatal if not managed.
I just want to say always we have to be thinking about the
patients' care foremost in mind because our patients really
can't wait. My question is for Ms. Handorf. Do you think it is
appropriate for pharmacy benefit managers to refuse to cover an
employee's treatment, even if it will result in irreversible
health outcomes or death?
Ms. Handorf. I think that costs usually end up driving
decisions when they ought not to, and the bottom line should be
that the benefits are for the participants' best health. I
think that when pharmacy benefit managers control the
pharmaceuticals that participants have access to, ultimately it
does not result in a good result because it is just going to
cost more in the long run.
That's of course, assuming that the patients live for the
second therapy, or the other drugs. I think there should be
control of that situation.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you for that. Can you talk a little bit
more about pharmacy benefit managers, and how important it is
to have more transparency, which we have talked about that
today, but really if you would like to elaborate even more
about the transparency for the American public when it comes to
what they do and the decisions that they make?
Ms. Handorf. Well, I think that is very hard to understand
how you can control costs if you do not know what your service
providers and the TPAs are doing. I think that transparency is
difficult to define right now because we do not even know what
we are looking for that needs to be open to the public view.
I think it is essential for employers to have equal
bargaining power with their service providers, in order to be
able to really control costs and provide good benefits.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you so much for your testimony, and I
yield the balance of my time.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Ms. McBath. Ms. Hayes, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you and thank you to our witnesses for
testifying here today. I am happy to be here, however, I
recognize that we are still just nibbling around the edges, and
we need to address health care in this country, in a real and
meaningful way.
According to the Peterson KFF Health Systems Tracker, the
majority of individuals under age 65 in the United States
receive their health coverage through a job-based plan,
including more than 164 million workers and their family
members. While people are generally satisfied with their
employer sponsored plan, the cost of health care is still far
too high for many.
According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, health care in the United States is among the highest
in the world, accounting for over $4.5 trillion in 2022. Those
are policy choices. Despite this spending, we have worse health
outcomes than other developed nations. This Congress has had a
large focus on the lack of transparency in this market due to
pharmacy benefit managers, or PBMs.
This Committee even marked up legislation included in the
bipartisan Lower Cost More Transparency Act, which would
improve transparency regarding PBM rebates. Employers who
sponsor health plans are often unable to determine the basics
of how PBMs make decisions with respect to their plans.
With respect to their plans, prescription drug benefits,
including rebates they earn, and whether those rebates pose a
conflict of interest that raises costs for workers and their
families. Mr. DuBose, in your testimony you pointed out the
need for Federal standards for PBMs. How do rebates impact how
a PBM designs a formulary?
Additionally, how does that affect consumers in terms of
their premiums and out of pocket costs?
Mr. DuBose. Thank you, Representative Hayes. Yes, we
believe the PBMs, they control the formularies. When it comes
to pharmacy costs for an employer-based plan, the formulary is
the driver of those expenses.
We have seen, and which was a reason we moved to a midsize,
transparent PBM, it is because the placement of some of those
formulary items are driven by the rebate model, as opposed to
lowest net cost. We encourage our fellow employers and plan
sponsors to focus on lower net cost because at the end of the
day that equals lower costs, lower premiums, for plan members.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. According to the Drug Channels
Institute in 2023, 80 percent of all equivalent prescription
claims were processed by three companies, CVS Health, Express
Scripts, through Cigna and Optim RX through United Health
Group.
Like many others on this Committee, I constantly hear from
constituents that they are either paying too much for
prescription drugs, or they cannot find the drugs they need
because of pharmacy consolidation.
How does this market concentration impact the employer's
leverage in negotiating for better health plans, and is
increased transparency regarding PBM rebates enough to lower
health care costs, Mr. DuBose?
Mr. DuBose. Yes. Representative Hayes, the recommendations
we have outlined are necessary, but I do believe the fiduciary
role of those PBMs is what is key to impact their behavior. If
that happens, those other things that we have talked about,
banning spread pricing. One of the Representatives mentioned
delinking and rebate model control.
Those types of things are necessary to change the business
model so that the prices become affordable to both the plan and
the plan members.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. I guess I will end my time, but I
got very excited when I heard my colleague, Mr. Bean, talking
about this idea that people could have health insurance that
was not connected to an employer, and they would not have to
change it all the time.
I just think that that was just such a ringing endorsement
for the whole idea of the Affordable Care Act Marketplace, that
we really should concentrate some time on improving plans like
that, so that people who will have multiple options, and that
all of those options will be both affordable and accessible,
and will not be contingent upon employment or geography, or
what community you are from.
I really hope that we take the opportunity to improve the
systems that we have in place to make them better for all to
access. With that, I yield back. Thank you.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Hayes. I now recognize myself for
5 minutes. Mr. DuBose and Mr. Behrens, State laws regulating
pharmacy benefit managers have been the vehicles for
litigation, challenging the extent of ERISA preemption.
However, I cannot emphasize enough that protecting ERISA
preemption is not about regulating PBMs.
Congress must understand how these State laws are the
camel's nose under the tent. How do these lawsuits impact other
service providers, and other employee benefits under ERISA?
Mr. Behrens.
Mr. Behrens. Yes. I think you are exactly right that the
way that states are looking at the response to the Rutledge
decision and applying the laws go well beyond PBM regulation.
If the idea is that the states can subvert the rights of this
Congress to regulate employee benefit plans by regulating PBMs
or TPAs, then that's going to have significant impacts.
Mrs. Foxx. Mr. DuBose.
Mr. DuBose. I agree that protecting ERISA preemption is not
about the states in their attempts to regulate PBMs. I believe
ERISA has always been to provide a self-insured employers a
Federal regulatory framework to provide great benefits to their
plan members. I just believe the states are reacting to a
condition with pharmacy pricing. It's their attempt to reign
that pricing in.
Mrs. Foxx. Yes. I will start with you, Mr. DuBose. How
should Congress both protect ERISA and ensure proper oversight
of PBMs?
Mr. DuBose. I think Congress and policy does a good job in
protecting ERISA. I think the arguments made at the State level
are things that need to be addressed at the Federal level.
Things such as a PBM, site neutral payments, that Medicare is
proposing. Those type things are very important, and we support
those, and if those things were managed and taken care of at
the Federal level, then the states would not have to engage.
Mrs. Foxx. Mr. Behrens, do you have anything you would like
to add to that?
Mr. Behrens. I think transparency is certainly important
and helpful. I would argue that in addition to some of the
efforts that are already underway, ensuring that the
information we are asking PBMs to disclose is disclosed timely.
For example, if we are merely asking for rights to audit PBMs,
those audits are very difficult and expensive.
We would prefer to see regular data feeds of that
information, so that it is actionable during the plan year. In
addition, when it comes to the fees, we believe that it is
important for PBMs, as well as TPAs, and others to disclose
their direct and indirect compensation.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Mancino, anti-competitive
contract terms are becoming more common as the health care
market becomes increasingly consolidated. Do you believe that
these anti-competitive practices inhibit a free market in
health care?
Ms. Mancino. Thank you for your question, Chairwoman. Yes.
We do think that the market--the work that we see, and the
challenges that employers face in the market, they are
challenged to unlock competition and their purchasing power
today.
Mrs. Foxx. How would you recommend Congress address this
anti-competitive behavior?
Ms. Mancino. Congress can seek to address anti-competitive
behavior in concentrated markets in two primary ways. Continue
to advance data transparency, codify the cost transparency
requirements, push that further, make it clear that TPAs cannot
hinder access to employer claims data.
Encourage the administration to implement the advanced
explanation of benefits to give consumers actionable
information as they make care decisions and incentivize
employers and health plans to contribute health care claims to
multi-employer claims data bases to drive better purchasing and
design decisions. Finally, prohibit all or nothing, most
favored nation, and anti-tiering contracting practices.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. I have another question I
am wanting to ask, but I am about to run out of time. It has to
do with hospital charging facility fees for telehealth
appointments. Mr. Behrens, would you give a very quick answer
to that issue?
Mr. Behrens. We are very skeptical of facility fees in
general, specifically with respect to telehealth when the only
required technology is a phone line or internet connection.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. Scott, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chair. Ms. Handorf, we have
talked about transparency. One of the shortcomings of
transparency is it is just the first step. I think you have
alluded to the fact that if you had transparency, a lot of
people would not know what they were looking at. What does an
employer know if he gets transparency?
Ms. Handorf. Well, I think that that is a problem with the
408(b)(2) disclosures because if you are going to get fees
reported, you have to know that those actually are the fees
that are being charged.
What I think will happen is, if you get more access to the
claims data you will be able to see how the fees are spent, how
they are collected, and you will end up finding out more.
I think that really the answer is to make the TPAs and the
PBMs fiduciaries under ERISA.
Mr. Scott. How would making them fiduciaries improve
things?
Ms. Handorf. Well, it would make them responsible to the
participants and beneficiaries. They would have to follow the
fiduciary rules. They could not set their own compensation.
They are basically running the health care plans anyway now,
and it would just put the responsibility where the power is,
and the liability where it belongs.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. You talked about denial of benefits.
When benefits are denied do consumers get a de novo right of
review when they go to court?
Ms. Handorf. No. You get a discretionary standard review,
which means that even if the judge thinks that you are right,
if there is a reasonable basis for why the plan denied the
claim, the court will have to affirm the denial. It really does
put a barrier in terms of people getting benefits, which is
what ERISA is designed to do, is to provide for those benefits.
If we had a de novo review, the court would be looking at
the record with a fresh eye and making a decision as to whether
or not the benefits should be provided.
Mr. Scott. I know there are other barriers like arbitration
agreements that get in the way of consumers getting a fair day
in court. Are there other barriers, arbitration agreements, for
example, that serve as a barrier to consumers getting their
fair day in court?
Ms. Handorf. Yes. I understand that the employers want to
control costs, but they put in their plan documents many things
that keep participants from protecting their own rights, like
class action waivers, arbitration provisions, venue provisions
that cause people to have to go across the country to
adjudicate their claims.
They are all designed to keep people from protecting their
interest. It is hard enough for employees to get representation
in ERISA cases. These make it even more difficult.
Mr. Scott. It is hard to get representation because we know
the claims are only a few thousand dollars, then you cannot
afford an attorney if that is all that is at stake, is that
right?
Ms. Handorf. That is correct. Usually, the claim will not
be great enough that it makes sense for a lawyer to pursue the
claim, so by allowing individuals to join together in a class
action, they are able to effectively get relief for everybody.
Mr. Scott. If the person--if the customer is successful,
who pays the attorney's fee?
Ms. Handorf. In a class action it comes out of the recovery
from the plan.
Mr. Scott. If there is no class action if it is an
individual claim?
Ms. Handorf. With an individual claim it still comes out of
the recovery, but what it does is it allows people to get
lawyers who they otherwise could not get.
Mr. Scott. That is if there is a class action?
Ms. Handorf. Yes. There is a lot of risk bringing class
actions, as I am well aware. There are many barriers to
bringing them. Article 3 standing provisions have kept many
people from pursuing their claims.
Mr. Scott. If there is an inappropriate denial that
effectively causes malpractice who is on the hook, and the
insurance companies essentially made the decision, what
responsibility for the malpractice does the insurance company
have?
Ms. Handorf. It really does not because the Supreme Court
said that ERISA pays for benefits. If they deny you the right
to a benefit, you still have the right to get the health care.
You just have to pay for it yourself, which is effectively
denying the health care. When insurers for example, do not
handle claims properly they should be liable for the
consequences of not doing so.
Mrs. Houchin [presiding]. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Mrs. Houchin. I now recognize Ms. Chavez-DeRemer from the
State of Oregon.
Ms. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding
this important hearing on employer provided health plans. Thank
you to the witnesses for being here. Roughly, 48 percent of
Oregonians get their health care from their employer. In a lot
of those plans Oregonians have trouble getting past medically
inappropriate step therapy protocols.
It has been found that step therapy was applied to almost
40 percent of all specialty drug decisions in the largest
commercial plans, and that many step therapy protocols went
against clinical guidelines. Not surprising, since the people
imposing step therapy are not doctors, all at the expense of
people's health.
As a business owner myself, I know this is not the fault of
employers, especially the small business folks. Pharmacy
benefit managers, PBMs, are responsible for processing
prescription drug claims, and they are implementing step
therapy without any flexibility for any individual's patient
medical history or needs.
That is why I joined Representatives Wenstrup and McBath in
introducing the Safe Step Act, and I hope this Committee can
advance it this Congress. Mr. DuBose, the Safe Step Act does
not end PBM use of step therapy, it simply establishes a timely
exceptions process. Do you think that is a fair balance between
finding savings without causing harm to the patients?
Mr. DuBose. We support the Safe Step Act. We do reserve the
right to use step therapy. I think what is important for plan
sponsors, especially small businesses, what they need to really
ensure in their plan design for pharmacies, is to make sure
that they have independent analysis carved out for their
authorizations for those specialty drugs.
As you mentioned, as those specialists, the doctors and the
pharmacists, as they confer to decide is it appropriate care,
because ultimately that is the purpose is what is the most
appropriate care of the right product at the right price at the
right time? By doing so, you provide the best medicine for that
patient to reach the best desired outcome possible.
Ms. Chavez-DeRemer. At the right cost. We also know that
misaligned incentives of the current payment system leave PBMs
to favor medicines with high list prices, and larger rebates.
That is why I am also proud to co-lead the Drug Act, which
would crack down on PBMs who put the bottom line ahead of their
clients and patients' interests.
As PBMs have faced exposure over their practices, they have
actually shifted their compensation models to focus on
administrative and other fees, and those fees have typically
remained tied to the list prices. Even in cases where health
plans may be receiving a substantial portion of rebates for
PBMs, PBMs may still have an incentive to favor those higher
list prices.
This compensation model is causing patients to face insane
prices for their prescription drugs, and for what reason? I
mean really PBMs can manipulate the market while Oregonians
have to choose between going hungry and buying their medicine.
It is really quite shameful what we are seeing across the
country.
Dr. Behrens, I want to make sure I get that right, thank
you. Do you agree the Drug Act would help address these issues,
and help bring down costs for employers and patients?
Mr. Behrens. First of all, I need to clarify I am not a
doctor.
Ms. Chavez DeRemer. Oh, I had it wrong.
Mr. Behrens. Just a Juris Doctor. Just a lawyer.
Ms. Chavez DeRemer. That is okay. Take the credit where the
credit is due.
Mr. Behrens. I have not specifically reviewed the
legislation. I would be happy to and followup more with it. I
do think one of the challenges--one of the fundamental
challenges here is the list prices and some of the prices that
are charged to begin with, and a lot of the programs that are
utilized, tools that are utilized are to deal with those high
prices.
I appreciate the opportunity to look into that more and
followup.
Ms. Chavez DeRemer. Yes. If you could followup, review it
and get back with me that would be great. PBMs should not tie
their compensation, in my opinion, to the price of medicine.
That runs counter to the stated mission of lowering drug costs.
Breaking a link between medicine list prices, rebates and PBM
compensation will go a long way in removing the incentives that
pad the PBMs pockets.
Madam Chairwoman, these are critical to lowering costs for
patients and improving transparency for employers throughout
our districts. I do hope we can move through this process as
this Congress wraps up, and with that, I yield back my time.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you. I now recognize Ranking Member
DeSaulnier for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Very good. Your high school French
succeeded. Well, thank you again to all the witnesses. The
ERISA Advisory Council just released a report for people who
are on permanent disability, long-term disability benefits
about behavioral health needs.
The council found that 99 percent of long-term disability
plans imposed duration limits for people with disabilities
arising from their behavioral health conditions while not
placing similar limitations on disability arising from physical
health conditions. Ms. Handorf, could you briefly discuss how
this fact squares with the concept of mental health parity?
Ms. Handorf. I do not think it is consistent with the
concept of mental health parity because I think, with mental
health parity, Congress recognized that mental health
conditions are just as serious as physical health conditions,
so you should have parity. People should be treated equally. I
think that is a public policy that has been well established.
It really makes no sense for disability plans to have different
standards for mental health disability and physical health
disability They should be the same because the impact is
exactly the same.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Exactly. Just this past week the New York
Times did a frontpage story examining a company called
MultiPlan, a private equity backed data and analytics firm that
works with third party administrators of ERISA health plans.
The practice is described as shocking, shortchanging health
care providers, and leaving patients on the hook, often with
bills amounting to tens of thousands of dollars.
Anecdotally, I have heard from friends of mine and
providers, long-term primary care providers, just talking about
how much time they are spending on challenges to what used to
be normally provided by health care plans, and it is just a
waste of that in the system.
Ms. Handorf, how did this company in particular make its
money, and who ends up bearing the cost of the savings it
achieves when patients are the ones who are billed for the
difference?
Ms. Handorf. I think it is still a secret exactly who bears
the cost. I think that most plans do not even realize there is
a savings fee attached to the payment. We have seen cases where
a provider is paid $1,500.00 and there is a $30,000.00 savings
fees attached to it.
It goes to the plan as the benefit payment of $31,500.00.
What is not clear is whether the patient, the employee, has to
pay a higher coinsurance because of that, but we do know from
the New York Times article that the providers will then bill
the patient, and the patient is then obligated to pay more.
I think this is probably, I have seen this a lot in plans.
They are usually described as savings fees for catching fraud
and abuse. In fact, they are fees for just bullying a provider
into taking a lesser payment.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Just again, anecdotally hearing from
friends who have been doctors for a long time. Here in the D.C.
area, and in my district in the San Francisco Bay Area, about
calling me and saying everything has changed. We have been
providing the same kind of advice, with the same kind of
financial support for years.
Here is an example, with not just the direct costs that are
lost to the person who is impacted by this, the person who is
seeking advice in health care, but also the doctors and primary
care doctors who don't have the kind of staff but have the kind
of trust and relationship with their patients. It is a real,
real, problem. I thought it was fascinating what the New York
Times did with it.
It seems like for efficiency, we should be able to do
something in a bipartisan level for employers, and for the
patients. The General Accounting Office recently noted that the
Employee Benefits Security Agency at DOL has been almost flat-
funded for over a decade, even as its responsibilities have
grown enormously during the time due to legislation like the
Affordable Care Act.
This has been a strategy by some of my Republican
colleagues do not provide the funding to actually regulate what
the law says. Ms. Handorf, do you have any comments?
Ms. Handorf. Well, I worked for the Department of Labor for
many years, and it is a big task. I think that without the
funding you are putting a band aid on enforcement. You need a
lot of money to investigate some of the insurers. They are not
going to want to give you the information that you need.
The problem is that not only does the Department not have
the resources to do it, but employees do not have the ability
to do it for themselves, so it is really important that the
Department have money.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, and I would like unanimous
consent to submit to the record a letter that Mr. Scott and I
have sent to the Department of Labor, and also a letter from
SunLife. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mrs. Houchin. Without objection.
[The Information of Mr. DeSaulnier follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Houchin. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes. Thank
you for testifying before us today. We are grateful for your
time. I have had the chance to speak with individuals and
stakeholders on literally every side of this PBM reform issue,
and I am hopeful that there are some policies we can agree on
to increase transparency and oversight with respect to PBMs,
and to reduce costs and address the concerns that I have been
hearing from constituents and pharmacists alike.
One such complaint is that there are three PBMs at this
time that control the vast majority of prescription claims for
the United States. In fact, their combined market share has
skyrocketed from 48 percent in 2010 to 80 percent in 2022.
While the PBM industry says there is a lot of competition in
the PBM marketplace, I worry that self-insured employers
actually do not have much choice.
I continue to hear from my community and independent
pharmacies, frustration about the lack of meaningful action in
Congress to reign in PBMs, and I agree. I was a proud supporter
of the Lower Cost More Transparency Act, which overwhelmingly
passed the House of Representatives on a bipartisan basis last
December, including some of my own language on the Hidden Fees
Disclosure Act.
As it sits in the Senate, unmoved. Mr. DuBose, you stated
in your testimony that the recent increase in State laws
seeking to regulate PBMs is caused in part by the vacuum
created by lack of action in Washington on PBM abuses at the
Federal level, and again I agree. As I continue to have these
conversations and continue researching on this matter, I would
certainly appreciate you sharing your expertise.
Mr. DuBose, how do you think Congress can help ensure more
competition in the PBM market, so employers do have real
choices?
Mr. DuBose. Yes. I agree the big three have taken over the
market share within self-insured space. They do that because
most employers subscribe to the rebate model that is in place.
Those big three PBMs, they own the aggregators, in which
rebates flow through from the manufacturers. So they own the
pipeline.
For employers, plan sponsors, they have to get educated,
and they have to identify and find high performing transparent
PBMs. I believe the key is they have to connect with PBMs that
are willing to serve as fiduciaries, until the law is changed,
and which decrees states that PBMs are fiduciaries.
That is who they need to seek because then the plan design
will move away to an administrative fee model, to where it
becomes transparent and the PBM is working with you to protect
the interest of the plan members.
Then we both seek to find the lowest net cost solution, and
to move away from an older paradigm that only enriches those
big three companies.
Mrs. Houchin. Is vertical integration an issue?
Mr. DuBose. Yes. Actually, I believe it is the bigger issue
from spread pricing. Delinking is very important as well
because it drives that vertical integration where they own the
pharmacies, especially mail order, so they are essentially
selling to themselves. When you do that, the spread pricing is
really not that important.
Mrs. Houchin. Should pharmacies and insurance companies be
able to own PBMs?
Mr. DuBose. Yes. In a free market if a pharmacy wishes to
own a PBM, I do not--I am not opposed to that, but I do believe
that PBMs should be a fiduciary, and they should understand
that obligation.
Mrs. Houchin. Should they be able to mandate that it is
their PBM that must be used, or should be?
Mr. DuBose. Absolutely not.
Mrs. Houchin. Should they be required to note only be
transparent, but be subject to oversight and accountability?
Mr. DuBose. Absolutely.
Mrs. Houchin. How would having some uniform standards in
place for PBMs help drug pricing and just the overall
marketplace in general?
Mr. DuBose. The standards are incredibly important because
that is where the employers, those plan sponsors, fall down. If
you do not have transparency, you cannot see the data, it is so
opaque you cannot craft the policy, which means you cannot
craft good plan design. Then that is where the plan suffers and
fails to meet the needs of the plan members.
I believe transparency has to come first, and then with
those prohibitions on those practices, then the right pathways
align.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you. I appreciate your knowledge on the
topic. I hope that this Congress we will continue to consider
how we can address it, and improve not only drug prices and
cost transparency, but the overall marketplace. I yield back my
time.
I would now like to recognize the Ranking Member for a
closing statement. Mr. DeSaulnier, you are now recognized.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you. I want to thank the Chair and
the Committee, and the witnesses as well for your testimony.
Thanks for spending your time with us. Fifty years ago,
Congress took action and passed the Employee Retirement Income
Securities Act, or ERISA, to protect the interest of millions
of workers and their families who receive retirement benefits
and health care through their employer.
As I noted at the beginning of this hearing, it is critical
to understand the significance of job-based coverage here in
the United States. Over 164 million workers and their families
benefit from health care coverage they receive through their
jobs. However, time and an ever-evolving workforce and the
health care industry have revealed that ERISA has failed to
live up to its promise for millions of Americans.
Significant gaps in health care coverage and exorbitant
costs for hospitals, physicians, and lifesaving prescription
medications continue to squeeze workers out of their last
dollar. Loopholes continue to allow large, unscrupulous
insurers to engage in practices that raise costs for both
workers and their employers.
Democrats have worked tirelessly to strengthen ERISA,
promote access to care, and lower health care prices, but there
is still room for improvement, only if consumer protections
remain in place, and become more efficient. I look forward to
working with the majority to see if we can find a common
interest to accomplish this.
I welcome and hope for earnest engagement with Republican
colleagues so we can fully support employers and workers and
continue to build our economy from the bottom up and the middle
out. I yield back.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you. I now recognize myself for closing
remarks. On behalf of the 153 million Americans whose health
care benefits rely on ERISA, I think we have certainly learned
a lot today about how we can improve the law. It is clear to me
there are areas where government should get out of the way,
like streamlining paperwork requirements.
ERISA was created to reduce the regulatory burden that
would arise from complying with various State laws. We should
not replace regulatory relief with more regulation. In other
areas, clarity is needed. I am particularly interested in how
increased transparency will provide employers, and ultimately
patients, with cost information for health care services.
In the age of technology, it is time we move past these
unknown and unexplained high health care costs. Employers and
patients both deserve to know the price of care. Congress
should protect the ERISA preemption, so that multi-State
employers can continue to easily offer benefits across State
lines.
Protecting this provision will preserve the private health
insurance system and shield American from devolving into a
single payer system. Thank you certainly to our witnesses for
your time, and for your insightful testimony. Without
objection, there being no further business, the Subcommittee
stands adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 12:13 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
