- SCHOOL CHOICE: EXPANDING EDUCATIONAL FREEDOM FOR ALL

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SCHOOL CHOICE: EXPANDING
EDUCATIONAL FREEDOM FOR ALL

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EARLY CHILDHOOD, ELEMENTARY, SECONDARY EDUCATION

of the

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, APRIL 18, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-5

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
51-823 PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EARLY CHILDHOOD, ELEMENTARY, AND SECONDARY EDUCATION

AARON BEAN, Florida, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon,
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                    Ranking Member
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               RAUL GRIJALVA, Arizona
MARY MILLER, Illinois                GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
MICHELLE STEEL, California               Northern Mariana Islands
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           FREDERICA WILSON, Florida
VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina        MARK DeSAULNIER, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on April 18, 2023...................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Bean, Hon. Aaron, Chairman, Subcommittee on Early Childhood,
Elementary, and Secondary Education........................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2
Bonamici, Hon. Suzanne, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Early
Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary Education.............     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5

WITNESSES

Davidson, Hon. Warren, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Ohio..............................................     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Pocan, Hon. Mark, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Wisconsin...............................................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Smith, Adrian, Former Member of Congress, Nebraska...........    17
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Messer, Luke, Former Member of Congress, President, Invest in
Education..................................................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    21
Black, Derek, Professor of Law and Ernest F. Holdings Chair
in Constitutional Law, University of South Carolina........    23
Prepared statement of....................................    26
Allen, Denisha, Senior Fellow, American Federation for
Children...................................................    33
Prepared statement of....................................    34
Burke, Lindsey, Director of the Center for Education Policy,
Heritage Foundation........................................    36
Prepared statement of....................................    38

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Ranking Member Bonamici:
Letter dated April 18, 2023, from the National Coalition
for Public Education...................................    50
Letter dated April 25, 2023, from the National Parent
Teacher Association....................................    74
Grijalva, Hon. Raul, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona:
Statement for the record submitted by Raul M. Grijalva...    76

SCHOOL CHOICE: EXPANDING

EDUCATIONAL FREEDOM FOR ALL

Tuesday, April 18, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Elementary, and
Secondary Education,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m.,
Room 2175, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Aaron Bean
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bean, Owens, McClain, Miller,
Kiley, Moran, Williams, Foxx, Good, Bonamici, Sablan, Hayes,
Bowman, Wilson, DeSaulnier, Norcross, and Scott.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Cate Dillon,
Director of Operations, Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant;
Sheila Havenner, Director of Information Technology, Amy Raaf
Jones, Director of Education and Human Resources Policy; Andrew
Kuzy, Press Assistant; RJ Martin, Professional Staff Member;
Hannah Matesic, Director of Member Services and Coalitions; Eli
Mitchell, Legislative Assistant; Brittany Alston, Minority
Operations Assistant; Nekea Brown, Minority Director of
Operations; Ilana Brunner, Minority General Counsel; Rashage
Green, Minority Director of Education Policy; Christian Haines,
Minority General Counsel; Stephanie Lalle, Minority
Communications Director; Kota Mizutani, Minority Deputy
Communications Director; Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff
Director; Banyon Vassar, Minority IT Administrator.
Chairman Bean. Ladies and gentlemen, a very good morning to
each and every one of you, and welcome to your nation's
capital, the U.S. House of Representatives, and specifically
the Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary
Education.
The meeting is officially called to order. I am Aaron Bean,
and I have the honor of chairing today's meeting. I note for
the record a quorum is present. Without objection, the Chair is
authorized to call a recess. We are expecting votes, possibly,
but we are able to call a recess at any time without objection.
We have got a big meeting, ladies and gentleman, planned
for you today, because Americans love choice. They love choice,
whether it is their cars, or their sodas, or their toothpaste.
I was in Walmart just recently, and I had lost count after 23
different types of shampoos, because Americans know that one
size does not fit all, and we want individual choice.
Well, our kids' education is no different. Kids learn
differently. They have different needs, and different assets,
liabilities in their learning journey. COVID, you know COVID
changed so many things. COVID gave parents a chance because of
in-home learning, or at-home learning on Zoom. It gave parents
a chance to see what is happening in the classroom, what is
going on.
They realized that sometimes that education--journey for
home school or public school is not the best for their child.
That is why education choice is on fire right now in our
country, and so many states are giving more and more options to
parents to let them go the best way for their own child.
Today, this meeting is about education choice, of how we
can do it, how we can offer it. To do that, what an assembly of
panels. We just do not have one panel for you, we have got two.
How about that? We have got two all-star panels that we are
going to allow to talk about ideas, and how they can give
choice.
What can we do as a Federal Government to assist states in
their mission to educate our kids. Sit back, buckle up. Let me
give you some good news. Here is some good news too. I am just
naive enough to think that maybe--I am 17 weeks in as a
Congressman--I am naive enough to think that maybe this is the
topic that can bring our body together.
We will see. We will see where that goes. I have already
met with Ranking Member Bonamici, who is sitting right to my
right, and in just a moment I am going to introduce her for her
opening remarks. Let me tell you where we have already agreed.
We have spent time together and we have already agreed on this,
that we are going to have a robust meeting discussion, and if I
am wrong, or if she is wrong, let us try to win each other over
with the facts and debate, as we go forward.
With that, it is going to be a great day, a great meeting.
I am going to introduce our panelists in just a moment, but
first, let us go to Ranking Member Bonamici for her opening
thoughts and comments. Good morning, Ranking Member Bonamici.
[The statement of Chairman Bean:]

Statement of Hon. Aaron Bean, Chairman, Subcommittee on Early
Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary Education

Why is school choice spreading like wildfire? Simply put, parents
are demanding it. They want the ability to choose where their children
go to school and provide them with the best education possible. The
traditional public school system has failed many families, particularly
those in lower-income communities. School choice programs offer a way
out of failing schools and provide access to high-quality education
options that would otherwise be unavailable.
Specifically, the COVID-19 pandemic showed the shortcomings of our
public school system and the need for education reform. School closures
left children trapped in unresponsive, rigid systems and created
generational learning loss. In my state of Florida, we kept school
doors open in 2020 despite massive opposition, and Florida students are
better for it. By keeping our students in school, we avoided the
catastrophic achievement gap that we are seeing in states across the
nation.According to The New York Times, nine-year-olds were set back
two decades in math and reading.\1\ Studies further found that students
in remote school districts did markedly worse than those in schools
that re-opened.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.nytimes.com/2022/11/28/briefing/pandemic-learning-
loss.html.
\2\ https://glenn.osu.edu/sites/default/files/2021-10/
210828_KL_OST_Final_0.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To parents, the failure of remote learning was obvious and
predictable. They did not need The New York Times to confirm what they
already knew. Now they want options to stop this from happening again.
Moreover, their children need recovery.
School choice provides the best possible solution on both fronts.
It gives parents the option to choose a traditional public, private,
charter, magnet, or home school for their child. It allows parents to
take an active role in their child's education and gives them the
flexibility that they need to ensure their child's success. We need
look no further than Florida--an early pioneer of education freedom--to
see how universal school choice successfully gives parents a greater
role in their child's education and ensures every student has access to
quality education.
School choice also creates competition, which will drive up the
quality of education across the board. Again and again, studies have
shown that school choice is a boon for academic outcomes and graduation
rates. Virtually no evidence supports the contrary. To the dismay of
Democrats and teachers unions, more options even improve outcomes in
Public schools.
Furthermore, one of the few silver linings of the pandemic is that
it brought the classroom to the kitchen table. Parents who had been
left in the dark by the public-school bureaucracy became first-hand
witnesses to the divisive curricula being taught in some traditional
public schools. Story after story has revealed that some schools are
teaching unconscionable, radical race and gender ideology. School
choice empowers parents to enroll their children in a system that
aligns with their values and beliefs.
Some will say that school choice is a threat to our public schools.
That is simply not true. School choice is about creating opportunities
for all students, regardless of their background or income. It is about
empowering parents to make the best decisions for their children and
giving them the freedom to choose a school that meets their individual
needs.
I urge my colleagues to join me in supporting school choice. Let us
give parents and students the power to choose the education that works
best for them. Let us empower our children to reach their full
potential and build a brighter future for our nation.
With that, I look forward to the hearing today and yield to the
ranking member.
______

Ms. Bonamici. Well, thank you so much Chair Bean, and it is
a pleasure to welcome our witnesses, and our colleagues on both
sides of the aisle to the first hearing of the subcommittee on
Early Childhood Elementary and Secondary Education in the 118th
Congress. Our public education system is a bedrock of our
democratic republic, and I will note that it is not a
commodity.
As noted by the founding fathers, numerous Supreme Court
Justices, and in many State Constitutions, the provision of
free, high-quality public education to all children serves a
compelling community interest. This subcommittee is responsible
for delivering on that mission.
Unfortunately, the majority has decided to use our first
subcommittee hearing of the 118th Congress not to focus on how
we can strengthen public education, but rather to promote
school privatization programs disguised as school choice. As a
result, today, we are discussing programs that divert taxpayers
dollars from public schools, rather than identifying how we can
improve public education, so it prepares all students for
success.
As a policymaker and a parent, I certainly understand the
importance of families having a voice in where and how they
educate their children. My own daughter chose a public arts
magnet school. My husband and I whole heartedly support her in
that decision, and I have enthusiastically joined my colleagues
in supporting funding for evidence-based school choice programs
that empower parents, improve student outcomes, and increase
diversity.
I am pleased to see bipartisan support for increased
funding for the Federal magnet Schools Assistance Program,
which funds high-quality, public magnet schools, educating more
than 3 and a half million students nationwide. Democrats on
this committee support funding for inter and intra district
choice programs, which provide families and students with a
meaningful opportunity to attend a public school that might
better suit their needs.
I highlight these choice programs because they are rooted
in a common goal, the improvement and advancement of a public
education that benefits all students. Vouchers, tax credit
scholarships, education savings account, and charter schools
with little accountability, those types of programs my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle are interested in
discussing are antithetical to this goal for many reasons.
The history of school voucher programs is engrained in an
active resistance to integration from white families across the
south. Between 1954 and 1964, in the decade immediately
following Brown vs. Board of Education, southern legislatures
enacted more than 400 laws to undermine or disobey public
school segregation.
Many of these laws have the intent to, or effect of
draining resources from public schools to benefit private
schools, often called segregation academies. It is important to
learn from this history because from the mid 1960's to 1980's,
amid court ordered desegregation throughout the south, private
school enrollment by mostly white students grew more than
200,000 students.
The legacy of these policies is that today public schools,
particularly those schools that serve students of color and
students from low-income families, are often left underfunded
and with fewer resources. My colleagues often claim that school
privatization programs provide lower-income students with the
opportunity to leave their public school in search of a better
education.
This is patently untrue in many, if not most, cases. Many
choice programs do not require prior attendance at a public
school as a prerequisite. Many programs, including the
unprecedented expansion of vouchers passed in the Chairman's
home State of Florida this year, do not even have a family
income cap.
As a result, taxpayer dollars have been used to provide
tuition coupons for students who are already in private
schools, and for wealthy families who do not need them. State
data in Wisconsin shows that two-thirds of students in the
Choice Program were already enrolled in private schools before
receiving the subsidy.
Similarly, previous reports indicated that half of
Indiana's voucher program recipients never attended a public
school before joining the State program. Private school voucher
programs also lack meaningful accountability requirements,
leaving taxpayer money vulnerable to significant waste, fraud
and abuse.
In Oklahoma, Arizona, Wisconsin, and Florida for example,
investigations have found millions of taxpayer dollars used by
voucher schools to hire unqualified teachers, serve non-
existent students, and pay for school administrators' personal
expenses and items. Florida's recent expansion of its school
voucher program to all elementary and secondary students,
regardless of household income, is a brazen demonstration that
its voucher program is meant to replace traditional public
schools and eventually dismantle the public education system.
It is also worth noting that State legislators from rural
communities are apprehensive, and rightly so, about the utility
and effectiveness of vouchers for their communities, as we saw
during the failure of voucher bills in both Texas and Georgia
this year. Many rural school districts are already underfunded,
and voucher policies would exacerbate their situation while
providing no benefit to families who live there.
I represent many rural communities and in most of them the
school is the community hub. There is not another school within
miles. We should not drain funds from them to support a
meaningless choice. My democratic colleagues and I also have
serious concerns about the effects of school privatization on
student's civil rights.
Once a student enters voucher programs, they are left
without most, or even all of the civil rights protections and
academic achievement standards that public schools are required
to provide. Private schools participating in choice programs
are not always required to honor students, families, and
student's civil rights protections such as IEPs and 504 plans
for students with disabilities and language services for
students with limited English proficiency.
Private school students may also be rejected or
unnecessarily disciplined, or expelled for reasons that would
not be allowed at a public school, often with few or no avenues
for recourse. Taxpayer dollars, which have clear State and
Federal accountability standards, have no place in schools like
this.
Contrary to proponents' claims, private school vouchers
have also not been shown to improve students' education. If
anything, they may hurt students' academic success. Research in
states with large private school voucher programs--Louisiana,
Indiana, and Ohio, shows that students using private school
vouchers scored significantly lower on academic assessments
than their public school peers.
In sum, private school choice programs drain resources from
public education, can lead to wasteful, and even fraudulent
spending, deprive students and parents of civil rights
protections and do not improve student achievement.
Unfortunately, I am disappointed to see my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle supporting low-quality education
options, instead of following the evidence and the research.
Instead, I invite my colleagues to join democrats in
investing in public education and evidence-based choice
programs, so every family can send their child to a high-
quality, accountable and safe public school. Thank you again,
Mr. Chairman, thank you to our witnesses. I look forward to
working with my colleagues to help every student succeed, and I
yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Bonamici follows:]

Statement of Hon. Suzanne Bonamici, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Early Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary Education

Thank you so much, Chair Bean. It is a pleasure to welcome our
witnesses and our colleagues on both sides of the aisle to the first
hearing of the Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Elementary, and
Secondary Education in the 118th Congress.
Our public education system is a bedrock of our democratic
republic--and I will note that it is not a commodity. As noted by the
Founding Fathers, numerous Supreme Court justices, and in many state
constitutions, the provision of free, high-quality, public education to
all children serves a compelling community interest. This subcommittee
is responsible for delivering on that mission.
Unfortunately, the Majority has decided to use our first
subcommittee hearing of the 118th Congress not to focus on how we can
strengthen public education but rather to promote school privatization
programs disguised as school choice. As a result, today we are
discussing programs that divert taxpayer dollars from public schools,
rather than identifying how we can improve public education, so it
prepares all students for success.
As a policymaker and a parent, I certainly understand the
importance of families having a voice in where and how they educate
their children; my own daughter chose a public arts magnet school. My
husband and I wholeheartedly supported her in that decision. I have
enthusiastically joined my colleagues in supporting funding for
evidence-based school choice programs that empower parents, improve
student outcomes, and increase diversity. I am pleased to see
bipartisan support for increased funding for the federal Magnet Schools
Assistance Program, which funds high-quality public magnet schools
educating more than 3.5 million students nationwide. Democrats on this
Committee support funding for inter- and intra-district choice
programs, which provide families and students with a meaningful
opportunity to attend a public school that might better suit their
needs.
I highlight these choice programs because they are rooted in a
common goal: the improvement and advancement of a public education that
benefits all students. Vouchers, tax-credit scholarships, education
savings accounts, and charter schools with little accountability--those
types of programs my colleagues on the other side of the aisle are
interested in discussing--are antithetical to this goal for many
reasons.
The history of school voucher programs is engrained in active
resistance to integration from white families across the South. Between
1954 and 1964, in the decade immediately following Brown v. Board of
Education, southern legislatures enacted more than 400 laws to
undermine or disobey public school segregation. Many of these laws had
the intent to, or effect of, draining resources from public schools to
benefit private schools, often called ``segregation academies.'' It is
important to learn this history because, from the mid-1960s to the
1980s, amid court-ordered desegregation throughout the South, private
school enrollment by mostly white students grew by more than 200,000
students. The legacy of these policies is that, today, public schools--
particularly those schools that serve students of color and students
from low-income families--are left underfunded and with fewer
resources.
My colleagues often claim that school privatization programs
provide lower income students with the opportunity to leave their
public school in search of a better education. This is patently untrue
in many, if not most, cases. Many choice programs do not require prior
attendance at a public school as a prerequisite, and many programs--
including the unprecedented expansion of vouchers passed in the
Chairman's home state of Florida this year--do not even have a family
income cap. As a result, taxpayer dollars have been used to provide
tuition coupons for students already in private schools and for wealthy
families who do not need them.
State data in Wisconsin showed that two-thirds of students in the
choice program were already enrolled in private schools before
receiving the subsidy. Similarly, previous reports indicated half of
Indiana's voucher program recipients never attended a public school
before joining the state program. Private school voucher programs also
lack meaningful accountability requirements, leaving taxpayer money
vulnerable to significant waste, fraud, and abuse.
In Oklahoma, Arizona, Wisconsin, and Florida, for example,
investigations have found millions of taxpayer dollars used by voucher
schools to hire unqualified teachers, serve nonexistent students, and
pay for school administrators' personal expenses and items.
Florida's recent expansion of its school voucher program to all
elementary and secondary students, regardless of household income, is a
brazen demonstration that its voucher program is meant to replace
traditional public schools and eventually dismantle the public
education system.
It is also worth noting that state legislators from rural
communities are apprehensive--and rightly so--about the utility and
effectiveness of vouchers for their communities, as we saw during the
failure of voucher bills in Texas and Georgia this year. Many rural
school districts are already underfunded, and voucher policies would
exacerbate their situation while providing no benefits to the families
who live there. I represent many rural communities and, in most of
them, the school is a community hub. There is not another school within
miles. We should not drain funds from them to support a meaningless
choice.
My Democratic colleagues and I also have serious concerns about the
effects of school privatization on students' civil rights. Once a
student enters voucher programs, they are left without most or even all
of the civil rights protections and academic achievement standards that
public schools are required to provide.
Private schools participating in choice programs are not always
required to honor students' and families' civil rights protections,
such as IEPs and 504 plans for students with disabilities, language
services for students with limited English proficiency.
Private school students may also be rejected or unnecessarily
disciplined or expelled for reasons that would not be allowed at a
public school, often with few or no avenues for recourse. Taxpayer
dollars, which have clear state and federal accountability standards,
have no place in schools like this.
Contrary to proponents' claims, private school vouchers have also
not been shown to improve students' education--if anything, they may
hurt students' academic success. Research in states with large private
school voucher programs--Louisiana, Indiana, Ohio--shows that students
using private school vouchers score significantly lower on academic
assessments than their public-school peers.
In sum, private school choice programs:
1) Drain resources from public education;
2) Lead to wasteful and even fraudulent spending;
3) Deprive students and parents of civil rights protections; and
4) Do not improve student achievement.
So, unfortunately, I am disappointed to see my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle supporting low-quality education options
instead of following the evidence and research.
Instead, I invite my colleagues to join Democrats in investing in
public education and evidence-based choice programs so every family can
send their child to a high-quality, accountable, and safe public
school.Thank you, again, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our witnesses.
I look forward to working with my colleagues to help every student
succeed.
______

Chairman Bean. Ms. Bonamici, thank you so much for the
opening comments. It is indeed an exciting time in education
across America. Pursuant to Committee Rule 8(c), all committee
members who wish to insert written statements into the record
may do so by submitting them to the clerk in Word format by 5
p.m., after 14 days of the date of this hearing, which is May
3, 2023.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days to allow such statements and other extraneous material
referenced during the hearing to be submitted for the official
record.
You have waited long enough. Let us go to our first all-
star panel. You thought you knew him. You see him in the
hallways. He is Hon. Warren Davidson. He represents Ohio's 8th
district, but did you know he graduated from West Point? He
served our country. Thank you for your service, Congressman
Davidson, in the Army, after the Army, he earned an MBA from
Notre Dame, and has done a variety of different things.
Most importantly, he was instrumental in the debate on the
historic Bill of Rights Bill that this body passed a week and a
half, 2 weeks ago, whenever we did, recently. The Bill of
Rights. He has got an idea on how we can expand choice. We are
looking forward to hearing from Congressman Davidson.
Ranking Member Bonamici, you brought a witness today too,
tell us who it is.
Ms. Bonamici. Indeed. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have with
us today Congressman Mark Pocan, who represents Wisconsin's
Second congressional District, a position he has held since
2013. He is a small business owner, a union member, and a
lifelong advocate for progressive causes.
In previous Congresses he served on this committee. I want
to add here that I miss his voice on the Education and
Workforce Committee, but we are glad he is back as a witness
today. He currently serves importantly on the Appropriations
Committee where he sits on the Labor, Health and Human
Services, the Education Subcommittee, and the Finance Services
and General Government Subcommittee. Welcome Representative
Pocan.
Chairman Bean. Thank you, Ms. Bonamici. We welcome
Congressman Pocan, and finally our third all-star witness of
our first panel, Adrian Smith as well. So lengthy of all of the
roles that he has done. Sure, he represents Congress's Nebraska
Third District, but prior to that he was an educator, a real
eState agent, and served his hometown as a member of the City
Council.
Notably, today he has a bill. He has a bill also, that is
focused on expanding choice, and letting kids and families
choose their own path going forward. With that, let us get to
our all-star panel. Welcome. We know you all are on a tight
schedule, so what we are going to do is allow each of you to
speak as long as you want, as long as you stop after 5 minutes.
With that, let us get to Congressman Davidson. You are on
the gun, and welcome to the committee. You are recognized my
friend, we are glad you are here.

STATEMENT OF HON. WARREN DAVIDSON, MEMBER OF CONGRESS, OHIO 8TH
DISTRICT

Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Chairman Bean, Chairwoman Foxx,
and the rest of the committee for hosting me on this member
panel today to talk about empowering parents and expanding
school choice. I am pleased the committee has decided to take
this issue up so early in the 118th Congress.
It was great to be able to support H.R. 5, the Parents Bill
of Rights, as it passed the House recently, without an
important amendment, nevertheless. What is the proper Federal
role for education policy? I think we can all agree that the
status quo does not fit our various descriptions and
expectations.
While I do like Thomas Massie's one sentence bill ending
the Department of Education, the reality is rather than
quitting cold turkey, the communities need us to unwind years
of policies that have made schools dependent on Federal dollars
at the expense of their own local autonomy, local
decisionmaking, aligned with the views and values of their
community.
The surest remedy to accountability for these dollars is to
fund students via parents, rather than schools. Courts have
found that parents have vast authority when it comes to
deciding how to raise and educate their children, and it is
exciting to see under republican leadership in the house, that
Congress is finally discussing policy that reflects this
reality.
Parents have the right to determine their children's
future, and it is up to us to ensure that they have the tools
they need to make informed decisions that align with their
values and beliefs. This starts by removing unelected and
unaccountable Washington bureaucrats from the classroom. People
here in this town do not need to decide things that parents are
empowered to decide.
Unfortunately, millions in taxpayer dollars currently prop
up failing school systems that generate abysmal student
outcomes year after year, not to mention they sideline parents
throughout the entire process. A couple of weeks ago, I offered
an amendment to H.R. 5 that, if adopted, would have required
local school districts that receive these Federal dollars to
hold an open enrollment period for children both inside and
outside of their school district.
It left details about how many and what criteria the
schools could choose, so long as they were not discriminatory
and were made public. This proposal would have given parents
the opportunity to pick the highest quality education for their
child no matter what zip code they live in.
In 2023, roughly 80,000 students took advantage of open
enrollment in my home State of Ohio. Participation has steadily
increased over time, and it is thanks to the abundance of
school choice options leaders in my State have worked
tirelessly to provide parents.
Now they have a lot of work left to do in Ohio, but one of
the most popular programs, Ed Choice, provides K-12
scholarships to students who are assigned to underperforming
schools, as well as to students whose families meet certain
income designations.
I think the principle should be that the money follows the
students without these tests. Ohio continues to expand
eligibility for their school choice programs in part because
the results of these early programs have already been
tremendous, despite outcries from democrats and teacher's
unions, these programs have empowered parents with options in
creating competition among schools.
Every student is different. Programs such as Ed Choice have
encouraged schools to carefully tend to the needs of parents
and their children who, if dissatisfied, can vote with their
feet and move to a more fitting school for them. According to a
2022 study by the Thomas B. Fordham Institute located in Ohio,
the academic achievement of district students was
``significantly higher'' than it would have been had districts
not been exposed to the Ed Choice Program.
Ohio's families are not the only ones reaping positive
results of school choice programs, as was highlighted in the
opening remarks by the Chairman. There has been an explosion of
school choice legislation introduced in states all around the
country, and while COVID was horrible, one thing that has been
positive has been the attention families have given to school
choice.
One of the many ways Congress could phaseout the Department
of Education is to simply consolidate Federal funding we
appropriate to the Department into block grants, which would be
awarded to individual states based on how many citizens are in
each State.
This is another path, versus the path that I offered in my
amendment, and perhaps the most fitting in our Constitution as
a Republic.If we gave these dollars to states, then the states,
of course, would choose different courses of action, but it
would certainly get Washington out of it and empower states to
do things differently.
There is clearly not a uniform consensus as to which way to
go, but it would certainly be more fitting for Federal dollars
to empower a more local form of government. Congress uses block
grants in Washington for a variety of programs, and I hope that
we can move closer to a more Constitutional form of government
in all respects, but certainly with respect to education
policy, and I yield.
[The Statement of Mr. Davidson follows:]

Prepared Statement of the Hon. Warren Davidson

Thank you, Chairman Bean--and the rest of this committee--for
hosting me on this member panel today to talk about empowering parents
and expanding school choice. I am pleased the committee has decided to
tackle this issue so early in the 118th Congress, and it was great to
be able to support H.R. 5, the Parents Bill of Rights Act, as it passed
the House recently.
What is the proper federal role for education policy? I think we
can all agree that the status quo does not fit our various
descriptions.
While I like Thomas Massie's one sentence bill, the reality is we
need to unwind years of policies that have made schools dependent on
federal dollars at the expense of autonomy--local decision making
aligned with the views and values of the community.
The surest remedy to accountability is to fund students (via
parents) rather than schools.
Courts have found that parents have vast authority when it comes to
deciding how to raise and educate their children. It is exciting to
see, under Republican leadership in the House, that Congress is finally
discussing policy that reflects this reality.
Parents have the right to determine their child's future, and it is
up to us to ensure they have the tools they need to make informed
decisions that align with their values and beliefs.
This starts by removing unelected and unaccountable Washington
bureaucrats from the classroom. Unfortunately, millions in taxpayer
dollars currently prop up failing school systems that generate abysmal
student outcomes year after year. Not to mention, they sideline parents
throughout the entire process.
A couple of weeks ago, I offered an amendment to H.R. 5 that, if
adopted, would have required local school districts that receive
federal funding to hold an open enrollment period for children both
inside and outside the district. It leftdetails about how many and what
criteria to the schools, so long as they were not discriminatory.
This proposal would have given parents the opportunity to pick the
highest quality education for their child, no matter what their zip
code is.
In 2023, roughly 80,000 students took advantage of open enrollment
in my home state of Ohio. Participation has steadily increased over
time, and it is thanks to the abundance of school choice option leaders
in my state that have worked tirelessly to provide for parents.
One of the most popular programs, EdChoice, provides K-12
scholarships to students who are assigned to underperforming schools,
as well as to students whose families meet certain income designations.
Ohio has continued to expand eligibility for their school choice
programs, in part because the results have been tremendous. Despite
outcries from Democrats and teachers' unions, these programs have
empowered parents with options and created competition among schools.
Every student is different, and programs such as EdChoice have
encouraged schools to carefully tend to the needs of parents and their
children, who if dissatisfied, can vote with their feet and go to a
more fitting school for them.
According to a 2022 study by the Thomas B. Fordham Institute, who
has offices in Ohio, the academic achievement of district students was
``significantly higher'' than it would have been had districts not been
exposed to the EdChoiceprogram.
Ohio families are not the only ones reaping the positive results of
school choice programs. There has been an explosion of school choice
legislation introduced in states all around the country.
One of the many ways Congress could phase out the Department of
Education is to simply consolidate the federal funding we appropriate
to the Department into a block grant, which can be awarded to
individual States based on citizens in each state.
Congress uses block grants in Washington for a variety of programs,
in no small part, because we want taxpayer dollars to be spent in the
best way possible. However, the block grants would have to come with no
strings attached.
For decades, presidential administrations have used the Department
of Education to implement ``one-size-fits-all'' policies. They failed
time and time again by funding schools that have clear track records of
bad studentoutcomes.
If we change the status quo and block grant our federal education
spending, states like Ohio would have the flexibility to spend taxpayer
dollars in ways that impact their students the most, such as expanding
their school choice programs.
Of course, approaches around the country could and would vary, but
that is how our Constitution is supposed to work. It is only a republic
if we keep it and education policy is only one example of how we have
far more government than will fit within our Constitution.
It is time for our federal government (all of us) to recognize
this. I look forward to working with Chairwoman Foxx, and the rest of
my colleagues on this committee to spend taxpayer dollars in a way that
restores a government small enough to fit within the Constitution. We
can afford that government financially and morally.
Thank you, Chairman Bean!
______

Chairman Bean. Mr. Davidson, thank you very much. We
appreciate your thoughts. Let us go to Wisconsin. Let us go to
Wisconsin where Mr. Pocan, you are recognized. Welcome to the
committee, we are glad to have you here. What say you on
education?

STATEMENT OF HON. MARK POCAN, MEMBER OF CONGRESS, WISCONSIN 2ND
DISTRICT

Mr. Pocan. Thank you to the full committee Chair, and thank
you, Ranking Member. I appreciate the chance to testify before
you today. The title of today's hearing School Choice,
Expanding Educational Freedom for all is somewhat ironic
because the data of these choice programs shows these programs
drain resources from public schools to fund private and
religious schools, which are not held to the same educational
standards, nor are subject to many of the anti-discrimination
laws that protect LGBTQ Plus students, students with
disabilities, and students of color.
I served for 14 years in the Wisconsin State Legislature
during one of our first in the Nation school voucher
experiments, and I am glad to share some of the findings.
Vouchers fund students already attending private schools, not
low-income kids. Let us be clear, voucher programs
overwhelmingly subsidize kids who are already in private
schools.
In Wisconsin, more than 70 to 80 percent of vouchers go to
kids already in private school. Wisconsin's program started
with 511 students in the 2013-2014 school year and now has an
enrollment of over 17,000 students, and each year the program
has consistently enrolled more students from private schools
than from public schools. Cutting their resources to subsidize
kids attending private schools that their parents can already
afford is not about education, it is really about tax breaks.
Second, vouchers do not save taxpayer dollars and drain
funds for public schools. Additionally, these programs do not
save taxpayer dollars. The cost of Wisconsin's statewide
voucher program has grown from just over 3 million in 2013, to
over 98 million less than a decade later. Wisconsin is
effectively funding two separate school systems, one public,
one private out of limited State education funds.
This puts a heavy financial burden on public schools and on
taxpayers who have to foot the bill. My republican colleagues
often talk about their support for rural communities, but
voucher programs hit rural schools particularly hard and put
these communities at risk. I live in a rural community of 830
people myself.
Rural communities cannot afford to lose their schools
because of unaccountable voucher programs. Third, vouchers do
not improve academic achievement. These programs also fail to
improve academic achievement for students. Studies have shown
that Milwaukee students using vouchers to attend private
schools performed no better on standardized tests than their
public school counterparts, and that the Milwaukee voucher
program had no effect on students likelihood of graduating
college. Many voucher schools also shutdown with little
warning, abruptly forcing students to move to schools, public
schools, and without returning a dime of public funding.
One study shows that 41 percent of all private voucher
schools operating in Milwaukee between 1991 and 2015 failed.
Research also shows academic outcomes tend to improve for
students who choose to leave their voucher school for a public
school.
Fourth, voucher schools lack accountability and oversight.
Finally, for my colleagues who love to talk about
accountability for Federal spending, it is worth noting that
these school choice programs have zero accountability for
taxpayers. When Wisconsin first started the voucher program the
standards were incredibly loose.
There was a school that used their government funds to
lease Cadillacs. Another school that received funds was run by
someone who said he could read a book simply by placing his
hand on it. While eventually the standards were improved,
voucher schools are not subject to the same requirements and
oversight as public schools, meaning there is little to protect
taxpayers from these types of abuses.
It is clear that public funds belong in public schools,
which serve all students regardless of whether they have
special needs, or their economic situation. The data shows that
voucher programs lack basic oversight measures, sometimes fund
discrimination, and fail to improve academic achievement for
the students that participate.
Our nation's public schools are already resource starved,
struggling to fund livable salaries for teachers, basic
infrastructure upgrades, or manageable classroom sizes. We need
to invest in them for better results. Thank you for this
opportunity to speak today, and I yield back.
[The Statement of Mr. Pocan follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.004

Chairman Bean. Mr. Pocan, thank you so much. If you are
just tuning in, we are talking about Americans educational
choice, where that leads, and what we can do with it. We are on
part A of two all-star panels. We are going to Nebraska now,
where Hon. Adrian Smith is standing by. Congressman Smith, you
are recognized. Welcome to the committee.

STATEMENT OF HON. ADRIAN SMITH, FORMER MEMBER OF CONGRESS,
NEBRASKA 3RD DISTRICT

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Chairman Bean, Chairwoman Foxx,
Ranking Member Bonamici, Ranking Member Scott, and members of
the subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss this
important topic here in today's hearing.
There is no question that school choice is having a moment
nationwide. Data shows parental involvement leads to better
outcomes for students, and as legislators we have a
responsibility to encourage more parental involvement in
education, not less. School choice is one way to do that.
Parental empowerment is more important than ever before. It
is incumbent upon us to come together and put forward creative
solutions to ensure all children can access a quality
education, no matter their background or where they live. This
was an issue near and dear to our friend and late colleague,
Representative Jackie Walorski.
While I wish Ms. Walorski were here testifying before you
today, it is an honor to have carried forward her bill
alongside Representative Burgess Owens, who serves on this
important subcommittee. Our bill, the Educational Choice for
Children Act, is an innovative policy mechanism to provide
deserving students of all backgrounds with more options to fund
their education needs, something we should all be able to agree
on.
It is important, and with emphasis I note this measure
leaves in place all existing public education resources. Let me
repeat. This measure leaves in place all existing public
education resources. The ECCA would create an annual ten-
billion-dollar pool of tax credits, which Treasury would
allocate to private, non-profit scholarship granting
organizations, or SGOs in each State, and in D.C.
These SGOs would receive donations from families and
businesses, allowing them to provide scholarships to families
below 300 percent of their state's median income. SGOs would
then allocate one for one tax credits back to the donors, and
grant the scholarships to families. In addition to paying
traditional tuition costs, the scholarships could also be used
to pay for tutoring, supplies, and other needs for families and
rural areas where their local district cannot fully meet their
needs, and where traditional private school options do not
exist.
This process is run by private, non-governmental SGOs,
there is no government involvement in providing these
scholarships. We do this through the tax code. Once again, we
are leaving in place all existing funding for education
budgets.
You may find this concept familiar because the structure of
this tax incentive is similar to programs with strong
bipartisan support like the low-income housing tax credit. The
ECCA is supported by numerous stakeholders and advocates, and I
hope today's subcommittee hearing will pave the way for
additional action on this important legislation.
Thank you again for having me to discuss this ECCA, and the
importance of school choice to students and families across
America. Thank you and I yield back.
[The Statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

Prepared Statement of Adrian Smith

Thank you, Chairman Bean, Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member Bonamici,
and members of the Subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to
discuss this important topic at today's hearing.
There is no question that school choice is having a moment
nationwide. Data shows that parental involvement leads to better
outcomes for students,\1\ and as legislators we have a responsibility
to encourage more parental involvement in education, not less. School
choice is one way to do that.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.apa.org/pi/lgbt/programs/safe-supportive/parental-
engagement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Parental empowerment is more important than ever before. It is
incumbent upon us to come together and put forward creative solutions
to ensure all children can access a quality education, no matter their
background or where they live.
This was an issue near and dear to our friend and late colleague,
Representative Jackie Walorski. While I wish Ms. Walorski were here
testifying before you today, it is an honor to have carried forward her
bill alongside Representative Burgess Owens, who serves on this
important subcommittee.
Our bill, the Educational Choice for Children Act, is an innovative
policy mechanism to provide deserving students of all backgrounds with
more options to fund their education needs, something we should all be
able to agree on. It is important to note this measure leaves in place
all existing public education resources.
The ECCA would create an annual $10 billion pool of tax credits
which Treasury would allocate to private, non-profit scholarship
granting organizations, or SGOs, in each state and in DC.
Those SGOs would receive donations from families and businesses
allowing them to provide scholarships to families below 300% of their
state's median income. SGOs would then allocate one-for-one tax credits
back to the donors and grant the scholarships to families.
In addition to paying traditional tuition costs, the scholarships
could also be used to pay for tutoring, supplies, and other needs for
families in rural areas where their local district cannot fully meet
their needs and where traditional private school options do not exist.
Because this process is run by private, non-governmental SGOs,
there is no governmental involvement in providing these scholarships.
Because we do this through the tax code, once again we are leaving
all existing funding for education budgets in place.
You may find this concept familiar because the structure of this
tax incentive is similar to programs with strong bipartisan support,
like the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit.
The ECCA is supported by numerous stakeholders and advocates, and I
hope today's subcommittee hearing will pave the way for additional
action on this important legislation.
Thank you again for having me to discuss the ECCA and the
importance of school choice to students and families everywhere.
______

Chairman Bean. Thank you, Mr. Smith, Mr. Pocan, thank you
very much for coming forward. We appreciate, we know you all
are excused. How about that? You are excused. Members, we are
going to pause literally for just half a minute, 30 seconds, as
we excuse our first all-star panel, and then we invite the
second all-star panel. Thank you very much. Well done.
Our second all-star panel now making their way to the
witness table. We are now looking for the witnesses for the
second all-star panel. We found one, hooray. You are first. You
get to choose. Your choice. We are back ladies and gentlemen.
This is the Subcommittee on Early Childhood Elementary and
Secondary Education.
We are in the middle of a discussion on education choice in
America. We have already heard from one all-star panel, and now
it is time for all-star panel No. 2. We have got four distinct
distinguished witnesses that we are going to hear from, and we
are glad to have you here. Welcome.
For our first witness introduction, let us go to our own
Mary Miller. You are recognized.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you so much to all of our witnesses for
coming today, and I would like to introduce Mr. Luke Messer,
who is the President of Invest in Education. From 2013 to 2019,
he served as a U.S. Congressman for Indiana's Sixth
Congressional District and was a member of this committee.
He also served as a State legislator in the Indiana House
of Representatives, and was President and CEO of School Choice,
Indiana, where he helped pass major school choice legislation,
and usher in the largest state-based education reform movement
in the country. Thank you sir for attending.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Ms. Miller. Welcome. We
are glad to have you here. I defer to Ranking Member Bonamici
to introduce our second witness.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Derek
W. Black is a professor of law and Director of the
Constitutional Law Center at the University of South Carolina,
School of Law. His area of expertise includes educational
policy, Constitutional law, and civil rights.
The focus of his current scholarship is the intersection of
Constitutional law and public education, particularly as it
pertains to educational equity, equality, and fairness for
disadvantaged students. His work has been cited by Federal
courts in various briefs before the U.S. Supreme Court.
Based on that research, he offers expert witness testimony
in school funding, voucher and Federal educational policy
litigation. He holds a JD from the University of North Carolina
School of Law.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, and welcome Mr. Black.
Nathaniel Moran, Congressman Moran, you are recognized to
introduce our third witness.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Chair. I am pleased to introduce Dr.
Lindsey Burke, who is the Director of the Center for Education
Policy at the Heritage Foundation. She has published
evaluations of education choice options for public policy
foundations across the country. If that were not enough, she
has also done extensive work shaping, and evaluating policies
on education savings accounts.
She holds a Ph.D. in education policy from George Mason
University, where she examined the intersection of education
choice and institutional theory. We are grateful, ma'am, that
you have joined us today, and look forward to hearing from you.
Please welcome Dr. Lindsey Burke.
Chairman Bean. Thank you, Mr. Moran, and welcome Dr. Burke.
I have the honor of introducing our fourth witness. It is
Denisha Allen. She is a Senior Fellow at the American
Federation for Children, and previously served as school choice
and youth liaison for the Secretary of Education at the U.S.
Department of Education.
She is from the free State of Florida. She is a tax
scholarship graduate, who had her life changed by being able to
choose the school that she chose. She has been featured in the
Wall Street Journal, Washington Examiner, and Fox News, but
most importantly, we discovered that we share a passion for the
Jaguars out of Jacksonville, because that is where you are
from. We are glad to have you here.
You have probably got one of the best jobs ever making
families--just changing lives by helping them navigate their
way through school choice. With that, panelists, we are glad to
have you here. There is a 5-minute warning. Your lights will
light up. Maybe I will give you the signal if you go forward,
but we are glad to have you here, and just welcome.
Welcome back to our first witness, Mr. Messer. We drew
straws, you lost, so you are going first. We are delighted to
have you here. Welcome back. So Mr. Messer, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF HON. LUKE MESSER, FORMER MEMBER OF CONGRESS,
PRESIDENT, INVEST IN EDUCATION

Mr. Messer. Thank you, Chairman Bean, Ranking Member
Bonamici, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify here today. It is great to be back in
this hearing room. As a former member of the Education and
Workforce Committee, former President of the State school
choice organization, and former State legislator, I have worked
for many years to reform K-12 education, with a particular
emphasis on expanding educational freedom and parental
empowerment in K-12 education.
This month marks the 40th anniversary of a nation at risk,
arguably the most important document assessing the State of K-
12 education ever published by the Federal Government. Forty
years later and not enough has changed. The truth is we are a
long way away from having a 21st Century K-12 education model,
where every student has access to a great education, and
schools are laser focused on learning and improving academic
outcomes for students.
The pandemic exposed a disturbing underlying political
dynamic that too often places the interests of adults above the
welfare, both emotionally and academically of students. The
result was a widespread documented learning loss that will take
years to recover.
During the pandemic, with millions of students learning
from home, America's parents also got a much better look at the
substance of what is being taught in our Nation's schools.
Unfortunately, many schools are driving an agenda that has
little to do with reading, writing, math, science, art, music
or history.
Thanks to the leadership of Representative Letlow,
Chairwoman Foxx, and many other members of this committee, the
House recently passed a bill, the Parents Bill of Rights, which
is intended to ensure that parents have a much stronger voice
in our Nation's schools, but importantly, school choice is the
engine that makes the Parents Bill of Rights enforceable.
Parents need the freedom to choose the education
environment that best meets their child's needs. Parents,
especially lower income parents, need the power to be able to
leave government assigned schools that are not working for
their child. Parents need school choice. The great myth about
school choice is that it allegedly hurts public schools.
Decades into this debate, school choice is an experiment no
longer.
In America today, there are 3.5 million students in public
charter schools. There are around 700,000 students benefiting
from a voucher, tax credit scholarship, or education savings
account. The public school system is still standing and still
educating the vast majority of our Nation's students.
In fact, more than 20 years of research compiled by
EdChoice, shows that the existence of school choice actually
improves academic achievement in surrounding public schools.
School choice is also incredibly popular. In America today, it
is hard to find a public policy issue on which republican,
democrat, independent, Latino, African American, and millennial
voters all agree, yet poll after poll shows 70 to even 90
percent support for these groups for various forms of school
choice.
Congress can heed the call from voters and parents of
school age children, and pass America's boldest school choice
bill, H.R. 531, the Educational Choice for Children Act,
authored by Representative Smith, who did a great job
describing the bill earlier today, my friend Burgess Owens, and
then my late colleague from Indiana, Jackie Walorski.
The ECCA represents federalism and ensures K-12 education
remains a State and local issue, creates no new mandates, or
government programs, protects religious liberty, and private
school autonomy. It does this by creating a ten-billion-dollar
Federal tax credit that allows individuals and businesses to
contribute to non-profit scholarship granting organizations and
the states.
These SGOs provide scholarships for students to use for a
variety of educational purposes, such as tuition, tutoring to
address learning loss, special needs services, school related
fees, education technology or curriculum materials. That is
private money, not Federal money, to fund scholarships, while
donors get 100 percent non-refundable tax credit.
Once implemented, the ECCA would provide educational
opportunities for more than a million families throughout the
country. Imagine how different a policy debate would have been
throughout the pandemic if one million families could have
voted with their feet.
[The Statement of Mr. Messer follows:]

Prepared Statement of Luke Messer

Chairman Bean, Ranking Member Bonamici, and Members of the
Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. As a
former member of the Education & Workforce Committee, former president
of a state school choice organization, and a former state legislator, I
have worked for many years to reform K-12 education, with a particular
emphasis on expanding education freedom and parental empowerment in K-
12 education.
This month marks the 40th anniversary of ``A Nation at Risk'',
arguably the most important document assessing the state of K-12
education ever published by the federal government.
For those who do not recall, ``A Nation at Risk'' was a data-based
report issued in April of 1983, by the Reagan Administration's National
Commission on Excellence in Education. The most famous line of the
report declared that ``the educational foundations of our society are
presently being eroded by a rising tide of mediocrity that threatens
our very future as a Nation and a people.'' (U.S. Department of
Education, 1983).
The report was fashioned as ``an open letter to the American
people'' and called on elected officials, educators, parents, and
students to reform a public school system it described as ``in urgent
need of improvement.''
Forty years later, not enough has changed. The truth is: we are a
long way away from having a 21st Century K-12 education model where
every student has access to a great education, and schools are laser
focused on learning and improving academic outcomes for students.
Today, our K-12 ``system'' continues to place the interests and
agendas of adults above the learning and academic needs of students. We
are still, for the most part, the same antiquated 19th Century model
that funds systems instead of students. If we learned anything during
the pandemic, it is that our K-12 ``system'' remains woefully
inadequate for the times, inflexible, and incapable of ensuring a
quality education for every child.
More alarmingly, the pandemic exposed a disturbing underlying
political dynamic that, too often, places the interests of adults above
the welfare, both emotionally and academically, of students. The result
was a widespread, documented learning loss that will take years to
recover.
As Members of the Education Committee, you are fully aware of the
catastrophic learning loss that occurred because of school closures and
often unreasonable government mandates during the pandemic. Millions of
students lost an entire year (or more) of learning. The loss fell
disproportionally hard on children in low-income families and special
needs students. The 2022 NAEP scores reinforced what we already knew.
Fourth grade reading scores were the lowest since 2005. One quarter of
fourth graders performed at the ``below basic'' level in reading.
Math scores for the 4th and 8th grades showed the biggest declines
since NAEP assessments began in 1990.
During the pandemic, with millions of students learning from home,
America's parents also got a much better look at the substance of what
is being taught in our nation's schools.
Unfortunately, many schools are driving an agenda that has little
to do with reading, writing, math, science, art, music or history. Many
parents discovered that their own local public schools no longer
aligned with or respected their family's values.
Thanks to the leadership, Rep. Letlow, Chairwoman Foxx, and many
other Members of this committee, the House recently passed a bill, the
Parents Bill of Rights, which is intended to ensure that parents have a
much stronger voice in our nation's schools.
No doubt, the Parents Bill of Rights will bring more transparency
into our public school system. Importantly, school choice is the engine
that makes the Parents Bill of Rights enforceable.
Parents need the freedom to choose the education environment that
best meets their child's needs. Parents, especially lower-income
parents, need the power to be able to leave the government-assigned
school that is not working for their child. Parents need school choice.
Parental empowerment through school choice will transform an
outdated 19th Century education system into a 21st Century model where
every child has access to a great education, regardless of their
parents' income, residence, privilege or social status.
The great myth about school choice is that it allegedly hurts
public schools. Decades into this debate, school choice is an
experiment no longer. In America today, there are 3.5 million students
in public charter schools. There are around 700,000 students
benefitting from a voucher, tax credit scholarship, or education
savings account. The public school system is still standing and still
educating the vast majority of our nation's students. In other words,
school choice has not hurt public schools. In fact, more than 20 years
of research compiled by EdChoice shows that the existence of school
choice actually improves academic achievement in surrounding public
schools.
School choice is also incredibly popular. In America today, it is
hard to find a public policy issue on which Republican, Democrat,
Independent, Latino, African American, and Millennial voters all agree.
Poll after poll shows 70% to even 90% support from these groups for
various forms of school choice.
We have seen this support playing out in the states. There are now
31 states, plus Washington, D.C., with a voucher, tax credit
scholarship, or education savings account program (ESA). Four states
have even passed universal school choice programs in which every K-12
student is, or soon will be, eligible to participate. Of course, there
are still 19 states where parents of school-aged children are denied
the opportunity to choose the best school for their own children.
Congress should heed the call from voters and parents of school-
aged children and pass America's boldest school choice bill--H.R. 531,
the Educational Choice for Children Act (ECCA).
The ECCA respects federalism and ensures K-12 education remains a
state and local issue. It creates no new mandates or government
programs. Instead, the ECCA creates a $10 billion federal tax credit
that allows individuals and businesses to contribute to non-profit
scholarship granting organizations (SGOs) in the states. These SGOs
provide scholarships for students to use for a variety of educational
purposes such as tuition, tutoring to address learning loss, special
needs services, school-related fees, education technology, or
curriculum materials. That is private money, not federal money, to fund
scholarships, while donors get a 100% non-refundable federal tax
credit.
Once implemented, the ECCA would provide educational opportunities
for more than a million families throughout the country. Imagine how
different the policy debate would have been throughout the pandemic if
one million families could have voted with their feet.
This is important enough to say again; the ECCA contains no
government mandates or encroachments on SGOs or schools that educate
scholarship students. It protects religious liberty and private school
autonomy. It benefits students who live in urban, rural, and suburban
parts of the country. For states that already offer school choice, the
ECCA scholarship can be stacked on top of an existing state
scholarship, voucher, or ESA, thereby increasing the purchasing power
for parents and allowing more students to benefit, especially during
the more expensive high school years. The ECCA also creates educational
opportunity in states that lack education freedom by directly
empowering parents to choose the school or education service that meets
their child's needs. It does these things without expanding federal
government education policy or spending new federal money.
Giving more parents the freedom to choose the best school or
education service for their children is where K-12 education must go.
It is just common sense. There is nothing to fear from directly
empowering parents. Our view is that it should not just be wealthy or
politically powerful parents who get to choose the best school for
their child. All parents should have this right.
______

Chairman Bean. Mr. Messer, thank you so much. You have not
lost it. You still stayed under time, so we are glad to have
you back. Let us go to our second witness, it is Mr. Black. Mr.
Black, welcome again, and you are recognized and your mic.

STATEMENT OF DEREK BLACK, PROFESSOR OF LAW AND ERNEST F.
HOLLINGS CHAIR IN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH
CAROLINA

Mr. Black. Thank you, Mr. Chair. It is my honor to testify
before the committee. I want to focus my comments on four
issues in particular, states' Constitutional duty in education,
the financial impact of vouchers on public education, unequal
access and discrimination in voucher programs, and student
achievement.
First, public financing of vouchers must be situated within
a larger Constitutional context. The key question is whether
private school subsidies are permissible under State
Constitutions. All 50 State Constitutions mandate the provision
of public education. These mandates are affirmative and
absolute, and they include qualitative components.
Both Constitutional language and courts describe these
obligations as states' paramount, or foremost duty, which is to
say that no other priorities can come before them. Various
State Constitutional clauses also directly limit states
involvements in financing private school education, and reserve
certain resources exclusively for public schools.
The purpose of those restrictions is to ensure states
remain wedded to public education as their top priority, and
the public funds do not get diverted elsewhere to the detriment
of public schools. Provisions of these sorts, for instance,
have required the Florida, Nevada, and South Carolina Supreme
Courts most recently to strike down voucher programs.
It is also worth emphasizing that these State
Constitutional education clauses are a function of the United
States Constitutional mandate that Congress guarantee a
republican form of government in the states. Since the Nation's
founding, the provision of public education has been understood
as a central pillar of American democracy, and a republican
form of government.
This understanding is reflected in one of the Nation's four
foundational documents--the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, which
actually precedes the United States Constitution, and in the
terms that Congress has imposed on states as a condition of
admission into the Union.
Second, various studies strongly suggest that many, if not
most, states are failing to meet their Constitutional
obligations regarding public school funding, and these
shortfalls tend to increase when states adopt a voucher and
voucher like programs. One study found that states disinvested
nearly 600 billion dollars in public schools following the
Great Recession.
During the same period, several states exponentially
expanded their private school choice programs. For instance, a
2022 report rated Florida's funding level in its public schools
as an F. It is funding effort as an F, and its distribution of
funds amongst those schools as a D. At the same time, Florida
spends roughly 1 billion dollars a year on private school
tuition.
Conversely, states with the highest public education
funding ratings do not typically support voucher programs. It
is also worth emphasizing that even when public schools lose
students, many of their costs relating to transportation,
facilities, utilities, and personnel remain fixed. As a result,
public schools must provide the same services, but with fewer
resources.
Third, private schools participating in these programs do
not provide equal access to all students. They are exempt from
various anti-discrimination and Constitutional restrictions,
and evidence suggests that some of these schools are in fact,
discriminating against students in admission, as well as
providing questionable curriculum.
In addition, states have increasingly changed their
programs from expanding opportunity for lower income students
to simply subsidizing private school tuition for all students.
No matter what, private schools continue to pick and choose
from student applicants based upon academic credentials, and
other factors such as behavioral history.
The net result of publicly financed programs that help to
sort, segregate, and stratify students into demographic silos.
These dynamics pose serious challenges for our democracy and
run contrary to the governmental role in education. If
government is no longer willing to pursue its democratic goals,
the rationale for publicly financing education evaporates.
Fourth, many school choice proponents incorrectly believe
that private schools, and thus, tuition programs, offer an
academic advantage over public schools. While the average test
score and private schools is higher, this is a function of the
fact that private schools are demographically distinct from
public schools.
When comparing apples to apples, public schools slightly
outperform private schools. Studies more specifically on
voucher programs show that students enrolling in these programs
often perform worse than their similarly situated peers in
public schools.
Congress and states have never fully achieved their goals
in public schools. The public education has, as much as any
aspect of the American story, been a central pillar of
achieving what Abraham Lincoln called, ``A more perfect
union.'' Now is not the time to abandon this crucially
important project, but to redouble our efforts, and recommit to
its premises.
Our State Constitutions and national credos do not allow
for anything less. Thank you.
[The Statement of Mr. Black:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Well done, Mr. Black. Thank you very much.
Our fourth panelist is Ms. Allen. Ms. Allen, welcome again, and
you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF MRS. DENISHA ALLEN, SENIOR FELLOW, AMERICAN
FEDERATION FOR CHILDREN

Mrs. Allen. Thank you so much, Representative Bean, and for
all the leadership for having me here today. I grew up in
Jacksonville, Florida, on the east side of Jacksonville. My
neighborhood sits on the east side of downtown, near the arena
where the Jaguars play, and it is closed off by Springfield.
By all accounts, the east side of Jacksonville should be a
prosperous neighborhood, but the reality is far different. It
has been the focus of many projects in the city, and statistics
tell a sad tale. The median household income is half that of
the citywide average. You can buy and sell drugs easily, crime
is high, this neighborhood is where I went to school, and I
failed the third grade twice because I could not read.
I felt so insecure. I just knew I was stupid. I was
regularly humiliated by my classmates because I was 2 years
older than everyone in my class. Teachers sighed when I walked
through the door. Unsurprisingly, I hated school. To me, school
was just a place that I had to go out of obligation, so my
mother would not go to jail because that had actually happened
before.
The summer before my sixth-grade year, I started to live
permanently with my godmother. I thought that I was a failure,
and it seemed that my life would follow the same path of many
folks in my family, dropping out, or worse. When I started to
live with my godmother, one of the first things she wanted to
do was put me in a great school.
She found out about the Florida Tech's credit scholarship
and immediately enrolled me into her church's private school. I
did not know my life was going to change as much as it did.
Every day at my new school, the teachers greeted me with a
smile. I felt so loved and seen.
Because I did not read on level, teachers met with me one-
on-one to catch me up. They saw the potential that was in me.
My confidence began to grow. They did not view me as a chore,
but as a child of God, and as a student that was capable of
learning. I went from making D's and F's consistently,
believing that I would be a teen parent, a high school dropout,
to making A's and B's, graduating from high school, becoming
the first in my family to do so, undergrad, and earning my
master's degree.
I now work full-time to create more opportunities for
students nationwide. I learned that I was not a failure, but
the public school system had failed me. Imagine all the
students who are like I once was, students who are trapped in
failing, poor performing schools, who do not read on grade
level, who are destined to drop out, become a teen parent,
spend the rest of their life behind bars.
Imagine the students who were sitting in the back of the
classroom being overlooked, even the students who are gifted,
who were not being challenged enough, and telling all of those
beautiful faces that there is a feasible alternative, that
their liberation is in the form of education freedom, but only
if their State leaders prioritize their students' needs above
systems.
Students in this country deserve a K through 12 option that
is beyond the singular one the government has assigned to them,
yet in many states the opportunity for America's students
remain out of reach. Florida, my home State, is a bright
exception. Over 100,000 black students in Florida are enrolled
in their non-district schools.
For context, that means that there are more black students
in Florida that are enrolled in choice programs than 30 states
have black students overall. School choice does not just
benefit students who have left district schools. As school
choice has been expanded in the State of Florida. The district
schools have also seen strong academic gains, both outpacing
black students nationally, and narrowing the achievement gap
between white students in Florida.
The sad reality is that many states will never access this
lifechanging opportunity unless Congress acts. There are many
proposals to provide more options to parents, but the Education
Choice for Children Act would allow education freedom now more
than ever. School choice is a rising tide that lifts all boats.
My own life is a reflection of that data, and as someone who
saw firsthand the power that it has had in my life, I cannot
wait to see the amazing things that happen across the country.
I encourage Congress to act swiftly to ensure that no child
is left behind. Thank you.
[The Statement of Mrs. Allen follows:]

Prepared Statement of Denisha Allen

Good morning. My name is Denisha Allen. Thank you, Representative
Bean, for your leadership, and to the body for having me.
I grew up in Jacksonville, Florida, mostly on the Eastside. My old
neighborhood, called the urban core, should by all accounts be
prosperous. It is just east of downtown, near the arena where the
Jaguars play, and closed off by historic Springfield. The reality is
far different.
It has become the focus of many urban projects in the city, but
statistics tell a sad tale. The median household income in the ZIP code
where I grew up is about half the citywide average. You can buy and
sell drugs easily, and crime is high. This neighborhood is also where I
went to school.
I failed third grade--twice--because I could not read. I felt so
insecure. I just knew I was stupid. I was regularly humiliated by my
peers because I was two years older than my classmates. Teachers sighed
when I walked through the door. Unsurprisingly, I hated school.
To me, school was not the window to opportunity but an obligation.
I thought school was a place I had to go so my biological mother would
not go to jail--because that had happened before. In the fourth grade,
I was enrolled in a check-up program to help me get into my correct
grade. At the end of the year, I was told I did not pass the program so
I would not be going to my correct grade. Again, I felt like a failure.
It seemed that my life path would follow in the same path as many of my
family members, with dropping out or worse.
Then, during the summer of my sixth-grade year, my life turned
around. I went to live with my godmother, and one of the first things
she wanted to do was to enroll me into a good school--a small private
school her church had recently opened on the northside of Jacksonville.
She applied for the Florida tax-credit scholarship. I was awarded one
of those scholarships.
I did not know my life was about to change. Every day at my new
school, my teachers greeted me with a smile. I felt loved and seen.
Because I did not read on grade level, teachers would meet with me
one-on-one to help me. They saw potential in me that I never had. My
confidence grew. They did not view me as a chore but as a child of
God--as a student capable of learning.
I went from making Ds and Fs, believing I would become a teen mom
and a high-school dropout, to making As and Bs, becoming the first in
my family to graduate from high school, then undergraduate college, and
grad school--earning a master's degree and going on to work full-time
in this field to ensure that as many other students as possible get
this incredible opportunity.
I was not a failure. The public school system had failed me.
Imagine all the students today who are like I once was--the ones who
are trapped in poor-performing schools, who do not read on grade level,
are destined to drop out of school, become a teen parent, or spend the
rest of their life behind bars.
Imagine the students who are sitting in the back of classrooms
being overlooked. Imagine the students who are gifted but are not being
challenged because the majority of classroom time is spent on
discipline and classroom management.
Imagine telling those beautiful faces that there was a feasible
alternative, that their liberation came in the form of education
freedom--but only if their state leaders prioritized students' needs
above the systems that had failed them.
Students in this country deserve K-12 education options beyond the
singular one the government assigns, yet in many states, the
opportunity for America's students, including its 7.7 million Black
public school students,\1\ to access these potentially life-changing
learning options remains out of reach.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Center for Education Statistics: Racial/Ethnic
Enrollment in Public Schools.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida, my home state, is a notably bright exception, with more
than 600,000 Black students, among the highest number compared to other
states, who are achieving great things thanks to education freedom.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ In 2017-18, Florida had 626,289 Black students in public
schools, ranking it third among states behind Texas and Georgia. Civil
Rights Data Collection (ed.gov).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For example, in the 2020-21 school year, 112,662 Black students in
Florida were enrolled in non-district options that did not exist a
generation ago, including charter schools, private schools via state-
supported scholarships, and home education using state-funded education
savings accounts.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Controlling the Narrative: Parental Choice, Black Empowerment &
Lessons From Florida. (See Figure 1.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For context, Florida now has more Black students enrolled in choice
options than 30 states have Black students overall, including Arkansas,
Minnesota, and Massachusetts.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Civil Right Data Collection (ed.gov).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Black students in Florida charter schools outperform their
counterparts in Florida districtschools, according to state and federal
test data.\5\ Academic data for Florida's private school choice program
shows that participants graduated from high school, went to college,
and earn degrees at significantly higher rates than their peers in
district schools.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ SAR1920 (fldoe.org).
\6\ The Effects of the Florida Tax credit Scholarship Program on
College Enrollment and Graduation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A 2020 report from the National Bureau of Economic Research found
that as the Florida Tax Credit Scholarship program grew, district
schools improved. School choice does not just benefit students who left
district schools. As choice expanded, Black students who remain in
Florida district schools are also making strong academic gains, both
outpacing Black students nationally and narrowing achievement gaps with
white students in Florida.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ NDE Core Web (nationsreportcard.gov).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the 1990s, Florida's graduation rate was 52 percent overall--and
42 percent for Black students. Now, it is 87 percent overall--and 82
percent for Black students.\8\ The same trends can be seen in national
math and reading scores. In the 1990s, Black students in Florida were
near the bottom relative to Black students in other states. Now in most
categories, Black students in Florida are near the top.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Florida's Graduation Rate, 1998-99 to 2017-18 (fldoe.org) The
graduation rate gap between Black and white students in Florida in 2020
was 5.1 percentage points.
\9\ Closing the Racial Achievement Gap: Learning from Florida's
Reforms | The Heritage Foundation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The sad reality is students in many states will never access this
type of life-changing opportunity unless Congress acts. There are many
proposals to provide more options to parents--like the Education Choice
for Children Act--it would allow parents to have education freedom now
more than ever. Since Covid, parents have been begging for more options
and state legislatures have been listening. To date, five states have
passed bills to provide all their students with education freedom.
School choice is a rising tide that lifts all boats. My own life is
reflected in this data. As someone who saw its power firsthand, I
cannot wait to see the amazing things to come in this new world of
wide-open options for all. I encourage Congress to act swiftly to
ensure no child is left to struggle.
Thank you.
______

Chairman Bean. Ms. Allen, thank you so much, and thanks for
coming and sharing your story. We are going to go to Q and A,
questions from members. Members, everybody has 5 minutes. We
have 5 minutes ourselves. Here is the list that I have right
now, and if this is not correct whisper in my ear, but
questions will go in the order of Bean, Bonamici, McClain,
Norcross, Moran, Sablan, Williams, Bowman, Miller, Wilson,
Owens, Estes, Kiley, Scott, and Foxx.
After we get to hear from Dr. Burke, because Dr. Burke, we
are not going to forget about you. We are glad to have you
here, so Dr. Burke let us go and give you 5 minutes too.

STATEMENT OF DR. LINDSEY BURKE, DIRECTOR OF THE CENTER FOR
EDUCATION POLICY, HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Ms. Burke. Thank you. I think I get 6 minutes now. My name
is Lindsey Burke. I am the Director of the Center for Education
Policy at the Heritage Foundation. The views that I express in
this testimony are my own and should not be construed as
representing any official position of the Heritage Foundation.
Thank you, Chairman Bean and Ranking Member Bonamici, for
the opportunity to testify today. Over the past decade, states
have increasingly adopted private school choice options, such
as vouchers, tax credits, scholarships, and education savings
accounts. As of March of this year, 13 states have education
savings accounts, or ESA's silo accounts, 15 have school
voucher options, and 21 give families access to tax credit
scholarships.
What began as an earnest academic idea proffered by Nobel
Laureate Economist Milton Freedman in 1955, and his seminal
essay The Role of Government in Education, has now become
mainstream public policy, a cornerstone of State efforts to
restore parental control in education, and improve learning
outcomes for students.
The benefits of education choice are numerous, and as
school choice options expand, these benefits are being
demonstrated empirically through a growing body of scientific
research. To date, researchers have conducted 18 randomized
control trial evaluations of the effect of school choice on
students' academic achievement.
RCTs are the gold standard of scientific research, because
differences in the outcome variable of interest between the
control group and the experiment groups can be attributed to
the policy intervention in question as a result of
randomization, enabling researchers to draw causal conclusions
to a high degree of certainty.
Of the 18 RCTs conducted on the academic achievement
impacts of school choice, 12 find positive effects for some or
all students, 4 find neutral effects, and 2 find negative
effects. The bulk of scientifically rigorous evaluations are
unambiguous about the positive academic effects of school
choice on students' outcomes.
In addition to improving academic achievement, access to
school choice significantly increases students' likelihood of
graduating from high school and enrolling in college. Of the
seven experimental evaluations conducted to date on the affect
of school choice on academic attainment, six find statistically
significant positive effects for some or all students, and one
finds no effects.
No rigorous studies find a negative effect on academic
attainment. One study is particularly noteworthy. A
congressionally mandated evaluation of the D.C. Opportunity
Scholarship Program, a voucher option for children from low-
income families right here in the Nation's capital.
Participating students were 21 percentage points more likely to
graduate than the students who did not receive a scholarship in
the control group.
You will be hard pressed to find another policy
intervention as successful as the D.C. Opportunity Scholarship
Program has been. School choice is important because it is
providing accountability to families. When an assigned public
school is poor performing, families and areas with education
choice now have the ability to hold that public school
accountable, by taking their child's share of education funding
elsewhere.
This is more critical than ever. On the most recent
administration of the National Assessment of Educational
Progress, student math scores fell 8 points for eighth graders,
and reading scores declined 3 points. Experts say this is the
equivalent of wiping out two decades worth of learning gains.
Overall, across the country, just 26 percent of eighth graders
are proficient in math, and just 31 percent are proficient in
reading.
Although school choice is primarily a State policy, there
is a role for Congress to play in advancing education freedom,
starting with areas over which Congress has ultimate authority.
It should secure and expand the highly successful D.C.
Opportunity Scholarship Program, formula funding the program,
transitioning it from a voucher to an education savings
account, and making it universally available to all D.C.
children.
It should make IDEA and Title I funding portable, following
families, following children to schools of choice. It should
provide education savings accounts to Native American children
who are currently trapped in underperforming Bureau of Indian
Affairs schools, and it should provide education savings
accounts to children from active-duty military families.
Education choice provides a needed course correction
aligning K-12 education with the rest of the American
experience, one based on free choice and the accountability to
consumers created through competition, even in the case of
publicly funded programs.
Pell Grant recipients are not assigned to particular
colleges because they receive a Pell Grant. Food stamp
recipients are not assigned to the grocery store that is
closest to their home. In K-12 education, students are assigned
to a school that is closest to where their parents can afford
to live, even if that school is a poor fit.
It is time to break the link between housing and schooling,
and fund families directly, just as we do in every other aspect
of American life. Thank you.
[The Statement of Dr. Burke follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.019

Chairman Bean. Well done Dr. Burke. Thank you so much. Mr.
Messer, thank you for the general nudge to make sure our full
panel has testified. Now, we are going to Q and A, and I have
got the list, members, I know there are several different
committees going at once, so put the clock on Bean, and let us
get started.
First of all, Dr. Burke, welcome. There is a group that
says money--it is all about money, and we need to funnel more
money to public schools, but you and I talked earlier. That may
not be the case. There are some states that spend a whole bunch
more and may not get it. Can you comment on money? Is it all
about money, Dr. Burke?
Ms. Burke. It is not about the money at all, and thank you
for the question, Chairman Bean. You mentioned New York. New
York City is now spending north of $38,000.00 per student per
year. If we look across the country, we know that we----
Chairman Bean. Now, Dr. Burke, if they are spending
$38,000.00, that is not per student. Is that per student?
Ms. Burke. That is per student per year.
Chairman Bean. They are probably far ahead getting the best
results. Is that right? Spending that much money?
Ms. Burke. If money mattered. If money mattered that would
probably be the case. To your point, money does not matter.
There is no correlation between spending and academic
achievement, and the research literature that is out there. We
are now spending nationally over $17,000.00. That is revenue
per pupil per year, and we can look at the private school
sector. You can look at the Catholic school sector, in
particular.
Catholic schools are spending less than half of what we are
spending per pupil in the public system, and getting results
that are far beyond what we see in traditional district schools
across the country, so money just simply does not matter. It is
not about how much we spend, it is about who controls those
dollars. That should be parents.
Chairman Bean. Is it true--there is argument, and now I say
this sometimes, and is this correct or not? I mean, we can
either fund the system or fund the student. Is that clarifying,
and we get better results in funding the students? Would you
agree?
Ms. Burke. As a general rule, we should absolutely move
toward funding children, not systems. We should fund the
student. We should not fund a system to which we assign a
student based on where their family can afford to buy a home.
That is an inequitable way of funding K-12 education, so we
should move in that direction certainly.
This is what states are doing across the country. State
after State are now recognizing, just as Milton Freedman did,
that just because we publicly finance education, does not
require government delivery of schooling, and so that is what
education choice does. It separates the financing of education
from the delivery of schooling, and funds families directly,
enables them to choose learning environments that are safe and
effective, and reflect their values.
Chairman Bean. Thank you, Dr. Burke. I want to say that
money does not mean more money does not automatically mean
better results, so that is a good takeaway from--if we only
learned that from this meeting, then we would be further ahead
had we not known that point.
Ms. Allen, what a tremendous testimony you have given. I
think you have the greatest job ever, changing family's lives,
knowing that they can access, to be part of the million African
Americans who are attending public school choice in the free
State of Florida.
You may know this, there is the KIPP School in the west
side of Jacksonville that has a fantastic statistic that is a
gamechanger. The chance of someone attending public schools and
going to college is less than 5 percent in Jacksonville when
they attend public schools. If they attend KIPP School that
number goes to 80 percent.
What is it like changing lives with a family, giving them
the hope that they can send their kid to the school of their
choice. What is that like?
Mrs. Allen. Yes. It is amazing to put quite frankly. Based
on my personal experience, not knowing what was going to be
possible, what potential lives, just follow the same path as
members in my family.
Now, working in this space to ensure that students across
the country are given the access to a high-quality education is
monumental. During my time in Florida as an advocate, the
teacher's union sued the Florida program twice. I was filming a
commercial once to tell the teacher's union to drop the suit.
During this time, there was a little boy who was fearful that
he would be ejected from his school, who looked up to me
crying, saying am I going to have to leave my school?
That was very disheartening to know that there are forces
that do not want kids to be in learning environments that are
meeting their ultimate needs because there are communities of
schooling that are meeting them.
Chairman Bean. Thank you. I was there when the step up for
students did a march on Tallahassee, and it was truly
empowering. Mr. Messer, welcome back again, and briefly, in all
of 30 seconds, what do we need to do to continue the march to
bring educational choice across America? What do we need to do?
Congressman Messer. The key is parents. You know, you
mentioned money may not make a difference. What does matter is
engaged parents, and when you have school choice policies that
empower parents to help shape the future of their child, you
get better results.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. That concludes my time.
Up next will be Bonamici, McClain, Norcross, and Moran. Ranking
Member Bonamici, you are recognized.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I find it very
concerning that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
consistently criticize public schools and then highlight what
they see as their shortcomings, many of which are the product
of decades of disinvestment, while proposing policies that
would drain more resources from public schools, and decrease
their capacity to effectively serve.
I want to emphasize all students because as we know, the
voucher schools, and charter schools, they do not all take all
students, and when you adjust for all of those factors, I think
it is baffling to say that funding does not matter. It does. I
am going to ask my question to Professor Black. I appreciate
your expertise on civil rights.
Particularly, your scholarship highlighting the benefits of
equal access to public education. For decades, civil rights
laws, Title IX, IDEA, ESEA, those have significantly decreased
discrimination and contributed to the goal of providing all
students with the opportunity to get a high-quality education.
How can absolving schools, especially private, religious
schools, from following civil rights laws affect students and
families, who may choose a private school as part of a choice
program?
Professor, if you can bring the microphone a little closer,
I think we will have an easier time hearing you.
Mr. Black. Sure. Yes. Well, I think as one of my colleagues
once said, the further our children get away from public
schools the less we can----
Mrs. Bonamici. Can you continue, but raise that up just a
little bit. Thank you.
Mr. Black. I said the further children get away from public
schools, the less we have the capacity to protect them. You
know, you mentioned in your opening remarks that ultimately
Milton Freedman's initial arguments were laid dormant regarding
private school choice.
It really was not until the State of Virginia decided that
it wanted to resist the desegregation of public schools there,
that there were any takers in the public school sector. African
American children, at least at that time, chose to stay home
rather than to participate in a private, segregated system.
Now, of course a lot has changed since then, but as you
point out, states consistently refuse to apply anti-
discrimination standards in their private school programs. In
fact, you know, we have hearings like this, and people insist
there must be accountability, there must be anti-discrimination
protections, religion, gender, sex.
There is almost always a refusal to include those
provisions in those programs, and so students are left to a
market that can deal with them, instead of students dealing
with the market.
Ms. Bonamici. Right. I want to get to a couple more
questions Professor Black, and I want to know, I want to ask
about students with disabilities. I just want to note that I
think about our role as policymakers. I think about all the
students who are in the school. Ms. Allen, awesome that you are
doing well. I think about all the students who are in the
school you left. Our obligation is to them as well.
Professor Black, I want to ask you about students with
disabilities. I know they are participating in school choice
programs, so where are they going, and what do the schools do
to meet their needs? The traditional public schools have
infrastructure. They have specialized personnel, they have
teachers, they have speech and occupational therapists. They
have adaptive equipment.
What happens when students with disabilities go to some of
these schools, and how would the unenrollment of some students
with disabilities and the money provided, diminish the services
to students with disabilities who remain in traditional public
schools?
Mr. Black. Well, so two things. No. 1, the IDEA protection,
which you referenced, does not follow the students there. In
fact, some states have required students, although it is not
always transparent, to sort of waive any disability rights they
may have as a condition of accepting enrollment in a private
voucher program, so that is No. 1.
No. 2, when you have fewer special education students
enrolling in the private system, what you really have is a
concentration of them in the public system, which again has an
increased cost in the public system. It is losing students who
may be easier to educate, or cheaper to educate, but retaining
the higher cost students.
Public schools do not object to that, but there is a
financial consequence to it.
Ms. Bonamici. They may go back to public school, and then
not get the funding, as Mr. Pocan pointed out. My third
question, Professor Black, some people, including some here
today, have posited that a massive, multi-billion, up to ten-
billion-dollar school choice Federal tax credit, would not
affect the public school funding, which I find a bit baffling
because it seems like 10 billion dollars less in revenue that
could be used for example, for fully funding IDEA. So do you
agree? Why or why not?
Mr. Black. Well, as you point out, the Federal Government
has yet to fully fund the IDEA in the history of the program,
so any dollars spent elsewhere would be a dollar not spent
there. I think we take that same point as I always emphasize at
the State level. Until you discharge a Constitutional
responsibility of the public education program, I do not
believe it is appropriate to consider alternatives to that
program, because there is absolutely an obligation there.
Ms. Bonamici. Just to clarify, a ten-billion-dollar school
choice Federal tax credit would reduce Federal revenue by 10
billion dollars. Is that correct?
Mr. Black. Look at the State level, any type of tax
credits, you know, movement of dollars from one system to the
other, does have the effect of either directly coming out of
the public education funding program, or indirectly coming out
of it.
Ms. Bonamici. Absolutely. Mr. Chairman, I see my time has
expired, but as I yield back, I request unanimous consent to
enter into the record a letter from the National Coalition for
Public Education, encouraging Congress to reject the private
school vouchers.
Chairman Bean. Without objection.
[The letter of Ms. Bonamici follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1823.021

Chairman Bean. There has been a line up in our order.
Owens, Norcross, Moran, Sablan, and Williams. Let us go to Utah
where Mr. Owens is ready for his time. Congressman, you are
recognized.
Mr. Owens. Thank you so much, Dr. Foxx and Chairman Bean
for holding this important hearing today, and thank you to our
witnesses for their participation. In particular, I would like
to thank my colleague Representative Adrian Smith, it has been
a pleasure to work with him on this Educational Choice for
Children's Act that we introduced earlier this year in honor of
our colleague, Jackie Walorski.
I would also like to thank former Representative Luke
Messer, who has been a long-time champion of school choice.
Representative Messer long ago caught the vision of school
choice, and how transformative educational freedom is for
families, especially those in low-income and on performing
school districts.
Educational freedom is a civil rights issue of our time.
Educational freedom supports students over systems, and gives
every child in America, regardless of his or her zip code, the
opportunity to achieve the American dream. I have seen first-
hand how access to quality education could change the course of
a child's life.
Educational freedom can give someone a second chance in
life, and passion, and will not stop fighting until every
child, regardless of his or her race, socioeconomic status,
family situation, or neighborhood has the right to educational
freedom. A little bit earlier, somebody stated that no public
rationale should support choice. I am going to disagree
vehemently on that. This is a civil rights issue. Every child
has a right for an education.
Every child has a right for a choice of going to the right
place. I think it is interesting because as we talk now about
how 10 billion dollars is--it pulls away from our revenue, I
mean of all times to talk about using that example. Let me just
go back. We have Ms. Allen here. That is a great example of
what could happen with choice.
Let me tell you about the other kids who have not had a
choice. 2017, 75 percent of the black boys in the State of
California could not pass standard reading and writing tests.
75 percent. No choice. Their parents did not have the chance to
have this opportunity we are talking about right now.
Do you want to see the results of that? Look at what is
going on in the streets of California across the board, and
every single urban city where these kids have not been taught
how to read, write, think or dream. 100 percent of the black
kids here in D.C. in one district, have zero proficiency in
math.
Now, it is one thing to commit to public schools. If it is
a bad school system, why should we put our kids in there? Why
should you put your kids in there? I would suggest no one in
this room should approach to keep their kids in a school that
is failing and say it is okay.
Some way we would put aside this empathy, and say it is
okay for other kids, particularly blacks, Hispanics, those who
cannot defend themselves. There is a result of us allowing this
system not to have meritocracy put into this process. I want to
address this real quick, Mr. Messer.
The Educational Choice for Children's Act, how does this
impact the resources for public education? I think it is very
important because this is what unions like to do is put fear in
people's hearts. How does this impact those educational systems
already in place right now?
Congressman Messer. First, Congressman, let us thank you
for your great leadership on the ECCA. Yes, as you talk through
this, I think it is important to remember you might be entitled
to your own argument, but you are not entitled to your own
facts, right? There are 200 billion dollars in COVID monies
that are out in schools across America.
100 billion, forgive me, we are in Washington, 100 billion
of which have not even been spent. The money that would be used
for this tax credit, it is not Federal Government money, it is
the money of the individuals who would decide to give their
private contributions to private SGOs, and then create better
opportunities for kids.
You were describing what is happening across America and
what happens to the kids that do not get a chance. I once had a
chance to speak at the Basis Academy here in Washington, DC.
This extraordinary mathematics academy, math and science
academy, with kids from every zip code in Washington, DC, with
graduation rates in the high 90's, 80 plus percent--90 plus
percent going to college. The first question they asked me was
Congressman, why do not my friends and neighbors have this same
chance?
Mr. Owens. Yes.
Congressman Messer. Sometimes even my sibling, or cousin
have this same opportunity. It is immoral in a country like
ours. No child should be forced to go to a failing or unsafe
school.
Mr. Owens. I only have a few seconds here, and I would just
say this. If you want the voice of those who are not being
heard, those who say we represent, listen to Ms. Allen please.
Ms. Allen, do you have any last comments on this topic of
choice?
Mrs. Allen. I would just like to reiterate what you said
that this is a civil rights issue of our time. I look at
Baltimore, that is not too far from here, where dismal academic
reports are pretty much every week being highlighted by the
media. The scholarship program there is $3,000.00, but the
average per pupil spending is $21,000.00.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. Thank you so much and I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Our order is Sablan,
Moran, Bowman, and Williams. Let us go to Congressman Sablan
from the Northern Mariana Islands. You are recognized.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you. Thank you very much sir. Good
morning to our witnesses. Welcome. I am trying to figure out if
we want most of our students to aspire to those coming out of
charter schools, when what we should really do is improve our
public schools so that they could all, you know, not just the
few.
Professor Black, and again, proponents of school choice say
that it will positively affect all schools and children. Is
that true, sir?
Mr. Black. I am sorry. I missed the last couple of words
there.
Mr. Sablan. All right. It is said that school choice will
positively effect all schools and children. Is that true?
Positively effect?
Mr. Black. It is hard for me to concede as to how school
choice would positively effect all schools, given the financial
impacts of private school choice on public school budgets, and
particularly given there was discussion earlier as to whether
money matters.
The research consensus of decades is, in fact, public
school funding levels are positively correlated to student
achievement, and in fact, even those who have questioned it,
when put on the stand in court, have conceded that of course,
not all money matters. If we waste money it does not matter,
but that money spent on things that matter in public schools
have a very positive impact on student achievement, so I do not
understand how removing funds from them could have a positive
effect.
Mr. Sablan. Again, Professor, our colleagues from the other
side of the aisle like to frequently point out that the word
education is not found in the United States Constitution when
they are trying to justify school choice programs and funding
private elementary and secondary schools. Can you please speak
about the history of public education as a founding principle
of our great nation?
Mr. Black. That is a long story. I will try to be brief. I
will at least say that our founding fathers, such as Jefferson
and Adams, in particular, well Madison and Washington were all
keenly aware of the problem of an educated citizenry, even
prior to the United States Constitution.
The notion was that we had to provide public education to
have an educated citizenry, so that we could have a republican
form of government. This sort of concept of a republican form
of government with public education as its pillar was there
before the United States Constitution.
I referenced earlier the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, many
of the people who voted on that, Continental Congress, which
proceeded this one, are also the same people who attended the
United States Constitutional Convention, but that Northwest
Ordinance of 1787, required that every single square inch of
land that remained in the United States of America outside of
the original colonies, would be divided up into squares, right,
and that each town would have 32 lots.
The 16th lot in each town would be reserved for public
schools. The outer lying lots would generate resources for
those schools. Anyone who has driven from Pennsylvania into
Ohio, or from Kentucky into Ohio, and they used to carry around
those little maps will notice something very different.
The lines between the counties in Ohio and every county
that goes west are straight. That is because of the Northwest
Ordinance and the standards that it sets for territories to
become states in the United States of America. After the Civil
War, Congress never admitted another State to this union
without requiring them to mandate public education in their
State Constitution.
Yes, it is the role of states to provide public education,
but that is a function of the overall Constitutional structure
of a republican form of government in the United States of
America.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, sir. Thanks for coming.
Chairman I yield.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Let us go to New York,
where Representative Williams is standing by. You are
recognized.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My wife and I both
attended public high schools, and she performed much better
than I did. She was valedictorian, and I will not comment
further. In our choice in our family, we actually decided to
home school our children. We actually did that across I think
five or six different jurisdictions, including different
states, always having to interpret the rules, and to comply
with the rules.
That required a lot of effort, and again I salute my
fantastic wife for the success of our children through that
process, and their ongoing success as adults. In my district
just in the last month I have visited two fantastic schools.
The first is the Fremont Elementary School, part of East
Syracuse Minoa School District.
It is a public school. It is extremely well-run and well
organized. It has tremendous outcomes, it has great leadership,
and most of all it has great teachers. Dr. DeSiato, who runs
that school district, is truly exceptional in her work. I
commend her.
In the poorest parts, or adjacent or near the poorest parts
of Syracuse, there is another school, it is called the Syracuse
Science Academies of New York. It is a charter school, run by
Dr. Tolga Hayali, and also has spectacular success. I truly
enjoyed getting to read my favorite books to a second-grade
class there and answer questions about life on submarines.
Just in my district, we have two fantastic examples of both
public schools, and charter schools, and yet also in my
district we have some of the poorest schools, and some of the
least, worst performing schools. I find that unfair. Mrs. Allen
you are the star of the show. Thank you for being here.
With all respects to the others, but your personal story is
truly inspiring. In your area of Jacksonville, where were the
best public schools that you were aware of in Jacksonville?
Mrs. Allen. Unfortunately, there are still no schools of
choice on the east side of Jacksonville where I grew up, and
the schools that were underperforming when I went are still
underperforming.
Mr. Williams. Which were the best performing in the greater
Jacksonville area, what were the best?
Mrs. Allen. It would have been on the more affluent side of
the city, on the south side, in the San Marco, downtown area
private schools were probably the best pick for families.
Mr. Williams. It seems like a simple solution. Why did not
your family simply move into the wealthy neighborhoods?
Mrs. Allen. We could not afford it.
Mr. Williams. Perhaps attend the private schools?
Mrs. Allen. Yep. We could not afford it. We do have a
system of choice in this country, to your point, and it is
based on zip code. If you can afford to buy a house in a
wealthy community, you have school choice. Unfortunately,
parents do not have that opportunity. Lower income parents,
even lower middle-class parents do not have the opportunity to
pay for a house in a great district.
Mr. Williams. Approximately how many miles would you say it
is between the east side of your neighborhood and some of these
south side schools that were high performing? Approximately how
many miles would you say?
Mrs. Allen. I would say about five miles from Jacksonville
to a great school, which is just right across the river.
Mr. Williams. Your opportunity to attend a school of your
choice, did it require that you move?
Mrs. Allen. No, it did not. Actually, I was able to go to a
private school on scholarship, and drive to that school. We did
not have to move from the neighborhood, yes.
Mr. Williams. You were able to stay in your neighborhood,
and because of the choice, you were able to markedly change
your education opportunities?
Mrs. Allen. That is right.
Mr. Williams. Okay. Well, I think that is a wonderful
story, and it seems like the easiest solution to overcome
geography and a lot of the discrepancy that we see in our
public school system, so thank you for sharing your testimony.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Let us stay in New York
where Mr. Bowman is standing by and ready for his 5 minutes. He
is recognized.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to
the witnesses for being here. I want to start by saying that I
went to public schools my entire life, and I received an
excellent education in my public schools, and now I am sitting
here as a Member of Congress after beating a 31-year incumbent
in 2020, without taking any corporate backed money, so that is
pretty impressive, I would say.
I just wanted to add that for the record. Dr. Burke, you
mentioned a New York City school spent how much per student?
Ms. Burke. It just came out, $38,000.00. North of
$38,000.00.
Mr. Bowman. $38,000.00 and that is based on what year's
data?
Ms. Burke. Most recent available data.
Mr. Bowman. Which year?
Ms. Burke. 2021-2022.
Mr. Bowman. 2021-2022, correct. This is the same time where
New York State received American Rescue Plan money?
Ms. Burke. Yes.
Mr. Bowman. The same time where New York State received
CARES Act money, as the first time that New York State has been
funded by the Campaign for Fiscal Equity, a lawsuit that they
won 20 years ago that finally is going to be fully funded. So
this $38,000.00 is the most money ever invested in New York
State schools. Is that correct?
Ms. Burke. Correct.
Mr. Bowman. That is correct. Okay. Prior to this influx of
money, New York State was not spending $38,000.00 per student.
Ms. Burke. Correct.
Mr. Bowman. Do you know how much they were spending?
Ms. Burke. They were still spending among the most, if not
the most.
Mr. Bowman. Do you know how much?
Ms. Burke. It was north of $30,000.00.
Mr. Bowman. North of $30,000.00. Okay.
Ms. Burke. Yes. I do not have an exact figure. I can get it
for you.
Mr. Bowman. Okay. Let us say $30,000.00 for argument's
sake. Let me explain student funding and student spending to
those in the room who may not understand how it works. It is
not $38,000.00 for every single child in the school system.
When you have a school system that has a disproportionate
number of children with special needs, and a disproportionate
number of English language learners, the school system receives
additional funding for those students. Is that correct, Dr.
Burke?
Ms. Burke. That is correct.
Mr. Bowman. That is correct. Because New York City has a
disproportionate number of children with special needs, and a
disproportionate number of English language learners, New York
City receives additional funding. When I was a school
principal, I had 250 students. If I had $38,000.00 per student,
my budget would have been 8 million. It was never anywhere near
that, because I did not have a large number of children with
special needs.
In addition, this money is not per student in terms of we
are giving students the money. This money is spent on teachers,
staff, books, and different things like that. If you are a
child with special needs, or a child that is an English
language learner, you need additional resources to make sure
you are meeting your academic needs.
Now Dr. Burke, is it true that charter schools by and
large, take and receive less children with special needs than
public schools?
Ms. Burke. No. In fact, if you look at not only charters,
but private school choice programs, private school choice
programs in particular, are the fastest growing private school
choice programs, are for those kids with special needs.
Mr. Bowman. Are you familiar with Success Academy in New
York City?
Ms. Burke. Yes.
Mr. Bowman. The Success Academy takes the same percentage
of special ed students that public schools take.
Ms. Burke. I would have to look.
Mr. Bowman. Okay.
Ms. Burke. I do not know.
Mr. Bowman. They do not. I could tell you that. They do
not.
Ms. Burke. I cannot tell you if they do or do not.
Mr. Bowman. Well I am saying for the record, and anyone can
look this up, Success Academy does not take the same percentage
of children with special needs as New York City public schools.
I have a few other questions. Mr. Messer, how are you doing? Do
you support teachers' unions? Yes, or no?
Congressman Messer. Teachers' unions have never supported
me.
Mr. Bowman. Do you support teachers' unions, yes or no?
Congressman Messer. Teachers' unions have never supported
me.
Mr. Bowman. Okay. Is that a no? Yes, or no? Do you support
teachers' unions?
Congressman Messer. I do not have a yes or no answer to
that.
Mr. Bowman. I am sorry?
Congressman Messer. I do not have a yes or no answer to
that.
Mr. Bowman. Okay. Dr. Burke, do you support teachers'
unions?
Ms. Burke. No.
Mr. Bowman. No. Mr. Black. Do you support teachers' unions?
Mr. Black. I have no objection to them, but I do not donate
any money to them.
Mr. Bowman. Yes, or no?
Mr. Black. I support their mission, but I do not support
them in any individual capacity.
Mr. Bowman. Ms. Allen, do you support teachers' unions?
Mrs. Allen. No.
Mr. Bowman. No, you do not. Okay. So we have three of the
four people who have identified themselves as people who do not
support teachers' unions. It feels to me that this support of
voucher programs to move students out of public schools into
private, and/or charter schools, is a direct attack on the
public-school institution and infrastructure, and specifically
on teachers' unions, as three of the four witnesses we have do
not support teachers' unions.
Let me ask another quick question starting with Mr. Messer.
Do you support the U.S. Department of Education, and do you
think it should be dissolved?
Congressman Messer. When I was----
Mr. Bowman. Dr. Burke, do you support the Department of
Education U.S.?
Ms. Burke. No. Dissolve.
Mr. Bowman. Okay. Ms. Allen, do you support the U.S.
Department of Education?
Ms. Allen. I worked at the U.S. Department of Education for
2 years, so.
Mr. Bowman. Yes, you do?
Ms. Allen. I worked at the U.S. Department of Education for
2 years.
Mr. Bowman. No, you do not? It is a yes or no? Do you
support it or not?
Mrs. Allen. I would rather not answer that.
Mr. Bowman. Okay. All right. Thank you. My time is up. I
yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Mr. Bowman. Let us go
to Michigan, where Representative McClain is standing by, she
is ready to go. Representative McClain, you are recognized.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you. Let us, just out of curiosity,
stay with that same thing. I would like an answer from all of
you. Do you support students?
Congressman Messer. Yes. I do support students.
Mrs. McClain. You do. Wonderful.
Congressman Messer. I think it is crazy to say that
supporting students somehow makes you anti-teacher's union, or
Department of Education.
Mrs. McClain. Let us understand. Unions are great, right?
Teachers' unions are just that. They support the teachers. I
thought we were doing the hearing on students, so you support
the students?
Congressman Messer. Yes.
Mrs. McClain. How about you? Do you support students?
Ms. Burke. Yes ma'am.
Mrs. McClain. Next?
Mr. Black. Yes, I do.
Mrs. McClain. Wonderful. How about you ma'am?
Mrs. Allen. Of course.
Mrs. McClain. Okay. Just so we are all clear. We are all
here about the students, right? The goal today is about the
student, just checking. Okay. All right. In my home State of
Michigan, and across the country, families have suffered
through prolonged school closings, and lockdowns during COVID-
19 pandemic.
It is what it is, right? Most students fell behind in math
and reading, and we actually have data, facts, right to support
that, and due to the force, remote instruction. I mean, I think
the teachers did the best they could with the situation at
hand. Dr. Burke, can you talk more about how school of choice
actually helped families during the pandemic?
I think what the pandemic showed is that people learn in
different ways, right? We should not go, and we should not just
have this one size fits all because last I checked we are here
about the student, right? Do you think school of choice helped
parents get their kids back in school sooner?
Do you think in person instruction would help these
students close the learning gap created by the pandemic? Can
you just talk a little bit about that from the eyes of the most
important, and that is the student?
Ms. Burke. Yes. Thank you, Congresswoman, for reorienting
us to the student question at hand today because it is all
about students, and we do not want students trapped in
unaccountable public schools. If we look at Catholic schools,
in particular, during the pandemic, you are absolutely right.
Private schools were much more likely to reopen much quicker
than the district schools, largely because teachers' unions
kept those district schools closed.
If we look at Catholic schools, they opened much quicker,
as soon as they knew it was safe to reopen, when the science
showed that it was safe to reopen schools. The result has been
pretty phenomenal. There was a piece by Kathleen Porter McGee
in the Wall Street Journal recently, and she found that if all
Catholic schools, all 1.6 million children in Catholic schools
were a State, they would outperform every other State on the
math and reading.
Low-income kids in particular, minority students in
Catholic schools gained 10 points in reading over the course of
the pandemic, when students across the country actually lost 3
points in reading, and 8 points in math. I mean this is a
phenomenal story to tell about how Catholic schools thrived.
Mrs. McClain. Well, Dr. Burke, let us not let the facts get
in the way of a good story over here. Mr. Messer, in your
testimony you mentioned the overwhelming support that school of
choice has among parents. In Michigan, we provide zero, no
public support for parents to choose private educational
options.
The State is increasingly out of step with the other states
that do help parents access private schooling options. Policies
that have a clear record of success, again facts. Can you talk
more about what the polls tell us about support for school of
choice across the country in my last minute remaining?
Congressman Messer. Yes. I mean overwhelmingly, we live in
America today where we agree on almost nothing, but we all
agree on school choice. Poll after poll, 90 percent, 80
percent, 70 percent of Americans support school choice,
support--here are three simple concepts. One, no child in
America should be forced to go to a failing or unsafe school.
Every parent should be able to move their child if their
kid is in that kind of school. 80 percent support across
America. It is not fair that only wealthy parents get to choose
where their child goes to school. 80 percent support all across
America. Schools should focus on the basics, not pushing the
political agenda.
Parents should have a right to send their child to a
different school if they think their school has gotten too
political. 80 percent across America, including by the way, 80
percent of African American parents, who support that same
point of view. If this was about what the American people want,
we would have universal school choice everywhere already.
Mrs. McClain. Imagine what we can do if we put the child
first. We would leave politics at the home, and again, just
really put the children first, and we focus on facts. Amazing
what would happen if we had some accountability in some
measurements, so with that I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Let us go to
Connecticut, where Representative Hayes is standing by for her
5 minutes. Representative Hayes, you are recognized.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. I am sitting here feverishly taking
notes, because I would like to recenter some of the comments
that have been made in this committee. As an educator, I know
for certain that predictable and sustained investments in our
public schools do in fact lead to better student outcomes.
What we are talking about here today is decades of
disinvestment. I agree that it is not fair that only wealthy
parents should be able to decide where they send their schools,
and I think the answer to that is to make all of our public
schools the best that they can be.
I also want to say, just as a followup to Representative
Bowman's questions, is that we are mandated. We have two very
important mandates by the Individuals with Disabilities and
Education Act. Public schools have to take differently abled
students, and we are mandated to address the needs of those
students first.
Two very important things stand out. We have to provide a
free and appropriate education to kids with disabilities, and
we have to do that side by side with their peers in the least
restricted environments. I will also say that this conversation
about supporting students, supporting teachers, supporting
teachers is supporting students. I hear over and over. I have
heard that the COVID pandemic exposed what teachers were doing
in the classroom, as if teachers were hiding something.
That teachers' unions, the work that they have done. I
would remind you that teachers' unions are teachers. I can tell
you that it was incredibly disturbing to hear one of the
witnesses on the panel say that it took for you to go to a
private school for a teacher to smile at you.
Educated in public schools, taught in public schools, my
children go to public schools, and I can tell you that those
environments are warm and nurturing, and could use additional
Federal funds, but this idea that the panacea for academic
success is charter schools is completely deceiving.
I will also note that there is a distinct difference
between private charter schools, and public charter schools,
and I would encourage anyone who is listening to this committee
to look those things up because a lot of the statistics that we
are hearing today is from in fact, public charter schools.
I am a proponent of public charter schools. I think that
parents should be able to choose a school that has a specific
stream, or a STEM academy, or arts education, or whatever it is
their children are looking for, but I also believe that public
funds should require public accountability, and that is what we
are not talking about today.
90 percent of our children go to public schools, and we
should make sure that all of those schools, whether it is the
school two towns away, the school across the street, or the
school around the corner is the best school that it can be with
the highest quality of public education.
My question today is for Professor Black. The Department of
Education collects extensive data on public schools, including
achievement, enrollment, discipline, bullying, and harassment,
and special education information. This data collection helps
make an informed decision on children's education.
Unfortunately, in most states, private schools, and private
charter schools are not required to report the same
information, even if they accept vouchers or public funding.
Professor Black, is there any transparency or oversight built
into school choice programs to ensure that the schools parents
choose for their children are high-quality, and is there any
recourse if they are not found to be high-quality?
Additionally, do you believe states should fund voucher
programs that do not meet high-quality education standards?
Mr. Black. I do not believe they should fund vouchers that
do not meet high-quality education standards. There is
tremendous lack of transparency in what happens outside of the
public school system, and therefore studies are often thinner
because they do not have the data to which you referenced.
For the record, I would say I do support the public U.S.
Department of Education because it is the institution that
ensures the enforcement of anti-discrimination statutes in this
country. I also would note for the record, that no voucher
program ever put to the people in the history of the United
States of America has ever succeeded on the ballot.
The most recent one of which I am aware was in Arizona, and
it failed 65 to 35 percent in the State of Arizona.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. As an educator by profession, I also
support the U.S. Department of Education, and their mission to
ensure that every child in every zip code has a high-quality
public education, and in my last seconds I just would like to
amplify some of the challenges with charter schools that are
not public.
They vary by State. There is a messy admission process that
excludes many students. There is high teacher turnover and low
student diversity. Those are all things that we can look at and
address if we truly want to make an argument for the charter
school movement, and I am open to doing that, but I quite
frankly, I do not believe that that is the direction that this
hearing is going, and with that I yield back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Bean. Ms. Hayes, thank you very much.
Representative Moran represents the great State of Texas, and
he is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman from the great State of
Florida. We appreciate that. Dr. Burke, I want to turn my
attention to you and give you an opportunity to elaborate about
some of the things that you mentioned in your brief and in your
opening statements.
In particular, you mentioned about the D.C. Opportunity
Scholarship Program. It is something democrats have long
criticized. That is especially unfortunate, because as you
pointed out, the DCOSP has been remarkably successful. This
program has helped rescue students from underperforming public
schools and gives them better options.
What can you say to my democratic colleagues on the left
who argue that this program should be terminated?
Ms. Burke. Yes. I mean what a travesty that would be for
the thousands of children and their families who are currently
enrolled. This, as I mentioned earlier, has been one of the
great public policy success stories, and D.C. is home to a
pretty robust choice marketplace now. Over 40 percent, probably
over 50 percent at this point of students, have access to
public charter schools, or are enrolled in them.
There is public school choice and then the D.C. Opportunity
Scholarship Program. It has been a lifeline for children to
attend safe and effective schools in the district. You can see
that play out. They show up at rallies where we see thousands
of children who are rallying in order to keep this program
secure.
During the Obama administration, nearly every budget cycle
President Obama tried to zero out funding for what is the
Nation's only federally supported school choice program, and
these families showed up day after day to fight tooth and nail
to secure this option. I genuinely hope that we can put it on
more firm footing moving forward.
Right now, the OSP is really at the whims of the Federal
appropriations process every year, and of course that can get
politicized. We need to move toward formula funding. The D.C.
Opportunity Scholarship Program, so that it is a stable revenue
source, we need to make it open to every single family in
Washington, DC. Every child should have access to a safe and
effective school.
If I could just really quickly, we keep hearing that public
schools are underfunded, and as Mr. Messer alluded to a few
minutes ago, they are still sitting on 100 billion dollars of
unspent art funding. I mean there is more money than they can
spend right now at the moment. We have to reorient toward
funding families directly, and move away from funding these
unaccountable systems of government schools to which we are
assigning children.
Mr. Moran. Thank you. I appreciate that. I appreciate the
concept of accountability. That is something that I think, when
we get into this discussion about teachers' unions, gets lost
because effectively the teachers' unions resist accountability
for performance in the classrooms, and that is unfortunate.
If we could actually have true accountability it might work
out a whole lot better. Let us turn now to education savings
accounts, in particular for our military personnel. We know
that there are a lot of military personnel that get assigned to
new bases, new locations or families are then effectively put
in a geographic area where they do not have a public school
choice, but they are forced into a certain area.
Talk about why education savings accounts, and particularly
for military personnel are so important.
Ms. Burke. Thank you for that. I mean this is something
that Congress should do as soon as possible in my opinion. I
mean the national security is not only an enumerated power, but
it is a responsibility of the Federal Government. We know from
survey after survey that about a third of military families
have thought about leaving the service altogether because of
the public school their child would have to attend at their
next duty station.
Military, kids of military families, are assigned to the
closest public school to the duty station to which their parent
is assigned when they move from State to State. We have to
break that link, and we can do that by funding them directly
through education savings accounts. A few military connected
children attend DOD schools.
It is only actually about 4 percent of those children. The
rest, 96 percent, attend public schools that are close to the
duty station, and that has given a lot of heartburn to military
families who need options when they are assigned to their next
duty station in order to serve effectively.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Dr. Burke. With the minute that I
have remaining, I just want to ask you about this notion that
seems to be arising from the other side about well, if we are
for school choice, somehow we are against public schools. Is
that the way you see this debate going?
Is it really that easy to say well if you are for school
choice you are against public schools?
Ms. Burke. No. Not at all. Look, if we look at State
Constitutions across the country, they do mandate for public
education. We have to make a distinction between public
education and public schooling. Yes, as I said earlier,
publicly fund education, but allow families to choose what that
looks like for them, what school works well for them, what
school is safe and effective, and aligns with their values.
We are getting to that point now, if we look across the
country we have got universal education choice now in six
states, which is a really phenomenal development.
Mr. Moran. That is right. I will just conclude by saying
that I personally had the option to send my kids anywhere I
want to. I have the means where I can do that if I want to, but
I choose to send them to a public school because for me and my
family and my kids, that is the best choice. I want other
parents to be able to make the choice that is best for their
kids as well. Thank you for your testimony. I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Here is our new order.
Miller, Kiley, Scott, Foxx, Good, so let us go to Illinois,
where Representative Miller is standing by, and she is
recognized for her 5 minutes of questions.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. Mr. Messer, I have a question for
you. In my home State of Illinois, very sadly, only 30 percent
of students are reading at grade level, and only 26 percent are
proficient in math. How do you think school choice would better
serve parents and students in Illinois?
Congressman Messer. Yes, look, I think that is a great
question, and as was alluded to by Mr. Moran, there is a sort
of false premise being thrown out there that we believe that
somehow there is some panacea. Here is, I think, the panacea.
Empowering parents through education freedom.
If you have a child who is unable to be at academic
standards, you can find a school that fits their needs better.
Through programs like the ECCA, the tax credit scholarship bill
that Congressman Owens, Smith, Walorski, and others have
supported, you have the option to pay for tutoring through, you
know, a math tutoring course, if you need to.
I think the key that we have to remember is it is not
enough to just tell folks well, tough, the reality is, and I am
going to say it. We have a lot of folks in America who can
afford to have choice, and send their kids wherever they want.
We are ready to fight to make sure others do not.
Mrs. Miller. Yes. I agree along with many of the other
members at the thought that we have disabled our young people
by not giving them the proper education, and definitely parents
should have the power to make the educational decisions, which
are best for their children, including moving them out of
failing schools and into schools where they can succeed.
Thank you so much, and I want to yield my remaining time to
Congressman Owens.
Chairman Bean. Congressman Owens you are recognized for the
remaining time.
Mr. Owens. Thank you so much. I would like to first of all
just make a point that you know the panacea is that when a mom
and dad look at their child, it is all said and done, said I
did my best, and I succeeded. Unfortunately, we have millions
of children today, and millions of parents who do not feel that
way. They think they are failures.
They think that the system is not for them. We see the
results of that as we speak. With the Educational Choice for
our Children Act, help us understand also the scholarship
organizations, how that works out, and is that something that
comes out of Federal budget, or can you help me understand
that?
Congressman Messner. Well, you have 21 states in America
today that have educational SGOs, scholarship granting
organizations. The reality is that means that you also have 29
who do not. The scholarship organizations will operate
differently in the states where they already exist, and they
just build on top of that. The reality is many of the
scholarships that are available for families today do not get
them all the way to where they need to be to have an actual
choice.
An important part of these ECCA is it will allow for there
to be scholarships in states that do not currently have any
other choice option, and frankly, states where the teachers'
union has such a political entrenchment, that those options
probably will not come to those states for quite some time.
Illinois, an example of State that is like that.
How does the ECCA do that? Simply through freedom. It
allows a donor to write a charitable tax contribution to a
scholarship creating organization that then will be able to
decide, you know, and give parents opportunities.
Mr Owens. That donor gets a tax credit, and the
understanding that they are finally building our country back
with good education by educating those kids that do not have
it. Let me just ask you. How many children do you have?
Congressman Messer. I have three.
Mr. Owens. Three. One, two, okay. Would you agree that you
know what is best for your child? Can we do that sitting up
here right now?
Congressman Messer. Yes.
Mr. Owens. That is the conversation with friends. You do,
and so does every other parent out there. These parents love
their children like we love our children, so it is time for us
to stop putting down parents, and it is time for us to stop
acting like they do not know what they are doing. They cannot
sit down and think this process through, what is best for their
child.
If a system is not working with the public, private,
parochial, home school, it is not working, they will do their
best to make sure you get to a safe place that does work. Thank
you for your participation. Thanks for your passion, and Ms.
Allen, I cannot say it enough, thank you for your success. That
is what we need to see more of. Thank you so much. I yield
back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Let us go to
California. Representative Kiley is standing by. Representative
Kiley, you are recognized.
Mr. Kiley. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Starting first with just a
brief point of clarification. We heard a lot of references on
the other side to private, charter schools. Mr. Messer, are
charter schools public or private schools?
Congressman Messer. They are public schools.
Mr. Kiley. We also heard the other side say that somehow
charters get to pick and choose their students. Is that true?
Congressman Messer. No.
Mr. Kiley. What are charter schools required to do when it
comes to admission?
Congressman Messer. There may be others on the panel that
can answer better than me, but essentially public schools are
required to meet the standards of public schools.
Mr. Kiley. Accept all students?
Congressman Messer. Yes.
Mr. Kiley. Thank you. Professor Black, you are an opponent
of school choice, correct?
Mr. Black. Not in all forms, but at least in the form of
that we have been discussing thus far yes, but private choice
can, or I should say school choice, as mentioned earlier in the
form of magnet, is tremendously successful, and charters with
appropriate restrictions could also produce positive benefits
that I would support. I would not say I am all for or all
against.
Mr. Kiley. You oppose the use of public funds for private
education, private schools?
Mr. Black. If there are, in most instances, I would not say
there are no instances in which I would say it is appropriate.
Mr. Kiley. Oh, and where would you support that?
Mr. Black. You know there are students who need residential
housing. Situations because of severe physical, and mental
disabilities that simply cannot be delivered in a regular
public education setting, and that seems to me to be----
Mr. Kiley. By and large you are opposed to the use of
public funds.
Mr. Black. By and large I would think of it, by and large
the State Constitutions are opposed to it, and I stand in
accordance with that.
Mr. Kiley. Sure. You do not think private schools should be
abolished, or anything like that?
Mr. Black. No, I do not.
Mr. Kiley. You do support the right of families to send
their kids to private school if they could afford it?
Mr. Black. I support, yes.
Mr. Kiley. The likes of, you know, President Biden,
Governor Gavin Newsom, Nancy Pelosi, Elizabeth Warren, who have
paid large sums of money to send their kids to private school,
you would support their right to do that?
Mr. Black. I support an individual's choice to spend their
money in whatever way they choose to, so long as it does not
violate State or Federal law.
Mr. Kiley. You make an interesting argument in your
testimony. You say that the U.S. Constitution, Article 4,
Section 4, says that Congress must guarantee a republican form
of government in the states. You go on to say that since the
Nation's founding the tradition of public education has been
understood as a central pillar of democracy in a republican
form of government.
Professor Black, did COVID era school shutdowns violate the
republican government clause of the United States Constitution?
Mr. Black. Could you repeat your statement?
Mr. Kiley. Did COVID era school shutdowns violate the
republican government clause of the U.S. Constitution?
Mr. Black. Public schools continued to provide education,
so when you say shutdown, in what respect do you mean shutdown?
Mr. Kiley. Well for example, Burbio, the in-person
instruction tracker for the 2021 school year, has an index of
in-person instruction of the vast majority of states were above
50 percent, but the 5 lowest states below 25 percent were
Hawaii, Washington, Maryland, Oregon, and last of all my home
State of California.
Would you say that those states violated the republican
government clause of the U.S. Constitution by refusing to offer
an in-person instruction to their students when other states
were able to do so?
Mr. Black. I would not say, the premise of the question as
I understand it, and maybe I misunderstand it, is that they
must provide public education at a particular time on a
particular day in a particular method. The republican form of
government does require public education, but it does not
specify the time of day, or the location of which that could
occur, and thus times in which one was not in school could be
made up at later points.
I think you asked a very complicated question, I would be
happy to have further discussions about, but I think there is a
lot of nuances to----
Mr. Kiley. Do you think it was a mistake for those states
to keep their schools closed that long?
Mr. Black. You keep saying closed.
Mr. Kiley. Or failing to offer in-person instruction?
Mr. Black. I am not a scientist. I do not think I am
prepared to say at what point we should have had in-person
instruction or not. I would ultimately think we would follow
the CDC guidelines.
Mr. Kiley. Okay. You also note that Florida has received an
F when it comes to spending rankings. You then go on to note
that several other states received A and B ratings. I looked up
one of those at random, Washington, DC, which received an A
rating, and then compared how those two jurisdictions, Florida
and D.C. have done when it comes to education outcomes and the
national assessment of education progress for students eligible
for free or reduced lunch.
For fourth grade reading, Florida, 61 percent achieved at
the basic level of achievement. D.C. was 38 percent. Eighth
grade reading, it was 62 percent to 49 percent. Why is it that
you care more about the level, the amount of money that is
being spent, than the amount that students are learning?
Mr. Black. I do not care more about the amount that is
spent. I care about studies that show what the amount spent
correlates, and as to the comparison you make, the percentage
of students with disabilities, low-income in the District of
Columbia, is exponentially greater than it is in the State of
Florida.
Mr. Kiley. If I may just add that I did a comparison of
students who are eligible for free or reduced lunch. This is an
apples-to-apples comparison.
Mr. Black. My apologies.
Mr. Kiley. Thank you.
Chairman Bean. Very good. Thank you very much, Mr. Kiley.
Well done, to keep it in the time. He represents the great
Commonwealth of Virginia. He is also the Ranking Member of the
full Education and Workforce, and I am happy to recognize him
for his 5 minutes, Representative Scott, you are recognized.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Professor
Black, are there public and private charter schools?
Mr. Black. All charter schools are public, but some of them
are run by private entities as opposed to public or non-profit
entities, so the distinction would be those that are run by
non-profits versus those that are run by private entities.
Mr. Scott. Okay. One of the criticisms throughout vouchers
is that if you start a voucher program, the first thing you do
is fund those already in private schools. Is that right?
Mr. Black. A very substantial portion of those programs do
fund children who are already in private schools.
Mr. Scott. Do the vouchers cover the tuition at the private
school?
Mr. Black. It does not cover the tuition of many private
schools, and thus children who cannot make up the difference,
or cannot afford to go to all private schools.
Mr. Scott. If you cannot afford the difference, then you do
not get any help. You mentioned disinvestment. Is that because
the political pressure, when you have vouchers and a public
school system, the political pressures increase the vouchers,
and not so much increase the investment in public schools?
Mr. Black. You certainly know politics far better than I,
Representative, but I would say that it is my experience that
vouchers are very popular inside of State legislative
buildings, but not very popular at all outside of them.
Mr. Scott. Do the private schools get to select who their
students are based on academics, better behavior, or parental
involvement?
Mr. Black. Yes.
Mr. Scott. On evidence of success, Dr. Burke mentioned the
success of the D.C. schools in terms of academic success. I
think you mentioned that when you equate for parental
involvement, education level of parents, other demographics,
can you say what happens to the achievement level after you
have done that?
Mr. Black. My reading of those studies is that the
achievement levels are not higher in the private schools.
Mr. Scott. Say it again.
Mr. Black. My reading is that those studies, when we
account for the things that you mentioned, do not demonstrate
higher achievement in D.C.'s private schools, for the students
participating in those programs.
Mr. Scott. In civil rights, you are talking about civil
rights laws, one of the problems we are experiencing today is
increased segregation in public schools. Green vs. Newton
County, Virginia, is from my home State, that found freedom of
choice unconstitutional. Can you say what these school choice
programs do to the integration or segregation of our public
schools?
Mr. Black. They do not contribute to it, and my
understanding based upon what I am looking at is they are
perpetuating, or at least facilitating additional--various
forms of additional segregation and stratification in private
schools, as opposed to public schools.
Mr. Scott. In terms of discipline, if the private school
expels problem students, or does not accept private students,
what happens to those students?
Mr. Black. They could raise the contract breach that the
United States Constitution does not apply to them.
Mr. Scott. They would end up back in the public school
system?
Mr. Black. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Are private schools covered by the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act?
Mr. Black. No.
Mr. Scott. What happens to all the students who need those
services?
Mr. Black. They would not get them. They would not be
legally entitled to them in a private setting.
Mr. Scott. Now we have talked about some students who were
stuck in a failing school, and they need choice. It seems to me
that the rational choice was everyone would get up and leave.
The fact is that whatever choice system you have, 90 percent of
them are going to be left behind with less resources, less
political pressure.
How is it a good idea to leave those 90 percent behind? How
are they helped with a choice program?
Mr. Black. They are not. As one study of Chicago's schools
aptly put it, the real privilege in America is not having to
make a choice as to where to go to school.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Mr. Scott. Let us go to
the Chair. How about that, she is the Chair of the full
committee. I was honored when she was on our subcommittee. She
is also a former educator. She is from the great State of North
Carolina, and she is recognized now. Dr. Foxx, you are
recognized for a question and answer period.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Chairman Bean. I think you have held
an excellent hearing today, and I appreciate that. Congressman
Messer, it was a pleasure to serve with you, and it is a
pleasure to see you in the role that you are in right now,
working on such a great cause. Thank you very much.
Congressman Messer. Thank you.
Mrs. Foxx. You obviously have extensive experience on the
issue of school choice at all levels. I have long believed that
education is best handled at the State and local level, and not
the Federal Government. One of the best ways to empower
parents, rather than the D.C. bureaucrats, is to put
educational choices back in the hands of parents.
You have served as President of School Choice Indiana,
consistently advocated for school choice during your time in
Indiana State House. What principles do you think D.C.
policymakers should keep in mind when it comes to education?
What can State and local leaders do to keep the Federal
Government from micromanaging schools?
Congressman Messer. Well, I think I have got kind of a high
minded answer, and then a really practical answer. Okay. The
high minded answer is to remember the stakes, and we talk a lot
in this building about the Constitution, appropriately so. I do
not think we talk enough about the second paragraph of the
Declaration, which says we are all endowed by our creator, with
certain inalienable rights.
Rights that cannot be taken from you, the rights to life,
liberty and the pursuit of happiness. You cannot do that in
America today. You cannot pursue happiness if you do not have
access to a quality education. We need to make sure every
family has that choice. How do you do it? That is the practical
part. This is not complicated. Empower parents. Parents know
best.
It cannot both be true that our current public school
system is doing a fabulous job and be true that if we give
parents an option, everybody is going to pour out of the school
and somehow destroy them, right?
The reality is that we are now 30 years into this debate.
Parents leave when it is best for their child to leave. The
rest of the system improves.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Allen, I was quite moved by
reading your personal story and hearing it today. Your story
perfectly encapsulates why we need school choice. I am
overjoyed that Florida's tax credit scholarship was available
to you and had such a positive impact.
What troubles me is that many children in our country do
not have that opportunity. Republicans are absolutely committed
to making sure every child has the opportunity you have had, to
find the educational option that works best for them, and their
families. I know you are the first in your family to graduate
from high school, college and graduate school, which is a
remarkable accomplishment.
Can you talk about what it means to you and your family to
be the first in your family to achieve such a high level of
education?
Mrs. Allen. It is a tremendous success. It is a pleasure
for me to serve as this trailblazer in my family. My niece is
now also a college graduate. She is a nurse traveling across
the country. It is a pleasure that she looks up to me, and so
we have been able to set a new trajectory, and it is because of
education freedom.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Dr. Burke, one of the
arguments we have already heard from our democrat colleagues is
that school choice hurts traditional public schools, and I
think Congressman Messer explained it very well just now. The
public schools are doing such a great job, and why are we
afraid of choice, and the fact that people will leave?
It is not true, and we know it is not true. We also know
that competition creates an incentive for anybody to improve.
It breaks up the monopoly power, traditional public school
districts. That is what it would do. I believe in school
choice, not only because it helps students of private schools
and charter schools, but because it helps traditional schools.
I know you have spent your career analyzing the evidence on
school choice. Could you give us quickly some findings from the
research on how school choice affects traditional public
schools?
Dr. Burke. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx. I appreciate that.
You are right. It is a competitive pressure that creates that
rising tide that lifts all boats. We know that school choice
improves academic outcomes for children who choose to stay in
their district schools as well.
There are 28 empirical evaluations of the effect of school
choice and the competitive pressure that it puts on public
schools as well. These are matching and longitudinal studies.
Of those 28, 26 show positive effects for students and public
schools as more and more private schools begin to participate
in a school choice program, one finds a null effect, and only
one found a negative effect.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Dr. Foxx. Our final
member in the spotlight just entered the building, or entered
our room, and he is from the Commonwealth of Virginia, let us
go to Virginia, where Mr. Good is standing by for his 5
minutes, and he is recognized.
Mr. Good. Thank you, Chairman Bean, and thank you to our
witnesses. I think I am the only thing standing between you and
being paroled from this hearing today, but thanks for your time
today. First, just a question or two to Ms. Allen, I appreciate
you again being with us today.
Our backgrounds are somewhat similar, where I grew up in a
lower income family, grew up on food stamps, free school lunch,
and I am old enough that it was the days when not everyone had
free school lunch. You had to qualify for it and went to rough
inner-city schools.
Low-income white kids, low-income minority kids, rough
background schools. Through the benevolence of others, my
family could never afford it. I was able to go to a private
Christian school for high school, which made a tremendous
impact on my life, similar to what I have seen in your
testimony on the impact that it made for you.
As you know, Title I of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act, was created to help, and theoretically anyway,
disadvantaged students. In a community like where you grew up
on east side Jacksonville, how would you comment on the
effectiveness of the Federal funds, what kind of impacts are
being made, effectively being leveraged I should say, to help
disadvantaged students in your experience?
Ms. Allen. Of course. Every school that I went to in
elementary school was a Title I school and did not meet my
needs. The schools are currently still Title I, and currently
still poor performing and lower income. With my work at the
American Federation for Children, I started a special project
called Black Minds Matter.
I actually have the first and the only directory of black
school founders, and these are folks who started schools. Many
of these black school founders used to be public school
teachers in Title I schools, and what is interesting is that
they reached the ceiling, and they saw that they could not
help, they could not do as much as they wanted to really help
kids learn.
They just decided to start their own school. Many of the
colleagues and members, we are talking about teachers in the
public schools, in the system. Teachers who are teaching in
private and charter schools are doing a tremendous job at
trying to help give students more opportunity, and so they are
also benefiting from what we are talking about today.
Mr. Good. You know, you certainly see the other side, you
know, we talk about school choice a lot on our side, if you
will, and I hate to say sides like that. The other side is very
much against school choice, and will say, you know, that school
choice harms the public schools.
Their feeling is if a public school is toxic, if it is
failing, if it is dangerous, if it is not meeting the needs of
the children, or the families that are subjected to those
schools, then everyone should have to share in that misery, and
no one should have the opportunity or school choice.
I have a bill that is called The Choice Act, which would
allow Federal dollars allocated for education to follow the
child through the school choice of the family, whether it was
another public school. You know, some districts charge you to
go outside your district of course, a few thousand dollars in
Virginia in some cases, whether it is the private or Christian
school, or a home school expenses, or what have you.
How might it have made a difference, or for people like
others in your situation or yourself maybe, if Federal dollars
went to the school choice of the family instead of being
restricted to that public school where the child happens to
reside.
Mrs. Allen. It would make a tremendous difference. You
know, folks who have backgrounds similar to ours are wanting
better options for their students. There is a very sad story of
a mom from Ohio who tried to pick a different public school for
her daughter, and ended up in jail because she was violating
the law by sending her kid to a school outside of her
district's assigned zip code.
That is not a free, equitable system. We need one though.
Mr. Good. You know, and sadly, unfortunately, there is not
a correlation that we can demonstrate in terms of achievement,
or excellence in education, and the dollars allocated by school
district. Some of the areas across the country where we spend
the most money in the public school system, or government
school system, we get the worst outcomes in those systems.
This is for Dr. Burke, and again thank you for being with
us, and in the limited time that I have left, could you just
comment on how you feel like the effectiveness is demonstrated
by the Federal Government's role in education?
What is the proper role of that education, and what is the
demonstrated effectiveness for the mandates and the controls
that come with the Federal Government's small amount of dollars
that are allocated?
Ms. Burke. Well education is not an enumerated power of the
Federal Government, so the more that we can do to start winding
down Federal intervention in K-12 education, the better. The
track record has been incredibly poor, unfortunately, since
Lydon Johnson launched his war on poverty. We have spent two
trillion just at the Federal level alone, which remember is
just 8.5 percent of all K-12 education funding.
Outcomes, if you look at the long-term trend assessment,
are flat for reading and math achievement over time. We are
still in the middle of the pack internationally. Disadvantaged
students are still struggling with graduation rates, et cetera,
so we have got to change that dynamic, start winding down
Federal spending, and intervention in K-12 education, and allow
education choice to flourish in the states.
Mr. Good. Thank you. In Virginia, 94 percent of our funding
for the schools come from State and local, and I would submit
that the 6 percent we get from the fed's is not worth it. We
can make do on the 94 percent without the Federal mandates, and
the negatives that come with it. Thank you so much, and I yield
back Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Bean. Thank you, Mr. Good. At the beginning of our
program today, I promised that it would be an interesting
debate, robust concepts, and big thoughts and ideas, and thanks
to each of our panelists today, that was a promise fulfilled.
You all did a great job, and thanks for the time this morning.
Before we adjourn, Ranking Member Bonamici and I discussed
the need to review our audio system, and maybe we can improve
it going forward, or at least review it, but what a great day.
So to all the members, thanks for doing your homework, coming
in before, coming in prepared. Let us go have a great day.
Since there is no business before the committee, we stand
adjourned.

[Additional submissions by Ms. Bonamici and Mr. Grijalva:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon 12:24 p.m., the Committee adjourned.]
