- EXAMINING AMERICA'S WORKFORCE CHALLENGES: LOOKING FOR WAYS TO IMPROVE SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING AMERICA'S WORKFORCE
CHALLENGES: LOOKING FOR WAYS TO
IMPROVE SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, MAY 11, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-8
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-460 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

BURGESS OWENS, Utah, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         FREDERICA WILSON, Florida,
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin              Ranking Member
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          MARK TAKANO, California
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   PRAMILA, JAYAPAL, Washington
LLOYD SMUCKER,Pennsylvania           TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               LUCY McBATH, Georgia
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona,
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Northern Mariana Islands
VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina        SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on May 11, 2023.....................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Owens, Hon. Burgess, Chairman, Subcommittee on Higher
Education and Workforce Development........................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Wilson, Hon. Frederica, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Higher Education and Workforce Development.................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5

WITNESSES

Logan, Lydia, Vice President, Global Education and Workforce
Development, Corporate Social Responsibility, IBM..........     6
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Ferguson, Bruce, Jr., Chief Executive Officer, CareerSource
Northeast Florida..........................................    16
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Holzer, Harry, J., John LaFarge Jr. SJ Professor of Public
Policy, Georgetown University..............................    24
Prepared statement of....................................    26
Pallasch, John, Founder and Chief Executive Officer, One
Source Solutions...........................................    30
Prepared statement of....................................    33

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Chairman Owens:
Letter dated May 10, 2023, from Carl Holshouser, Senior
Vice President, TECHNET................................    74
Good, Hon. Bob, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Virginia:
Fiscal information for the record from The Fiscal Burden
of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023
FAIR...................................................    61

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Response to question submitted for the record by:
Dr. Harry J. Holzer......................................    76
Lydia Logan..............................................    77

EXAMINING AMERICA'S WORKFORCE
CHALLENGES: LOOKING FOR WAYS
TO IMPROVE SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

----------

Thursday, May 11, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Higher Education and Workforce
Development,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m., in
Room 2175, House Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Burgess
Owens [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Owens, Thompson, Grothman,
Stefanik, Banks, Good, Moran, James, Williams, Houchin, Foxx,
Wilson, Takano, Manning, McBath, Courtney, Bonamici, Adams, and
Scott.
Also present: Walberg
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Nick Barley,
Deputy Communications Director; Mindy Barry, General Counsel;
Hans Bjontegard, Legislative Assistant; Cate Dillon, Director
of Operations; Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant; Sheila
Havenner, Director of Information Technology; Amy Raaf Jones,
Director of Education and Human Services Policy; Andrew Kuzy,
Press Assistant; Marek Laco, Professional Staff Member; Audra
McGeorge, Communications Director; Eli Mitchell, Legislative
Assistant; Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Kent Talbert,
Investigative Counsel; Ilana Brunner, Minority General Counsel;
Scott Estrada, Minority Professional Staff; Stephanie Lalle,
Minority Communications Director; Kevin McDermott, Minority
Director of Labor Policy; Kota Mizutani, Minority Deputy
Communication Director; Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff
Director; Jessica Schieder, Minority Economic Policy Advisor;
Dhrtvan Sherman, Minority Staff Assistant; Banyon Vassar,
Minority IT Administrator.
Chairman Owens. The Subcommittee on Workforce Development
will come to order. I note there is a quorum present. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to call a recess at any
time. The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
the skills gap facing America's workforce.
If the past 3 years have proven anything it is that America
is an extremely resilient workforce. Through the pandemic we
prevailed. Nurses found creative ways to assist the patients
through telehealth. Truckers showed up day in and day out to
get food delivered to American's kitchen tables.
I am proud of our resilience. With it, Americans can
overcome any hardship. The workforce faces another challenge
today, the skills gap. Simply put, the skills gap is a growing
disconnect between the employer's needs and employee
competencies. Nearly 10 million jobs remain unfilled in the
United States. These jobs require in-demand skills, and our
workforce system has failed to provide these skills to American
workers.
Without swift action, the skills gap is in danger of
becoming the skills canyon. There are many reasons for the
skills gap, but only with a workforce system that is
effectively reskilling, and up skilling individuals can we
begin to address these issues. Innovations, and a fresh
approach is needed for the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity
Act to achieve its potential and equip more job seekers with
the skills needed in the modern economy.
Employers across the country are searching for talent.
Good-paying jobs are available for those who possess the right
skills. Too few Americans upgrading their skills in the
workforce system. Only about one-third of those participating
in WIOA engaged in any type of skills development.
Less than 100,000 individuals nationwide completed their
programs in the most recent year. We are not going to close the
skills gap if we stay on this trajectory. Skills development
must be a greater priority in the system. The government acting
alone cannot meet the historic challenges facing our workforce.
Private sector involvement and investment are essential to
align skills development programs with industry needs, and to
give workers hands-on experience. Employer-led and work base
learning must be a focal point in the law. When it comes to
skills development, employees must be in the driver's seat.
While skills and competencies become the new currency in
the labor market, we cannot continue to support programs in
WIOA that are failing to deliver skills our economy needs and
demands. Reforms are needed to ensure all eligible programs
lead to good outcomes. The priority of WIOA must be to connect
job seekers with job granters.
At this critical moment Congress cannot simply double down
on the status quo. More taxpayer dollars will not magically fix
the problems that are being identified in our workforce system.
Today's hearing provides an opportunity for us to hear from
experts on these issues and identify solutions together. This
is an area where we have a lot of bipartisan agreement. In
fact, back in 2014, we found a deal that worked for both sides
of the aisle, legislators, regulators, employers, employees,
and countless talks to responsibly outline its system to
connect workers and employers.
Those discussions resulted in WIOA's passage in 2014. At
that time the American government looked very similar to what
is happening today. A Democrat was in control of the White
House. Democrats were in control of the Senate and Republicans
were in control of the House. I hope a good faith discussion we
can once again reach an agreement that reforms and strengthens
WIOA.
Delivering results for the job seekers, job creators and
taxpayers. With that, I yield to the Ranking Member, Ms.
Wilson.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Owens follows:]

Statement of Hon. Burgess Owens, Chairman, Subcommittee on Higher
Education and Workforce Development

If these past three years have proven anything, it is that America
has an extremely resilient workforce. Through the COVID pandemic, we
prevailed.
Nurses found creative ways to assist patients through telehealth.
Truckers showed up day in and day out to get food delivered to
America's kitchen tables.
I am proud of our resilience. With it, America can overcome any
hardship. Our workforce faces another challenge: The skills gap.
Simply put, the skills gap is the growing disconnect between
employer needs and employee competencies. Nearly 10 million jobs remain
unfilled in the U.S. These jobs require in-demand skills and our
workforce system has failed to provide those skills to America's
workers. Without swift action, the skills gap is in danger of becoming
a skills canyon.
There are many reasons for the skills gap, but only with a
workforce system that effectively re-skills and upskills individuals
can we begin to address these issues. Innovation and a fresh approach
is needed for the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act to achieve
its potential, and equip more jobseekers with the skills needed in the
modern economy.
Employers across the country are searching for talent, and good-
paying jobs are available for those who possess the right skills. Too
few Americans are upgrading their skills through the workforce system.
Only about one-third of those participating in WIOA engage in any type
of skills development. Less than 100,000 individuals nationwide
completed their program in the most recent year. We are not going to
close the skills gap if we stay on this trajectory. Skills development
must be a greater priority in the system.
The government acting alone cannot meet the historic challenges
facing our workforce. Private sector involvement and investment are
essential to align skills development programs participation with
industry needs and give workers hands-on experience. Employer-led and
work-based learning must be a focal point in the law. When it comes to
skills development, employers must be in the driver's seat.
While skills and competencies become the new currency in our labor
market, we cannot carry on allowing programs to participate in WIOA if
they are failing to deliver the skills our economy demands. Reforms are
needed to ensure all eligible programs lead to good outcomes--and to
give jobseekers the information they need to choose the best pathway to
their own success.
At this critical moment, Congress cannot simply double down on the
status quo. More taxpayer dollars will not magically fix the problems
that are being identified in our workforce system.
Today's hearing provides an opportunity for us to hear from experts
on these issues and identify solutions together, because this is an
area where we have a lot of bipartisan agreement.
In fact, back in 2014, we found a deal that worked for both sides
of the aisle. Legislators, regulators, employers, and employees engaged
in countless talks to responsibly outline a system to connect workers
and employees.
Those discussions resulted in WIOA's passage in 2014. At that time,
the American government looked very similar to today. A Democrat was in
control of the White House. Democrats were in control of the Senate.
Republicans were in control of the House.
I hope, with good-faith discussions once again, we can reach an
agreement that reforms and strengthens WIOA--delivering results for
jobseekers, job creators, and taxpayers.
______

Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Owens, and good morning.
Thank you so much to our witnesses. Welcome today, thank you
for your time and looking forward to your testimony. Investing
in workforce development is a critical step we must take to
ensure a brighter future for our economy.
With today's hearing we are taking a step in the right
direction to support both workers and employers alike. The need
for this investment is more urgent than ever. Not because our
economy is struggling, but because it is thriving. The reality
is that the unemployment rate is still near record lows, and
wages are increasing. This is a direct result of key
legislation we delivered last Congress.
These legislative victories are creating millions of good-
paying jobs, combined with President Biden's work to build the
economy from the bottom up and middle out. We have created on
average 470,000 jobs every month since the start of this
administration.
For workers to benefit from this historic job growth, they
need the skills and credentials to succeed in new careers. For
employers to benefit, they need access to a dedicated and
skilled workforce. There is no better tool to meet both of
those needs and connect people with quality jobs than the
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, or WIOA.
WIOA is the backbone of our workforce system. Our
investment in workforce development falls short of where it
needs to be to stay competitive in the global economy. Other
developed countries spend half to 1 percent of the gross
domestic product on workforce development.
We in America spend only one tenth of 1 percent. We cannot
afford to fall behind in this critical area. Increasing our
investment is the only way to stay competitive. That is why
last Congress Committee Democrats led a series of bipartisan
hearings to craft the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act
of 2022, which was designed to enhance WIOA funding, expand
access for underserved communities, and ensure that workers are
connected to high quality jobs.
The House passed the bill last year with four Republican
votes. I believe my Republican colleagues agree that we must
strengthen skills development. Just last month, House
Republicans passed a debt ceiling proposal that takes us
backward. By cutting workforce funding, the Default on America
Act would prevent roughly 750,000 job seekers from accessing
services and skills programs.
This is the wrong approach. Today's hearing can help us
correct course, and build on last Congress's progress toward a
bipartisan WIOA reauthorization. There are two fundamental
goals, a meaningful reauthorization must achieve. Expanding a
job seeker's access to workforce programs and meeting the needs
of businesses.
Far more workers could benefit from skills development
programs and enter higher quality jobs if we finally put
serious money behind WIOA. In fact, the WIOA of 2022 included
80 billion over 6 years to help train more than a million
workers each year.
Importantly, more jobs, many job seekers need additional
support with childcare, transportation, housing, to complete
skills programs. Take for example, job seekers with children.
If they don't have childcare, they will not be able to attend
classes, or go to work, or on-the-job training.
It is time to stop putting up barriers and start breaking
barriers down by investing in critical support services, we can
empower job seekers to achieve their full potential and succeed
in the workforce. We must also ensure that skills programs and
support are accessible to those who need them most, but
currently have the least access.
Workers of color, young people, workers who have been
forced out of their jobs, and justice-involved individuals. For
example, I led the Strengthening Job Corps Act of 2022 last
Congress to ensure that the job corps programs utilize work-
based learning to get young people into good jobs.
Skills programs and support must be accessible to those who
have the least access--young people and displaced workers.
These groups face significant barriers to education and
training programs, limiting their job opportunities and
hindering their success to the workforce. For our workforce
system to truly succeed, it needs to be a win/win for both job
seekers and employers.
Without adequate funding, WIOA programs for employers are
being utilized by just 8 percent of employers. That has to
change. Currently, WIOA programs are only used by measly 8
percent of employers due to insufficient funding. It is time
for a change.
Reauthorization of WIOA that would prioritize the
employment-based training and sector partnerships can help
businesses find the skilled workers they need and boost local
economies with higher paying jobs. The bottom line is that an
effective reauthorization must put access first, quality and
innovation also that meets the needs of workers and businesses.
Today, I look forward to charting a path forward that
achieves these priorities and prepares workers and businesses
for success. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Wilson follows:]

Statement of Hon. Frederica Wilson, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Higher Education and Workforce Development

Thank you, Chairman Owens, and good morning. Thank you so much to
our witnesses--welcome today--thank you for your time and I am looking
forward to your testimony.
Investing in workforce development is a critical step we must take
to ensure a brighter future for our economy. With today's hearing, we
are taking a step in the right direction to support both workers and
employers alike. The need for this investment is more urgent than ever,
not because our economy is struggling, but because it is thriving.
The reality is that the unemployment rate is still near record lows
and wages are increasing. This is a direct result of key legislation we
delivered last Congress.
These legislative victories are creating millions of good-paying
jobs. Combined with President Biden's work to build the economy from
the bottom up and middle out, we have created, on average, 470,000 jobs
every month since the start of this administration.
For workers to benefit from this historic job growth, they need the
skills and credentials to succeed in new careers. For employers to
benefit, they need access to a dedicated and skilled workforce.
There is no better tool to meet both of those needs and connect
people with quality jobs than the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity
Act, or WIOA.
WIOA is the backbone of our workforce system. Our investment in
workforce development falls short of where it needs to be to stay
competitive in the global economy. Other developed countries spend half
to one percent of their gross domestic product on workforce
development. We, in America, spend only one-tenth of one percent. We
cannot afford to fall behind in this critical area, and increasing our
investment is the only way to stay competitive.
That is why, last Congress, Committee Democrats led a series of
bipartisan hearings to craft the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity
Act of 2022, which was designed to enhance WIOA funding, expand access
for underserved communities, and ensure that workers are connected to
high-quality jobs. The House passed the bill last year with four
Republican votes.
I believe my Republican colleagues agree that we must strengthen
skills development. Just last month, House Republicans passed a debt
ceiling proposal that takes us backwards. By cutting workforce funding,
the Default on America Act would prevent roughly 750,000 job seekers
from accessing services and skills programs.
This is the wrong approach. Today's hearing can help us correct
course and build on last Congress's progress towards a bipartisan WIOA
reauthorization.
There are two fundamental goals a meaningful reauthorization must
achieve: expanding job seekers' access to workforce programs and
meeting the needs of businesses.
Far more workers would benefit from skills development programs--
and enter higher quality jobs--if we finally put serious money behind
WIOA. In fact, the WIOA of 2022 included $80 billion over six years to
help train more than a million workers each year.
Importantly, many job seekers need additional support with child
care, transportation, and housing to complete skills programs. Take,
for example, job seekers with children. If they don't have child care,
they will not be able to attend classes or go into work for on-the-job
training. It is time to stop putting up barriers and start breaking
barriers down. By investing in critical support services, we can
empower job seekers to achieve their full potential and succeed in the
workforce.
We must also ensure that skills programs and support are accessible
to those who need them most, but currently have the least access:
workers of color, young people, workers who have been forced out of
their jobs, and justice-involved individuals. For example, I led the
Strengthening Job Corps Act of 2022 last Congress to ensure that the
Job Corps program utilizes work-based learning to get young people into
good jobs.
Skills programs and support must be accessible to those who have
the least access-young people, displaced workers. These groups face
significant barriers to education and training programs, limiting their
job opportunities and hindering their success to the workforce.
For our workforce system to truly succeed, it needs to be a win-win
for both job seekers and employers. Without adequate funding, WIOA
programs for employers are being utilized by just eight percent of
employers. That has to change. Currently, WIOA programs are only used
by a measly 8% of employers due to insufficient funding. It is time for
a change. A reauthorization of WIOA that prioritizes employment-based
training and sector partnerships can help businesses find the skilled
workers they need and boost local economies with higher-paying jobs.
The bottom line is that an effective reauthorization of WIOA must
put access first--quality and innovation also--that meets the needs of
workers and businesses. Today, I look forward to charting a path
forward that achieves those priorities and prepares workers and
businesses for success.
______

Chairman Owens. Thanks, Ms. Wilson. Pursuant to Committee
Rule 8(c), all members who wish to insert written statements
into the record may do so by submitting them to the Committee
Clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5 p.m., 14
days after the date of this hearing, which is May 25, 2023.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open 14
days to allow such statements and other extraneous material
reference during the hearing be submitted for the official
hearing record.
I will now turn next to the introduction of our
distinguished witnesses. The first is Ms. Lydia Logan, who is
Vice President for Global Education and Workforce Development
at IBM. A second witness is Bruce Ferguson, who is CEO of
CareerSource Northeast Florida. The third witness is Dr. Harry
Holzer, who is a Professor of Public Policy at Georgetown
University.
Our fourth witness is John Pallasch, who is Founder and CEO
at One Workforce Solutions, located in Aiken, South Carolina. I
want to thank all witnesses for being here today and look
forward to your testimony.
Pursuant to Committee rules, I would ask that you each
limit your oral presentation to 5 minutes, a summary of your
written statement. I would also like to remind the witnesses of
their responsibility to provide accurate information to the
subcommittee. I first recognize Ms. Lydia Logan.

STATEMENT OF MS. LYDIA LOGAN, VICE PRESIDENT FOR GLOBAL
EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT, IBM

Ms. Logan. Good morning, Chairman Owens, Ranking Member
Wilson, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. I am
Lydia Logan, IBM's Vice President for Global Education
Workforce Development. Thank you for the opportunity to testify
on the State of skills development in the United States.
In my role at IBM I create effective education and
workforce programs by leading our community and the university
skill's initiatives. Today I will share IBM's experience
leading skills development programs, talk about the need for
multiple pathways to careers, and to offer policy
recommendations that can scale proven efforts.
As a global technology leader, IBM believes the U.S. must
rethink it is education and workforce development approach to
meet today's market needs and create good paying jobs. To help
close the skills gap we offer a range of education and career
readiness programs at no cost.
To broaden and diversify our talent pool IBM removed the 4-
year degree requirement for 50 percent of our U.S. job
postings. That resulted in a more diverse applicant pool, and
almost 20 percent of our U.S. hires joining without a degree.
The IBM apprenticeship program is another way we're creating
pathways to meaningful careers in technology.
We started our first of its kind technology apprenticeship
in 2017. Today we have over 30 different apprenticeship job
roles, from cybersecurity to AI, to digital design. IBM's
apprenticeship programs are recognized up to 40 college
credits, or about 80 percent of an associate's degree.
This is all at no cost for the participants and allows them
to pursue a career and college education at the same time. We
are working with community colleges to transfer these credits
and add complimentary courses that would lead to an associate's
degree for participants who wish to do so.
As part of our commitment to skill 30 million people
worldwide by 2030, we offer the cost-free IBM skills build
program to high school and university students, educators, and
adult learners. This helps participants develop valuable tech
and workplace skills, and the access to career opportunities
through customized, practical learning experiences.
The platform offers over 1,000 courses and up to 20
languages, with the opportunity to earn digital credentials
recognized by industry. We work with partners like the
Department of Veteran Affairs to offer IBM skills build for
service members and veterans, to pursue in demand technology
roles. The online version is open to anyone and is flexible in
meeting individual learning needs for place, pace and path.
As this panel and employers know, our Nation's education
workforce systems are not equipped to meet the market demands
of the modern digital economy, and there is no silver bullet to
fix that. Instead, we suggest employers, policymakers,
education providers, and other stakeholders act collectively to
make the most significant impact, help current and future
workers.
We offer the following policy recommendations. First, align
higher education workforce development laws to focus on skills.
It is critical our Federal higher education workforce laws work
together to provide the necessary resources to obtain and
demand skills.
Second, dedicate individual training accounts for workforce
development. IBM recommends that Congress remove barriers that
limit skills attainment within WIOA, including dedicating
funding toward ITAs, increasing dollar limits on incumbent
worker programs, and enhancing work-based learning programs.
Third, reform the eligible training provider list. We need
to directly connect the list of employers within demand and
growing jobs. Fourth, transparency and the outcomes. Job
seekers need complete information on program measures, such as
completion and employment rates, credential attainment, and
earnings.
To do this, they need to better access quality data. We
also believe Congress can encourage the development and
coordination of an open interoperable data infrastructure with
strong privacy and security measures so that job seekers,
employers, and education providers can better align and share
digital credentials.
In conclusion, we know these updates can be made in a way
that unlocks opportunities for all Americans. It is going to
require industry, government, education institutions, and other
community stakeholders to shift the way we approach education,
skills development, and hiring. Thank you again for the
opportunity to share IBM's experience and recommendations with
the Committee.
[The prepared statement of Lydia Logan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Owens. Thank you, Ms. Logan. I would like to next
recognize Mr. Bruce Ferguson.

STATEMENT OF MR. BRUCE FERGUSON, CEO, CAREERSOURCE NORTHEAST
FLORIDA

Mr. Ferguson. Thank you. Chairman Owens, Ranking Member
Wilson, and distinguished members of this subcommittee. My name
is Bruce Ferguson, and I serve as the CEO of CareerSource
Northeast Florida, the regional workforce board serving the
Jacksonville region.
As Congress considers reauthorizing WIOA, I would like to
address the importance of work-based learning as a tool to
upskill our Nation's workforce, as well as the importance of
regulatory flexibility and the reduction of administrative
waste.
Some 25 years ago our Board of Directors made a key
decision that the skills needed to put business community at
the center of our strategies.
Since then, our team of professionals has worked to
understand and respond to the needs of our companies. We have
developed the central partnerships with our regional economic
development organization, the JAXUSA partnership, the economic
development councils in each of our counties and industry
associations.
These relationships enhance our understanding of the
regional economy, and focus our resources on targeted
industries, such as advanced manufacturing, logistics and
healthcare. We are experiencing one of the tightest labor
markets in history, and employers are having a hard time
finding the skills they need. This creates an opportunity to
enhance our region's focus on work-based learning.
Businesses are seeking ways to upskill their workforce and
increase productivity. Tools such as customized training and
apprenticeships act as catalysts for companies to build their
own workforce pipeline and create career pathways for their
employees. The key to getting companies to use WIOA's services
is to keep it simple.
We assist interested employers in completing a simple,
eight-page grant application. Once approved, the rest of the
agreement is only a few additional pages. We also employ an
apprenticeship navigator who assists companies in development
of apprenticeship programs.
Too often, our system and regulatory bodies turn what
should be a simple and concise application and agreement into
an overly complex process, resulting in employers turning away
from our services.
Businesses know best what skills their employees need to
succeed, and they need access to skill building programs that
are easy to use.
A couple of our success stories are with Grace Aerospace
and Flagler Health. Grace Aerospace is a small manufacturer
providing full service electrical and structural manufacturing
for U.S. military and commercial clients. With WIOA funding
assistance, a Grace quality manager became a certified
institute for printed circuits IPC trainer.
The company has since leveraged that manager's new
certification to upskill seven additional Grace employees. They
are all now certified IPC specialists, and receive the minimum
pay increase of 10 percent.
This new workforce skillset also enabled Grace Aerospace to
grow in new market segments, performing electrical work for the
Department of Energy and Nassau, both of which require
certified IPC techs to perform the manufacturing process.
Flagler Health faced a shortage of surgical technologies
and reached out to us for assistance. We helped them navigate
the apprentice development and approval process through the
Florida Department of Education. The result was a 12 month
apprenticeship, and all apprentices were already employed in
other areas of the hospital, and were looking for new career
opportunities.
They only needed a high school diploma, or a GED to be
considered. Surgical tech apprentices start at $15.00 an hour
with full benefits, and after program completion they make over
$19.00 an hour, a 28 percent salary increase.
These are examples of how our focus on WIOA customized
training and apprenticeships is positively impacting our
region's workforce and businesses. We believe enhancing current
WIOA legislation can be even more integrated and flexible, and
really be a difference maker.
With the current flexibility, our Board has been able to
make policies and skill building programs that meet local
business needs. Our philosophy is that if the law and the rules
do not say we cannot do something, then it must mean we can.
However, additional explicit flexibility is encouraged to
counter those who tend to operate with the opposite philosophy
of if it does not say we can, then we cannot.
Also, there is still a tremendous amount of administrative
waste in the process, and separately tracking multiple funding
silos, eligibility processes and data entry.
While we strive to streamline our services for businesses
and job seekers, multiple programs we worked with make
streamlining more difficult. We are forced to use systems that
require extensive data collection and reporting to the State
and Federal level.
The job seeker and business customer experience take a back
seat to reporting requirements. This approach is backward and
needs to be addressed as part of the reauthorization. Chairman
Owens, that concludes my remarks. I want to thank you again for
the opportunity to testify before the subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ferguson follows.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Owens. Thank you, Mr. Ferguson. I will now
recognize Dr. Harry Holtzer.

STATEMENT OF DR. HARRY J. HOLZER, JOHN LAFARGE JR. SJ PROFESSOR
OF PUBLIC POLICY, GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY

Mr. Holzer. Thank you. Good morning. Chairman Owens,
Ranking Member Wilson, and distinguished Subcommittee members.
I would like to make four main points in my testimony this
morning.
No. 1, many millions of Americans without any post-
secondary education or training credentials would have higher
productivity and higher earnings if they received more
training, and many million vacant skilled jobs would be able to
be more easily filled.
Remember that in America today, almost half of all
Americans have no post-secondary education or training
credential. Too many of them are employed in very low wage
jobs, often low wage service jobs, and particularly people of
color are very heavily concentrated there. All the numbers are
in my written testimony.
They could receive better training and do better. No. 2,
relative to American skill needs, relative to almost all other
industrial countries, and even relative to earlier decades in
the United States, our levels of public spending on workforce
training are extremely low.
For instance, we now spend only about 4 billion dollars a
year on the core programs in titles one and two of WIOA. Total
spending of those titles is about 6 billion. Now in a 25
trillion-dollar economy, and one with 150 million workers, that
constitutes very, very low investment.
Now, GAO, the General Accountability Office tells us we
have a lot more programs, Federal programs besides WIOA. If you
add all those up, it comes out to be in the ballpark of 20
billion.
That may sound like a lot, but it remains less than one-
tenth of 1 percent of GDP, which is vastly lower as a percent
of GDP than almost all other industrial countries spend on what
they call active labor market programs.
In the United States it has declined over time. In 1980,
the Department of Labor was spending an amount that in current
dollars would be 60 billion dollars a year, and now it's 20. It
has declined by two-thirds in a time when the labor force has
grown by 50 percent and skill needs have risen.
We are under investing. Point No. 3, the impacts of the
training we do on participant productivity and participant
earnings are dramatically limited by these very low funding
levels. Total of all the dollars being spent, only about a half
a billion dollars right now are being spent on actual training
for about 220,000 people per year.
Each one gets a little over $2,000.00 on average. Compare
that to the Pell program. Pell Grants provide almost $7,000.00
per year at this point and serve 6 million people. There is a
great imbalance. Now how effective is that training because at
the end of the day we want to make cost-effective investments.
The research evidence is somewhat mixed, but the most
plausible studies suggest that the impacts eventually reach
$1,500.00 to $2,000.00 in the adult program. That is the annual
bump up generated by this training. The numbers for the
displaced worker program are somewhat smaller.
That is a pretty--if those impacts last. If they do not
fade out over time that is a quite strong economic return on
investment. Of course, the core and especially the intensive
services people receive at the American Job Centers are also
cost-effective. They are much, much less expensive, and those
small dollars are generating quite strong returns.
Of course, there are other versions of training besides
these programs. Take certificate programs at community college.
On average they generate nice returns. They vary across the
programs, but on average the larger the investment, the larger
the earnings gain.
Short-term programs generate impacts, but less than long-
term, et cetera. The very best programs, the sector-based
programs, like Per Scholas and Project Quest, Europe, generate
over $5,000.00 per worker that does not fade out over time, but
they cost about $10,000.00 per worker.
Then my fourth point, besides just increasing funding for
training, I would put the additional priorities on the table as
follows. No. 1, we need to expand dedicated additional dollars
for highly effective sectoral training programs, of the kinds
already discussed today, as well as research and evaluation for
what makes them good.
Right now, we mandate that local boards create these
partnerships, but there is no funding or technical assistance
to support that. No. 2, I support more funding for
apprenticeships for work-based learning and incumbent worker
training to support very good State innovations going on.
No. 3, we need to fund career guidance and services,
support services more fully. No. 4, we need much better data
than we have right now.
Data on WIOA outcomes, the Employer Training Provider Lists
are a bit of a mess. They do need to be reformed as has been
said. Other data on labor market trends, various State
initiatives, credential engine. All of these are making
progress.
Thank you for allowing me to testify. I am happy to be
here. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holzer follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Owens. Thank you, Doctor Holzer. Last, but not
least, Mr. John Pallasch.

STATEMENT OF MR. JOHN PALLASCH, FOUNDER AND CEO, ONE WORKFORCE
SOLUTIONS

Mr. Pallasch. Thank you, Chairman Owens, Ranking Member
Wilson, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify before you today. My name is
John Pallasch, and most recently I ran the Employment and
Training Administration at the Department of Labor, so the
Federal agency responsible for administering the Workforce
Initiative Opportunity Act.
Prior to that I ran the State Workforce Agency for the
State of Kentucky, the State agency that administers WIOA at
the State level. It is an honor to discuss a topic vital to
America's continued growth and prosperity, building and
sustaining a skilled workforce.
For my appearance today I would like to highlight three
areas where I respectfully believe Congress could further its
mission to increase opportunities, enhance accountability, and
improve outcomes across the public workforce system. First, we
must acknowledge and incentivize State and local boards to
overcome perceived and real challenges to innovation.
Second, we should hold the U.S. Department of Labor, State
workforce agencies, and local boards accountable for their poor
performance across a multitude of workforce programs. Third,
Congress should explore targeted clarification and changes to
WIOA, to ensure skills development in the system aligns with
the needs of employers.
My written testimony explains in greater detail the
challenges, performance failures, and areas for improvement in
our public workforce statement. My oral statement will argue
significant underperformance and failures at multiple layers of
our workforce system are generally the fault of local, State
and Federal partners.
Local, because the infrastructure, as it exists, is present
at the local level with more than 550 local workforce boards
operating more than 2,400 American job centers across the
country. In addition, a majority of WIOA funds pass through the
State and land with the local boards as sub-grantees. With it,
the accountability and responsibility to be good stewards of
the taxpayer's dollars.
States share responsibility because the Governor and State
boards set the strategic direction for the State and have a
critical role in negotiating levels of performance, maintaining
the list of eligible training providers, and fostering
alignment across workforce programs.
To date, no State, not even Utah, which has the strongest
statewide integration of workforce programs has fully achieved
the promise of WIOA. At the Federal level, the Department of
Labor's Employment and Training Administration must reorganize
to be more aligned with State and workforce agencies as states
explore integration and innovation, while also holding states
and other grantees more accountability to delivering positive
outcomes for the billions of dollars awarded annually through
formula and discretionary grants.
Finally, Congress must provide more rigorous oversight to
ensure that DOL is performing its critical role in skills
development. Congress has a unique role here, and today's
hearing demonstrates your willingness to press for improved
performance and accountability.
Having said that, I agree with Ms. Logan, we must resist
the urge to look for the silver bullet to address our Nation's
workforce challenges. Almost never are complex problems
resolved by pulling a silver level, utilizing a particular
flexibility, or holding a particular hearing.
Rather, we must look across the broader workforce system,
and understand how poor leadership, outdated technology,
incomplete data, and a disjointed patchwork of Federal
workforce programs allows too many in the system to do what
they have always done, which for decades employers have told us
is simply not enough.
As currently constituted, too much of our workforce funding
goes to cover overhead and an obsolete brick and mortar
delivery system. Couple that with a train and pray model where
incomplete and outdated labor market information pair with the
lack of reliable performance data for most eligible providers
to present a greater emphasis on job attached or employer
driven skills development.
Nowhere is that more apparent than in the ETPL, which
contains more than 75,000 WIOA eligible skills development
programs across the country, with little to no repercussion for
poor outcomes. We know this because the WIOA data tells us that
only 34.6 percent of WIOA adults, who receive WIOA skills
development are placed in a job related to that skills
development.
That percentage drops to 34.2 percent for dislocated
workers and drops all the way to 20.8 percent for youth. One in
five youth who receive skills development under WIOA find a job
related to that skills development.
Finally, most local boards, and I do not include northeast
Florida in this group, fail to maximize job attached skills
development flexibilities that currently exist in WIOA, such as
customized training, incumbent worker training, on the job
training, and apprenticeship programs.
For their part, Governors and State workforce agencies
often do not see high enough standards for performance, and
rarely hold local boards accountable. In addition, the states
conduct insufficient oversight of their states ETPL, and often
fail to exercise existing staffing flexibilities designed to
aid and program coordination.
My old employer, the Department of Labor, must also be more
aggressive to fostering the workforce system, welcoming and
inviting of innovation, and creativity to address the lack of
skilled workers produced by the system. As currently
constituted, the Department of Labor lacks adequate talent,
technology, structure, and appropriate resource allocation to
provide both assistance and accountability to grantees.
In closing, I welcome the opportunity to provide technical
assistance to Congress on these legislative issues. Thank you
for your commitment to building a stronger workforce system by
listening to the needs of job creators, delivering upon
upscaling opportunities to workers and holding skills education
programs accountable for their performance. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallasch follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Owens. Thank you, Mr. Pallasch. I appreciate that.
Under Committee Rule 9, we will now begin questioning witnesses
under the 5-minute rule. I will begin the process. Ms. Lydia
Logan, you gave us an example of how IBM has used the work-
based learning to address a shortage of skilled workers and
support career by advancements.
What updates to WIOA would be needed to make employer led
programs to be a greater force, a greater focus in this
particular law?
Ms. Logan. Yes, thank you for that question, Chairman
Owens. We believe that there are a variety of programs that are
needed to really address the skills gaps that we see. IBM is
addressing them in multiple ways. We both have apprenticeship
programs, and we have the free skilling programs that we offer,
like skills build.
We work with workforce boards, and with partner
organizations, so that people who need opportunities can access
the skill development that is appropriate for them where they
are. I think the flexibility that WIOA can offer for local
programming at high quality align to job needs is what we need
to focus on. How do we make sure that we are aligning what
employers need with the skills that are offered in a measurable
way.
Chairman Owens. Very good. Thank you so much. Sorry. Mr.
Ferguson, having the business sector contribute to the cost of
skill development programs is a critical way to maximize the
impact of taxpayer dollars. How does the cost-effectiveness of
WIOA customize training, compared to those other skills
development programs?
Mr. Ferguson. Right. For us, Mr. Chairman, on the
customized training piece, the employer has to contribute at
least 50 percent of the cost of the training. Quite often it is
more than that. For this current program year that we're in I
can tell you that our average individual training account,
single scholarship, is costing us about $6,300.00 per
participant.
Our average cost per participant for the customized
training is just over $1,400.00. That is about a four and a
half times more efficient on the customized side.
Chairman Owens. Very good. Thank you so much. Mr. Pallasch,
we have nearly 10 million unfilled jobs, it is a severe skilled
shortage and too many Americans are sidelined and out of work,
yet the DOL considers the public workforce system in every
single State a performance success. Why is that? What changes
in WIOA's accountability structure are needed to tackle the
workforce issues facing our nation?
Mr. Pallasch. Yes. Thank you for your question. I think
there are two things we need to focus on. One is the particular
measures within the WIOA law. If we take a look at what states
are measured against, there are six common measures. If we
drill down on what those measures are, for example, two of the
measures are--was the individual employed during the second
quarter after they exited the program, and were they employed
during the fourth quarter, after they exited the program.
It does not ask if they were employed for the entire
quarter, nor does it ask if the employment in the second
quarter was the same as the employment in the fourth quarter. I
could have two jobs during the year, 1 day in the second
quarter, and 1 day in the fourth quarter, and the State is able
to claim me as a plus one in both of those.
We really have to take a look at the measures that we are
holding states accountable to. Then we also have to look at the
negotiated levels of performance, and I took--I pulled down
from the Department's website the 2023 negotiated performance
levels for some of the states. If you look at the performance
levels, and I hate to pick on states, but we are going to have
to do that.
If I look in New York and New Jersey, their second quarter
after exit, so the number of people they say during the second
quarter after the exit the program are going to have a job. It
is 61 percent for New York, and 62 percent for New Jersey.
Those states are telling us right off the bat, 40 percent of
the people who exit our program are going to be unemployed for
6 months.
They are telling us that right off the bat. That is their
negotiated level of performance. If we look at the fourth
quarter after exit we can pick on a State like Vermont where it
is 60.5, so again trending down. Another measure is the median
wages. How much wage does an individual make in a quarter?
Again, if we look at the negotiated performance levels in
New Jersey, their negotiated performance level for the adult
program under WIOA is $5,400.00 a quarter. So that's $20,000.00
a year. That is the bar that they want to hold themselves
accountable to. We are going to provide skills development to
people, and we hope they will make $20,000.00 a year when they
leave our program.
That is just not enough. We need to do better. It is
strengthening the performance measures, and then it is making
sure we hold the states to higher performance targets.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. Thanks so much for that. I now
recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Scott. Okay.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank the Ranking
Member. Mr. Holzer, there was a study that showed, and I think
you kind of referred to this by giving two numbers, that only
about 22 percent of the money spent on the local boards was
spent on actual training services. What is the rest of the
money spent on?
Dr. Holzer. The rest of the money is spent on a range of
other services offered, and of course the staff. The data is
needed to support those efforts. A lot of other money is spent
on core services, intensive services at one stop shops. The
evidence, the rigorous evidence suggests that those are
effective, very cost-effective investments, and we should be
making more of them.
The whole pot needs to be bigger, so that this effective
investment is not competing with this one.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. When you mentioned 50 percent of the
public has no post-secondary education, what if that group
shows up at the Workforce Council looking for a job. Where do
they actually get the training?
Dr. Holzer. Well ideally, they go to the one stop, the
American Job Centers, as we now call them, and ideally, they
get some guidance as to where they can get training.
Mr. Scott. They will be referred to somebody on the
eligible training list.
Dr. Holzer. That is correct.
Mr. Scott. You mentioned the typical costs of $1,000.00 to
$10,000.00?
Dr. Holzer. On average they are a little over $2,000.00,
and unfortunately that is just vastly less money than is often
needed for a really good training program. Again, compared to
Pell Grants for----
Mr. Scott. The cost of the programs then is up to
$10,000.00, I think you mentioned.
Dr. Holzer. I do not think I mentioned that number. The
very best sector-based programs, Per Scholas, Project Quest,
Europe, which have very good relationships with private
employers, those--the very best programs do cost about
$10,000.00 a year. That is correct.
Mr. Scott. Okay. We have all seen studies that show that a
lot of families cannot come up with a couple of hundred
dollars. How do people without a job looking for a job come up
with the costs of these training programs?
Dr. Holzer. It is very difficult. It is very difficult for
them to do so. With the amount of money, again, in these ITAs
is too small. Now if these folks are eligible for a Pell Grant,
then that provides almost $7,000.00 a year. That is good money,
but remember currently there is great restrictions on that, on
Pell Grants. It has to be a relatively long certificate
program.
It has to be for credit and that is why passing some
version of short-term Pell is important, with the appropriate
guardrails.
Mr. Scott. I think you have really struck at the heart of
the problem. How do you guarantee that if we were to pass
short-term Pell that it would only be available for quality
programs? That is, you do not have to answer that, that is what
we are working on right now.
Dr. Holzer. I would briefly--to answer that, I think to do
this correctly you need the right data. You need the right
earnings data that follows people over time and compares them
to people who are not in the programs. I respectfully disagree
with my colleague Mr. Pallasch. I read those data completely
differently than he does.
You cannot just look at earnings levels. You have got to
look at the improvements over time, those generated. If a
person is starting at a very, very low earnings level, and gets
a 10 or 20 percent bump up, I would consider that a successful
program.
With the right data, we could do a good job of having
guardrails.
Mr. Scott. You mentioned apprenticeships, very briefly, why
are they such a good deal?
Dr. Holzer. Apprenticeships seem to be effective because
they are targeted for the individual employer. They are
customized in some sense. The employers are training people for
exactly the skills they need. When that fits, when the workers'
needs fit with the employer's needs, that generates a good
return.
Having said that, we also want to make sure that the
training is not too narrow. If we are investing public money in
these workers, we want to make sure that at least some of those
skills are portable beyond just the individual in question. I
think apprenticeship does seem to pass the mark. I do not think
the earnings gains fade out.
Mr. Scott. Youth employment opportunities, particularly for
disconnected youth, that are not in school and not working, why
are those investments important?
Dr. Holzer. Very simply, this is primarily out-of-school
youth. There are a lot of good programs for in-school youth
careers in technical education, and in some community colleges,
but for out-of-school youth very often with not great, but
often no post-secondary training whatsoever. They need more.
They need more help.
Their current level of skills simply does not enable them
to try to get good jobs, and often they even lack the knowledge
of where good jobs are and what employers are looking for,
where they can enhance their skills, et cetera, so there is a
big job to do there.
Ms. Logan, in your testimony, we do not have time for an
answer, but I am going to pose a question to you. You suggested
reforms in the Eligible Training Provider List. Obviously, we
want to separate the good from the bad. If you could provide
your suggestions that would be very helpful.
Ms. Logan. I would be happy to do that.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Mr. Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Yes. Ms. Logan, I will start with you. Given
the current worker shortage and skills gap, we cannot afford to
spend taxpayer dollars on workforce programs that are not
effective. How do we get better data on program outcomes, such
as completion employment rates, and help steer funding to
higher quality programs?
Ms. Logan. Some of these needs to be required of the
providers on the eligible provider list. We need to, as our
panelists said, make sure that data is publicly available.
People who are seeking out skilling need to know that the
program they are going to participate in is going to yield the
result that they need, that they will be able to be placed in a
job that will give them a living wage.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. Mr. Pallasch--I got that right--in
your opinion, what are the key factors that contribute to
successful workforce development programs, and how can these be
integrated into a successful WIOA system?
Mr. Pallasch. I think it starts with leadership at the
State level. It starts with integration of programs across the
State level, so that when we realize we have got many funding
streams from the Federal Government coming into the State, the
ability for a State to coordinate that funding, the ability for
the State to make sure that they are leveraging the funding for
its targeted intent.
Then it is really getting back to performance. It is
getting back to what we are holding ourselves accountable for.
We talked a lot about the ETPL list today. There are a couple
of states out there who have more training programs on their
ETPL than people they train.
Right there we know we have too many programs. A lot of the
responsibility falls to the Governors and to the leadership at
the State level to make sure that the local workforce boards
are targeting that skills development.
Mr. Grothman. More programs than people who are in the
programs.
Mr. Pallasch. Correct. More training programs, correct.
Mr. Grothman. How many of those are what you would call
primarily federally funded, and how many are primarily State
funded?
Mr. Pallasch. Being on the eligible training provider list
makes you eligible for WIOA funding. As Bruce was talking
about, the individual training encounter, the ITA. When I go to
an American Job Center, and I present myself, and I said I need
some upskilling, I want to get some skills development, in
essence I am able to pick from the eligible training provider
list.
The career coaches are supposed to help me narrow down that
choice, so that it is really informed customer choice. By being
on the ETPL, all of those are eligible for WIOA funding.
Mr. Grothman. What would happen if the Federal Government
got out of this and just the State had to determine who they
were going to train on their own?
Mr. Pallasch. Would the State be paying in that instance on
their own?
Mr. Grothman. Well, I would suppose that most states want
adequate job training. We in Wisconsin have a tremendous
technical college system, the states and local support. What do
we get for having the Federal Government involved in it as
well?
Mr. Pallasch. I think we can have both. As I mentioned, I
think there is responsibility at all three levels.
Mr. Grothman. What would happen if the feds got out it?
What do they add to the mix?
Mr. Pallasch. Traditionally, what they add is funding. They
add infrastructure. They add partnerships, the ability to
leverage like I said, across programs, so that there are
advantages to having the Federal Government as a partner in
this.
Mr. Grothman. Would the State pick up some of the funding?
Well, Mr. Ferguson, as we look to increase access to work-based
learning opportunities, some have raised concerns about the
regulatory burden, and administrative waste associated with
WIOA workforce boards.
How can we streamline these processes to reduce waste, and
increase efficiency while maintaining accountability and
oversight, and do you feel that it is accurate that there is
regulatory burden and administrative waste associated with
WIOA?
Mr. Ferguson. Well, in our experience in Florida in
particular, not only under our umbrella do we have the WIOA
funding, we also have the workforce piece of TANA of the SNAP
employment and training, veterans services, et cetera. There
are a multitude of Federal funding programs that operate under
our umbrella, and that makes it difficult.
I have to train staff across multiple programs in addition
to WIOA to get the job done, and we work with multiple systems
and lots of programs.
Mr. Grothman. Okay, lots of programs, is not that by itself
a sign, we have problems with lots of different programs here
and there? Would the State be a little bit more nimble and be
able to handle this stuff without us mucking around?
Mr. Ferguson. Well, certainly we appreciate the funding
level and the effort that does come in from the Federal level
to make this work.
Mr. Grothman. I know we have a lot of extra Federal money.
I know, but go ahead, go ahead.
Mr. Ferguson. To have it more simplified under one program
would certainly be beneficial.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Ms. Wilson.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Chair Owens. My mantra has always
been jobs, jobs, jobs. When we talk about WIOA, I think about
how this Federal investment and workforce development changes
lives, gives hope, and propels our constituents to greater
heights and prosperity.
While this hearing is focused on adult job training
services, I would be remiss if I did not highlight the need for
a hearing focused on youth workforce investment. Title I of
WIOA, which supports job training programs and services for
unemployed and underemployed individuals.
We need to make a substantial investment in dropouts and
those we consider out-of-school youth, that investment can play
a crucial role in dismantling the school-to-prison pipeline and
reducing crime in our communities. With that, I have a few
questions. Dr. Holzer, you mentioned in your testimony that
inclusion of scale sectoral training programs is vital in any
WIOA reauthorization.
The WIOA of 2022 expanded the sectoral training programs
requiring local boards to allocate a billion dollars a year
through formula grants. Can you explain the reasons behind the
success of this approach to training and is it necessary to
ensure that local boards have sufficient funding to implement
an evidence-based approach?
Dr. Holzer. Thank you for that question, Ms. Wilson.
Sectoral approaches work for similar reasons to why
apprenticeship works. There is a dual customer focus where we
are making sure that the training dollars are going to
employers who have good jobs, as well as workers to get the
right skills to meet those needs.
You usually need a skilled intermediary who knows the
industry, a Per Scholas, a Project Quest, et cetera, to bring
the two sides together and make sure that the training is
effective. It also requires support services and all of those
successful programs provide support services, career guidance,
job search assistance, childcare and transportation, et cetera.
You simply cannot do that on the cheap, and that is why the
very best programs do in fact need approximately $10,000.00 per
participant in order to put all of the pieces in place to make
these efforts successful.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you. Mr. Ferguson, it is always great
having another Floridian in the room, and as the CEO of
CareerSource Northeast Florida you have experienced that with
the State system, which is relevant to my work with
CareerSource Broward and CareerSource South Florida in my
district.
I have worked with Mr. Rick Beasley for years. As you
shared in your testimony, a good, customized training program
requires buy-in from the two key partners--the board and the
employer. In your case, it seems employers are instrumental in
the success of your programing.
Unfortunately, the customized training program is an under-
utilized program for other local boards. How can we not only
encourage more employers to participate in the program, but
also get buy-in from those employers?
Mr. Ferguson. I was really surprised at how under-utilized
customized training is across the country as I saw some of the
data about that. I was not surprised. I was actually shocked.
We find it to be a highly effective program, both for the
companies, the Grace Aerospace is a double win because the
employees got new skills, new certifications, and additional
dollars in their pocket, and it opened new markets for the
business, so that business can grow and hire more workers as
they go along.
For us, it becomes second nature. It is really critical for
our workforce boards to have really deep partnerships with the
economic development organizations in their particular
workforce areas. That is a huge benefit for us to understand
what sectors our economic developers are targeting in terms of
the best areas for growth, and because we do have limited
funds, we try to target both our ITA funding as well as
customized training in those targeted industries.
I say it is not rocket science, but apparently, it is less
used than it should be. It is a competitive advantage for our
region. I will just say that.
Ms. Wilson. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Moran.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
testimony today, and your participation in this hearing. Mr.
Pallasch, I want to start with you. You mentioned earlier just
a few minutes ago in response to Mr. Grothman's questions about
the need for additional accountability.
I just wonder if you can give me some examples about the
times for the accountability that you believe should be a part
of the WIOA program as we move forward to ensure that every
dollar is used appropriately?
Mr. Pallasch. Thank you for your question. Accountability
starts with the sanctions provision in the law. Unfortunately,
there was no sub-regulatory guidance from the Department of
Labor on how to administer sanctions until February 2020. It
just so happened that I signed that sub-regulatory guidance.
For more than 5 years the law was in place without the
Department of Labor weighing in on exactly how the Department
would hold the states accountable, and how the states would
hold the local workforce boards accountable. We can see that
there was not a real commitment to accountability. There was
not a real commitment to sanctions up front.
I think if we can get the Department of Labor to focus on
its responsibility, if we can get the states to focus on their
responsibilities, we all have a role here. We all have to do a
little bit better at our job. We all have to do a little bit
better about holding everybody accountable, making sure that
the ETPL is clean. Making sure we have tight relationships with
employers.
To Mr. Holzer's comment earlier, in my written testimony I
said that I do not think wages are a good measure, and within
the pearl, which is a very massive file that the states are
required to submit for every individual they serve, we collect
their pre-enrollment wages, and their post-enrollment wages, so
we can absolutely look at the difference in wages, the change
in wages, but we do not do it.
That is not the measure. The measure we are held to is just
what are your wages. There are things that we could do to
tighten this up, to really focus on what we all want, which is
positive outcomes for job seekers.
Mr. Moran. Each of you, and I agree with that. Thank you
for your response. Each of you has been involved in workforce
development for a number of years. I am curious if we could
just go down the panel, and I would like for each of you to
give me a quick response on programs. You do not have to
identify them by name, but programs that have not worked. Help
me understand and help the Committee understand why they are
not working, and what traps we need to avoid as we begin to
reshape WIOA this next year. Ma'am, I would like to start with
you, Ms. Logan.
Ms. Logan. I think what we need to focus on are programs
that are connected to jobs that are local, so that people see
the relevance of what they are learning, connected to what is
actually going to--where they will be employed afterwards. Job
connected learning.
Mr. Moran. Yes. That was going to be one of my next
questions, but since you brought it up, I am curious. What
would you suggest we do to make sure the businesses are
connected to the workforce development, because that in fact is
the goal, right?
Ms. Logan. Absolutely. Well first, certainly involvement
with workforce boards. I would also say that economic
development locally always is driven by business, and the jobs
that are going to be created locally is a way to make sure that
the skills that are needed by the jobs that will be created
need to be aligned to the skilling programs that are being
offered.
Mr. Moran. Mr. Ferguson, back to my first question about
programs that you have seen that have not worked, where it has
been a bottleneck, or what has been the problem?
Mr. Ferguson. Gosh, what does not work? We try to make it
all work as best we can. Some of the difficulty lies in the
data collection that we have to go through for a participant in
WIOA to do a full WIOA application for us. It may take up to 45
minutes through the State system. That is too long.
We need to be able to collect what we need and move a
participant through the process in a quick manner.
Mr. Moran. I am shocked that you would say a Federal
program has too many documents and strings attached to it to
make it difficult, and unfortunately that is the case. I think
that is true. Sir, next I would like to move to you to answer
my question if you do not mind. What have you seen that does
not work that we need to avoid?
Dr. Holzer. I cannot name individual or single out
individual programs. I would argue that in some cases, in
certain limited cases, the training either may not be
appropriate or portable for workers who leave that sector, or
in fact the wages on those jobs might be extremely low and with
training individuals could do better than that.
I think again, with the right data, we could weed out
ineffective programs, get them off the ETPL lists, but again,
the quality of the jobs for which we are training, and let us
be honest, the dollars are so small that they cannot use them
to train for really good jobs because the dollars are too
limited.
Mr. Moran. I am almost out of time, so I think what I heard
you guys say is a lot of the problems is there is no
portability sometimes, there is no basis or outcomes, there is
no accountability, there is too much regulation, and oversight
by the Federal Government, and frankly, not enough creativity
in allowing local workforce boards to do what is best in their
local community. Is that an accurate summary? All right. Thank
you, guys, I appreciate your time. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I represent a
district where we have had huge job losses when many of our
textile and furniture manufacturing facilities moved overseas.
After many, many years of effort we have been successful in
attracting new advanced manufacturing jobs, but those jobs
require more skills than many of our workers have.
Those skills require programs from apprenticeships to
training programs, to community college, and of course all
these programs cost money. Dr. Holzer, you mentioned in your
testimony that compared to other developed countries, we are
dramatically underinvesting in training our workforce and you
cited reports that show that greater investment in worker
training results in higher income to those workers, which I
assume leads to more self-sufficiency.
How much should we be investing in our workers?
Dr. Holzer. I do not think there is any magic number or
magic level. What I know for sure is that less than one-tenth
of 1 percent of GDP is dramatically too small. If we were more
like some of the more successful countries in the EU, where as
a percentage of GDP, they will spend four-tenths of a percent,
five-tenths of a percent. I think by those standards that would
put us in a better place.
Again, even in 1980, as a percentage of GDP we were
spending dramatically more than we are today. I cannot give an
exact number, but it would be substantially higher. We are
spending half a billion dollars of WIOA money on training. It
is crazy to think that that is sufficient for what a 25
trillion-dollar economy with 150 million worker's needs.
Ms. Manning. What other kinds of efforts can be made to
attract people to seek out these skills, programs, how can we
remove hurdles to participation?
Dr. Holzer. I think that starts simply with getting the
word out in the community, in schools, and community colleges
about local opportunities within the region, about vacant jobs,
the skills they require. Now, not every form of training is
going to work for every unemployed worker, every low skilled
worker.
Right, there is a certain basic level of skill needs, which
is why basic literacy needs, including digital literacy are
also important, but I think getting the word out, combining I
think brick and mortar, American Job Centers still have a role
to play, but also digital forms.
A lot of people do need some human touch to help that
process, but strong outreach, making information and
opportunities available that meet what individual workers, as
well as individual employers can bring together is the goal.
Ms. Manning. Are there other Federal programs that provide
support services like food assistance and childcare and
transportation that could also allow people to seek out these
kinds of training programs that they might not be able to
pursue right now?
Dr. Holzer. Yes. Out of the 43 programs that GAO
identifies, some of them do allow spending on childcare,
transportation, and career guidance and job seeking guidance is
very important. Of course, WIOA money is spent on those things
as well.
There are simply too few dollars to provide all of those
needs off of this very small pot.
Ms. Manning. At what age should we be talking to young
people about the kinds of skilled jobs that are out there and
the kinds of training that they might need? Should we be
approaching them earlier in high school or should we be
approaching them in middle school?
Are we talking to kids too late about what might be out
there?
Mr. Holzer. I believe we are talking to them too late. I
mean we tell kids in the 7th grade you need to take algebra. We
do not tell them why. A lot of those 7th graders may not be
highly motivated to take those classes. If they know you
actually need algebra to be a successful machinist, or to have
this kind of good-paying job, I think their motivation would be
higher.
I think it is terribly low career information, and I think
we all would agree on that. People need to know more about what
skills are required in the economy for success, for career
success, and the earlier we start that the better and the more
motivated students would be to undertake the basic skill
development that they need.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. Ms. Logan, one key question that we
should be answering with WIOA reauthorization is how we can
bolster employer engagement with our workforce programs, and
WIOA participants, and you gave a great description of what you
do in your company to help workers.
How can a WIOA reauthorization start attracting good
employers like IBM for middle to high skilled jobs?
Ms. Logan. I think making sure that there are opportunities
to connect to workforce boards and making sure that the
transparency is there in the data. The quality of the programs
that prepare people for employment in companies, really matters
for companies to participate.
Ms. Manning. Great. Thank you. My time has expired, and I
yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Logan, you have
provided a number of inciteful comments and insights about your
partnership and workforce development at IBM, so thank you for
that. I would like to build on that. In my district we are very
fortunate to have two excellent community colleges, Onadaga
Community College in Mohawk Valley Community College in New
York's 22d district.
These excellent institutions are actively involved in
workforce development, and partnering with local employers,
particularly around skill-based certificate education that are
exactly targeted to both the needs in our community, the needs
of the employers, and the opportunities for these aspiring
students.
They partner in a lot of ways, but you know, it really
falls along technologies, even cybersecurity, manufacturing,
healthcare, and the hospitality industries. All of these really
are covered. Can you give any insight as to what are the best
practices for these community colleges?
I try very hard to partner with them, and to be a good
partner for them. What is the best way for them to partner with
industry and companies from your perspective? Any advice you
have?
Ms. Logan. Absolutely. We work closely with several
community colleges in a variety of ways from providing expert
lectures in key technical areas. We have our skills build
program that we offer to community colleges, so that they can
have current content at no cost to them.
We help them with pathways that are both degree and non-
degree content from IBM. We also offer our digital credentials.
I think those are things that community colleges can do with
industry to ensure that they are offering key skills that
employers are looking for, and give students the opportunity to
earn digital credentials, that is signal to the market that
those students have the skills employers are seeking.
Mr. Williams. That is a great list. Thank you. Could you
advise me what it is that we in Congress, what can the Federal
Government do to support or encourage, you know, particularly
in this context, these kinds of partnership programs that
you're describing?
Ms. Logan. Well, one of them would be a short-term Pell
revision. That would make a tremendous difference.
Mr. Williams. OK. Can you expand on that? I have heard some
comments on that, just to get it in this context?
Ms. Logan. Absolutely. We know that many people are not
going to brick and mortar institutions. They may be learning
online, they may not be seeking a degree, and they may not need
a degree in order to gain employment. We need to make sure that
there are quality opportunities for them to gain the skills
they need, and short-term Pell would help to close that gap. It
is part of the larger ecosystem.
Mr. Williams. Great. Thank you. I have heard that also from
the community college presidents as well. I just want to touch
on individual training accounts. It is open for anyone to react
to it. Many aspiring and ambitious students are seeking these
critical skills that we are talking about to advance
themselves, to provide for their families.
They find it hard to come up even with the minimum tuition
payment. I think one example was $1,200.00 for a phlebotomy
class. There is a great story of a single mom driving an hour
and a half two or three times a week just to get this class and
certificate, so that she could provide for her family. That has
a really great outcome and success story.
How would ITAs help meet this need, even at these low
dollar numbers. What can we do in Congress to provide this
boost? Can anybody provide any insight for individual training
accounts? Pro or con?
Dr. Holzer. I would say we could do better with that. I
think the funding levels are too low right now. On average,
$2,000.00 is only enough to provide training for quite low-wage
jobs. I agree about short-term Pell, as long as it has the
appropriate safeguards. There are a lot of very ineffective
programs, and I am sorry to say that most for profit providers
on average, those programs that will have value.
Not all, but some. We need good accountability for that
money. We need higher levels, and that is why the support
services are so important. You get the voucher, but the staff
has to have extensive knowledge of exactly which jobs in the
economy are appropriate for that particular person, and that
requires some resources. That requires good training for the
staff at the job centers as well, so I think that combination
could enable us to do better.
Ms. Logan. One thing I would like to add is we need to
think about the larger ecosystem of opportunities for people to
gain skills. There are programs that we offer, like skills
build is free and available to the public. You are going to
think about that at the wider end of the funnel.
People can log on, create an account, learn for free, earn
an IBM digital credential. They may need the next level of
skilling after that. That is where they may use an ITA or use
something else. They may go use short-term Pell, go to a
project-based learning program, a boot camp.
There are levels of skilling that people may need in order
to get the job they are seeking, and we need to make sure that
people are aware of those opportunities. When we did our
morning consult study a year ago, we found most people do not
know, 60 percent do not know where to start, and do not know
that technological training is available to them.
Mr. Williams. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. Mrs. McBath, I now recognize.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you, Chairman Owens, and Ranking Member
Wilson, and to your staff, and to our witnesses for being here
today, and I hope you can hear me. I kind of lost my voice.
Since it was signed into law in 2014, with the help of
Chairwoman Foxx, the Workforce Innovation Opportunity Act, or
we will refer to it as WIOA, has really assisted millions of
American workers in helping themselves gain the skills
necessary to be able to succeed in today's country, in our
economy.
It has inspired people who may have had to drop out of high
school to start working sooner than they expected, or to go
back to school to make better lives for themselves and their
families, and their loved ones. This helped families in
districts like mine, Georgia 7th, helped them to learn English.
For roughly a quarter of the population of my district was
actually born outside of the United States, and many of them do
not speak English as their first language. Stories like this
kind of illustrate how important it is that we continue to
reauthorize WIOA and ensure that it gets the necessary funding
it needs to expand upon the successes that we've had with it.
Congress must really take action to reverse the decades
long trend, declining public investment in our workforce
development programs. As I said in this Committee many times
before, the Federal Government spends significantly less today
on workforce development programs than they did over 20 years
ago in 2001.
My bill, the Train for Better America Act, which was
included in the bipartisan WIOA reauthorization that passed the
House last Congress would assist community colleges and
technical schools connecting recent and upcoming graduates with
employers in their area to fill the workforce shortages by
making the strengthening community college training grant
program at DOL permanent.
We know that community colleges and technical training
schools like Gwinnett Tech in my district in Lawrenceville and
Georgia Piedmont Technical College in Clarkston, are some of
the best and the most frequent providers of training for our
workforce system, yet there is no dedicated funding to support
these community colleges through WIOA.
The Train Act would actually authorize over 770 million
dollars for our Nation's community colleges to develop and
sustain job training programs for job seekers with barriers to
employment. Dr. Holzer, I have two questions for you. I hope we
can get to both.
What value do you believe the community colleges bring to
the workforce system, and do you think WIOA authorization needs
to include targeted funding, specifically for community
colleges?
Dr. Holzer. Thank you for both of those questions.
Community colleges are the only institution in America that
could deliver job training at a scale remotely close to what
our labor force and our economy needs. They could potentially
play an enormous role.
Unfortunately, I think so far, the performance is more
mixed, as some do much better than others. We know that
community colleges, we expect them to wear a lot of hats and do
a lot of things. We expect them to have a purely academic
mission, to be a steppingstone to 4 year programs, which some
do well.
We expect them to do really effective job training, but
many, many of them are strapped for cash. They simply cannot do
so many different functions really well. For instance, most
students get very, very little career guidance at community
colleges. I mean they might see an academic adviser once a
semester who checks off their courses.
That is not real career guidance. Frankly, a lot of
community colleges cannot afford to provide more of that
guidance and more of the support services a lot of students
need. I think another issue is this divide between for-credit
and not-for-credit. Frankly, for a lot of students, if they did
badly in high school, they may not be academically prepared for
some of the better for-credit classes requiring the community
colleges, without short-term Pell, which I think all of us
could agree on some version that is really important.
It requires the community colleges to do all kinds of
creative work to try to reach those students and provide them
what they need. I think, you know, more dollars for things like
career guidance and for teaching capacity. Another thing we
have to remember is that a lot of these industries, especially
in IT and advanced manufacturing, change very quickly, and the
skills can become obsolete very quickly, and community colleges
sometimes can be a little bit bureaucratic. Less bureaucratic
on the not-for-credit side, which is why those programs are
important. They also need more funds to support capacity
building, effective capacity building, as well as good
interactions with the employers with need in those districts.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you so much, and I am out of time.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. Right now, I would now like to
recognize Mr. James.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have heard a number
of amazing and informative things. I want to say thank you for
each of your care and service to folks who are seeking the
American dream at every corner of this country.
I have heard a number of things that I vehemently agree
with, and it is so refreshing to be on the same page,
especially with our Democratic colleagues. Among the things
that I very much agree with, what our ranking member said
earlier today.
In her statement, she mentioned two fundamental goals,
reauthorization must achieve expanding job seeker's access to
workforce programs, and meeting the needs of business. She also
stated, and I agree quite strongly, that reauthorization of
WIOA based training and sector partnerships can help businesses
find workers they need and higher paying jobs.
Effective reauthorization must put access first, quality
innovation also, that meets the needs of workers, and business.
I, as a former business leader, and representing Michigan's
10th congressional District, the arsenal democracy, No. 1
manufacturing district in the entire nation, know how important
it is to make sure we have a workforce that is ready, and that
the American dream is accessible and attainable.
Based upon the comments of the ranking member earlier,
would estimate that we agree there should be no wrong path.
There should be no wrong path to pursue the American dream. I
also really appreciate Ms. Logan's comments about skills
recognized by industry.
I think that many of us would also agree that at the local
level businesses and industry led institutions are probably
better to determine what is needed, than we are here in
Washington, DC. Programs that would allow paid work, written
training programs, written apprenticeship agreements,
specialized knowledge, promotes safety, equal employment
opportunity, credit for prior knowledge and experience,
mentorship, industry recognized credential, and disclosure of
costs and fees for transparency, which would move people
forward, are some things that we also agree with.
What I just listed and described are exactly what industry
recognized apprenticeship programs provided that was repealed
by the Biden administration. Mr. Pallasch, given your
experience at DOL, can you explain to me what the rationale may
have been behind that decision?
If you believe, in your estimation, that was the right
decision?
Mr. Pallasch. Yes. Thank you very much for the question. I
do believe it was the right decision. I believe the intention
was to create yet another pathway for individuals to achieve
the American dream, to achieve the skills development that they
need. We talk about multiple pathways all the time.
The IRAP program was designed to create yet another pathway
for an individual to take. We have also talked----
Mr. James. The repeal was the wrong decision?
Mr. Pallasch. I did not agree with the repeal.
Mr. James. Okay.
Mr. Pallasch. Having been the individual who signed the
rule into law under the previous administration, I was dismayed
to see that that rule was rolled back. The reason being is we
talked a lot today about administrative burden, and that was
another thing we were trying to do, is we were trying to take
the Department of Labor, take my office, out of that
decisionmaking process, and push that down to the states.
Push that down to the trade organizations, the employer
groups, the folks who actually know what is needed, and taking
some of that onus off of the Department of Labor, because I do
not know what occupations should be apprentice-able at a
Federal level.
I need the local folks to tell me that. I did not agree
with the action. I think it took away an avenue for individuals
to achieve that American dream, and that is unfortunate.
Mr. James. I firmly believe, and I think we agree that when
the Federal Government believes they know better what
businesses and locals need, that is where we run afoul.
Offering opportunities to earn and learn while obtaining
valuable portable industry recognized competency-based
credentials are very important.
In the last 30 seconds we have, Ms. Logan, you listed four
items that should be priorities. Could you re-list those for
again please? I think they are very important.
Ms. Logan. Absolutely. Align higher education and workforce
development laws to focus on skills. Dedicate individual
training accounts for workforce development. Reform the
eligible training provider list and focus on transparency and
outcomes.
Mr. James. That is outstanding. I believe IRAPs achieve all
of those, thank you all for your time.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would not like to recognize
Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
the witnesses for your thoughtful testimony this morning. I,
you know, appreciate the fact that you opened this hearing by
reminding us that in 2014 it was a bipartisan initiative that
passed the last authorization of WIOA.
Congresswoman Bonamici and I were comparing photographs
because we were in the executive office building at the bill
signing, and have a nice picture of Chairwoman Foxx standing
behind President Obama at the time that was signed, and it was
an extraordinary event.
Having said that, it was not the Ten Commandments, and we
obviously have a job to do to update and reauthorize and make
improvements to WIOA. Really looking at the, in my opinion,
extraordinary sort of consensus of the four witnesses here
today on a number of issues.
I think there is great hope that we can, with good faith,
try to put together an intelligent change in terms of the
program that is there. In my district, which is the home of
Electric Boat, which is a ship builder that builds nuclear
powered submarines, that is now on a huge trajectory of growth
because of a change in focus by the Congress, in terms of
appropriations, as well as the Navy.
We again, have seen a hiring demand in terms of the metal
trades, that you know, sort of in the late 90's to mid-2000's
sort of atrophied in terms of just the numbers of people, and
the focus of trade schools as well as job training programs.
The good news is that WIOA, in my opinion, succeeded in
terms of bringing together the employer, the trade unions, who
have been part of this extraordinary company, going back to the
1930's, and crafting a curriculum that in an accelerated
fashion, has resulted in over 3,000 graduates that 90 percent
plus have been immediately hired and the job retention is a
smashing success.
Ten weeks for welding, 8 weeks for electricians, 8 weeks
for CNC machinists. The only thing that has been holding us
back, as I mentioned to Dr. Holzer this morning, is really just
that there is insufficient funding to get more slots.
The hiring target this year for EB is 5,750 jobs in 2023.
Again, the need to look at the authorized and appropriated
funding levels in my district is issue No. 1, two, and three.
Part of that funding, and again, Ms. Logan, in your testimony
you talked about the fact that IBM has made this process free
for workers, in terms of going through the pre-apprenticeship
and apprenticeship programs, that is also key.
I mean the 10-weeks for welding is very intensive. You
cannot just hit a pause button on your life in terms of daycare
and transportation, paying the rent, and get through this
process there. Dr. Holzer, again in your testimony you talked
about the fact that this is just the reality in terms of the
number of job openings in the economy, and just the real life
needs of people to be able to afford going through these
transformation training programs.
Is that again, what you were focused on in your testimony?
Dr. Holzer. Yes. I agree with your summary of that. It is
great to hear success stories, and we have heard a number of
success stories today, that I have actually been very happy to
hear. We have to be honest about the level of demand. The need
for funds out there is relative to the resources that are
available. The programs you describe really do require trainees
to come in with a fairly high level of basic reading and math
literacy, digital literacy, et cetera.
We have to be honest that not all candidates for these
training programs can meet those bars. That is why in fact,
Title II programs are important as well. Investing in the basic
literacy. The best programs are ones that integrate a pathway
program that starts with basic literacy, and then targets the
literacy support to what the skill needs and the training will
be.
We have some good examples of those programs and that is a
major need as well.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. Ms. Logan, again IBM has a nice
presence in Southbury, Connecticut, and yes again, I think it
surprises maybe people to hear about a company like IBM using
apprenticeships. The Hartford Financial Group also has been,
you know, using apprenticeships for a number of years now for
their IT.
Again, there are a lot of complaints about the fact that it
is too burdensome to participate in the Fitzgerald Act
Register. The Hartford Insurance Group, what I have heard is
they had no problem, you know, setting up the program in
accordance with WIOA. What was IBM's experience with registered
apprenticeships?
Ms. Logan. The first thing I would like to say work-based
learning is important in all forms, right. Work-based learning
compared with quality programs. With regard to apprenticeships,
for IBM it was important to do a registered apprenticeship. We
are a national company. We are very large. We wanted to make
sure both for us and for participants, that when they--if they
stay with IBM, and a thousand of them are now IBM employees, or
whether they move on to another company, it is recognized where
they go next by other employers.
For smaller companies, they may have a different situation.
We had to do the bridge between the skills, the technical
skills for our apprenticeship job roles, and what the
registered job roles were. There is some work involved for
sure, and the modernization would advantage the program, and
allow for more employers to participate.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would now like to recognize
the Chair of the Full Committee, Dr. Foxx.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank our witnesses
for being here. Mr. Courtney, maybe WIOA in 2014 was not the
Ten Commandments, but like the Ten Commandments, WIOA has not
been honored as we had hoped it would be.
I think I point out all the time that all we have ever
needed, we do not need all these laws, we pass now. All we ever
needed was the Ten Commandments. Everything, every action we
take could be contained within the Ten Commandments, so
unfortunately WIOA has not been adhered to like the Ten
Commandments have been.
Ms. Logan, you recommend dedicating WIOA funding toward
what I like to call individualized education accounts. I do not
use the T word. Work-based learning. What impact would it have
for job seekers and employers if a greater share of WIOA
dollars were consistently available for upskilling?
Ms. Logan. We believe it would allow us to serve more
people but having more dollars of the allowable dollars
dedicated to skilling programs, would help us to serve more
people, and prepare them for available jobs.
Mrs. Foxx. Right. Everybody who said, including Mr.
Holtzer, that too much money is going to administrators,
bureaucrats feather their own nest, with WIOA money, and that
is the reason only about 20 percent to 30 percent. I saw that
when I was a community college President, and we have been
frustrated by breaking that mold.
Mr. Pallasch, in 2020, DOL established a website to
increase transparency and accountability in the workforce
system. Almost 3 years later, the site still lacks basic
performance data on most eligible programs and providers. Why
do we not have the data? What will it take to fix it? What does
this say about the current State of accountability in the
system?
Mr. Pallasch. Thank you for your question, and I think it
is important to note that I was the one who launched that
website because I knew coming from the State of Kentucky, that
the training programs in Kentucky were not performing.
Mrs. Foxx. You mean the education programs?
Mr. Pallasch. I am sorry. Yes. The eligible education
programs, yes. I knew that we were providing customer choice to
individuals, but we were giving them bad choices. If the State
of Kentucky did not know whether the programs were good or bad,
and if the Department of Labor does not know whether the
programs are good or bad, how can we possibly expect the
individual job seeker to know?
I think that that is the crux of what we are here to talk
about, is making sure we can talk about funding levels, but
putting more money into a system that does not have the
accountability and does not have the performance is not going
to generate the results we want it to.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you for that. That is a wonderful way to
say it.
Mr. Pallasch. Yes. We do, we have to clean up the process
first, and we have to leverage work-based learning and on-the-
job training, and then coworker training. We have to leverage
apprenticeships. Then those programs that are on the ETPL, we
have to make sure those are the highest performing programs.
Then we could infuse more money to make sure that
individuals are being pushed and directed toward programs that
are going to succeed.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Ferguson, you discussed how
cutting down on administrative waste in the system, which I
have alluded to already, and so has everybody else, will allow
local workforce boards to focus more funding on skill
development. Do you believe consolidating similar workforce
programs would make the system more efficient and empower local
leaders to achieve better results?
Mr. Ferguson. Very simply, yes.
Mrs. Foxx. Well, that is a succinct answer, and we
appreciate that. Again, we worked on that in 2014, with what we
did with WIOA. Mr. Ferguson, I mean sorry, Ms. Logan. I would
like to come back to you. Several years ago, IBM instituted a
program I understood, in Bedford Stuyvesant in high schools
where they began with high school students.
You may not be aware of this program, and if you are not
that is OK. My understanding was, and I cannot remember what
they called it, but where IBM went into the high schools and
developed the curriculum. Students enrolled in the 9th grade,
and went through for 4 years, and my understanding was at the
time, and it has been several years since anyone has talked to
me about it, that at the end of the 4-years they were
guaranteed an interview.
Not guaranteed a job but guaranteed an interview. Could
you, if you have information, bring us up to date on that? If
you do not, could you send it after the hearing?
Ms. Logan. I would be happy to send more information after
that is our pathways and technology education program. It's the
P-TECH program.
Mrs. Foxx. P-TECH, that is it, yes.
Ms. Logan. It is an early college high school model. It is
a career to high school pathway. There are many pathways high
school models now out there, and we believe it includes high
school plus work base learning, plus higher ed. Those students
earn an associate's degree. They have internships at IBM.
They also have work-based learning while they are in high
school. That is a wonderful model for high school, and happy to
talk afterwards more about that.
Mrs. Foxx. I happen to think that this is actually the
model that we need to be following in our country everywhere.
North Carolina is doing a great job on early college, and we
give free community college courses to high school students,
and many students now are graduating from high school with
their high school diploma, as well as an AA or an AAS degree,
and credentials, so that they could go immediately into a job.
I really think we cannot wait until students graduate from
high school to start working on helping them gain the skills
they need for a productive career. Thank you again. I am sorry,
Mr. Chairman, I went over.
Chairman Owens. Thank you, Dr. Foxx. I appreciate it. I
would now like to recognize Ms. Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Wilson, and thank you to the witnesses. I am really glad we are
having this conversation and I really see the Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act as Representative Courtney said,
was at the bill signing. It was the first bill signing I
attended. I see it as a vision for a demand driven workforce
system that really has the dual goals of getting people into
jobs, but also meeting the needs in the industry.
Of course, funding is critical, and as Dr. Holzer
testified, we do not have enough funding. It is pretty clear
that there is a tremendous amount of potential there. I want to
focus on a couple things. I know the importance of helping
people who historically faced barriers to getting into good
jobs. That is important as well.
A couple comments. First of all, I am planning to
reintroduce both my Partners Act and Builds Act. We hear a lot
about industry partnerships, the Partners Act, which has been
historically bipartisan. We are hoping to keep it that way,
will help especially smaller and medium sized business with
workforce and apprenticeship programs, and also the Builds Act,
which is specifically designed to help people get into
constructions trades and trades that help build the
infrastructure that we so desperately need.
Again, a bipartisan piece of legislation we are planning to
reintroduce. I also want to mention as a graduate of a
community college, the importance of the work of community
colleges. Portland Community College, for example, in the
district I am honored to represent, has an amazing mechatronics
program for example, because we have a huge semi-conductor
industry, and they get people ready to work in advanced
manufacturing.
We have an amazing industry partnership called the Oregon
Manufacturing Innovation Center with lots of private industry,
working with not only our higher education institutes, but also
Portland Community College, to get people ready for advanced
and additive manufacturing, lots of models there, but the
potential to do so much more with more funding is real.
With regard to current technical education is the culture
of the CTE caucus. We cannot start young enough. When we see it
is not only getting the skills, it is also the hands-on
education that keeps students engaged. I just visited St.
Helen's High School in the rural part of the district I
represent where they have eight different CTE programs.
It is amazing what they can do. Dr. Holzer, I want to talk
about apprenticeships. We know the successful model, and 93
percent of apprentices receive employment and make a good
salary. Good paying jobs, in fact, in my home State of Oregon,
we had more than 10,600 people go through apprenticeship
programs in 2022.
As we are considering reauthorization of the Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act, and the National Apprenticeship
Act, which has not been updated since the 1930's, what should
we be doing to lower the barriers to entry, and are there
policies we should consider to make it easier for businesses to
host apprenticeships?
Dr. Holzer. Thank you for that question. I think there is
broad agreement that registered apprenticeships, the entry
barriers, the hurdles need to be streamlined. My sense is that
the current drafts of revisions in the National Apprenticeship
Act would help to do that.
The exact details go beyond my level of expertise, but I
think that is the direction we all agree on. Now, unlike Mr.
Pallasch, I would have some concerns about programs like IRAP
because all the evidence that we have is on registered
apprenticeships. We simply have no evidence of the
effectiveness of these alternative programs. That does not mean
that they should not exist.
Ms. Bonamici. I share that. I share that concern.
Dr. Holzer. What we know is registered apprenticeship, I am
open to expanding with other versions of that, but that is what
the focus needs to be. Streamlining outreach to employers. Now
I will refer to a red State like South Carolina that actually
does a very nice job of outreach to employers, some tax
credits, a comprehensive model.
I think that is a nice approach. I think we want to use the
opportunity to reauthorize the National Apprenticeship Act to
bring those barriers down, to create some resources for
outreach to support some of these very nice State models,
innovative models.
Ms. Bonamici. We will look at that as a model. I just have
a little bit of time left, and I just want to, Dr. Holzer, if
we could just touch briefly on the 2002 legislation that
codified re-entry grants. Those services are made available to
those re-entering the market after leaving the justice system,
and we know the evidence is there. RAND did a report. It is a
good return on investment.
We have a fabulous program in Oregon called Constructing
Hope for people who get out of the criminal justice system, and
then get a job in the trades. Why should a future
reauthorization make these services a priority?
Dr. Holzer. It is so important. We have incarcerated way
too many people in America. When they are coming out, and a lot
of people come out having been disconnected from the school
system, they need support. Sometimes they are not ready for a
really rigorous training program. It might be basic literacy.
It might be other services just to make sure that they are
housed in a safe place.
The best programs prevent recidivism. Recidivism is so
expensive. Not only does it help them get into an economy at a
time when there's some shortage of employees, but when you
prevent recidivism, it's a strong return for the entire
country, and the entire economy, and that's the main reason in
favor.
In some cases, you also need things like subsidized jobs
for a while, for people that are not quite ready for the more
rigorous demands of the private sector.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would now like to recognize
Mr. Good.
Mr. Good. Thank you, Chairman Owens. Again, thank you to
all of our witnesses for your submitted written and expressed
testimony here today. One of the top concerns I hear, and I
think many of my colleagues hear from employers in our
districts, is the inability to find workers with the right
skills.
Obviously, that is one of the reasons why we are here
today. In light of the Title 42 expiration today, that is
throwing gasoline on the already raging fire that is the border
invasion, I think that effects everything. I think it is
appropriate to ask how flooding the labor market, flooding the
country with millions of unskilled, non-English speaking
illegal aliens, impacts the labor market.
Would anyone say in our panel that this helps employers who
are seeking more skilled labor? Somewhat rhetorical. Would
anyone say that this helps increase wages for Americans? Would
anyone say this helps employers? This is part of our
jurisdiction on this Committee. Would anyone say this helps
employers provide better healthcare for their current workers?
Would anyone say this helps enhance the education
excellence for our K to 12 children, and the quality of
teaching and learning for American children as we require every
school to accommodate every illegal that's here, and whatever
is their native language.
I would like to submit for the record, official record of
this hearing, a document that I have from Federation for
American Immigration Reform. In my home State of Virginia, the
Commonwealth of Virginia says we have an estimated already,
419,000 illegal aliens residing in Virginia, 123,000 of which
are students in our K to 12 schools.
The average cost to Virginians is $5,000.00 annually per
illegal alien. Total of nearly 3 billion, 2.84 billion in
costs, which costs the average household in Virginia right at
about $900.00. Shifting gears to more specifically to what the
purpose of this hearing is, Mr. Ferguson, how has this
historically tight labor market created new opportunities to
establish work-based learning partnerships with employers, and
how could WIOA be updated to support more employer engagement?
[The information of Mr. Good follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ferguson. For us to have the opportunity through the
WIOA funding to help a business upskill their workforce, and
increase their productivity is just one measure of a way that
we can help both the worker and the business make it through a
tight labor market.
Creating programs and showing companies how to build a
workforce pipeline through work-based learning, we can provide
some very entry level, short term training. For instance, where
a certified nursing assistant may take four to 6 weeks, and
they can go right to work, and then add on.
We talked about phlebotomy certification earlier as another
short-term training that we have done as an add on, bolt on
skill, that increases that individual's wage by two to three
dollars per hour, and it gives the hospital that many more
phlebotomists that are able to work.
From there, we have individuals going on to licensed
practical nursing, so businesses are figuring out with our help
how to build their pipeline and build their workforce
internally.
Mr. Good. Thank you for being part of the solution with
your Career Centers, and by the way the private solution that
is always better than government solutions. What have you found
that works best in developing partnerships between State and
local workforce boards and employers?
Then what are some of the challenges that prevent employers
from collaborating with the public workforce system?
Mr. Ferguson. For us, the biggest key is being active
members in our business community organizations, our industry
associations, such as the First Coast Manufacturers
Association. We have staff that are in the workforce,
particular subcommittees that those industry associations have.
Understanding our economic development targeted industries,
knowing your business community is the key for us to invest the
dollars that we do have in the areas that are growing, so that
a worker may not work for company A, but they are in the
distribution and logistics industry within our area, which is
very strong, we know we can get them to company B or company C.
Mr. Good. Thank you, sir. Mr. Pallasch, one last question
for you. If the Department of Labor was less involved in
workforce development, leaving employers to work on it, what do
you think that would do for our economy?
Mr. Pallasch. I think that is the key is the Department of
Labor's responsibility is to foster an environment where that
happens, where employers are working with their local workforce
boards, as Bruce has described.
Working with the other workforce partners to find solutions
that are best for them, and that part of the State, or that
part of the country because folks here in D.C., myself
included, do not necessarily know what central Texas needs
versus, you know, Northern California.
It is best left up to them. The Department of Labor does
have a role. It is fostering that type of environment, and not
being the big, bad cops all the time. It is working with them
so that the locals, as Bruce has done, take advantage of the
flexibilities that exist.
We need to make sure they are aware of that and encourage
them to do that.
Mr. Good. Well said. We could apply that to a lot of
government that we should just facilitate the private sector to
thrive and succeed, so thank you for succinctly answering that.
I yield back Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Owens. Thanks so much. I would like to now yield
to Ms. Adams.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses today for joining us this morning, certainly a topic
that we need to talk about. Dr. Holzer, because funding for the
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act is not mandatory,
funding may fluctuate, and even be reduced during times of
heightened demand for training services.
Have you seen an increase in demand for job training during
the COVID pandemic? How could the Federal Government provide
equitable outcomes for disadvantaged communities through
funding?
Dr. Holzer. I think COVID was very unusual, because it
affected, it limited both the supply and the demand for
education, enrollment in community colleges declined, et
cetera. Now, in most cyclical downturns, training is counter
cyclical. When the labor market is not that good, that is a
good time for people to go and train, and I think it will be
nice if there were some mandatory dollars that are tied to the
State of the business cycle, and many other areas, many other
programs were trying to improve the automatic stabilizer role
of support programs like SNAP and other things.
That, I think we could probably do some of that with WIOA
dollars as well. On the equity issue, I think right now people
of color, broadly defined, are overrepresented in the WIOA
population, so they benefit more from these dollars than anyone
else.
Now, the average impacts are roughly the same in percentage
terms, for people of color. As for white people, we wish they
were a little higher, but in fact so I think a lot of the
improvements we have talked about today, plus some extra
resources could make the system better serve.
Of course, the whole adult program is really designed for
the disadvantaged population, people who often start with a
fairly low level of work experience and basic skills, so more
resources. With the appropriate accountability in that system,
I think would increase its equity value.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, sir. Ms. Logan, you mentioned in your
testimony that you believe that Congress should dedicate
funding for individual accounts, to increase dollar limits on
incumbent worker programs, and we should also enhance workplace
learning programs. Could you talk a little bit about the wrap
around services and how the program distribution has impacted
the workforce at companies like IBM?
Ms. Logan. Sure. Let me start with incumbent workers. Thank
you for the question. As Mr. Ferguson said earlier, there are
opportunities for people to start with WIOA dollars, earn a
credential, get employment, but there may be other short-term
programs they could get to go to the next level, and those
kinds of upscaling opportunities that would allow them to get a
few more dollars per hour, and continue on a career trajectory
are why incumbent workers should be included in the ITAs.
We also believe that there are opportunities for people to
get training that are not currently working for them. They are
not necessarily work-based learning. They are not necessarily
high quality. These are some of the points we have been talking
about and we need to make sure that those are all part of the
revisions that this Committee is considering.
IBM offers programs that are free. I know in the past we
have talked about several of them, and some of them were
working with HBCU's on our cybersecurity centers are benefiting
from our digital credentials that we offer.
We can build on what is available to people, and then make
sure that they have the opportunity to continue to use more
resources that are available to align with employer needs
locally, quality programs, and get them into jobs.
Ms. Adams. Well, thank you very much and thank you for all
of your work with our HBCUs. I appreciate that. Mr. Chairman, I
am going to yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would now like to recognize
Ms. Houchin.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, guys, for
coming to testify today. I am actually very excited to continue
this conversation about the WIOA reauthorization, and how we
can improve the skills gap, and address the workforce shortage.
The State of the workforce continues to change. Right now,
if you want a job you can find it. WIOA, over the past, was
connecting job seekers to jobs, and we have about 40 percent of
the able-bodied population not engaging in the workforce.
I would like to see a reauthorization that keeps that issue
in mind, promoting incentives that would engage the 40 percent,
and utilize Work One and other programs to encourage those to
participate in the workforce, and provide the scaling up that
they need to do the jobs of today.
One of the things I am considering in this Congress is a
tiered tax credit for employers who are retaining new
employees, allowing, you know, out of the 40 percent, allowing
more workforce programs funds to be extended to adult education
opportunities like the Goodwill Excel Center in my district, in
Clarksville, Indiana.
I have been there and seen it firsthand. They are doing
amazing work at taking that marginal population, and providing
them an education, and opportunities that they might not
otherwise have. Mr. Ferguson, I believe workforce programs are
most successful when employers are in the driver's seat. What
have you found to work best in developing partnerships with
employers?
Mr. Ferguson. I would agree. Our board agrees that the
philosophy of the business knows best what skills they need.
When our board sets that kind of a tone for us as professional
staff, it is my job to make sure we understand what our
business community skills needs are.
We do that through, as I said, in my testimony with our
economic development councils, by being part of our Chambers of
Commerce, by participating in Advisory Councils for our State
college system. We sit, so we are hearing what industry is
asking for from our colleges.
It is really all about partnerships and understanding your
local labor markets so that we can coach our job seekers that
are coming into the career centers. Here is where your areas of
best opportunity lie.
Ms. Houchin. To that point, do you think it would be
beneficial for us to consider legislation that concerns the
tiered tax credit program where employers could work with
workforce boards as they retain employers for say, three, six,
employees in that 40 percent for three, six, nine or 12 months?
Mr. Ferguson. Certainly, any kind of a tax credit program,
or something like that, it needs to be simple to use. If it
takes too much to get the credit the business will not do it.
Ms. Houchin. Right. Then would you consider supporting
employers and reskilling workers as part of this
reauthorization? Would you consider a program that would
support employers in helping to reskill the workforce?
Mr. Ferguson. Right. I think it is there with the current
ability to do the customized training types of things that we
do to make it more explicit, to encourage it in some way, that
it kind of opens the door to other workforce boards and other
states to understand this tool, and how to use it would be very
beneficial.
Ms. Houchin. Clarifying what already exists, and making
sure it's advertised?
Mr. Ferguson. Yes.
Ms. Houchin. Mr. Ferguson, my time in social services
showed me that we should be focusing on young adults aging out
of foster care. As you may know, over 23,000 children age out
of foster care every year, 20 percent of them become instantly
homeless upon aging out.
Furthermore, only half of those young adults will have
gainful employment by the age of 24. Do you have any
suggestions on how through this we can engage that demographic
in the workforce?
Mr. Ferguson. The best thing that we can try to do is to
get to those kids before they age out.
Ms. Houchin. Correct.
Mr. Ferguson. Show them what the opportunities are in the
labor market to introduce them to potential training programs.
For us to connect them to employment as soon as possible
because you can build skills while you work.
Ms. Houchin. Do you think we are reaching those students
early enough now, or those foster children early enough now?
Mr. Ferguson. Probably not, or you would not end up with
the homeless situation that we are having.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you. I look forward to continuing this
discussion on reauthorization. I have got lots of thoughts on
how we can make improvements. I appreciate you being here
today. My goal is to support job creators in the workforce, and
in Indiana, and across the country. Thank you very much. I
yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My first question is
for Mr. Ferguson. Mr. Ferguson, you highlight some success for
job seekers specifically with job seekers in certified nursing
assistant programs. You State a majority of them earned a
significant wage after passing the CNA certification exam, and
this is a very real accomplishment, and I applaud you for that
success.
I wonder what is next for these individuals? They are now
earning in many instances $12.29 an hour, which is a decent
starting wage, but still not enough to raise a family, or be
sustainable over a whole career. This is an arena that we need
to focus on in the next WIOA reauthorization.
My question is how can WIOA play a role in these
individuals' more long-term career paths?
Mr. Ferguson. Well, so thank you for that question, and
what we are trying to set forth in that particular example is
that is the starting point for us. We continue to engage with
that particular hospital, and they look forward to, and we have
done a follow on employed worker training, where we have helped
those CNAs become an LPN, which again boosts that income, and
fills a need for the hospital, and you know, gives the
opportunity for that particular worker to upskill and earn more
money, so.
Mr. Takano. How could WIOA play a role?
Mr. Ferguson. We utilize the customized training dollars to
do that exact thing, so the funding that we have, and the
employers paying for half of this because they have got to
benefit, you know, from that as well, now I have an LPN filled
that I did not have, and it is easier for us, at our workforce
career center level, to go replace another CNA with a very
short-term training, and just get that pipeline going.
Mr. Takano. Well, how can WIOA support lifelong learning
and a sustainable career pathway, because $12.29 is a start,
but do you have ideas about how we can use WIOA to support the
lifelong learning and sustainable career pathway?
Mr. Ferguson. Exactly. I will go back to the apprenticeship
program that Flagler Health Plus put in place. They were taking
individuals that worked at the hospital. Some of them were in
administrative, entry level jobs, or the food service area of
the hospital, through a 1-year, just a 12-month apprenticeship
program. Went from a starting wage of $15.00 in that program,
and when they graduate as a surgical technician, they are
making over $19.00 an hour. That is a really significant gain
in a short period of time.
Mr. Takano. Well, thank you. Dr. Holzer, a recent study by
the Harvard Project on Workforce found that of the 75,000
programs across the United States on Eligible Training Provider
Lists, or ETPLs, 75,000 or 75 percent could not report on
critical information of their program like employment rates,
earnings, and credentials.
While I would like to see greater focus on skills-based
hiring, I am concerned that without transparency on the type of
credentials being trained for, we risk making the situation
worse and causing harm to low-income populations who need this
information to make informed--an informed choice.
How can we address this issue of transparency for
credentials?
Mr. Ferguson. Thank you, Mr. Takano. It starts with making
sure the right data is available. I would prefer individual
records to be more available, so you could really track the
progress of each individual in those programs. We are making
some progress. I think the ETPL lists have a lot of problems in
their current form, in terms of the ability of people to
navigate them.
They are not transparent right now, and as well as the
ability to use those to weed out less effective programs.
Several states, and in fact the program credential engine, is
making some nice progress, and gathering the data and making it
in a digestible form for job seekers, for program
administrators, so making sure people have the right resources
supporting efforts like that to improve the quality of the wage
data, I think would be a good first step.
Mr. Takano. Well thank you, Dr. Holzer. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Owens. I would like to now recognize Mr. Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Logan, I want to
address the statement made by IBM's CEO Arvind Krishna just
last week that roughly 7,800 of IBM's jobs could be slowed or
eliminated entirely by artificial intelligence. How is IBM
planning to balance offering good paying, stable roles to
American workers, while competing in a high stakes environment
in which our competitors, including international ones, might
be relying on AI?
Ms. Logan. Sure. Absolutely, and thank you for the
question. The technology industry, as we all know, is a rapidly
evolving sector. We are continuously increasing our own skills
as IBM-ers. We are all required to do a minimum of 40 hours of
learning a year to maintain and increase the skills that we
have.
In addition to that, we are offering programs, many of
which I have talked about today, our skills build program,
which is available to the public, and offers AI and
cybersecurity, and digital data analytics, et cetera, so that
people can learn for free with current content.
It is important for this WIOA program to focus on making
sure that people have those skills that are the skills of today
and tomorrow. It is also important that we think about the fact
that some jobs will be eliminated. Some jobs will shift, and
new jobs will be created.
AI is a tool. It is something that is going to shift and
change the way that we work, and the way that jobs are shaped.
It is not new. It has been around for a long time. It was 2011
that Watson won jeopardy, so it is really about how we use it,
and not just about the thing itself.
We need to make sure that people have the skills that they
need in order to leverage AI in the jobs of today.
Mr. Banks. I appreciate that. It is interesting that you
require continuing education for your employees, but is there
an ongoing effort by IBM leadership to take care of those
people, those workers who you know their jobs will be
eliminated by AI? Is there a regular discussion, especially
about artificial intelligence?
Ms. Logan. Well, artificial intelligence is something where
you are using it to become more efficient. It is not always
about what is being eliminated. It may be about how your job is
shifting, so that is a big part of the reskilling that we all
do, is making sure that we are keeping pace with the jobs as
they evolve.
Mr. Banks. 300 million jobs around the world may be lost,
or severely diminished by AI according to Goldman Sachs March
report. Even if it is a fraction of 300 million, it is still a
huge number of American workers whose jobs are lost or
disrupted by artificial intelligence.
What sectors of the U.S. economy do you think are most
vulnerable? I will start with you, Ms. Logan, and maybe
everyone else can take a shot at answering that question too.
Ms. Logan. Well first, I would say this is also not the
first time we have seen this. Anytime we have a major
technological advance we see these shifts in the workforce. We
saw it on the internet, we have seen it with advanced
manufacturing, so this shift is a pattern, and this is the
latest iteration of it.
Mr. Banks. Would you agree? I mean artificial intelligence
is different than creating the internet. Artificial
intelligence is explicitly designed to perform a role, or a job
of someone who had that role before, so would you distinguish
that as being somewhat different?
Ms. Logan. It still requires people to manage it. It is now
someone who understands how to apply it in the context of what
it is doing.
Mr. Banks. Mr. Ferguson, what roles do you think are most
likely to be eliminated due to, especially American worker's
jobs?
Mr. Ferguson. That is a great question. I mean we have seen
how technology reduces the need for the number of workers. How
AI ends up impacting that is something that I have not studied
a lot. I am certainly trying to keep aware of what is going on,
but in my reading things in the world of accounting, and other
areas, could have significant impacts, so we will see how it
goes.
Mr. Banks. Dr. Holtzer.
Dr. Holzer. I think certain sectors will be affected first.
Customer service very obviously, since a lot of that has been
automated already. Almost any kind of fairly low-level research
assistants, or low level writing assistants, Chat GPT will do
fairly soon, if not currently, what we really need is some kind
of system of lifelong learning, including for incumbent
workers.
If a worker sees that 20 or 30 percent of her tasks were
getting automated, that we helped the employer help the
employee pivot to a different set of tasks, and that is ideal,
and a few states have actually have lifelong learning accounts,
but also various forms of tax credits for incumbent worker
training to help employers, rather than displace those workers,
to help them pivot to the skills, because there will be a lot
of new skills demanded to replace the old ones.
This has been going on for over 200 years, so we need to be
better about helping both workers and employers adapt to that
with new forms of skill support.
Mr. Banks. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Chairman, thank you for holding this timely
hearing to address one of the main challenges facing businesses
across the country. In nearly every meeting with my
constituents in recent months, I hear firsthand how workforce
shortages impact everything from childcare to trucking.
Part of these issues stem from a lack of a skilled
workforce, and as co-Chair of the congressional Career
Integrational Educational Caucus, I am committed to ensuring
the success of these highly beneficial programs, and I believe
that they provide Americans with the skills necessary to
address our current challenges.
First, a comment and then a question for Ms. Logan. My
comment for Mr. Ferguson is just congratulations on what you
have done in Florida with career ladders. That is what you have
described, and I am a product of that. Out of high school I
worked a job at a nursing home, 11 at night until 7 in the
morning, today it would be a CNA.
This was before CNA, but from there I became an Assistant,
I worked the career ladder, became assistant therapist, a
therapist, a rehab services manager, and eventually was
licensed as a nursing home administrator.
I think those career ladders fit--well, I think with the
younger population as well. You know, it is not so important
where you start in life, it is where you end up. Quite frankly,
I think we have known these career ladders rather well for some
time, and certainly through WIOA, and everything else we really
should do our best to even make them better.
My question is for Ms. Logan. Ms. Logan, working at IBM,
you know firsthand the importance of highly skilled
cybersecurity professionals, not just in places like IBM, but
quite frankly businesses nationwide. Anybody that touches the
internet is at risk, right?
At the last Congress, I was proud to co-lead the
Cybersecurity Skills Integration Act, which would create a new
grant program, incentivizing cybersecurity education into new
established CT programs. Do you have any experience cultivating
education and workforce programs at IBM, do you currently work
with CT programs to develop curriculum that addresses
cybersecurity issues in the skillsets that are needed?
Ms. Logan. Thank you for the question. We have been in
conversations with school districts about that. There are
certainly more school districts could do around cybersecurity
education, again our Skills Build program offers some entry
level and exploratory content for high school teachers and
students on cybersecurity, so it encourages them to explore
that.
There is not enough that students and teachers, and every
individual can know about cybersecurity and their role in
keeping their own information safe on the internet, and for any
network they are participating in. That is why IBM is
establishing 20 cybersecurity leadership centers with HBC's.
We work closely through digital promise. We have got a
cybersecurity initiative there with some school districts
across the country, and we have got a cybersecurity
apprenticeship program, that is a year long. We need
cybersecurity roles filled in the United States.
We committed to fill--to skill 150,000 cyber people in the
United States, so we are hard at work on the cyber issue, and
absolutely there is more that can be done in the high school
space.
Mr. Thompson. Well, you are doing a great job. It sounds
that is a pretty extensive list, a lot more than what I
expected. The question is, from your perspective, what more can
Congress do to help integrate career and technical education
programs with employers like yourself to ensure that we have
the cybersecurity workforce necessary to confront the
challenges of the future?
Ms. Logan. Sure. I think absolutely the CTE programs can
take a look at some of the newer content that is out there, and
new challenges that are facing us as we discussed today. Roles
and technology are evolving all the time. We need to make sure
students are lifelong learners, but also that the programs and
pathways that are available are taking into account the new
technologies that are out there, and what is facing our Nation,
national security, cybersecurity, information, and there is
opportunity for CTE to be updated to include some of that.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Pallasch, we know one of the challenges
with WIOA is that many programs within the bill do not
participate in skills development training, or education. Quite
frankly, many adults are simply unaware of the programs and
benefits available to them.
In your testimony, given your experience as a former
Assistant Secretary, you noted that the Department of Labor
Employment and Training Administration, needs to be more
engaged on these issues. What do you believe the Department can
do to expand awareness of these critical career counseling
programs, and opportunities to help increase participation?
Mr. Pallasch. Thank you for your question. Since we are
showering praise on Bruce, I think one of the things that the
Regional Administrator from the Department of Labor could hold
up what northeast Florida is doing, and share that with other
workforce boards, so that when we find somebody that's doing it
right, when we find somebody that has employers engaged to job
attached training, that we, as the Department of Labor, amplify
that, and in essence put our arm around that and say yes, that
is good, we want to see this more.
We want to see folks do this in Nevada, and in Colorado and
Michigan and Washington.
Mr. Thompson. That is great. Create a mechanism to share
best practices?
Mr. Pallasch. Absolutely.
Mr. Thompson. That is great. Mr. Chairman, thank you so
much.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the panel
for being here. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate you allowing me to
wave on to this Committee, a Committee that was long very close
to my heart with what you do here. America's workforce needs to
have drastically change how Americans access education, and
workforce development has changed as well.
There are many good changes that offer opportunities.
Through the Workforce Innovation Opportunity Act, WIOA, we have
an opportunity to address America's workforce challenges to
bring more employers to the table and offer innovative ways to
reskill and upskill workers.
Today, I introduced with my colleague, Representative
Rochester, the Immersive Technology for American Workforce Act,
which would help the job seekers gain the skills they need
through programs that utilize immersive technology or virtual
reality.
I have seen how immersive technologies, including augmented
and virtual reality tools, can be used to upskill workers in
the telecommunications industry. Advanced manufacturing, and in
healthcare. These technologies have potential to lower training
costs and improve safety while paving the way for individuals
to pursue good-paying careers.
Across the country, businesses are struggling to find
employees to meet the ever-growing demand in the skilled trades
or technical fields. Our bill would enable Americans in rural
and underserved areas to utilize immersive technologies to
pursue career development, and better access quality job
development courses.
Ms. Logan, in your testimony you discussed about how IBM is
partnering with innovative education providers to expand career
opportunities for millions of Americans. Thank you for that. As
we think about ways to deliver more skills and developments
through the public workforce system, how can we encourage more
engagement from employers who want to offer innovative skill
development opportunities?
Ms. Logan. Thank you for the question. We believe that
transparency and quality in programs that are offered, one way
to make sure that employers are at the table. Making sure that
they are connected, that the programs that are offered locally,
are connected to the needs of the employers, the job
opportunities that are there, so that the pipeline of people
being skilled are the ones being prepared for the jobs that are
available.
We also believe that we need to look at some of the reforms
to the program, so that we are not just looking at the brick-
and-mortar providers, but looking at quality providers that may
be online, and the other modalities that will help people learn
at the place, pace, and path that is right for them.
We cannot leave anyone behind when we are looking at
finding talent. Employers need to fill jobs to keep our economy
strong, and to keep our local economies going, thank you.
Mr. Walberg. I guess this definitely starts at the early
ages, to start young people thinking about what could be the
potential for the values that they share in their life. That
includes finding ways to get parents to start reacting
differently to appropriate educational opportunities that may
be different than what they planned for their young people as
well, and to foster the desire to look for ways that will get
them to the marketplace, which oftentimes seems to make them
want to expand that in the future.
Are we looking at ways through business and industry, and I
guess I could ask any of you to respond to that. Do we really
start addressing that to introduce, and even inoculate people
against certain perceptions of certain jobs and start to
introduce them to the fact that any job could be expansive
opportunity, and unique, creative training courses can assist
in that.
Mr. Pallasch. Yes, I would like to jump in as possible
because I appreciate the question, and I think one of the
barriers to entry for the apprenticeship program that we found
was speaking to the point that you're talking about. Parents
oftentimes look at an apprenticeship as something less than. It
is not--I hoped that John would go to college, and I do not
want John to be an apprentice, not realizing exactly what an
apprentice is.
It is a job attached training program that we know--I
forget the Representatives we mentioned it earlier, it is about
a 94 percent tension rate. It is a $70,000 starting salary
across the board for apprenticeships. We know that is a proven
model that it is getting past the stigma of oh, an
apprenticeship. I am going to an apprenticeship. I am not going
to college.
To speak to your earlier point about location or VR, I
could not agree more. When I was at the Department of Labor we
launched a pilot with the job corps program, to try to bring
virtual reality headsets into some of our job corps centers, so
that we could allow career exploration for the students, but
also allow training for them.
I think there is real value in looking at things a little
bit differently, trying some new things, encouraging, getting
people comfortable with doing it a little bit differently.
Mr. Walberg. Virtual reality to bring out reality, and for
the future, so Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I appreciate it. Thank you
again. I wanted to, as we start our closing comments, recognize
Ranking Member Ms. Wilson.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Owens, and thank
you so much again to our witnesses for being with us today. As
I said at the start of this hearing, investing in WIOA and
skills development is one of the best things we can do to boost
our economy. I am grateful for our productive discussion on the
steps that would and would not meaningfully update our
workforce system.
We have our work cut out for us, and we may not see eye to
eye all the time, but politics aside, let us agree on this. A
WIOA reauthorization must cater to the needs of diverse job
seekers and ensure workforce investment helps businesses. I
look forward to working with Chair Owens on a bipartisan WIOA
reauthorization that delivers on these commitments and meets
the needs of workers and businesses. Thank you so much, and I
yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you, Ms. Wilson, appreciate that. I
wanted to just say thank you so much. I think that we are
having a very helpful conversation. You know, there are a lot
of bad things that happened due to COVID. One of the good
things is innovators are stepping to the plate, and I
appreciate that in so many ways.
We talk about supply chain, and we know that there will
have issues in so many ways, but the greatest danger to our
country is our workforce supply chain, not being prepared to
take us to the next level. I looked up--because I just want to
remind what WIOA means, the WIOA is Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act.
I think a key word to that is innovation. We seem to have
forgotten that. I think we have to also understand we have a
partnership here. There is the government and there are the
innovators, and we both have our parts, and both weaknesses and
strengths.
I was kind of thinking about some of the weaknesses and
strengths of both, this is the mindset, and the mindset is
real. The weaknesses of the government mindset is that it is
risk adverse. It does spread away from accountability and
transparency.
It seems the goal itself versus looking at the matrix of
gross success in the mission statement. The upside is that it
is funded, but it is funded by taxpayers. Unfortunately, with
that, throwing money at the wall is very easy to do, so we have
to make sure that we bring that accountability into it.
The other side is innovation, innovators. Innovators, all
about profit, and that means they have to create the best
product, and the best talent and hold on to that talent. That
is what makes this whole process work. That is the upside. The
weakness is lack of funding, so therefore, scaling of a good
idea sometimes is more difficult.
What we have to do at this present place is walk across the
aisle and realize that we are fighting for the soul of our
country right now, and we need to make sure that our people,
old and young, have hope. They only do that if they have the
skillset, they have a dream, they can know to go out there and
go through the ups and downs, and know they will end up on the
right side.
We have to, and I am thankful again for what you are doing
right now, cannot wait. Just know that we have a Congress now,
we have a Congress that believes very simply, we need to be
innovative in our legislative process. We can only do that by
hearing from the innovators what works, what is outside the box
that we do not understand.
We will never understand in DC. If we are open to that,
then we will make sure our country comes back really, really
strong, and I look forward to that process. I think we are
going to do very well with that.
I want to thank you guys again for being here. I would like
to thank you for taking the time, for coming to testify before
the subcommittee today. Without objections, there being no
further business, the subcommittee stands adjourned. Thank you
so much.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon at 12:42 p.m., the subcommittee adjourned.]

[all]
