- PREPARING STUDENTS FOR SUCCESS IN THE SKILLS-BASED ECONOMY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PREPARING STUDENTS FOR SUCCESS
IN THE SKILLS-BASED ECONOMY

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EARLY CHILDHOOD,
ELEMENTARY, SECONDARY EDUCATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JANUARY 18, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-34

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-310 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EARLY CHILDHOOD, ELEMENTARY, AND SECONDARY EDUCATION

AARON BEAN, Florida, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon,
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                    Ranking Member
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               RAUL GRIJALVA, Arizona
MARY MILLER, Illinois                GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
MICHELLE STEEL, California             Northern Mariana Islands
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           FREDERICA WILSON, Florida
VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina        MARK DeSAULNIER, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on January 18, 2024.................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Bean, Hon. Aaron, Chairman, Subcommittee on Early Childhood,
Elementary, and Secondary Education........................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Bonamici, Hon. Suzanne, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Early
Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary Education.............     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8

WITNESSES

Corwin, Danny, Executive Director, Harbor Freight Tools for
Schools....................................................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Mosley, Kelly, Supervisor, Career and Technical Education,
Clay County District Schools...............................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    24
Kincaid, Richard, Senior Executive Director, Office of
College and Career Pathways, Maryland State Department of
Education..................................................    28
Prepared statement of....................................    30
Mabile, Brandon, Strategic Development Manager, Performance
Contractors Inc............................................    35
Prepared statement of....................................    37

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Chairman Owens:
Letter dated January 18, 2024 from Western Governors'
Association............................................

PREPARING STUDENTS FOR SUCCESS
IN THE SKILLS-BASED ECONOMY

----------

Thursday, January 18, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Elementary, and
Secondary Education,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15, a.m.,
2175 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Aaron Bean [Chairman
of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bean, Thompson, Owens, McClain,
Kiley, Williams, Foxx, Bonamici, Hayes, DeSaulnier, and
Norcross.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Nick Barley,
Deputy Communications Director; Mindy Barry, General Counsel;
Hans Bjontegard, Legislative Assistant; Isabel Foster, Press
Assistant; Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant; Sheila Havenner,
Director of Information Technology, Amy Raaf Jones, Director of
Education and Human Services Policy; Marek Laco, Professional
Staff Member; Georgie Littlefair, RJ Martin, Professional Staff
Member; Hannah Matesic, Deputy Staff Director; Hannah Matesic,
Deputy Staff Director; Audra McGeorge, Communications Director;
Eli Mitchell, Legislative Assistant; Rebecca Powell, Staff
Assistant; Brad Thomas, Deputy Director of Education and Human
Services Policy; Maura Williams, Director of Operations;
Ni'Aisha Banks, Minority Intern; Nekea Brown, Minority Director
of Operations; Scott Estrada, Minority Professional Staff;
Rashage Green, Minority Director of Education Policy & Counsel;
Christian Haines, Minority General Counsel; Stephanie Lalle,
Minority Communications Director; Raiyana Malone, Minority
Press Secretary; Kota Mizutani, Minority Deputy Communications
Director; Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director; Olivia
Sawyer, Minority Intern; Maile Sit, Minority Intern; Clinton
Spencer IV, Minority Staff Assistant; Jamar Tolbert, Minority
Intern; Adrianna Toma, Minority Intern; Banyon Vassar, Minority
IT, Natalia Wilson, Minority Intern.
Chairman Bean. Ladies and gentlemen, a very good morning.
Welcome to your nation's capital. This is the Subcommittee on
Early Childhood Elementary and Secondary Education. The
Committee is now--will come to order. A quorum is present.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to call a recess at
any time.
We are glad to have you here, and those in the audience
thank you. We are going to have a great hearing today. I think
it is a lively topic, something that our Nation is challenged
with, a problem that we are going to delve into and see what we
can do. We are going to talk about the critical role of K
through 12 career and technical education, CTE, and Preparing
Young Students for Success in the Modern Economy.
You know, I serve, and in fact, I am missing a Committee
hearing right now on small business, and for the last year we
have talked to small business, and medium business, even large
business.
If you ask them some of the challenges they are facing in
today's economy, the vast majority--the vast majority, hiring.
Hiring skilled employees that are ready to go to work, that is
a challenge for many of them.
I believe, if we are going to tackle this problem, we have
to talk about flux capacitors. Flux capacitors, if you are over
30 you know that is the critical piece of a time machine that
was featured in the movie Back to the Future. Back to the
Future was a great, zany movie in the 80's where Marty McFly
and Doc Brown had their adventures, but they were trying to get
back to the future. I think that is our mantra today, back to
the future.
There was a time where there was a heavy focus on career
and technical training in schools. This issue is personal to
me. My dad was a shop teacher--was an industrial arts teacher.
Think about this. He took over a school, his first job out of
college was to be a shop teacher.
On his first day at class he finds he has got 45 students,
but no money, no budget, no materials, no tools, no anything,
and he has got to teach these students. He went to the
administration and said you know; how do I teach shop? They
said, make do. Make do. What do you do without any money,
without anything? Let me tell you what my dad did, and so many
people have told me your dad taught me shop, or your dad, you
know, was a great influence in my life.
What he did was he brought his own tool kit to school and
told each kid to find something that is broken at your house,
bring it in, and we will fix it as a class. That had such a
lasting impact on so many people, and has prepared the people
that do my plumbing, and the people that fix my car, my dad
taught them automotive shop.
As a country, we have consistently undervalued the value of
this type of education. I think it started, ironically, in the
80's when shop and other classes like that were removed. Here
is the truth. Two thirds of Americans do not possess a
bachelor's degree. One out of three students who start college
never finish. If we do not recognize these realities, and
reflect them in the Committee's priorities, employers will in
fact change.
They are already changing right now. Employees are moving
as we speak, they are removing degree requirements for job
applicants and moving toward skills-first hiring. LinkedIn, if
you go to them, 2023 skills report found significantly fewer
job postings requiring degrees.
More employers are explicitly hiring skills data than in
previous years. If we are going to tackle this problem
collaboration between educational institution and industry
partners will be key. We have established an all-star panel
that we are about to hear from.
In closing, I will note that a few years ago Discovery
Channel's Dirty Jobs Host, Mike Rowe, you know the man, Mike
Rowe, appeared for this Committee and said there is a problem
we need to fix, 7 years ago.
He pointed at that time, in 2017, there were 5.6 million
open jobs if we just had some skills to fill them. Today that
number is 8.8 million jobs. Our all-star panel, I have met with
each of you, Richard, we just had a conversation. In just a few
minutes we are going to hear from this all-star panel that
comes from across the Nation, whose doing it well? Maryland and
Florida.
Who is doing great, but what is the industry leaders out
there? We will hear from Danny and Brandon, Richard and Kelly
in just a few minutes. Our members, thanks for participating.
Before we start though, let us turn to our Ranking Member,
Representative Bonamici for an opening statement, and her
thoughts on today's hearing.
Ms. Bonamici.
[The Statement of Chairman Bean follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much, Chair Bean, and thank you
to the witnesses for joining us today. I am very grateful that
we are having this hearing on career and technical education,
an issue that has broad bipartisan support. During the last 2
years congressional democrats and the Biden/Harris
administration have been working hard on rebuilding the economy
from the bottom up and the middle out.
When we think about the Inflation Reduction Act, CHIPS and
Science, the bipartisan Infrastructure Law, these are creating
millions of new infrastructure, clean energy and STEAM related
jobs. I say STEAM intentionally because integrating art and
design into science, technology, engineering and math, means
more creative and innovative students and workers.
These legislative victories that we are working on now,
will create a sustained demand for postsecondary, STEAM and
construction based pathways, particularly with an eye on those
who historically have been left out of these jobs and these
opportunities.
Investing in CTE, career and technical education, can help
build a skilled pipeline for students when they get out of high
school to meet this new demand. To that end, we need CTE
programs that are available to all students, so they can
explore careers that interest them. Whether or not they require
a 4-year degree, or an industry recognized credential is still
beneficial.
Named after Carl D. Perkins, who Chaired this very
Committee, the Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education
Act allows students to learn about competitive careers in
information technology, health science, manufacturing,
hospitality to name a few.
These opportunities are critical to helping students refine
relevant skills, incompetencies which frequently leads to
industry recognized credentials and increased earning
potential. Under the Perkins Act, funding for CTE courses is
commonly offered in public and private high schools with more
than 80 percent of students completing at least one CTE credit.
Additional funds are also directed into local, secondary
institutions, or specialized high schools that focus on
vocational industry specific training. Chairman Bean, I really
appreciate the story about your father. I am thinking today
about all the CTE equipment, which most people are not likely
to have, whether it be, you know, CD printers, or labs, or you
know, large industrial equipment.
In recent years, schools and administrators are rethinking
the value of CTE and the role it can play in helping students
prepare for college or the workforce in keeping students
engaged in school.
In the past year CTE was used as an alternative track for
students less interested in college, or worse, those who are
deemed usually inappropriately, not college eligible, but it is
now a much valuable tool to bring much needed career and
postsecondary exposure to all students.
CTE is an important part of a well-rounded education, but
not a substitute for it. CTE has become essential as students
today are looking for hands on learning opportunities, and new
rewarding careers while employers are increasingly requiring
some type of postsecondary education.
Our data shows that there is a 90 percent CTE student high
school graduation rate, versus a 75 percent average nation-wide
graduation rate, so we know CTE is valuable to keeping students
in school. If students with the lowest profile enroll in a CTE
program, they are eight to ten times less likely to drop out of
school in the 11th and 12th grades.
The Department of Education under President Biden has made
career connected learning through CTE programs a priority.
Career connected learning is centered on four evidence-based
strategies. It prepares students for career success.
Expanding work based learning opportunities, increasing the
use of dual enrollment for CTE courses, strengthening career
navigation support, and requiring that CTE programs lead to
valuable industry recognized credentials.
For example, the Department of Education has teamed up with
the Department of Labor and the Department of Energy for its
Raise the Bar initiative, which embeds these strategies into
CTE programming and grants, so students are offered robust
career exploration opportunities. Taken together, these
strategies will help students gain career exposure, and
importantly, learn soft skills.
That is what we hear about when we are out talking to
employers, responsibility, communication, collaboration, all of
those things that those are skills that students will gain
regardless of what path they take. It will strengthen local
economies, and help employers fill vacancies. With that, Mr.
Chairman, I look forward to a productive and thoughtful
discussion, and I yield back the balance of my time.
[The Statement of Ranking Member Bonamici follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Thank you so much. Well done. Let us get to
that all-star panel I promised you. Our first witness, Danny
Corwin, Executive Director of Harbor Freight Schools--Tools for
Schools, located in Calabasas, California. As Executive
Director, and we had a little chat this morning, he is in the
fight to bring the next generation to jobs where it matters,
where they can make a difference.
They can make big bucks. That is the other big thing. Mr.
Corwin brings over three decades of leadership, experience
dedicated to expanding opportunities for K to 12 public
schools, and leader positions over 13 years with the California
Charter School Association, including being CFO, Vice
President, Senior Vice President of Development, 4 years as the
Director of Career Academies. I told you all-star panel, and he
is going to be our leadoff hitter.
He serves on the boards for several nonprofit
organizations, and received his BA from UC Santa Barbara, and a
master's in education from UCLA. Welcome, Danny, we'll get to
you in just a second.
Next is Kelly Mosley. Kelly is from a special district in
Florida, the 4th congressional District, Clay County. She is
the Career and Technical Education Supervisor for the Clay
County School District in Northeast Florida, located in Green
Cove Springs, Florida, where my wife is from.
After graduating from the University of Florida, go Gators,
in 2004, she taught agriscience at Wilkinson Junior High
School, and Lake Asbury Junior High School.
In 2007, Ms. Mosley was named the--are you ready for this,
the Florida Association of Career and Technical Education's New
Teacher of the Year. She holds a master's degree in education
leadership for the University of North Florida, and I want to
explain something to you being from the State of Florida. This
white stuff we are seeing outside, they call it snow, so it is
new to me too, Kelly, we are glad to have you here.
Our next witness, I will yield to Ms. Bonamici to introduce
Mr. Kincaid.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Richard Kincaid
is a Senior Executive Director of College and Career Pathways
of the Maryland State Department of Education, where he runs
the College and Career Pathways Office, and implements the
Blueprint for Maryland's Future. A program that increases
funding for education by 3.8 billion dollars each year over 10
years.
Prior to joining the Maryland State Department of
Education, he was a State Director of Career and Technical
Education at the District of Columbia's office of the State
Superintendent of Education. He has also served as a Director
of K-12 curriculum and instruction, Director of Career and
Technical Education in Career Academies, Campus Administrator
and High School Debate Teacher, for several school systems in
Texas.
He holds a bachelor's in human resources management, a
master's in organizational development, and a master's in
educational leadership, and is nearing completion of an ED.D.
in Education in curriculum and instruction from the University
of Virginia. Welcome, Mr. Kincaid.
Chairman Bean. Thank you, Ms. Bonamici, and welcome. Mr.
Kincaid took the Red Line in this morning, so we are glad to
have you here. Our last witness, Brandon Mabile, who has got
the second-best looking beard here today. He is the Strategic
Development Manager for Performance Contractors, Sugarland,
Texas.
He is based out of Houston, spent some time in Louisiana as
well. Let me tell you he joined Performance Contractors in 2006
and was named Strategic Development Manager in 2021 after
serving as the Texas Regional Business Development Manager for
11 years. He represents today Associated Builders and
Contractors.
They are the go-to industry for building, building America,
and he has got thoughts that he will share with us on what the
next generation needs, what he needs, and his contractors all
across America are.
Ladies and gentlemen, and member, pursuant to Committee
Rule 8(c), all Committee members who wish to insert written
statements into the record may do so by submitting them to the
Committee Clerk electronically in Microsoft Word, which is
taught in Clay County schools, in that format by 5 p.m., after
14 days from the beginning of today's hearing, which is
February 1, 2024.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days after the date of this hearing to allow such statements
and other extraneous materials referenced in the hearing to be
submitted for the official record. Let's get to our all-star
panel members. I kind of talked to you a little bit. We have
this 5-minute--your statements are already--I read them, they
are good.
You have got good closing statements and opening
statements, but let us hear from you. Danny Corwin, you are
recognized. Welcome to the Committee.

STATEMENT OF MR. DANNY CORWIN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, HARBOR
FREIGHT TOOLS FOR SCHOOLS, CALABASAS, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Corwin. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Bean, and
Ranking Member Bonamici, and all of the distinguished members
of this Subcommittee. My name is Danny Corwin, and I am the
Executive Director of Harbor Freight Tools for Schools, which
is the program of the Smith Foundation.
The Smith Foundation is a private foundation, established
by Eric Smith, the owner and founder of Harbor Freight Tools, a
national tool retailer with over 1,400 stores and 28,000
employees. Grateful for a shop class that he took in high
school and concerned that such programs were on longer
available to many students around the country, Eric established
Harbor Freight Tools for Schools to increase understanding,
support and investment in skill trades education in U.S. public
high schools.
Our flagship initiative is the Harbor Freight Tools for
Schools prize for teaching excellence, which annually awards
1.5 million dollars to 25 outstanding high school trades
teachers across the country. We also created the platinum
standard, to outline the elements of excellence in skill trades
teaching and learning in U.S. public high schools.
Some elements of particular importance include starting
with an excellent teacher, and having a relevant, aligned
curriculum within demand career pathways, opportunities for
work-based learning, all resulting in a high school diploma and
an industry recognized credential. We know that high school
trades education broadly coursework focused on the
construction, transportation, electrification and manufacturing
sectors, is critical for our Nation's future.
Our economic vitality rests on our ability to create a
skilled workforce of highly trained professionals to design,
build and repair the very fabric of American life, from the
roads we drive on, to the homes we live in, to the electrical
grid and energy sources that power it all.
In 2019, we commissioned opinion research to survey
students, parents and voters. The results reflected a desire
for greater support and access to trades coursework. 83 percent
of voters, and 79 percent of parents said that school districts
should make skill trades education a high priority.
Skilled trades education also leads to better educational
outcomes for high school students. A study by Jobs for the
Future showed that students who concentrate on skill trades
coursework are more likely to graduate from high school than
their national peers.
Why are excellence skill trades classes not available to
every American student? Some of the obstacles include a college
for all mentality, that has limited student options, and
created a stigma around trades careers, while increasing the
percentage of students with access to college is laudable and a
necessary goal, it has been the unintended effect of closing
off options for students who may choose to pursue a different
path.
Other obstacles include a lack of alignment among K-12,
postsecondary, workforce development and industry sectors, an
acute and growing shortage of skill trades teachers, and
finally the fact that spending on CTE makes up just 3 percent
of the estimated overall funding for high school and middle
school education in the United States.
Despite these obstacles, many promising practices have
developed across the country, some illustrated by the work of
our prize-winning teachers. These include integrating skill
trades and traditional academic coursework, as demonstrated in
Colorado, where Scott Burke cofounded Geometry and
Construction, a program that integrates skill trades and
traditional academic coursework.
The program teaches students both trades and geometry,
through the process of building affordable homes for families
in need. Also, incorporating project-based learning to impart
core concepts, and teach professional skills.
In Connecticut, Roxanne Amiott, automotive repair--teachers
automotive repair in a classroom that is a live, licensed
repair facility, where students work on customer vehicles in
teams, learning every aspect of the professional process from
repairs to customer interaction and time management.
Also, expanding opportunities for dual enrollment and
college credit to give CTE students a head start on
postsecondary education and careers. In Arizona, Cesar Gutierez
teaches precision manufacturing, where students can receive up
to 25 college credits, nearly a full year of school for their
associate degree in industrial technology, thanks to a dual
enrollment partnership with Pima Community College.
Other promising practices include increasing work-based
learning experiences to help students build technical and
professional skills with workplace mentors, and leveraging out
of school hours, flexible schedules and summer learning, to
give students more access to hands on skill trades education.
These promising practices can help prepare our students for
success in the skill-based economy. Again, thank you for the
opportunity to address the importance of skill trades
education, and I look forward to your questions.
[The Statement of Mr. Corwin follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Spot on, Danny Corwin, well done. Thank you
so much. I have got a great question for you in just a few
moments, but thank you so much. Our next witness, Kelly Mosley,
I spent the morning with her showing, looking at her programs,
and so Kelly Mosley, welcome. You are recognized.

STATEMENT OF MS. KELLY MOSLEY, CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION
SUPERVISOR, CLAY COUNTY DISTRICT SCHOOLS, GREEN COVE SPRING,
FLORIDA

Ms. Mosley. Chair Bean, Ranking Member Bonamici, and
members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me here
today and giving me the opportunity to share about career and
technical education in Clay County, Florida. My name is Kelly
Mosley, and I serve as one of two supervisors of career and
technical education for Clay County District Schools where our
goal is to prepare students for college and careers.
Clay County has nearly 120 career and technical education
teachers in secondary schools. We are fortunate to have college
and career coaches as part of our CTE team, who work at all
seven high schools to support CTE students and teachers. Over
11,000 students are enrolled in CTE programs.
There are 33 different CTE programs across the county,
representing 11 career cluster areas. In Clay County, students
are on a six-period school day, and they can choose to take CTE
courses as their electives, in addition to their academic
courses. They can continue to take CTE courses that buildupon
each other as part of the CTE program of study throughout their
high school career, or they can choose to explore another CTE
program or elective.
Exploratory CTE courses are offered at the junior high
school level, where they can take semester long CTE courses
during their 7th and 8th grade school years. These courses
relate to the courses offered at the high school level and are
an important part of the workforce pipeline.
Students in Clay County CTE programs prepare for a variety
of nationally recognized, industry certification exams from the
Florida Department of Education's CAPE Funding list. Last year
over 1,400 industry certifications were earned by Clay County
students.
We offer work-based learning opportunities, such as CTSOs,
pre-apprenticeships, school-based enterprises, internships,
field trips, career fairs, and clinical experiences. We have 14
advisory boards where business and community partners advise,
assist and advocate for CTE programs, and they are the
foundation of business partner involvement.
Even though we are constantly trying to overcome the
obstacle of the nationwide CTE shortage, our department
collaborates with regional workforce partners to determine in
demand career fields, as we develop new CTE programs. Recently
we had expanded health science, , construction, information
technology and communication programs in the county, and we
look forward to continuing to expand manufacturing programs in
the future.
Please continue to support CTE. CTE programs provide
something for every student. CTE programs provide real-world
hands-on experiences to prepare students for college and
careers, and CTE classes are the reason that many students come
to school every day.
CTE's teachers have the unique opportunity to serve as
their student's teacher for their entire high school career,
and forge relationships with students that impact student
attendance, discipline and academic achievement.
I could share Clay County's CTE student success stories for
days. Stories of how a student ended up in a certain career
because of a field trip they took, or how they earned a college
scholarship because they were well prepared for the interview,
due to the mock interviews they had during their CTE program.
Or the job offer they were given because they were able to
network with industry professionals, and that job turned into a
career that helped them overcome generational poverty. I could
share stories of how students who participated in internships
were hired as permanent employees, and they're now modeled
employees for local businesses, where they're given tuition
reimbursement, health benefits, and more.
I will leave you with this one story of a former Clay
County student who excelled in two different CTE programs while
he was at Middleburg High School. He participated in two
different CTSOs, and the ACE Mentoring program where he met
various people who would offer him employment in the
construction industry.
He was able to serve as the project manager who helped to
build the latest hospital in Clay County and was able to
experience a full circle moment 10 years later. He shared with
current CTE students on a field trip to the constructionsite
provided by business partners about the opportunities Clay
County CTE provided him, that led him to the team who was
building the 2-million-dollar hospital that will provide
services for our entire county.
The numbers and statistics are important, but stories like
these are even more important because they represent lives
changed, and communities impacted, and I appreciate the
opportunity to share our story with you today, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The Statement of Ms. Kelly Mosley follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Kelly Mosley, well done. Thank you very
much. He used to run D.C. Schools, now he is doing it for
Maryland, Mr. Kincaid, you are recognized my friend, welcome.

STATEMENT OF MR. RICHARD KINCAID, SENIOR EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
OFFICE OF COLLEGE AND CAREER PATHWAYS, MARYLAND STATE
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, BALTIMORE, MARYLAND

Mr. Kincaid. Chairman Bean, Ranking Member Bonamici, and
distinguished members of the Committee, it is an honor to
testify before you today. My name is Richard Kincaid, and I am
testifying on behalf of the Maryland State Department of
Education, led by our interim State Superintendent, Dr. Carey
Wright.
In my role I lead the Office of College and Career
Pathways, a team that is responsible for ensuring that all
students have access to high-quality career and technical
education programming. While the State of Maryland is making
excellent progress toward developing an educational system that
is connected to the world of work, we still have not done
enough to communicate that career is the destination, and
college is one of the many pathways to get there.
Today I want to introduce you to a piece of groundbreaking
legislation known as the Blueprint for Maryland's Future.
Second, I want to share with you a competitive grant program
called Maryland Works. Third, I want to emphasize the
importance of rigor, quality and cross sector collaboration in
the apprenticeship space.
The Blueprint for Maryland's Future is a significant shift
in the state's approach to education policy, governance and
accountability. This multi-billion-dollar State and local
investment intends to transform Maryland's public education
system into a worldclass education model.
For the purpose of my testimony today I will highlight
pillar three of the blueprint, which requires that all students
have equitable access to rigorous education that prepares them
for college, career and life, and more specifically to our work
in CTE, mandates that all high school graduates earn an
industry recognized credential, and/or complete the high school
level of a registered apprenticeship program by the 2030-2031
school year.
This mandate requires a rapid state-wide scaling of
industry recognized apprenticeship opportunities, both on the
industry side, and for our school systems. To achieve this,
Maryland has implemented various strategies, including
significant investment in expanding and improving CTE
programming.
Pillar three of the blueprint parallels the intentionality
of the Biden administration's four keys to unlocking career
success, dual enrollment, work-based learning, workforce
credentials, and career advising and navigation via career
counselors. Each of these elements become a critical piece of
Maryland's CTE redesign over the next few years.
To seat and skill the apprenticeship and industry
recognized credential elements of the blueprint, MSDE developed
and launched Maryland Works, a competitive grant that leverages
remaining ESSR III funding to make a substantial investment in
establishing industry aligned apprenticeship infrastructure
across our State for all Maryland schools and business sectors.
The Maryland Works grant allocates 12.2 million dollars to
nine entities, including six local education agencies, and
three intermediaries, showcasing a national model for using
recovery funds to build a talent pipeline, in key workforce
sectors. The grant emphasizes innovative transportation, unique
high school scheduling, and diverse youth apprenticeships in
career fields not traditionally associated with
apprenticeships.
Fields such as finance, IT, biotechnology, life sciences
and education, and then also broadens the traditional intern or
apprenticeship space in construction, hospitality and
healthcare. By the end of the current school year, Maryland is
on track to nearly double the number of students in youth
apprenticeship programs, with estimated counts exceeding 1,000
students by the end of the school year.
Both large government agencies like the National Security
Agency and NASA, are hiring Maryland youth apprentices
alongside small rural businesses like Westminster Automotive,
all who recognize the value add our programs and
apprenticeships bring to economic development within our State.
In Maryland, the landscape of youth apprenticeship is evolving
dynamically as well, shaped by the ambitious goals of the
Blueprint for Maryland's Future, and innovative approaches of
programs like Apprenticeship Maryland, and school to
apprenticeship initiatives.
The Blueprint's goals underline the state's commitment to
creating pathways that lead to good jobs, and Apprenticeship
Maryland is a significant component of the effort, offering a
framework that integrates academic and practical learning
through on-the-job experiences.
Following a similar route to approval as registered
apprenticeships, Apprenticeship Maryland opportunities must be
paid, aligned with the student's career pathway, must include
concurrent and ongoing related instruction, and must be
approved by The American Apprenticeship Training Council.
Regardless of the specific model of apprenticeship that's
developed and implemented, several quality assurance elements
must be in place. First, collaboration among industry partners,
educational institutions and government agencies. Two, a review
board to formally approve the apprenticeship.
Three, continuous evaluation of the apprenticeship program
and individual experiences. In closing, I want to thank each of
you for the commitment to develop meaningful national policy
that strengthens CTE education, industry recognized
credentials, and apprenticeship programs for the youth of our
country. Our work in Maryland is both exciting and critical, as
we collectively work to prepare all students for success in the
skills-based economy. Thank you.
[The Statement of Mr. Kincaid follows.]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Richard Kincaid, thank you so much. Right on
time, my friend, well done, and you have got a much healthier,
or lengthier testimony printed, and so thank you for
summarizing it and bringing it in. Mr. Brandon Mabile, thank
you, is coming in from Texas, and you all get snow in Texas, so
you are no stranger to what is on the ground up here, but we
are glad to have you here. You are recognized, welcome.

STATEMENT OF MR. BRANDON MABILE, STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENT MANAGER,
PERFORMANCE CONTRACTORS, INC., SUGARLAND, TEXAS

Mr. Mabile. Chairman Bean, Ranking Member Bonamici, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to
testify this morning, and for the opportunity to discuss the
construction workforce and policies to expand critical career
pathways for high school students across the country.
My name is Brandon Mabile, and I am the Strategic
Development Manager for Performance Contractors, headquartered
in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and a member of Associated Builders
and Contractors, better known as ABC.
Today I am testifying on behalf of ABC, a national
construction trade association with 68 chapters, representing
more than 22,000 members. One of the key issues facing
Performance and contractors throughout the construction
industry is the severe workforce shortage that threatens our
ability to thrive and build critical construction projects on
time and on budget.
To ensure the success of our business and the industry as a
whole, Performance knows that we must locate, encourage and
educate a new generation of skilled American workers, and
ensure these hardworking and determined individuals are able to
participate in the American workforce, and make a living right
out of high school, if they so choose, at a time when they are
most needed.
Part of my role at Performance Contractors has been working
with high schools and school districts to provide students with
important exposure to the rewarding careers available through
the skilled trades. While still facing outdated and inaccurate
stigmas, a job in the skilled trades is vital work that
requires a high skill level, intense focus, and a healthy work
ethic.
In the construction industry, highly skilled craft
professionals are also able to obtain high-paying, high-demand
jobs that are necessary in most every community throughout the
country. We work to ensure that students are aware of the
opportunities available to them, and the worthwhile skills
education that Performance Contractors can provide them if they
choose to take this career pathway.
To provide these services to our high schools, Performance
Contractors has joined with contractors and construction users
throughout the country, but particularly in the greater Houston
area to support and fund the Construction and Maintenance
Education Foundation, a 501(c)(3) education foundation. CMEF
provides education to current and aspiring craft workers, both
at its own facility, and through partnerships with local area
high schools and community colleges.
CMEF sponsors 62 area high schools, giving them access to
the National Center for Construction Education and Research
Curriculum. Additionally, CMEF connects high schools with
contractor sponsors who provide personal protective equipment,
construction materials, guest speakers and mentors to the high
school programs, providing vital resources and important
contacts and guidance to the students interested in the skills
trades.
CMEF has a current operating budget of $270,000 a year for
its high school program, which has allowed us to serve our
students. We are always looking for new partnerships and roads
to let students, teachers and parents know about these
important opportunities, and successful careers the skilled
trades can provide.
As a member of ABC, along with its 68 chapters, and its
22,000 plus members, we continue to do our part to educate,
craft, and management professionals using innovative and
flexible learning models to build a safe, skilled, and
productive workforce.
A 2023 survey of ABC members indicated that 79 percent of
ABC contractors have targeted outreach to high school students,
high school graduates, and individuals with GED diplomas, and
65 percent have targeted programs to community college students
and graduates.
ABC members partner with and offer internships for college,
university and high school students, 74 percent and 62 percent
respectively. 84 percent of ABC contractors offer paid
internships to college universities and high school students.
The construction industry must attract more than half a million
additional workers on top of our normal pace of hiring in order
to meet the demand for labor, according to a 2023 model
developed by ABC.
With nearly one in four construction workers over the age
of 55, retirements continue to whittle away at our construction
workforce. Simply put, our industry cannot afford to miss this
opportunity to expand critical career pathways for the future
of construction workers across the country.
I look forward to discussing this important issue with the
Committee today, and hopefully provide insight into the
successful programs we have offered, and the lives we have
enriched through our high school programs. Thank you.
[The Statement of Mr. Mabile follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Mr. Mabile, thank you very much. It is now
the members turn to question our all-star panel. Put the clock
on me as I will start the questioning. Bonamici is on deck. Mr.
Corwin, thank you for coming forward, and your credentials are
on the front lines of recruiting and putting up programs.
We talked a little bit, and it is in your statement that we
are only spending 3 percent of school district's generally
across America are focused on these types of vocational
programs. Where did we go wrong? Why is that such an imbalance,
and why is it so important to partner with industry to make
things happen?
Mr. Corwin. Thank you, Chairman Bean. Especially for your
leadership on this critical issue. I think we reference in our
written testimony, recent research on the college for all
mentality, and its connection to funding of CTE historically,
and kind of the history of vocational education, which we know
is fraught with--complicated it--has a complicated history.
You know, I think the current moment that we're in right
now, and from this, you know, esteemed panel, we know that
there is great public support for CTE and skilled trades
education. We also know that the students that participate have
great success, both completing high school, and also attending
college.
I think when I consider priorities in terms of budgets and
you look at that 3 percent figure, budgets are aligned with
values, and that is a question that we really have to ask
ourselves. It is unfortunately that you look at the 3 percent
figure, and it would equate that our school systems and our
educational leaders who are hard at work every day are not
providing the same value to students who participate in skilled
trades and CTE.
Chairman Bean. We do have work to do, and that is why Ms.
Bonamici brought up that we cannot afford everything, but the
partnering with industry, it is truly a big deal. Ms. Mosley,
thank you so much for the hospitality. A few months ago, we
spent a better part of the day together touring Clay County
schools.
I have been blown away by how many programs from vet tech
programs to paralegal, to we were building tiny houses, we were
rebuilding engines of all the different classes today, and your
success is truly amazing. I want to elevate what you have been
doing.
We had a conversation about how early is too early. You
have a program of exposing 7th graders. Talk about that.
Ms. Mosley. In Clay County we have our 7th and 8th grade
students who are in junior high schools, and we offer
exploratory CTE courses that are semester long courses that
students can take as their electives, in addition to their
academic courses. They can choose up to four of those by the
time that they are in 7th and 8th grade.
Those courses expose them to different careers, and they
also expose them to the opportunities that are at each high
school, and so we make sure that the courses that are offered
at feeder junior high schools are the same ones that are
offered at the high schools. We make sure that those students
are able to go to the high schools and visit those programs,
and we also share with them when they are in 8th grade, we have
freshman expos that the parents can come to the high schools,
and they can see all of the different programs at the high
schools.
As well as we have business partners and our postsecondary
partners as well, so that the families can see the entire
pipeline from junior high school through high school, and then
career opportunities for them, and postsecondary opportunities
for them as well.
Chairman Bean. Very good. I think that introduction is
helping breakdown the stigma that there are so many options,
and your story about one of your former students building the
hospital is truly a big deal. The stigma is something that ABC
has been worried about.
We talked a little about this, Brandon, earlier, and you
say it is a real problem. Talk about, are we breaking down the
stigma? Are we making progress?
Mr. Mabile. We are trying, and part of the reason I am here
today is hopefully to further breakdown that stigma. Everybody
thinks construction is dirty. It is hot, or it is cold, it is
unsafe. One of the things we are doing with ABC is our STEP
safety management program, and STEP, platinum and diamond,
which are the highest levels of STEP participants are actually
now 800 percent safer than the construction industry average,
and so bringing those safety numbers down, making it you know,
using technology to introduce students to new ways of doing the
construction work is very important to break those stigmas.
Even things as simple as providing new B roll to local news
stations, because when they talk about construction, they tend
to use outdated workers doing unsafe things that are really no
longer acceptable. Things as simple as that are steps that we
are taking as an organization to reduce that stigma, and really
trying to get in front of the guidance counselors, the parents,
and the students to talk about the rewarding careers in the
industry.
Chairman Bean. 10-4. I think what will break that stigma
too is money. There is big money in these jobs, including--I
just met with a dealership that repairs trucks, and kids, young
people, can make big money, $80,000.00 to $100,000.00,
$120,000.00 repairing trucks, if they will just invest a few
years there. Thank you all for kicking things off.
I now will recognize Mr. Norcross from New Jersey, who is
recognized for a series of questions or thoughts.
Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman, and certainly to you and
the Ranking member for this hearing, preparing students for
success. I started my apprenticeship in 1979, and it does not
happen very often that you go from the constructionsite to
Congress, so this is near and dear to me, and certainly, more
importantly than that, it is to our Nation, and what we need to
do.
The one thing that comes to mind typically when we look
about the next generation of worker, I call it the big three.
First and foremost, is the interest of the student, whether it
is 7th grade or earlier. How do we know what is available to
you? The second one is information on what is available,
whether it is construction, machinist, auto mechanic, the list
goes on and on.
The third, and probably in many ways, the most significant
is the educational stigma that goes along with this. The idea
that college for all, or the only way to make it in America is
through college. You know that stigma is incredibly difficult,
and quite frankly, there are three areas that I guess
contribute to this, it is so often teachers, counselors who
tend to push people into the college mode because that is the
way we do it.
It is also society, and what we value. What we do here in
the United States is very different than the German model, the
model that we have in Switzerland. I just was on my way down to
christen a ship in Key West. I was sitting next to the young
lady who started a conversation, and she was a teacher. Talking
about her children, and somehow, we started talking about what
they are going to do.
She told me the story, you know, her one son is going to
college and the second one, he is not sure what he wants to do.
She said to me, we have to give our children permission to look
at what they consider non-traditional areas. Like going to a
vo-tech school was for losers.
Mr. Kincaid, how do we start to address those three big
issues? First off, let students know that there is something
else out there, get them the right information, and most
importantly, how do we address mom and dad, who think the only
way is through college?
Mr. Kincaid. I appreciate your question, and I think this
is something that we need to highlight nationally. Those three
areas that you talked about, you know, the student and
information to parents, and then also the sort of national
stigma, all sort of go hand in hand.
We did not enter this world of college as the only option
overnight. It was an investment in that particular strategy,
widespread on a national scale, and it was also you know, an
incredible marketing campaign, right? To really shift us and
our mindset into that direction. I think it would be wise for
us, as a community of career and technical education
professionals, to model that very similar strategy.
Where are we investing our dollars, and is it enough to
make sure that we are creating the workforce that we need, and
that our students and families deserve, and also at the same
time, are we being incredibly clear and leading on the
messaging that we are providing to all of the stakeholders,
families, communities across the country?
From the student and the parent perspective, this is where
schools and State agencies like the one that I work for, can do
a better job. We need to be communicating the benefits of
career and technical education, and talk about the value that
apprenticeship can bring as a pathway to a job. Unfortunately,
a number of companies have started to lead this effort when it
really should have been a partnership to lead the effort of
communicating that not every job requires a 4-year degree.
Most jobs you can learn and earn through an apprenticeship
model, and so it is on us to communicate that information as
early as middle school, and perhaps even earlier in upper
elementary school, so that students can begin seeing what they
can become in the world of work. Career counselors is something
in the State of Maryland that we have doubled down on to help
make this connection and this communication to those families.
Mr. Norcross. I certainly appreciate that. Our Department
of Defense is literally spending tens of millions of dollars to
attract and educate that next generation of ship building, so
the idea that those, instead of college, now it is those and
college, whichever way you want to go, but give them your
permission, the idea that it is not worth it.
I have three kids. A doctor, a lawyer, and an electrician.
Only one of them has his house paid for and has a retirement
fund that we all would be proud of. Anybody want to guess which
one that is? It is the electrician. With that, I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Mr. Norcross. Up next
is going to be McClain from Michigan, she will be followed by
Ms. Bonamici. From the great State of Michigan, Representative
McClain, you are recognized.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Chairman Bean, always a pleasure
to serve on your Committee, and thank you all for being here
today. I think it is a critical topic for the Nation, for our
children, for everyone, so I really appreciate you being here.
Mr. Mabile, I have seen firsthand the work conducted by
Associated Builders and Contractors when I visited Florida.
Your east coast chapter. The concerning part, I think for me,
when I spoke with some of your educators and whatnot, and
apprentices there, the average age was about 28, which is not
necessarily bad, but if we could get that average age down, and
we could begin to incentivize earlier, I think that would help.
If Congress incentivized middle school, high school, to
create skilled trades programs, so to speak, for students, do
you think that would obviously have a positive effect on our
workforce in the future? I would like you to talk about if so,
the criticalness and importance of incentivizing to these high
school and middle schools and how we do that.
Mr. Mabile. Yes, I think it would have a huge effect, and
thank you, Congresswoman McClain. You really cannot underState
how important it is, and some of the most impactful programs we
have are things like we just did a middle school girls
construction camp, where they got to come in and actually put
their hands on some tools and introduce those things.
Like I said in my opening statement, we need to hire a half
million more construction workers a year on top of our
replacement rate, and so every available worker is important to
us. Giving those opportunities to high schools students, and to
middle school students can only help.
I can tell you in the State of Texas where before Senate
Bill 5 was passed in 2012, high school students would not get
graduating credit for vocational training. We only had three
high schools that would work with us in the greater Houston
area. Once Senate Bill 5 was passed in 2012, we now have 62
high schools and a waiting list because we are simply out of
people and resources to provide services to more high schools.
When you incentivize it, when you build it they will come.
The CTE directors are changing course on this, and they really
want our input and our help.
Mrs. McClain. What are the obstacles and hurdles that are
not allowing incentives? What do you see that we can have an
impact on to remove those obstacles and hurdles? One, what are
they, and two, how do we fix them?
Mr. Mabile. The biggest obstacle for a high school, or a
school district is going to be financial. It is expensive to
start a training program, and that is why we provide so much in
the way of materials and personal protective equipment, and
construction equipment, because it is very expensive to start
this type of program, and so I think that is where the most
impactful incentives would be for high schools to really get
into CTE and craft education.
Mrs. McClain. Okay. Can education providers be nimble and
responsive like business and industry, right? I come from the
business background. We have to be able to change on a dime.
Let us just look at what happened during COVID. We had to adapt
and adjust, and we had to do it rather rapidly. Do you believe
that they can do the same thing, and especially collaborative
with companies and trade schools?
Mr. Mabile. Some of them absolutely can, and we see it time
and time again. We have some great school districts in the
Houston area that work with industry, and that are very quick
to respond to changes in the industry, changes in technology,
and they want our feedback. They want to hear what is going on
because they want to graduate students that we can hire, and so
I think they absolutely can.
Mrs. McClain. In your opinion you believe that schools and
educators can adapt quickly, right?
Mr. Mabile. Yes. Yes, ma'am. Absolutely.
Mrs. McClain. Ms. Mosley, first to develop programs that
leave high school students with credentials to enter trades
have proven to be efficient getting, and effective, getting
students into lifelong careers, right? We have talked about
that, but there is a supply, there is a demand, there is a
need, right?
How have you developed the CTE pipeline in your schools to
get students with marketable credentials into registered
apprenticeship programs?
Ms. Mosley. In the Clay County School District, we actually
have----
Mrs. McClain. I am sorry, I cannot----
Ms. Mosley. In the Clay County School District, we have two
different pre-apprenticeship programs with the Northeast Board
of Builders Association and the Electrical Training Alliance
JATC. Those students take part of that, and then they are able
to get preferential entry into the registered apprenticeship
program, and they are actually those business partners work
very closely with our schools, and so that is one of the things
that we are doing is to participate in the pre-apprenticeship
program, and we have also received grants from the State
through the Pathways to a Career Opportunity.
Mrs. McClain. The business education partnership has
worked?
Ms. Mosley. Absolutely.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Up next will be our
Ranking Member Bonamici, followed by Mr. Thompson. Our Ranking
Member from Oregon, Ms. Bonamici, you are recognized.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses. I am glad you are back, Mr. Thompson. Mr. Thompson
and I co-chair the CTE caucus, and certainly understand the
value of preparing students today for the industries of
tomorrow. CTE programs offer a strong bridge between the
classroom and good paying in demand careers, and I mentioned in
my opening statement, and I know Mr. Corwin did as well, that
they also help students stay in school.
My home State of Oregon is a leader in making CTE programs
accessible, in fact we have very high rates of students
participating. CTE is in nearly every one of our high schools
and is in every single one of our community colleges. I will
give you a couple of examples that I am proud of.
In St. Helen's, St. Helen's High School, which is in rural
Columbia County, Oregon. They have seven different programs,
including early childhood education, culinary arts, auto
repairs, people from town bring their cars to this high school
to get fixed. They also have a manufacturing class, which is
great because they are very close geographically to the Oregon
Manufacturing Innovation Center, which has research and
development as well as advanced and additive manufacturing.
Talk about exposure. This year Ulmick had 700 high school
students from the region come through on Manufacturing Day to
see what manufacturing really looks like. Then over on the
Oregon coast, the Warrenton High School, I have spoken with
educators and students there about CTE. They are really excited
because they have classes in fisheries, in fish hatchery
management.
They appreciate the Perkins funding to help with equipment.
Then in Hillsboro, Oregon, this is exciting because they have
the first in the State registered youth apprenticeship program,
where students earn and learn advanced manufacturing in
partnership with the city of Hillsboro, and the semiconductor
industry.
We are doing some really great things. We just need to
expand those opportunities. Mr. Kincaid, in your testimony you
mentioned the Blueprint for Maryland's Future, and the five
pillars of that program. The third pillar, college and career
readiness, aims to prepare all students for both college and
the workplace.
How does Maryland use CTE programming to meet these goals,
and why is CTE a useful approach to preparing students, not
only for a job out of high school, but also for college?
Mr. Kincaid. Yes. I appreciate that question, and it is
something that I think Maryland, in particular, but a number of
states nationally really grapple with to make sure that all
students have access to CTE for all of the benefits that we
have been talking about already today.
Within the State of Maryland, the Blueprint becomes a
critical sort of north star for us because we recognize that
every student deserves an opportunity to move into the world of
work and have a good job. It is our job as educators, to make
sure that we have provided them with every opportunity and
knowledge of every pathway in order to get there.
One of the unique things about the Blueprint is it removes
sort of this notion that CTE and apprenticeship is locked into
some of the more traditional fields that have already been
mentioned this morning. Things collectively known as the
trades, right?
When we think about apprenticeship and CTE, oftentimes it
is the trades that are sort of elevated within that field, and
Maryland is really taking a different approach to that in
making apprenticeships available in many of the non-traditional
areas that I spoke about in my testimony.
We want to make sure that students, regardless of what
field they want to go into know how to get to that field
through a number of different pathways available to them.
Ms. Bonamici. Okay. I do not want to cut you off, Mr.
Kincaid, but I have another question, and the clock is ticking.
Mr. Kincaid. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Bonamici. We know this is a popular topic, for most
members, regardless of their party support CTE programming,
especially for high school students, but despite that support
we have seen Federal funding through the Perkins Act decline
over the past four decades.
I had mentioned earlier some of the equipment is very
expensive, and you know, some of us who came from State
legislatures or local government, or school boards know there
is often not extra funding in the school district budget for
this kind of equipment. It really makes a difference. In 1980,
for example, funding for CTE was at 2.6 billion after adjusting
for inflation in 2021 dollars.
Today it is 1.3 billion. Right? About a half of what it
once was, even though the number of students in secondary
schools has increased. What would it mean to have additional
Perkins funding, and what would Maryland do if an increase of
funding in CTE through the Perkins program?
Mr. Kincaid. Yes. I am really glad that you highlighted
that statistic going all the way back to 1980 because we have
seen a dramatic reduction in funding for these programs, even
as interest in enrollment into these programs has increased in
particular over the last couple of years.
What this requires states to do like Maryland, and larger
states like my home State of Texas, is to use State money to
backfill, to create these level of experiences that are
expected not only as our families, but also for our business
partners and our economy in general.
Using Perkins as a lever to reinvest additional funding
into these programs would be a game changer for places like
Maryland that rely not only on Federal funds to move this
agenda forward, but also to make sure that we are well aligned
with business and industry.
Ms. Bonamici. It is a tremendous investment, but my time
has expired, so I am going to have to yield back. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Bean. It is a great question. Thank you, Ms.
Bonamici. Our lineup is Thompson then Hayes. Let us go to the
great State of Pennsylvania, Chair Thompson, you are
recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Chairman, thanks so much. Thanks for calling
this hearing today. As Co-Chair of the bipartisan congressional
Career and Technical Education Caucus, alongside Ranking Member
Bonamici, I have seen firsthand how Federal CTE programs
successfully help jobseekers find the next wrung on the ladder
of opportunity, from agriculture to the arts, and that is why I
spell STEAM, S-T-E-A-A-M. I throw agriculture in there.
From marketing to manufacturing, CTE programs work to
develop America's most valuable resource, its people. With more
than 12 million students currently enrolled in CTE programs
across the country, the nearly 9 million vacant jobs, we must
continue to strengthen Federal investments, CTE programs, to
connect educators with industry stakeholders.
Ms. Mosley, thank you very much for being here today, and
for all the work you do ensuring the success of CTE programs in
Clay County. In your testimony I could not help but notice as
the Chair of the House Agriculture Committee, that you offer
CTE programs in agriculture.
I have seen many of these CTE based agriculture programs
succeed throughout the country, including in my district. Can
you talk a little more about these programs that you oversee,
and what more can we be doing from a CTE perspective to inspire
the next generation of American agriculturalists.
Ms. Mosley. Thank you for your questions, Representative
Thompson, and I am sitting here actually with an agriculture
education FFA portfolio because agriculture is my background, I
actually my family, I am raising my daughter on our sixth-
generation family farm. I was an agriculture teacher before I
came to the county office.
In our--whenever I first started teaching agriculture in
Clay County, there was only three of us. Now we have 11
agriculture programs across the county, and we have them in
places like Oakleaf High School, where we teach agriculture
biotechnology, and we also teach agribusiness management and
leadership.
That high school is actually a suburban high school, and
whenever we built that high school, the director at the time
people questioned him like you are going to be an agriculture
program in a suburban area, and he said absolutely. Every
student needs to have the opportunity to explore an industry
that meets the most basic needs of our people of food, clothing
and shelter.
Whenever I was at Oakleaf High School, I actually had the
opportunity to serve on a committee for selecting their FFA
officers last year, and over and over in there whenever I would
ask him what has FFA, and agriculture education meant to you,
they would talk about I had no idea all the different careers
that were out there.
Through field trips, and their work with their CTSO, FFA.
It has exposed them to all kinds of different careers. They
also talked about how they found a home in their FFA chapter,
in their agriculture program because Oakleaf High School is a
very big school, and many of them were 9th and 10th grade
students who like didn't have their place in high school, but
once they joined that agriculture program, they were very,
very--they found a place, and they were excited to be there.
We are also very fortunate in Clay County to have a lot of
support from our agriculture organizations, like our country
fair, our Farm Bureau. In fact, our county fair has a livestock
auction where the students can take their supervised
agriculture experiences there to the auction, and they generate
over a half a million dollars through our livestock auction,
through our country fair, that students are able to use for
their future education.
Those are just a few ways in Clay County that we have
supported agriculture education
Mr. Thompson. Very good. Well, thank you very much. Those
youth livestock auctions are--I buy a lot of critters to
support those kids, that is really important. I always like to
say that one of the reasons CTE programs are so successful is
because students complete them with a certificate or diploma in
one hand, and multiple job offers in the other.
The only way to make that a reality, however, is by
ensuring that those who sign the front of a paycheck, local
employers and businesses are involved in these programs. Ms.
Mosley, if local business want to get involved with CTE
programs to address their workforce needs, what steps should
they take to establish a connection?
Ms. Mosley. They should reach out to their local CTE
leadership, and or their high schools, and they should get
involved in advisory boards. We have 14 different advisory
boards, and their job is to advise, assist and advocate for
CTE, and that is really the foundation of business partnerships
for Clay County.
Through those advisory boards we talked about the trends
and issues that they are seeing in their industry, and how we
can address them in the school district, and through our
teachers. Part of that advisory board also has postsecondary.
It also has those teachers, and so they should become part
of an advisory board because they help direct that work of mock
job interviews, guest speakers, field trips and a lot of those
work-based learning opportunities that we are able to provide.
Mr. Thompson. Well thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, my
time is about to expire.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Well done. Well done.
Our lineup will be Hayes, then Miller. Let us go to
Connecticut, where Representative Hayes is recognized for
questions. Good morning.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you, and thank you to our witnesses for
being here today. I would first like to say congratulations to
Ms. Mosley on being Florida New Teacher of the Year for CTE. It
is kind of a big deal, and also you have no idea what you just
did for the Chairman's heart by speaking to Ag. I brought him
to my district to visit our Vo-Ag school, and I have been
pushing for those same things, so thank you so much for
articulating that so beautifully.
I am pleased to be here with all of you today discussing
how this Committee can expand access to career and technical
education. I am a teacher by profession, and I am the biggest
champion for CTE training for allowing students multiple
pathways to achieve the American dream because 15 years in the
classroom talking to thousands of students, I know that college
is not for everyone.
Last Congress, we passed the bipartisan Infrastructure
Investments and Jobs Act, and the Inflation Reduction Act,
which together are expected to add millions of new
infrastructure, clean energy and manufacturing jobs.
These high wage, high skilled jobs will require a robust
pipeline of talented workers graduating from our high schools,
so it is imperative that we make the investments and do this
work.
Mr. Kincaid, we have heard a lot about CTE staffing
shortages, and the most common concern we hear is that
qualified experienced technical instructors have a high
turnover rate because of the salaries and competing with the
private sector. I can also tell you from my personal experience
it was always very difficult to bring in experienced business
partners to teach in the classrooms because we had the barriers
with certification and credentialing them to be in a classroom.
We cannot just have people standing in front of students
who have read about these things, we need some people with real
world experience who have led factories, who have led
automotive shops, who have actually worked in the business
world to really teach students what to expect when they enter
these professions.
Can you address what you have learned about how to address
those staffing shortages, and just the barriers to
credentialing certified professionals to stand in front of
students?
Mr. Kincaid. Yes. Thank you for the question. It is no
secret there is a national shortage, particularly within CTE of
high qualified teachers. What it is going to require us to do
is to think differently about how we staff classrooms,
particularly in skilled areas like CTE.
Leaning into my past experience in the District of Columbia
competing with a hospital trying to hire a nurse to teach in
the nursing program is problematic. We will never be able to
meet the salary requirements, but that skill that that
particular person would bring to the table, students would
benefit from immensely.
We had to create a partnership with Trinity Washington
University at the area technical center that was recently
opened in D.C. where teachers in front of high school students
come from the university, the postsecondary space. That
partnership has generated numerous benefits, not only for you
know, D.C. and the students, but also in honing that faculty's
sort of, you know, grooming the future.
States have to begin looking at valuing work experience of
people coming from industry, and figuring out different ways
and pathways to certification so that these highly experienced
folks can be in our classrooms.
In the meantime, it is teachers and administrators reaching
out to those in industry and making sure that they are involved
in the classroom, making sure that they are integrated very
intentionally into the work that we are doing, within the CTE
space.
Mrs. Hayes. That is actually a terrific model because
students would benefit from someone who has one foot in the
classroom and one foot in the field who is continually updating
their skillset, and seeing the challenges that are facing the
world today.
I heard the Chairman mention Microsoft Word, and computer
programming. I can tell you that at my high school generally
the students knew more about programming than any of the
teachers who were teaching those classes because they were
literally in real time experiencing it.
Finally, you talked about some barriers for underserved
students who access pathways. In the last 30 seconds, can you
tell us how you have addressed helping minorities, girls,
students from communities that would historically be
underserved.
Mr. Kincaid. Absolutely, in the CTE space we have looked
almost ad nauseum at gender and race gaps, and we are guiding
students into pathways. I would say that as we think about
apprenticeships and retooling students for the skills-based
future, things like transportation and economics become the
equity issues that we are going to have to solve next.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you, thank you so much. Lunch is another
one, I appreciate your testimony. I yield back
Chairman Bean. Thank you, and for the record Ms. Hayes was
recognized as the 2016 National Teacher of the Year, how about
that? Our lineup will be Miller, DeSaulnier, and then Foxx. Let
us go to the State of Illinois where Representative Miller is
recognized for questions.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Chairman. Mr. Mabile, you mentioned
in your testimony that Associated Building and Contractors
chapters offer more than 800 work-based learning programs
across the country. Could you say more about how employers
support CTE students seeking to move from high school into
careers, in the skilled trades with the skills and education
they need to build thriving careers.
Mr. Mabile. Yes, So some of the things that we are doing is
providing mentorship, both to the instructors, and to the
students, and showing them pathways, helping them to develop
the soft skills that they need to get into a career in the
industry. We do things like construction boot camps that are
really focused on getting to work on time and learning the
things that you are going to need to know on day one.
One of the funnest things we are doing now are national
signing days whereas these high school students are graduating.
We have a bunch of contractors come up, and we put the hats on
the table, and they get to put the hat on and say I am going to
performance contractors, or I am going to wherever.
Just showing them the path, and then also teaching them
about the path from once they get in to the many different
career paths that exist for an entry level construction worker,
depending on where they choose to pursue further education.
Mrs. Miller. I love that. Ms. Mosley, could you tell us
more about how schools in Clay County establish businesses that
give students hands on experience, which align with career and
technical education programs?
Ms. Mosley. In Clay County we have several school-based
enterprises. For example, in our early childhood education
programs, for students who want to become teachers. We have
childcare centers where there are actually preschools on
campus, and our CTE teachers teach our high school students how
to work with those students. We also, for example, have Five
Star Credit Union and Garber Auto Mall, that they have
businesses there in our school.
We actually have four Five Star Credit Unions that have
branches inside of our schools that students as part of the
business program could apply to be interns, and then they can
work in that on school credit union branch. Garber Auto Mall
came to us a couple of years ago, and they said we have a need
for technicians, and the age of our employee, they are going to
retire, and we have this need, and so they said but we need
them to have manufacture specific certifications.
We explained to them that the industry certifications that
we offer our students have to come off the Florida Department
of Education CAPE funding list. They said well, what if we send
somebody after school to work with the students on those
manufacture specific certifications, so we have students that
applied to that, and they work there after school with Garber
Auto Mall employees.
Here, when we talk about barriers for students, they also
take them to Garber, and there were some students, so they will
work a couple days a week at the school, and then a couple days
at Garber, but that they found that there was some students
that did not have access there, so they actually we worked with
them to help shuttle them, they provided a Garber shuttle after
school, and the parents could pick them up from Garber.
We also have culinary programs that operate onsite
restaurants, and catering programs as well as our agriculture
program has a floral design business, and we have a lot of
business programs that have graphic designs that business
partners can give them projects, like hey, we need a new logo,
or something like that, as well as printing different
materials.
Those are just a few of the school-based enterprises that
we have in the Clay County School District.
Mrs. Miller. I commend you for the work you are doing,
thinking outside the box, and looking for solutions for
students and for our businesses to help fill the needs that
they have. Do you have early dismissal for students that want
to actually go work somewhere?
Ms. Mosley. If students have like room in their schedule
where they can, then and they already have their credits, then
they can leave, and they can use of the internships like for
example, with Clay County Utility Authority they came to us and
they said we have an issue, again similar to Garber, where we
have an aging workforce, and we do not have water treatment
operators, wastewater treatment, a lot of our programs.
We actually have an internship program with them where they
can where the students apply to work at the utility, and they
are actually earning hours that they can get toward their
license for the water and wastewater treatment plant, and so a
lot of our students when they are seniors, they only have a
couple of credits left, and the school counselors and our
college and career coaches work closely with them to have those
classes at the beginning of the day, so then they could leave
and go work with their business partners, like Clay County
Utility Authority.
Mrs. Miller. That is fantastic. I love to hear how flexible
you are. Do you know if these opportunities are common in
schools across the rest of the State and country?
Ms. Mosley. I think they are very common in Florida for
sure. There is a lot of examples around the State of where
business partners have worked with a different school district
to provide internships in different work-based learning
opportunities.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Let us go to California
where Mr. DeSaulnier is recognized for thoughts or questions.
Mr. DeSaulnier.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You are always
welcome in California where the temperature is considerably
higher right now. Mr. Kincaid, I want to talk to you about your
youth apprenticeship programs. In California, historically
50's, 60's, when we had an aerospace industry, and a lot of
infrastructure for that, part of the culture in high school was
career tech.
We moved away from that like the rest of the country.
Somewhat I think because our UCs, CSUs, and community colleges
were so successful, but also because those degrees were the
knowledge-based economy. Now we find ourselves sort of we want
to do both. I was recently talking to my friends in the
California building trades, and my local building trades. They
told me a lot of their members are college graduates who are
actually going back.
I wanted you to talk to me a little bit about your youth
apprenticeship programs in Maryland. In my area that I
represent, it is the industrial area of Northern California.
You have got five oil refineries who are transitioning as we
want to move our energy sources. But one of we have been very
successful with the republican and democratic Governors, well
back when we had those, Governor Schwarzenegger in particular,
where we were opening academies.
In a lot of the lower income schools where the industrial
belt is, I found when I visited those that the whole school
knew about these 25 kids who were getting apprenticeship
standards, or where companies like Chevron was working with the
building trades.
Can you speak to your experience about the value of people
who are young and trying to decide what kind of careers to be
in, but also in disadvantaged communities where it is more of a
challenge?
Mr. Kincaid. Yes. In Maryland, we really launched headfirst
into youth apprenticeships, really around 2016, with the launch
of Apprenticeship Maryland, and the focus was the youth
apprenticeship model. I feel like we are making great progress
in making sure that students know that this is a pathway
available to them.
I mentioned in my testimony earlier in the year with about
1,000 students, which has nearly doubled what we had a year ago
at this point. With youth apprenticeship programs, one of the
things that we have been very particular about in Maryland is
we do not want it to be sort of an elevated internship, nor do
we want it to be a watered-down apprenticeship program.
It is sort of finding the balance between making sure it is
a valuable experience that industry also values because that is
where students are moving toward, right? Also giving students a
flexibility to still be high school kids. We hear a lot about
the German and Swiss models, and you know, we are modeled
differently in our education system.
While we still value sort of the same direction that those
other countries are heading toward, you know, we need to really
make sure that the apprenticeship programs that we develop help
kids get to the world of work, knowing that they are still
students.
I would speculate that moving forward in Maryland we put
some guardrails up. Youth apprenticeship typically ends at
graduation. We want to make sure that there is some commitment
with employers post-graduation, so that students have the
ability to continue on within that craft, within that, you
know, vocation post-graduation.
Really leading into what are some of the best
characteristics of a full registered apprenticeship, while
still valuing the fact that a lot of these kids are 16 and 17
years old.
Mr. DeSaulnier. An interesting part is when I was in the
legislature in California, and we had we went and talked to the
Germans and the Swiss, and one of the Germans said to me, you
know, it is funny you are asking us how we do this because we
copied you in many ways, post World War II.
It is interesting how these things change. In the energy
field it is important these young people get the training, but
the continuous training. Again, the German model where people
are going back to work, so somebody who is working in an oil
refinery gets a good paying job right now in California, but
they have got to be prepared to maybe move out, or at least the
next generation.
How do you get that flexibility? Dual enrollment also was a
question I wanted to ask you about where young people are
trying to decide in the dynamic that I mentioned where people
with bachelor's degrees are going back in the trade like work.
Being flexible, but also realizing this is continuous education
for this workforce.
Mr. Kincaid. High-quality, CTE programs integrate things
like an industry credential, and work-based learning
experience, like internship or apprenticeship and college
credit, right? In Maryland we lean into all of those things
with the Blueprint, and we want to make sure that students when
they graduate have the ability to move into any one of the
pathways, and they are well-equipped to do so, right?
I do, I would be remiss if I didn't mention that in order
for an apprenticeship, or any other sort of CTE program to
function effectively, there has to be a, you know, a
demolishing of silos right? Education and industry must work
hand in hand.
All of these players have to be at the table so that we can
make sure that education is responsive to the very quick needs
of industry, but also industry knows the importance of the
education that students are receiving, and that education is
being crafted in such a way that it is going to make a
successful student going into the world of work.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you, Mr. DeSaulnier. Our lineup is
Foxx then Owens, it is a pleasure always to welcome the big
Chair of Education and Workforce, face it she has got just a
tremendous education background herself. Dr. Foxx, you are
recognized.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you. I know you mean that metaphorically,
so thank you Mr. Chairman. I appreciate our witnesses being
here today, this is a topic that is always near and dear to my
heart. Mr. Corwin, you mentioned how high school skilled trades
education leads to better educational outcomes.
As schools continue to confront COVID related learning
loss, can you discuss how high-quality CTE programs can
reengage students in their learning, particularly for students
who may have fallen off track during the pandemic?
Mr. Corwin. Thank you for your question, Chair Foxx. I
think it is a really critical one. We have heard a little bit
about the educational outcomes that CTE students achieve, but
we have also heard that often times high school students----
Mrs. Foxx. Will you pull the mic closer to yourself?
Mr. Corwin. Certainly. We have also heard that high school
students often come to school for their CTE class because it is
engaging their relationship with their teacher, and it is hands
on, and that is what so many of our talented students want to
do. We have surfaced some research on the socio-emotional
benefits for skilled trades that you reference in terms of
COVID.
A recent study of high school students in Sonoma County, by
Youth Truth, found that students who participate in CTE classes
or work based-learning are full cortile more likely to report
being--taking pride in their school work, and also more than
twice as likely as those who do not take such classes, to say
that there is an adult at school that they can talk to when
feeling upset, stressed, or having problems.
As a program of a foundation, Harbor Freight Tools for
Schools, one of the things that we take pride in doing is
making small grants to teachers and especially during the time
of COVID, we were looking for ways to--we asked teachers how
can we help in terms of bringing kids back into the fold, and
making them feel like they are a meaningful part of their
coursework.
They came up with ideas to engage their students using
their skills and their talents in their communities. One
example was from Freedom, Wisconsin, where the students
actually refurbished a trailer for a veteran to have that as a
space where he could live.
That process of giving students and empowering them to
design programs, you know, our Gen Z population really want to
find meaning in their schoolwork, and that type of community
impact is really critical as well.
Mrs. Foxx. Yes. These are principles that I think we have
always known, but they do not always get applied. Ms. Mosley, I
have been fighting my whole career to breakdown stigmas
associated with skills education. Could you talk about how your
school district is integrating skills education into the
general high school curriculum, and promoting skills education
as a viable pathway?
Ms. Mosley. Thank you for your question, Chair Foxx. In
Clay County school districts, industry certifications are
incredibly important to the school's grade from the Florida
Department of Education, and they are a win/win/win for
everybody because it impacts the school's grade, it is great
credential for the students after they graduate high school,
and it brings back bonus money to the schools.
With those industry certifications, many of our schools
highlight students who have completed a career pathway, or they
have earned an industry certification at graduation with cords
that the students are so excited to wear. They are recognized
at senior awards. We even have one high school, Middleburg High
School, where they have the CTE student of the week, as well as
they have the scholar of the week, the citizen of the week, and
athlete of the week.
Career and technical education students are held in the
same regard as students in the other venues within the school.
We believe that that is one of the ways that it is held in the
high regard, and that we are promoting the pathways for those
students.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. Mabile, many skills
education programs offer students an opportunity to earn
industry recognized credentials, along with their high school
diploma. Can you discuss some of the credential's students are
able to earn through the National Center for Construction
Education and Research, and how this impacts their career
opportunities postgraduation.
Mr. Mabile. Yes, Dr. Foxx. The NCCR offers credentials for
most construction trades, and the beauty of the NCCR credential
is that it is portable, and that it is stackable. It is
recognized throughout the country, and it really helps a
student because the construction workforce is often transient.
They go from job to job, and from area to area.
But because of the NCCR, and the way the training is set
up, they could take a semester with my company. They could move
on to one of my competitors and take their second semester,
move on again and take their third semester, and really take
that credential anywhere through the country, so it really
opens up avenues for their future career growth, because it is
such a portable credential.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Dr. Foxx. Our final
presenter, unless somebody else sneaks in--is a friend, a
colleague, he is also the Chair of the Higher Education
Subcommittee. Mr. Owens from Utah, you are recognized.
Mr. Owens. Thank you, Mr. Chair. First of all, it is crazy
that sometimes Congress seems to be--this is one area it looks
like we are all on the same page. It has really been very
rewarding to hear how as a bipartisan process we are going to
address this. I thank you for what you are doing. It is such an
important piece to make sure our kids have a great future.
I have long been a supporter of educational choice and
freedom and allowing children or students to excel in fields of
study that are most in line with their interests. I am proud to
be a proponent of the career and technical education, and as
one of the multiple pathways of future success.
I have submitted for the record a document from the Western
Governor's Association that highlights the importance of CTE,
especially in the western states, and encourage Congress to
take action to strengthen the workforce through a robust
support of CTE. I have a unique background.
My dad was a college professor, and Ms. Mosley, he was
actually an educator in agriculture. He got his Ph.D. in Iowa
State, forty years. I know how exciting it is when you can
actually work with your hands and have the ability to move
forward and then have a career.
I do appreciate being in that environment. One of the
things that was talked about before is how did we get here,
where we have to have now try to change the way we consider
careers. We have spent decades of investments and marketing
that has been one way to make this all happen. Part of this is
what we are doing in the K through 12.
If we have counselors that are coming out and not teaching
these options, or counselors that without a school would not
allow these options to be even taught or discussed, it causes a
problem. I guess I want to start with you, Mr. Corwin. How do
we address that? We talked about schools being nimble because
of the supply and demand.
We all know that we have such a great sector of
opportunities of kids who are not being trained or taught. How
do we make sure that in K through 12, what are the incentives
that we might think of that we could have these counselors
begin to show that there are other options other than a 4-year
college?
Mr. Corwin. Thank you, Congressman Owens. It is a great
question. I think, you know, our role in this work has been to
shine a light on excellence. We have been honored to award 133
skill trades teachers with this prize for teaching excellence.
I think you were able to attend one of those celebrations in
Utah.
It is our hope that we can share the best practices that we
are seeing from these educators across the country. The
counselor role needs to be lifted up in terms of the importance
that they play in helping students to get to college and
connect with careers.
We have found that a dedicated counselor, or sometimes an
intermediary organization that can make those connections
between high school and work base learning opportunities is
critical to success. Those folks as well. The counselors need
to be recognized for the incredible work that they are doing.
They need to be lifted up. They need to be supported by non-
profits and other community organizations, and business needs
to be at the table.
We have really got to break down those barriers between K-
12, workforce development, and industry and higher ed.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. And Ms. Mosley, you actually
mentioned how early your program starts, and that's so
important. We talked about the dual enrollment program that's
becoming increasingly popular. How can we encourage more
schools and colleges to have that understanding of the dual
enrollment? Being able to, as young people come through high
school, have actual credit in a college they may go into later
on? How could we encourage that, and maybe what are some of the
challenges that you are seeing so far?
Ms. Mosley. Some of the challenges for us would be that the
transportation barrier. If the course cannot be taught on the
high school campus, there are going to be a lot of barriers for
some students that do not have transportation to actually get
to the college campus where they are taught.
The conversation needs to be between the postsecondary
institution and the high school is either to figure out the
transportation issue, or to similarly like he was saying with
the health science program, to have adjunct professors that are
able to come onto the high school campus, and to teach them
there, to break down that barrier for students.
Mr. Owens. Now is that something you would be able to do
with your--in your training facilities, in which some of my
colleagues have had a chance to see so far?
Ms. Mosley. Yes. I believe in many of our CTE programs
thanks to the funding that we have had from the Perkins Act
that we have a lot of great equipment and programs, and we
would be able to teach them. I think that we would probably
have to have additional funding to be able to upgrade some of
those programs.
Mr. Owens. I had questions for the other two. I really
appreciate what you guys are doing, seriously. This is probably
one of the more important conversations we can have as a nation
to make sure our kids can supply that workforce, give it the
supply we all need right now, so thanks so much. I appreciate
your efforts. I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you, Mr. Owens. Let us go to New York,
Mr. Williams, Brandon Williams you are recognized for thoughts
or questions.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Bean, thank
you for bringing this topic to the forefront. It is absolutely
critical in my district. Workforce development at all levels is
critical to the economic success of our area. We are very
fortunate to be anticipating the single largest CHIPS Act grant
for chip fabrication in the entire country, and we need the
workforce to get us there, and that involves everyone in our
district.
Have any of you are any of you familiar with the term
industry 4.0? Have you heard that term? The industrial
revolution that began 160 years ago or so, really was a
transformation of labor to a form of machines. The machines
performing labor, and that had this migration off the farms and
into the factories. We have all studied the industrial
revolution.
That continued into the 70's and 80's when computers and
automation really began to augment what humans could do, but it
also increased the sophistication of the machines that were
involved in every level of what we do. Today we are on the
verge and are entering, what is called the fourth industrial
revolution, which is digitally enabled technologies that
permeate things that are in the trades in construction and
manufacturing, and all the things that are involved in this
next generation workforce.
It is digital technologies, it is robotics, it is
artificial intelligence, all of these things are actually
allowing what historically we think of as blue-collar jobs to
be able to add much greater value in their labor, and therefore
command much higher wages.
In many ways it is not exactly true, but it is almost like
inverting the pyramid of what we grew up with that the
traditional education path puts you on an increasing pyramid to
have and be able to command a higher and higher premium for
your labor. Today because of the fourth industrial revolution,
that pyramid is inverted that in order to install, maintain an
HVAC system requires a tremendous amount of technical knowledge
and skills to operate a refinery.
We are in the process of increasing the technology, the
compute technology in our refineries and chemical plants by
1,000 fold. Not 1,000 percent, 1,000 fold so that we are
actually running artificial intelligence in the control loops
or the production systems in our economy.
What does that mean for what you do? Is that you are
preparing an extraordinarily important and talented group of
workers that will and are going to be well paid, that are
entirely out of line with the education system that we have
grown up with. I am very excited about it, and have been
involved in that, and you are a critical part, and critical to
our district.
One question I would like to address, it is not a got you
question, it is a genuine question. We are fortunate to have
great STEM education in my district. I like drawing attention
to Dr. DeSiato who was the New York State Superintendent of the
Year for the entire State, and she runs an excellent K through
12 system, the Minoa East Syracuse System, and does a great job
with STEM.
Is STEM competing with CTE? Are these mutually exclusive?
Are they complimentary? How can we make these two important
initiatives work together to achieve a desired outcome? Can
anybody help me out with that? Mr. Kincaid, we are going to go
to you, sir.
Mr. Kincaid. Great. Thank you. The hard question, right AI?
My grandma thinks the machines are taking over, so you know,
there is certainly a shift in how we are educating students in
the future. In order to get students to where they need to be
in the workforce, it requires educators to work very directly
with these emerging industries like what you are talking about.
This is not your grandma's Oldsmobile anymore, right? We
have to be nimble. We have to be connected to the industry and
the emerging technologies, and more importantly, the folks that
are leading this innovation with an industry need to be highly
responsive and involved in schools so that we are making sure
that we are teaching the right components.
I would also that--this highlights the need for teacher
externships as well, making sure that those folks that are in
our classrooms understand how the technologies is changing,
even within that workforce, so they can bring that knowledge
back to their students. It is going to require a much different
level of collaboration than what we have ever experienced, in
order to make sure that we are prepared and can drive this
economy in the direction that it needs to go.
Mr. Williams. That is a fantastic answer, and a really
solid and good connection. My time is expired. Thank you. I
yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you, Mr. Williams. Let us go to
California. The Sub Chairman of Workforce Protections has just
slipped in, and he is recognized for thoughts or questions, Mr.
Kiley of California.
Mr. Kiley. Well thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for convening this hearing on a really important topic, and
I think an underappreciated topic, and one that probably does
not get enough focus when it comes to public policy. I was
really struck, Mr. Corwin, by a statistic from your testimony
that spending on CTE makes up just 3 percent of the estimated
overall funding for high school and middle school education in
the United States.
Just 3 percent, and that is despite the manifold benefits
of career education in schools, just to sort of reiterate some
from your testimony, as well as some of our other witnesses,
you know. This is something that is overwhelmingly desired by
parents and by students.
You cite in your research that 80 percent of parents favor
greater offerings of career educations in schools. Frankly,
that sounds low to me. I do not think I have ever talked to a
parent who does not think it is a good idea to have more
opportunities for students to engage here.
From the perspective of academic achievement, there are so
many benefits to having career education offerings in our
schools. In fact, your research shows that when students engage
in career education, they are actually more likely to graduate,
and from high school they are more likely to enroll in
postsecondary education.
There are social emotional benefits. Their enthusiasm for
learning increases, their pride in their schoolwork increases.
I can affirm this from my own experience, having been a high
school teacher. I can tell you how much pride and excitement
students had for these sort of classes where they could really
do hands on work, and how that has sort of spilled over into
their broader coarse work.
It made them excited to come to school. It gave them hope
and a sense of purpose. Beyond that, the pathways that we are
creating here are to really good jobs that can pay well, that
young people can build a career around, and then more than that
it is filling critical workforce needs.
Mr. Corwin, in your research you cite one statistic that 88
percent of construction firms have trouble finding skilled
workers. There are over 73,000 openings for electricians every
single year. It just makes all the sense in the world to focus
more, to invest more in this area, yet still just 3 percent of
resources are being spent specifically on career education.
This is a question for Mr. Corwin, or for any of our other
witnesses as well. That you have cited a lot of very successful
programs which do exist all across the country, and we have
also discussed barriers such as a lack of trained teachers and
other resources. Can you kind of highlight some jurisdictions
that have managed to not just offer sort of isolated,
successful programs, but have been able to offer these
opportunities to students at scale?
What has it taken to sort of awaken the political will to
make the investments, and to take the steps that are necessary
to not just have a successful program here and there to make it
fundamentally part of the offerings available to all students
within those jurisdictions.
Mr. Corwin. Sure. I mean I think where we have seen the
greatest success, and students and schools flourish around CTE.
That has been where there has been the collaboration and the
partnership between K-12 and industry and workforce
development.
As we have talked about breaking down those barriers, I
mean one that comes to mind is in Colorado, in Denver. There is
a combination of comprehensive high schools that are doing
phenomenal CTE work, career technical centers, and industry is
at the table.
There is support by elected officials across the board, and
that is what our students deserve--that type of partnership
having their backs and providing these opportunities. I think
one of the reasons we were really excited to be included today
is part of our role is to raise attention to this issue with
other funders, and with industry, and with other sectors.
When our founder heard that CTE did not have much financial
support, there were not many other foundations supporting the
work, it really was not much of a power behind the work. He
said that is where I want to go. That is where I want to kind
of be a spark and see if we can be a model, and have other
folks follow, and just by today's discussion I am really
excited to hear that this is beginning to happen, so thank you.
Mr. Kiley. Well, thank you, and thanks very much for the
work that you are doing. I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. We are nearing the end
of our Committee. I am really proud of this, the members, we
had great conversation. We had great--we came together, I
think. I want to thank Ranking Member Bonamici. I am about to
yield to you, Ranking Member, for your final thoughts, but I
want to thank you personally.
I think we both illustrated that both sides of the aisle
can come together and elevate that we have work to do. We have
work to do to let everybody know there are choices out there,
that there is not a one pathway, or a one size fits all. Ms.
Bonamici, you have sold me on joining the CTE Caucus, which I
am looking forward to coming and being a part of that. What are
your final thoughts before we adjourn?
Ms. Bonamici. Well, we appreciate that, Mr. Chairman, and I
have often said as a senior member of this Committee that we
need to make sure everyone has a path, and not everyone is on
the same path. I think this is an important conversation. We
know that career and technical education is a way for students
to explore those career pathways, gain relevant and competitive
skills.
That hands-on learning that we talked about is so
important. I have to emphasize that CTE benefits students
regardless of what path they take. Whether they go into college
or a workforce program and directly into a career as we
mentioned, and I know Mr. Corwin has continued to mention, CTE
courses help keep students in school.
They increase graduation rates, but also they are
beneficial for students to learn those very, very, important
soft skills that I hear about, and I know you do as well when
we talk to employers. They are really helpful programs.
We discussed today how schools and administrators use
career and technical education and programs and courses to
expand work base learning, such as youth apprenticeship, the
dual enrollment courses, which is important, and that is to
help strengthen the support, but also leveraging industry
recognized credentials.
It is also important to emphasize that all students should
have access to CTE courses. They should have this opportunity
to explore careers and prepare for the next step after high
school graduation because we know that these courses, through a
career in technical education. Regardless, I know Mr. Williams
asked a question about AI and technology, and CTE competing
with STEM, which I say STEAM, or Mr. Thompson says with two
A's.
There are a lot of CTE programs that involve a lot of
technology and a lot of STEM or STEAM, and those are all
important, and important for students to have those choices.
When we see students in a culinary program, yes, they are
learning skills, but they are also learning science and
nutrition, and so there is just a lot of benefit, regardless of
what program it is.
I also, I want to emphasize that we need to make sure that
all of the students get this benefit, and students from all
backgrounds should have access to programs that prepare them
for life, for college, for a job, for a long-term sustainable
career. That is not going to happen if we do not do this
properly, if there is some outdated and, in some ways,
inequitable practices that continue to funnel some students
into more low wage jobs.
I hope we can turn the page on that chapter and recognize
that every student has tremendous potential and should have
those options. I remain committed to working together, Mr.
Chairman and Committee members on this to support CTE as a very
important part of well-rounded education. I hope that we can
update the funding as I mentioned, which over the past four
decades has decreased.
I certainly appreciate the foundations and the private
industry, and everyone else who is helping, but that Perkins
funding really makes a difference because we have a lot of
schools and a lot of districts across the country, and with the
value of this investment I hope this is something we can
accomplish to update that funding to today.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, thank you to our witnesses,
and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much Ranking Member, well
done, well said. I think we are definitely on the same team.
Thank you everybody that helped put the hearing together. I
want to give and recognize the Clay County School
Superintendent, David Brosky, who sent Kelly, and Kelly, thank
you for coming.
Superintendent Brosky is in Tallahassee today at Clay
County Day in the State of Florida. I want to wish your
daughter the best and thank your daughter for letting you come.
She is at an Ag competition in Clay County, so it is truly a
big deal. To all our panelists, I did something that I probably
should not have done. I bragged how good you guys were going to
be. I said this all-star panel--it is among the best.
Let me tell you what you did. You exceeded expectations
today, each of you, and you will always get to tell everybody
you testified before Congress. We are about to adjourn, but if
you could stick around, I would love to take a picture of you
guys before we leave. There being no further business to come
before us unless I have to say something official. Do I have to
say something official?
Hopefully we can submit questions and let everybody know
the record is open. Without objection, there being no further
business, this Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 11:59 a.m, the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
