- CONFRONTING UNION ANTISEMITISM: PROTECTING WORKERS FROM BIG LABOR ABUSES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CONFRONTING UNION ANTISEMITISM:
PROTECTING WORKERS FROM
BIG LABOR ABUSES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH,
EMPLOYMENT, LABOR, AND PENSIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JULY 9, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-58

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILBLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-223 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
VACANCY

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EMPLOYMENT, LABOR, AND PENSIONS

BOB GOOD, Virginia, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           MARK DeSAULNIER, California
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
RICK ALLEN, Georgia                  JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA, JAYAPAL, Washington
AARON BEAN, Florida                  LUCY McBATH, Georgia
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                KATHY MANNING, North Carolina

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on July 9, 2024.....................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Good, Hon. Bob, Chairman, Subcommittee on Health, Employment,
Labor, and Pensions........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
DeSaulnier, Hon. Mark, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions....................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5

WITNESSES

Kopmar, Ilana, Staff Attorney, Nassau County Legal Aid
Society....................................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Sussman, William, Graduate Student, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology..............................................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Lofaso, Dr. Anne Marie, Professor of Law, West Virginia
University College of Law..................................    51
Prepared statement of....................................    53
Taubman, Glenn, Staff Attorney, National Right To Work Legal
Defense Foundation.........................................    67
Prepared statement of....................................    68

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Foxx, Hon. Virginia, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina:
Testimony dated July 22, 2024, from Glenn M. Taubman.....    91
Letter from Adina Bechhofer..............................    98

CONFRONTING UNION ANTISEMITISM:
PROTECTING WORKERS FROM
BIG LABOR ABUSES

----------

Tuesday, July 09, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health, Employment, Labor, and
Pensions,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m., in
Room 2175, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Good
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Good, Wilson, Walberg, Allen,
Bean, Burlison, Houchin, Foxx, DeSaulnier, Courtney, Norcross,
Jayapal, Manning, and Scott.
Staff present: Mindy Barry, General Counsel; Jackson
Berryman, Speechwriter; Isabel Foster, Press Assistant; Daniel
Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant; AnnMarie Graham Barnes, Deputy
Communications Director; Ben Gruber, Intern; Sheila Havenner,
Director of Information Technology; Alex Knorr, Legislative
Assistant; Trey Kovacs, Professional Staff Member; Georgie
Littlefair, Clerk; Hannah Matesic, Deputy Staff Director;
Carson Middleton, Staff Director; Mike Patterson, Oversight
Investigative Counsel; Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Kiah
Stith, Intern; Seth Waugh, Director of Workforce Policy; Maura
Williams, Director of Operations; Ellie Berenson, Minority
Press Assistant; Ilana Brunner, Minority General Counsel; Arana
Blake, Minority CBCF Intern; Stephanie Lalle, Minority
Communications Director; Dhrtvan Sherman, Minority Research
Assistant; Raiyana Malone, Minority Press Secretary; Kevin
McDermott, Minority Director of Labor Policy; Meghan O'Neil,
Minority Intern; Eleazer Padilla, Minority Staff Assistant;
Mason Pesek, Minority Policy Counsel; Veronique Pluviose,
Minority Staff Director; Banyon Vassar, Minority IT
Administrator.
Chairman Good. The Hearing on the Subcommittee on Health,
Employment, Labor and Pensions will come to order. I note that
a quorum is present. Without objection, the Chair is authorized
to call a recess at any time. Today's hearing will examine the
ways in which unions put politics over people through the lens
of rampant union antisemitism.
Unfortunately, the politicization of unions is not new. The
National Institute for Labor Relations Research estimates that
unions spent about 25 billion dollars in political donations
during the 2022 election cycle, or far more than the roughly 2
billion they report as political activities.
In the 2020 Presidential campaign, President Biden received
27.5 million in direct donations from labor organizations,
while President Trump received less than 360,000. While the
working class seems to be moving in favor of the GOP in the
upcoming election cycle, it is clear that union bosses sold out
to the left long ago.
Additionally, the response by union leaders to the October
7 Hamas terrorist attacks on Israel have exposed yet another
way that unions are beholden to the radical left, instead of to
the workers they claim to represent. Rather than focus on their
stated purpose of negotiating better workplace conditions for
workers, unions choose to spend time and money advancing their
divisive and anti-American political agenda.
Take for example the Association of Legal Aid Attorneys, or
ALAA, the ALAA represents more than 2,700 public interest
lawyers in the New York metro area. On December 19, 2023, it
passed a highly controversial resolution calling for a cease-
fire in Gaza.
The resolution's inflammatory rhetoric, such as calling
Israel an apartheid State alienated many members and caused
nearly 35 percent of the membership to vote against it. The New
York Post has further exposed more details of offensive and
harmful antisemitism that is rampant throughout ALAA
communications.
Some of the union members sued the union, but shockingly
the union members that filed the lawsuit were charged with,
``Conduct unbecoming of a union member.'' They were charged
under the UAW Constitution, and they are now facing trial with
a penalty of expulsion from the union.
In other words, the union members shelling out roughly
$120.00 a month to be part of the union, will now be put on
trial by the same organization intended to protect and
represent them, simply for standing up for what they believe.
One of the Plaintiffs argued, ``I should not have to
financially support an organization that adopts antisemitic
resolutions, sides with terrorist organizations, and advocates
for the destruction of Israel in order to be a public defender
in New York.''
I could not agree more. Union members have rights under the
Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act, and the Supreme
Court's Beck decision to speak out against their unions, and to
cease paying union dues for political activities they disagree
with. Unfortunately, unions have an incentive to keep their
members ignorant of their rights.
They often make little effort to inform them of these
rights, and as Jewish workers have recently experienced current
Federal labor law, and Supreme Court precedent failed to
adequately protect individual employees' right to refrain from
union activity.
The ALAA, along with other organizations like the MIT
graduate student union, demonstrates how unions neglect their
members to pursue left wing activism at all costs.
Today we are providing a platform for those who are not
truly represented by the unions they pay dues to. We will
discuss how the law protects their political and religious
convictions, and how further protections could be provided.
Perhaps not everyone here and on the panel agrees on the
appropriate role of the unions in society, but I hope we can
all agree that if anything, they should pursue, they should
advocate on behalf of the workplace interest of workers, rather
than pursuing a radical, political agenda that alienates their
members. With that, I yield to the member for his opening
statement.
[The Statement of Chairman Good follows:]

Statement of Hon. Bob Good, Chairman, Subcommittee on Health,
Employment, Labor, and Pensions

Today's hearing will examine the ways in which unions put politics
over people through the lens of rampant union antisemitism.
Unfortunately, the politicization of unions is not new. The
National Institute for Labor Relations Research estimates that unions
spent about $25 billion in political donations during the 2022 election
cycle, or far more than the roughly $2 billion they report as political
activities.
In the 2020 presidential campaign, President Biden received $27.5
million in direct donations from labor organizations, while President
Trump received less than $360,000. While the working class seem to be
moving in favor of the GOP in the upcoming election cycle, it is clear
that union bosses sold out to the Left long ago.
Additionally, the response by union leaders to the October 7 Hamas
terrorist attacks on Israel have exposed yet another way unions are
beholden to the radical Left instead of the workers they claim to
represent. Rather than focus on their stated purpose of negotiating
better workplace conditions for workers, unions choose to spend time
and money advancing their divisive and anti-American political agenda.
Take, for example, the Association of Legal Aid Attorneys (ALAA).
The ALAA represents more than 2,700 public interest lawyers in the New
York Metro Area, and on December 19, 2023, it passed a highly
controversial resolution calling for a ceasefire in Gaza.
The resolution's inflammatory rhetoric--such as calling Israel an
apartheid state--alienated many members and caused nearly 35 percent of
the membership to vote against it. The New York Post has further
exposed more details of offensive and harmful antisemitism that is
rampant throughout ALAA communications.
Some of the union members have sued the union, but shockingly, the
union members who filed the lawsuit were charged with ``Conduct
Unbecoming of a Union Member'' under the UAW Constitution and are now
facing trial with a penalty of expulsion from the union.
In other words, these union members shelling out roughly $120 a
month to be part of the union will now be put on trial by the same
organization intended to protect and represent them, simply for
standing up for what they believe.
One of the plaintiffs argued, ``I should not have to financially
support an organization that adopts antisemitic resolutions, sides with
terrorist organizations, and advocates for the destruction of Israel in
order to be a public defender in New York.''
I could not agree more. Union members have rights under the Labor-
Management Reporting and Disclosure Act and the Supreme Court's Beck
decision to speak out against their unions and to cease paying dues for
political activities they disagree with.
Unfortunately, unions have an incentive to keep their members
ignorant of their rights and often make little effort to inform them of
these rights. As Jewish workers have recently experienced, current
federal labor law and Supreme Court precedent fail to adequately
protect individual employees' right to refrain from union activity.
The ALAA, along with other organizations like the MIT Graduate
Student Union, demonstrates how unions neglect their members to pursue
Left-wing activism at all costs.
Today we are providing a platform for those who are not truly
represented by the unions they pay dues to. We will discuss how law
protects their political and religious convictions, and how further
protections could be provided.
Perhaps not everyone here and on the panel agrees on the
appropriate role of unions in society, but I hope we can all agree
that--if anything--they should advocate on behalf of the workplace
interests of workers rather than pursuing a radical political agenda
that alienates their members.
______

Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to start by
making clear that I condemn antisemitism, and all forms of
hate, whether it be in the classroom, in the workplace, or
anywhere else. As Members of Congress, and citizens, we have a
responsibility to stand up against all forms of hate,
regardless of the source of the political party, or the
political party.
I agree with the Chairman that we should do more to combat
antisemitism. No one should be threatened, harassed, or
attacked because of who they are, who they worship or what they
stand for.
I look forward to the witnesses' testimoneys, but we should
avoid the broad brush, stereotypical attacks on workers'
ability to organize and collectively bargain that have
characterized the Subcommittee's six prior anti-labor hearings.
Based on the title of today's hearing, I fear we will do it
again. Just for the record, corporate interests and the
wealthiest in America, and income and equality is at its most
intense in the history of this country, eclipsing the Gilded
Age, is now the advantage of corporations in the top 10
percent, 16 to 1.
We talk about labor contributing to campaigns, they are
being buried by corporate interests, particularly after the
Supreme Court's Citizens United decision. Immigrants, including
Jewish immigrants, left their home countries often under
duress, and sought to build a better life and future for
themselves and their families in the United States.
Many immigrants opted to organize and join the labor
movement because they understood what is still very true today,
unions give workers a voice, and have the power to transform
their lives through collective action. That means elections--
union elections.
Throughout history unions have been pivotal in advancing
the conditions and rights of workers, from establishing the 5-
day work week, to championing minimum wage laws, banning child
labor, which is now under attack again, and protecting workers
from being maimed and killed at work.
Their advocacy, the union advocacy, has been instrumental
in building and sustaining America's middle class, which is now
under attack. At a time of extreme wealth inequality, workers
are increasingly organized because as they seek the collective
and democratic power unions provide them in order to secure
higher wages, better benefits, and safer workplaces, union
workers enjoy approximately 20 percent higher wages, and are
more likely to have access to essential benefits, such as
health insurance, paid leave, and defined benefits pension
plans.
These gains not only benefit individual workers and their
families, but they also contribute to a more robust economy,
where prosperity is more broadly shared. Unions also create
workplace democracy. Unions are inherently ``small d''
democratic institutions. For example, workers need at least
majority support in the workplace to form and join a union.
Union workers need majority support to authorize a strike.
They need majority support to ratify a contract. Workers are
their unions, and unions are accountable to their members, by a
vote While the fundamental principle of unions is rooted in
majority rule, just like any democracy, our Nation's laws also
protect the rights of individual workers.
We are fortunate to have Dr. Anne Marie Lofaso as one of
our witnesses today. The Doctor's testimony notes that workers
have multiple levels to choose from, to related to how they
want to affiliate with their unions.
Union-represented workers have a right to resign from union
membership. The right to object to dues beyond representational
activities known as the Beck right, and the right to request a
religious accommodation for non-payment of union dues.
Those are all rights. Unions are legally required to inform
workers of their Beck right, and their equal rights, and
protection under Title 1 of the Labor Management Reporting and
Disclosure Act.
While employers are required to inform workers of their
right to religious accommodations beyond a basic flyer posted
in the workplace, employers have no obligation to directly
inform workers of their rights to organize a union or come
together with their coworkers to engage in concerted activity
regarding the terms and conditions of employment.
As we discuss these issues today, let us not forget that
the true threat to workers' freedom and rights is not unions,
but employer, bad employer, low road employers, intimidation
and retaliation, as well as deficiencies in our labor laws to
hold unscrupulous businesses.
As I have said many times, it is not responsible
businesses, it is a few businesses that bring the whole culture
down to us versus them, more money for us, and less for them.
Not all businesses, just the ones that do not play by the
rules, accountable for violations of the law. These include
employers holding mandatory coercive, captive audience
meetings, inadequate penalties for violating workers' rights
and prolonged delays in justice for workers facing retaliation.
We must reaffirm our commitment to strengthening workers
protections, and advancing legislation such as the PRO Act,
Protecting the Right to Organize e Act. This landmark
legislation would modernize our labor laws for the first time
in decades, empowering workers to organize freely, and ensuring
that employers are held accountable for their actions.
Last, we have a responsibility to fund the very agencies
that enforce workers' rights. We should make sure we are
appropriately funding key agencies like the National Labor
Relations Board, and the EEOC, so they can fulfill their vital
mission to protect workers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
yield back.
[The Statement of Ranking Member DeSaulnier follows:]

Statement of Hon. Mark DeSaulnier, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to start by making clear that I condemn antisemitism and all
forms of hate--whether it be in the classroom, in the workplace, or
anywhere else. As Members of Congress and citizens, we have a
responsibility to stand up against all forms of hate, regardless of the
source or the political party.
I agree that we should do more to combat antisemitism. No one
should be threatened, harassed, or attacked because of who they are,
who they worship, or what they stand for. I look forward to the
witnesses' testimonies--but we should avoid the broad-brush
stereotypical attacks on workers' ability to organize and collectively
bargain that have characterized the subcommittee's six prior anti-labor
hearings, and--based on the title of today's hearing--I fear we will
hear again.
Just for the record, corporate interest is the wealthiest in
America, and income inequality is the most intense in this country.
Eclipsing the glided age is now the advantage of cooperation in the top
10 percent, 16 to 1. When we talk about labor contributing to
campaigns, they are being buried by corporate interest, particularly
after the Supreme Court's Citizens United decision.
Immigrants, including Jewish immigrants, left their home
countries--often under duress--and sought to build a better life and
future for themselves and their families in the United States. Many
immigrants opted to organize and join the labor movement because they
understood what is still very true today--unions give workers a voice
and have the power to transform their lives through collective action.
That means elections. Union elections.
Throughout history, unions have been pivotal in advancing the
conditions and rights of workers, from establishing the five-day work
week to championing minimum wage laws, banning child labor, which is
now under attack again, and protecting workers from being maimed and
killed at work. Their advocacy, the union advocacy, has been
instrumental in building and sustaining America's middle class. Which
is now under attack.
At a time of extreme wealth inequality, workers are increasingly
organizing because they recognize the collective and democratic power
unions provide them in order to secure higher wages, better benefits,
and safer workplaces. Union workers enjoy approximately 20 percent
higher wages and are more likely to have access to essential benefits
such as health insurance, paid leave, and defined-benefit pension
plans. These gains not only benefit individual workers and their
families but also contribute to a more robust economy where prosperity
is more broadly shared.
Unions also create workplace democracy.
Unions are inherently small ``d'' democratic institutions. For
example, workers need at least a majority of support in their workplace
to form or join a union. Union workers need majority support to
authorize a strike. They need majority support to ratify a contract.
Workers are their unions, and unions are accountable to their members
by a vote.
While the foundational principle of unions is rooted in majority
rule, just like any democracy, our nation's laws also protect the
rights of individual workers. We are fortunate to have Dr. Anne Marie
Lofaso as one of our witnesses today. Dr. Lofaso's testimony notes that
workers have multiple avenues to choose the level with which they wish
to affiliate their unions. Union-represented workers have the right to
resign from union membership, the right to object to dues beyond
representational activities, known as the ``Beck'' right, and even the
right to request a religious accommodation for nonpayment of union
dues.
Unions are legally required to inform workers of their ``Beck''
rights and their equal rights and protections under Title I of the
Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act. While employers are
required to inform workers of their right to religious accommodations,
beyond a basic flyer posted in the workplace, employers have no
obligation to directly inform their workers of their rights to organize
a union or come together with their coworkers to engage in concerted
activity regarding the terms and conditions of their employment.
As we discuss these issues today, let us not forget that the true
threat to workers' freedom and rights is not their unions, but
employers, bad employers, low road employers. Intimidation and
retaliation, as well as deficiencies in our labor laws to hold
unscrupulous businesses--as I have said many times, it is not a
responsible business, but a few businesses that bring the whole culture
down to us versus them. Not all businesses, just the ones that do not
play by the rules--accountable for violations of the law. These include
employers holding mandatory and coercive captive audience meetings,
inadequate penalties for violating workers' rights, and prolonged
delays in justice for workers facing retaliation.
We must reaffirm our commitment to strengthening worker protections
and advancing legislation such as the bipartisan Protecting the Right
to Organize (PRO) Act. This landmark legislation will modernize our
labor laws for the first time in decades, empowering workers to
organize freely and ensuring that employers are held accountable for
their actions.
Lastly, we have a responsibility to fund the very agencies that
enforce workers' rights. We should make sure we are appropriately
funding key agencies like the National Labor Relations Board and the
EEOC so they can fulfill their vital mission to protect workers.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
______

Chairman Good. Thank you. Pursuant to Committee Rule 8-C,
all members who wish to insert written statements into the
record may do so by submitting them to the Committee Clerk
electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5 o'clock p.m., 14
days after the date of this hearing, which is July 23, 2024.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days to allow such statements, and other extraneous
materials referenced in the hearing, to be submitted to the
official hearing record.
I will now turn to the introduction of our distinguished
witnesses. Our first witness is Ms. Ilana Kopmar, who is a
Staff Attorney employed by the Nassau County Legal Aid Society
in Hempstead, New York. Welcome.
Our next witness is Mr. William Sussman, who is a Graduate
Student, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technical, or MIT,
in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Welcome, Mr. Sussman.
Our third witness is Dr. Anne Marie Lofaso, who is a
Professor of Law at West Virginia University College of Law in
Morgantown, West Virginia. Welcome, Dr. Lofaso.
Our final witness is Mr. Glenn Taubman, who is a Staff
Attorney with the National Right to Work Legal Defense
Foundation, which is located in Springfield, Virginia. Welcome,
Mr. Taubman.
We thank the witnesses for being here today and look
forward to your testimony. Pursuant to the Committee Rules, I
would ask that you limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute
summary of your written statement, and I would like to remind
the witnesses to be aware of their responsibility to provide
accurate information to this Subcommittee.
I now recognize Ms. Kopmar for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. ILANA KOPMAR, STAFF ATTORNEY, NASSAU COUNTY
LEGAL AID SOCIETY, HEMPSTEAD, NEW YORK

Ms. Kopmar. Thank you, Chairman Good, and Ranking Member
DeSaulnier. I am a criminal defense attorney at Nassau County
Legal Aid, and I am also a member of the UAW Local 2325, the
Association of Legal Aid Attorneys, the ALAA.
I am also Jewish, and Zionism, the belief in the right of
the Jewish people to self-determination in our ancestral
homeland is as integral to my religious practice as is keeping
kosher and observing the sabbath. Most American Jews share this
belief, that Zionism is integral to their Jewish faith.
After Hamas' bloody attack against Israel on October 7th,
the ALAA and its leadership created an antisemitic, hostile
work environment for its Jewish members, for whom the existence
of Israel is integral to their Jewish identity, and for their
non-Jewish allies.
On November 14th, the ALAA just gave 3 days' notice of a
membership vote on a resolution entitled, Resolution Calling
for the Ceasefire in Gaza, an End to the Israeli Occupation of
Palestine. Despite its title, the Resolution was not a call for
a cease-fire, but for Israel's defeat. The Resolution does not
mention Hamas even once.
It dehumanizes the victims of October 7th by not mentioning
that Hamas massacred, raped, and mutilated Jews, Israelis and
Americans, and violently abducted men, women and children.
Instead, it is a one-sided vitriolic attack against the Jewish
State using antisemitic tropes, and language widely understood
to be a call for the destruction of Israel.
Three of my colleagues and I from my office, believe that
this antisemitic resolution would interfere with our ethical
responsibility to zealously represent our Jewish and Israel
clients free from discrimination. It also added to an already
hostile, antisemitic environment in the union.
We sought, and were granted in State Court, a temporary
restraining order halting the vote. After the case was removed
to Federal Court, the TRO was dissolved, the resolution passed
with just over half of members voting at all, and one-third of
those voted no.
Immediately after filing the TRO, the union retaliated and
filed internal charges to expel us. They accused us of conduct
unbecoming to a union member, even though we have a legal right
to oppose the union's antisemitism. We appealed to the UAW
International Executive Board.
It denied our appeal without even considering our legal
arguments. If we had not filed an immediate appeal of that
decision to the UAW's Public Review Board, the union was going
to start jury selection, and our expulsion trial tonight. We
have now filed our own charges against the union with the EEOC
and brought a lawsuit in Federal Court for violating our labor
rights, and unlawful discriminatory retaliation.
After the TRO, the union's antisemitism against us
intensified, and in Gaggle, an email listserv for members, and
in member-wide Zoom meetings, we were called ``fascist,''
genocider,'' ``fascist colonizers,'' ``Zionist ghouls.'' We
were told to go kill ourselves. Members advocating kicking
Zionists out of the union, and outrightly called for the
elimination of Israel.
One member stated that the union has a duty to stand up and
called for an end to Israel, and signed their email with the
Nazi reference, ``Goosestepping outside.'' When Jewish and
Zionist members introduced a resolution to free the hostages,
the immediate response on Gaggle was ``LMAO,'' laughing my ass
off. Another responded that this resolution confirmed that
Zionist union members were not comrades, but fascist
colonizers.
At the Joint Council meeting the resolution's presenters
were called ``disgusting'' and ``F'd up,'' and there were calls
to mute them. Members wanted to kick out a Jewish member from
the meeting for expressing typical Zionist lies. The union
overwhelmingly voted down the resolution, calling to free the
hostages.
ALAA President Lisa Ohta, and leadership were at that
meeting, and they did nothing to stop the attacks, or tamp down
the bullying and vitriol. The next day, a paid ALAA staffer
emailed the membership characterizing the hostage release
resolution as a small Zionist minority, attempting to disrupt
the ALAA. He also blamed the Zionists for collaborating with
this congressional Committee and attempting to weaken the
union.
I am not here to weaken the union, but to strengthen it.
The union is tearing itself apart. Union leadership has a duty
to protect its members from bias and discrimination, not foster
attacks against its Jewish and non-Jewish Zionist members. This
is not how a union should act, and we should not be forced to
support the discriminatory actions. Thank you so much for
inviting me, it has been an honor and a privilege.
[The Statement of Ms. Kopmar follows:]

Statement of Ilana Kopmar, Staff Attorney, Nassau County Legal Aid
Society, Hempstead, New York

My name is Ilana Kopmar. I have spent my entire legal career of 32
years as a criminal defense attorney for the Legal Aid Society of
Nassau County. I also served as President of our office's prior Union
for five years before we joined our present Union.
My job is very rewarding, primarily because of the relationships
that I develop with my clients. Every day, my colleagues and I appear
in court to zealously defend our clients and protect their rights.
Pursuant to the Sixth Amendment right to counsel, we are assigned to
clients of every race, national origin, and religion, including Jewish
clients.
Our clients do not choose their attorneys, and we have an ethical
obligation to represent every client free from even the perception of
bias and discrimination. When we walk into a courtroom, it is crucial
that our clients trust us to protect and defend them.
Just as our job is to protect and defend our clients, our Union has
a job to protect and defend its members. Our job can be very difficult.
We are paid low salary wages and have high caseloads and low retention
rates. As prior President of our office Union, I know that we need a
strong Union to protect and advance our interests. Over 10 years ago,
our office joined UAW Local 2325, the Association of Legal Aid
Attorneys, also known as the ALAA. We believed that through the
camaraderie and the support of more than 3000 members of the ALAA,
spread over 30 non-profit agencies, we would have the Union's support
to help us bargain for higher wages, increased state and county
funding, improved benefits, and a better work environment. We thought a
supportive
Union would make us a stronger, more effective Union.
Recently, instead of focusing on collective bargaining and
fostering a united membership, the ALAA and its leadership created an
antisemitic, hostile work environment for its Jewish members for whom
Zionism is an integral part of their Jewish identity, as it is for the
vast majority of American Jews, and their non-Jewish allies. After the
attack by the terrorist organization Hamas on October 7--the worst
attack against the Jewish people since the Holocaust--the ALAA
communication channel, Gaggle (an email listserv for Union members and
Joint Council meetings) became a hotbed of antisemitism and blatant
discrimination directed against us.
Shortly after October 7, my office colleagues and I learned that
ALAA colleagues of ours working at the NYC Legal Aid Society were
subject to inter-office emails from their fellow ALAA members denying
the atrocities that happened on October 7. One email questioned whether
Jewish Legal Aid lawyers who have ``an allegiance to Israel'' can
zealously represent clients who are Palestinian or Muslim and
questioned whether such lawyers were colluding with prosecutors. In
late October, the Bronx Defender Chapter of the ALAA adopted a
blatantly antisemitic resolution which questioned the veracity of
reports of Hamas' brutality, killing, mutilation and rape of Israeli
victims, and falsely accused Israel of genocide. Most shockingly, the
resolution proclaimed the ALAA Chapter's support of Hamas' ``resistance
under occupation,'' which is a call for continued violence by Hamas
against the Israeli and Jewish people. Shortly thereafter, the CAMBA
Chapter of the ALAA, located in Brooklyn, New York, put out a similar
antisemitic resolution. These resolutions caused a public outcry and
calls to defund the organizations employing ALAA members.
I and others recognize these resolutions as supporting violence and
discrimination against us, our families, friends and other Jewish
Zionist and allied Union members. Unions should not engage in
discriminatory speech against its own members or show bias against our
clients. My Union has the right to criticize Israel and its government,
just as it may any other government. However, denying Jews the right to
self-determination in their ancestral homeland and condoning violence
and discrimination against Jews crosses a clear line into antisemitism.
Pursuant to the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (``IHRA'')
definition of antisemitism, such denial of the Jewish people's right to
self-determination, and the demonization of Jews who support Israel,
constitutes antisemitism. This esteemed body recognized this by passing
H.R. 6090, the ``Antisemitism Awareness Act of 2023,'' and H.R. 894,
affirming unequivocally that anti-Zionism is antisemitism.
To me, an integral part of my faith and identity as a practicing
Jew is the recognition of Jewish people's right to self-determination
in their indigenous homeland in Israel. My connection to and support of
Israel is as important to me as is my commitment to keep kosher and
observe the Sabbath. In other words, it is an integral part of my
sincerely held religious belief system.
On November 14, 2024, the ALAA gave just three days' notice of a
resolution to be voted on by its entire membership, entitled
``Resolution Calling for a Ceasefire in Gaza, and End to the Israeli
occupation of Palestine.'' This resolution is an antisemitic screed
against the Jewish state and its supporters including myself and other
Union members. Despite its title, the resolution was not a call for a
ceasefire, but for Israel's defeat. Nowhere in the 1,147-word screed is
the terrorist organization Hamas even mentioned, let alone called upon
to stand down. Nowhere does the resolution acknowledge that Hamas
massacred, mutilated, raped, maimed, burned, killed over 1,000 Jews and
Israelis, including many American citizens. Nowhere does the resolution
mention that Hamas violently abducted men, women, children and babies
and are holding them hostage. There was no demand that Hamas release
its hostages. Instead, the resolution was a one-sided vitriolic attack
against Israel. It uses antisemitic tropes and language widely
understood as a call for the destruction of Israel.
The ALAA resolution was so shocking in its antisemitism that the
Legal Aid Society of New York City, The Bronx Defenders Organization
and the President of the New York Legal Assistance Group issued
statements rejecting the ALAA resolution as antisemitic. The Board and
management of the Legal Aid Society of Nassau County, my employer, led
by our Chief Attorney,N. Scott Banks, issued a statement rejecting the
resolution for its ``antisemitic language and thinly veiled call for
the destruction of the State of Israel.'' The statement concluded that
``this resolution does not represent the values or mission of our
office and is divisive and hurtful to so many members of our staff and
clients.''
My colleagues and I were immediately concerned about the negative
effect this resolution would have on our office and our clients. We
reasonably believe that the resolution constituted a discriminatory
statement and created a hostile work environment. People questioned why
our Union was getting involved in a conflict thousands of miles away
that has nothing to do with defending our clients' constitutional
rights. More importantly, we were concerned that the antisemitic
resolution showed bias against our Jewish, Israeli and non-Jewish
Zionist clients and fellow Union members, making them lose trust in us.
Four of us obtained a temporary restraining order under New York law
from a Nassau County Supreme Court Judge, in Clarke, et al. v. The
Association of Legal Aid Attorneys, et al., Index No. 618764/2023 (Sup.
Ct., Nassau Cnty.), to halt the membership vote from concluding on
November 17. The following week, after listening to extensive oral
arguments, the Judge extended the TRO. Eventually the case was
transferred to federal court in the Eastern District of New York, where
the TRO was dissolved. The vote proceeded, and the resolution was
passed by a vote of 1067 to 570--almost half of ALAA members did not
vote at all, and a third who did voted ``no.''
After the resolution was presented, the Union turned on anyone who
expressed their support for Israel as a means of retaliating against us
to dissuade us from engaging in protected activities such as testifying
before this body or making or supporting a charge of discrimination. We
were subjected to a barrage of vitriolic hate speech through Gaggle and
during Joint Council meetings. We were called fascists, genociders,
genocide deniers, snitches and Zionist ghouls. We were told to go kill
ourselves. The slogan ``from the river to the sea'' was routinely used.
More than that, Union members were very vocal in outrightly calling for
the elimination of Israel. One member wrote ``we have a duty to stand
up and call for a Free Palestine, which means an end to Isreal [sic]. .
.'' and signed off with ``goosestepping [sic] outside.''
Contrary to the very nature of a Union requiring unity and
camaraderie with fellow members, one member wrote that they ``will
never have camaraderie with zionists.'' Another email stated ``y'all
are assuming and conflating that somehow our vote was unconstitutional
or antisemitic simply because y'all are Zionists and will defend
israel's [sic] settler colonial project until you cannot any longer.
until [sic] the liberation of palestine [sic]--from the river to the
sea.'' One member wrote that ``If the majority decides that LAS should
not have Zionists in its ranks, then it will be the majority.''
The emails were a continuous barrage of antisemitic and anti-Israel
rhetoric. There was no thoughtful discussion and respectful dialogue.
Instead, Gaggle was replete with insults, denigration, divisiveness and
antisemitism that would not be tolerated in any other workplace space.
For what was intended to be a safe space for people to express
themselves, Gaggle was not a safe space for Jews and Zionists, and,
most alarmingly, the Union leadership did nothing to tamp-down this
behavior.
Immediately after the TRO was filed, four members from the ALAA
filed discriminatory retaliatory charges, pursuant to Article 31 of the
UAW Constitution, to expel me and the other three members who exercised
our legal right to oppose the Union's antisemitism by securing the TRO.
They accused us of ``conduct unbecoming of a union member'' for
engaging in protected activities in filing the TRO to stop the Union
from voting on the resolution and for calling out antisemitism espoused
by Union members in Gaggle. On January 2, 2024, the ALAA Amalgamated
Council ratified the discriminatory Article 31 charges and sent the
retaliatory complaint to the Joint Council to hold a trial and render a
verdict. A guilty verdict results in our expulsion from the Union.
With the assistance of the Louis D. Brandeis Center for Human
Rights Under Law, we appealed the ALAA's ratification of the expulsion
charges proceeding to the UAW International Executive Board. We argued
that the proceeding violates the Labor-Management Reporting and
Disclosure Act, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the New York
State Human Rights Law, and the New York City Human Rights Law. After
waiting months for a decision without hearing anything, we filed
charges against the ALAA with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission. Within days of the ALAA being notified of the EEOC charges,
we received a decision from the UAW International Executive Board
denying our appeal without even considering our arguments that the
expulsion violates Federal and New York laws. Shortly thereafter, we
received notice that the Union intended to commence the expulsion trial
on July 9, 2024. We immediately appealed to the UAW Public Review
Board, staying the expulsion proceedings.
This vitriol continued even after the Union began expulsion
proceedings against us, in both Joint Council meetings and Gaggle.
Jewish Zionist members and their allies were demonized as ``scabs,
snitches and genocide-deniers.'' One recent meeting was particularly
difficult. At that meeting, three Israel-related resolutions were
proposed to be voted on by Union delegates. The first resolution
demanded that in support of the student pro-Palestinian protesters, all
public defense agencies should issue public statements opposing Israeli
genocide. The second resolution condemned UAW President Shawn Fain and
other IEB members for voting against divesting from Israel Bonds and
continuing the ``UAW's complicity in genocide.''Two of my colleagues
(Jewish ALAA members) offered a third resolution as an alternative.
This resolution condemned Hamas for abducting hostages and called for
the release of hostages. When the resolution supporting the release of
the hostages was first introduced on Gaggle, the immediate response was
``lmao.'' Another member wrote that the resolution confirms that ``in
act and thought, y'all not like us. Y'all aren't comrades, but fascist
colonizers--mere prosecutors in defender's clothes.''
The meeting proceeded along similar hostile lines. In the Zoom chat
when one Jewish Zionist member expressed her opposition to the
divestiture resolution, one member responded that she was expressing
``typical Zionist lies,'' and another responded, ``sorry but no settler
colony like Isra*l [sic] has the right to exist.'' Another commented
that she should ``please get out of here with this despicable shit,''
and someone else on the chat requested that she be removed from the
chat because she is a Zionist. During the presentation by two Union
members in support of the Release the Hostages Resolution, people
called for an end to the presenter's ``rant'' and to mute her. Others
commented that their presentation was ``disgusting'' and ``fucked up.''
The chat was then flooded with ``Free Palestine'' and ``all eyes on
Rafah'' statements.
These attacks were done in the presence of ALAA President Lisa Ohta
and the ALAA Sergeant at Arms. Not once did they or anyone else from
Union leadership tell the membership to stop their antisemitic vitriol,
to act with decency and respect, and to stop their attacks. They did
nothing to stop the antisemitic bullying. The resolution condemning
Hamas for the taking of Hostages was a simple one, meant to call upon
the Union to show compassion towards innocent Jews, including five
American citizens, and non-Jews who were violently abducted and are
still being held hostage by Hamas. That night, the Union revealed its
animus and discrimination against Jewish Zionist members. The Union
delegates overwhelmingly rejected the resolution calling for the
release of hostages by a vote of 18 in favor and 124 against. The other
two resolutions were overwhelmingly affirmed.
The next day, a paid ALAA staff member sent an email to the entire
membership stating that ``a small Zionist minority has repeatedly, but
unsuccessfully, attempted to distract from and disrupt UAW 2325 ALAA
members' support of Palestinian Liberation.'' The staff member then
blamed the Zionists within the ALAA for collaborating with this
Congressional Committee, allegedly attempting to weaken the Union. To
be clear, the Union's paid staff member associated being a Zionist with
weakening the Union.
I am not here to weaken the Union, but to strengthen it. This Union
is tearing itself apart. Union leadership has a duty to protect all
members from bias and discriminatory attacks. Instead, they are
allowing and fostering attacks against its Jewish and non-Jewish
Zionist members who fight against antisemitism and discrimination. This
is not how a Union should act, and its members should not be forced to
support such discriminatory actions.
______

Chairman Good. Thank you. Mr. Sussman, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. WILLIAM SUSSMAN, GRADUATE STUDENT,
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. Sussman. There we go. Chairman Good, Ranking Member
DeSaulnier, and members of the Subcommittee. My name is William
A. Sussman. I am a doctoral student in computer science at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. This past year I served
as President of MIT Graduate Hillel.
Last December, this Committee heard MIT's President testify
that calling for the genocide of Jews, ``can be antisemitic,
depending on the context.'' Allow me to share some of that
context.
According to the Anti-Defamation League, the Boycott,
Divestment and Sanctions movement, or BDS, is an international
campaign aimed at delegitimizing and pressuring Israel, through
the diplomatic, financial, professional, academic and cultural
isolation of Israel, Israeli individuals, Israeli institutions,
and increasingly, Jews who support Israel's right to exist.
The MIT Graduate Student Union, known as the GSU, has
engaged in BDS since its inception. It is one of the reasons
they chose to affiliate with the United Electrical Workers, or
UE, which endorses the BDS movement, and urges the union at all
levels to become engaged in BDS.
In 2022, a plurality of MIT graduate students voted to
install this union as our exclusive bargaining agent, and in
September 2023, MIT capitulated to its demand for a contract
with mandatory dues. Then came October 7th. According to the
American Jewish Committee, Hamas terrorists waged the deadliest
attack on Jews since the Holocaust, slaughtering babies, raping
women, burning whole families alive, and taking hundreds of
innocents, hostage.
The blood had not yet dried when my colleagues at MIT
declared, ``Victory is Ours.'' The full-time GSU staff
organizer told NBC 10 Boston, ``Those who rebel against
oppression cannot be blamed for rebelling against that
repression.'' In November, my union representative joined anti-
Israel protestors, who were occupying a building, and when
threatened with suspensions, the GSU backed the protestors.
Meanwhile, the GSU illegally threatened to terminate anyone
who refused to pay for their so-called activism. I filed a
charge against the union with the National Labor Relations
Board, which agreed that the GSU had violated our Beck rights.
However, the NLRB refused to require training of union agents,
who continue to break the law.
In January, when MIT brought disciplinary charges against
two graduate student protestors, the GSU blamed external
pressure from billionaire donors and right-wing politicians,
and organized another protest, this time in front of the
Discrimination and Harassment Office. One picket sign read,
``Anti-Zionism does not equal Antisemitism.''
In April, the GSU pushed through a cease-fire resolution
that does not mention ``peace,'' ``hostages,'' or ``Hamas.'' In
May, the GSU Vice President was arrested at yet another
protest. She was banned from campus, but remains on paid union
leave. As I wrote in the Wall Street Journal, ``Jewish graduate
students are a minority at MIT.''
We cannot remove the GSU or disabuse it of its
antisemitism. We also cannot support an organization that
actively works for the eradication of the Jewish homeland,
where I have family living now. That is why many of us asked
for a religious accommodation that would divert our compulsory
dues from the UE to a charity.
The union denied my request, telling me in a letter that no
principles, teachings or tenets of Judaism prohibit membership
in, or the payment of dues or fees to a labor union, that one
of UE's founders was Jewish, and that opposition to BDS is not
a position I hold for religious reasons. In other words, UE
thinks it understands my faith better than I do.
With the help of the National Right to Work Legal Defense
Foundation, I joined four other Jewish graduate students in
filing discrimination charges against the union, with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission. In response, the GSU chanted
``shame'' against us, calling our lawyers ``well-financed.''
They forgot to mention our horns.
Facing potential charges of its own, MIT began approving
religious accommodations, and the union followed suit. UE
represents graduate students at a dozen other universities, and
it should not take five discrimination charges to exercise our
freedom of religion and association.
This Congress should pass the National Right to Work Act,
so that unions have to earn their dues, and think twice before
discriminating against minorities. As a lifelong democrat, I
would like to conclude with a warning for my fellow party
members. A major union president who voted for FDR four times
would later in life say, ``I didn't leave the democratic party,
the democratic party left me.''
That union president was Ronald Reagan. If the democratic
party leaves the Jews, we will have no choice but to leave the
party. Ironically, this incentive structure is precisely what
is missing from unions. Thank you for the invitation to testify
today, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The Statement of Mr. Sussman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, sir. Dr. Lafaso, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. ANNE MARIE LOFASO, PROFESSOR OF LAW, WEST
VIRGINIA UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF LAW, MORGANTOWN, WEST VIRGINIA

Dr. Lofaso. Good morning, Chairman Good, Ranking Member
DeSaulnier, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee. I am
Anne Marie Lofaso, a labor law professor at West Virginia
University, and a former NLRB attorney. Thank you for inviting
me to testify regarding employee's rights to know their labor
rights.
There has been renewed interest in unions among workers,
with a record high support of 71 percent. Workers want unions,
and should know all of their rights, including how labor law
provides recourse to protect against antisemitism and other
forms of hate.
Let us start with what the law already requires of unions.
The law already requires unions to inform members of their
Title 1, and their Beck Rights. The law also requires a union
to represent fairly, and non-discriminatorily all employees in
the bargaining unit, including nonmembers who pay no dues.
Religious objectors have at least six avenues of recourses
if their union acts contrary to their religious beliefs. First,
the religious objector, like any employee, can refuse to join a
union, and can resign from a union at any time.
Second, under Section 9--sorry, under Section 19, that
expressly allows religious objectors to refuse to pay any dues
but may be required to donate to a non-religious, non-labor
charity in the same amount they would have paid in dues.
Third, the union's refusal to accommodate a religious
objector's request to substitute charitable payments for union
dues, makes a prima facia discrimination case under Title 7,
and the law requires employers to post these rights.
Fourth, the objector could file unfair labor practice
charges, or a lawsuit against the union, alleging a violation
of the union's duty of fair representation, such as a failure
to process grievances of Jewish employees.
Fifth, if the union or the employer tries to inflame
employees' passions by dividing them, using religiously
inflammatory words during an organizing campaign, any party can
file objections to the union, which may result in a re-run
election.
Sixth, in the public sector, a religious objector may also
have Constitutional claims against the union. Now, let us look
at what the law does not require of unions or employers. No one
is required to inform workers of any of their NLRA rights,
other than Beck rights, that is the right not to join a union.
This Subcommittee should put its energy in solving the real
problem facing workers. Employer interference with their right
to free association, and workers' lack of awareness of the
broad spectrum of rights they enjoy under labor laws. Few
private sector workers understand that labor law protects them
even if a union does not represent them.
Employees are protected if they discuss how to improve
their working conditions during break times, and in non-working
areas. Employees cannot be fired for expressing their support
for labor legislation, or for invoking their Weingarten rights.
Workers should be informed of all their labor rights, not
only Title 1 rights, Beck rights, and their right to religious
accommodation, but all their rights.
A simple fix would require employers to post these rights
in the workplace alongside other employment rights posters.
Even when workers know their rights, the NLRB's underfunded,
making it challenging to conduct union elections and combat
unfair labor practices, including union ULPs.
Congress should fully fund the Board and EEOC, to ensure
enforcement of all workers' rights, including their Beck
rights, and their religious accommodation rights. To the extent
that compliance with the LMRDA's disclosure requirements is
problematic, those problems seem to be on the management side.
Congress should fully fund the Department of Labor's OLMS
to ensure compliance. Even when workers know their rights, they
are often met with employer resistance during an organizing
drive, or first contract negotiations. Given the act's weak
remedial scheme, some employers prefer to pay lawyers to defend
ULP charges, knowing that even if they lose the remedy is often
a no cost, notice posting.
However, the Act is limited to public causes of action,
meaning that access to privately relief via court is typically
preempted. This is why the passage of the PRO Act is so
important. The PRO Act would strengthen the Act's remedies and
require the agency to seek injunctive relief to reinState
employees whenever it has reasonable cause to believe that the
employee's job termination was unlawful.
The PRO Act would create a private cause of action, giving
workers access to courts, rather than relying on the Board's
General Counsel to enforce their rights. The PRO Act would also
make mandatory captive audience speeches unlawful, thereby
diminishing the employer's power to interfere with employee
free choice.
I welcome the Subcommittee's support for workers. I ask
that the members of the Subcommittee better target the problems
facing workers, so that workers know all their rights, and can
enforce those rights against all institutions, including the
government, business, and labor unions. Thank you.
[The Statement of Ms. Lofaso follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you. Finally, Mr. Taubman, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. GLENN TAUBMAN, STAFF ATTORNEY, NATIONAL RIGHT
TO WORK LEGAL DEFENSE FOUNDATION, SPRINGFIELD, VIRGINIA

Mr. Taubman. Thank you for the opportunity to appear today.
I have been practicing labor and Constitutional law for over 42
years at the National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation in
Springfield, Virginia. My clients are individual employees, who
wish to stand apart from the workplace labor union they did not
choose, and do not want.
For 42 years I have helped litigate the Foundation's
groundbreaking Supreme Court cases, like Communications Workers
v. Beck, and Janus v. AFSCME. These decisions recognized
individual employees' Constitutional and statutory rights to
partially limit their association with labor unions they wanted
no part of but were nevertheless forced to join or fund.
Despite these Supreme Court decisions, I must regularly
explain to my clients that while they can choose to join any
worship, house of worship, any affinity group, or fraternal
organization that they want, Federal law prevents them from
choosing the agent that exclusively represents them in their
workplace.
In half the states without right to work protections, they
must pay union dues, or be fired. Since October 7th, those once
routine explanations of basic labor law have become dark,
sobering, and often heartbreaking conversations about the
reality of union antisemitism, and legalized compulsion in the
workplace today.
Now, my phone is ringing off the hook with calls from
unionized Jewish and Israeli graduate students at this Nation's
elite educational universities, MIT, Columbia, University of
Chicago, to name a few, asking me how they can disassociate
from a union that is partnering with, and often leading groups
that organize protests to shut down the campus, destroy
property, chant the genocidal, antisemitic slogans, and menace
them on campus.
Many of these employees are forced to pay dues that go
directly to subsidize the union's celebration and support of
Hamas's massacres. In case any of you need reminding, Hamas is
a medieval death cult on the U.S. government's terrorist watch
lists, not unlike ISIS and Al Qaeda, wearing masks at the
workplace, while changing, ``Death to Zionists from the River
to the Sea,'' is not benign or legitimate union bargaining
activity.
My phone is also ringing off the hook from medical
residents and interns at some of the Nation's finest teaching
hospitals, asking the same question, as their union is busy
poisoning their workplace with hateful and exclusionary anti-
Jewish, and anti-Israel propaganda.
My phone is ringing off the hook from teachers and legal
aid lawyers, all of whom wonder how the union they used to
support, and even championed, had suddenly turned away from
advocacy for better benefits, and to a radical advocacy against
Israel's just and moral defensive war.
A war that is occurring thousands of miles away from their
workplace. Federal labor law has long allowed employees to be
trapped by exclusive bargaining agents they never voted for,
and do not want. Today, Jewish employees find themselves forced
under the thumb of exclusive bargaining agents who are loud and
ardent supporters of the Hamas death cult.
At the National Right to Work, we are redoubling our
efforts to help such employees forcibly saddled with
antisemitic unions. We have filed Beck charges because unions
falsely tell employees that they must join, and must pay dues,
even when the money is spent to support radical campus
protestors.
We have filed charges of religious and ethnic
discrimination with the EEOC because unions refuse employee's
requests for religious accommodations. Despite our best
efforts, Title 7 and Beck are not nearly strong enough
protections, as long as unions can force workers to pay
anything to get or keep a job, employees will be denied their
full freedom of association, speech and conscience.
The Janus decision was a small step for employee freedom in
the public sector. Now is the time for this Congress to pass
the National Right to Work Act in the private sector, to end
the problem of coercive forced unionism, and the particular
problem of compelling Jewish and other religious employees to
fund unions, whose views and activities are hateful,
threatening and deeply divisive.
What could be more American than that? Thank you, and I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The Statement of Mr. Taubman follows:]

Statement of Mr. Glenn Taubman, Staff Attorney, National Right To Work
Legal Defense Foundation, Springfield, Virginia

Chairman Good, Ranking Member DeSaunier and distinguished Committee
Members:
Thank you for the opportunity to appear today. I have been
practicing labor and constitutional law for over 42 years at the
National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation. National Right to Work
Foundation Glenn M. Taubman--National Right to Work Foundation
(nrtw.org). My clients are individual employees, not unions or
employers. For 42 years I have helped litigate the Foundation's
groundbreaking Supreme Court cases, like Communications Workers v.
Beck, 487 U.S. 735 (1988) and Janus v. AFSCME, 585 U.S. 878 (2018).
These landmark decisions secured the constitutional and statutory
rights of individual workers to limit their association with labor
unions they wanted no part of, but were nevertheless forced to join or
fund with their hard earned wages, just to get or keep their jobs. My
perspective comes from decades of representing more employees than I
can count, all covered by the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA), the
Railway Labor Act, and the Constitution.
This hearing is aptly titled ``Confronting Union Antisemitism:
Protecting Workers From Big Labor Abuses,'' and the need to protect
employees, especially Jewish employees, from the latest form of union
abuse is clear. Federal labor law must be reformed and reimagined to
better protect individual liberty and safeguard individual workers'
free choice concerning unionization, especially in the face of today's
blatant union anti-semitism.
Unions reflect the harsh realities of majority rule. Minorities
within unions almost necessarily get crushed. For example, it is well
documented that for decades, unions blatantly and grotesquely
discriminated against black workers, see Steele v. Louisville & N.R.
Co., 323 U.S. 192 (1944) and Conley v. Gibson, 355U.S. 41 (1957). To my
frustration, American unions have not become more enlightened. Today,
many unions are discriminating against and threatening a different
minority group: the Jewish and pro-Israel workers they purport to
represent.
Many labor unions have strayed far from their ostensible role as
protectors of employees' workplace rights. Partisan politics and
foreign policy escapades are simply more exciting and interesting than
filing workplace grievances or negotiating workplace protections. These
unions are beholden to their own extremists and are often led by people
more interested in the ideological and ``intersectional'' causes
fashionable at the fringes of the political spectrum than they are in
the well-being of the workers they purport to represent. These unions
are not your father's or grandfather's labor unions, many of which were
once staunchly pro-Israel and pro-American. In many workplaces such as
college campuses, teaching hospitals, government offices, and K-12
schools, these unions have campaigned for the anti-Israel boycott-
divest-sanction (BDS) movement, taking pro-Hamas and anti-American
positions because BDS has become the siren song of the progressive
left. As the Members of this Committee should know, Hamas is an anti-
semitic and anti-Western death cult, not unlike ISIS and al-Qaeda, yet
many of today's unions are among its loudest and most ardent
supporters.
Many old line unions like the UE electrical workers union or the
UAW autoworkers have seen precipitous declines in their traditional
industrial membership, so they have searched for low hanging fruit to
organize--and that is typically young people like graduate students,
medical residents and interns, and legal aid lawyers, people whose
political views might previously have aligned with the unions but who
had no experience actually dealing with them. (See Ex. 1, Labor Notes
article on the targeting of students for compulsory unionism; and Ex.
2, Wall Street Journal editorial about the UAW's pro-Hamas activities).
The current travesty of herding graduate students into anti-semitic
unions finds its source with the Obama-Biden National Labor Relations
Boards, which have by fiat turned graduate students into graduate
employees--subject to unionization under the NLRA and, of course, the
payment of forced union dues as a condition of their academic careers.
See, e.g., Trustees of Columbia University and UAW, 364 NLRB 1080
(2016), overruling Brown University, 342 NLRB 483 (2004). Many Jewish
and pro-Israel graduate students are now being told that they must pay
dues to these radical unions or face termination. Such union coercion
is not limited to university campuses.
After October 7, my law practice and my dealings with my clients
took an even darker turn. Initially, my phone began ringing off the
hook with calls from Jewish and Israeli graduate students at the
nation's elite educational institutions--MIT, Columbia, NYU, the
University of Chicago and Northwestern to name a few--asking how they
can disassociate not just from any union, but from the anti-semitic
anti-Israel union that is menacing them on campus, protecting their
tormentors, or forcing them to pay dues to subsidize the union's pro-
Hamas activities.
These academic unions have not participated in the occupation of
campus libraries to protest the murder of Sudanese, who are being
starved and killed by the thousands every day by their own co-
religionists. Nor are they helping to set up encampments to protest the
treatment of Uighurs being herded into labor camps by the Chinese
Communist Party. Nor are they demanding that the Assad regime halt its
bloody repression against its own Syrian people, which has resulted in
the murder of hundreds of thousands. Nor do they demand the boycott of
Iranian oil products and pistachios in an effort to secure an end to
Houthi and Hezbollah rocket attacks on commercial shipping and innocent
civilians in both Israel and Lebanon. These unions' time and treasure,
and yes, their anti-semitic hatred, is laser focused on defaming Jews
and destroying the State of Israel.
In addition, my phone is now ringing off the hook from medical
residents and interns at some of the nation's finest teaching
hospitals, asking the same question, as their union is busy poisoning
their workplace with hateful anti-Jewish and anti-Israeli propaganda
and union resolutions.
My phone is also ringing off the hook from teachers and legal aid
lawyers, all of whom wonder how the union they formerly supported had
suddenly become organizers of pro-Hamas demonstrations and purveyors of
hateful rhetoric calling for the destruction of Israel, the one Jewish
homeland in the world, and the annihilation of all Jews.
Though this anti-semitic storm has been brewing for a long time, it
did not make landfall in the lives of most Jewish employees until after
October 7, when unions began funneling their resources to virulently
anti-semitic and anti-Israel projects. One example of this is the UE
union filing unfair labor practice charges against MIT because the
university suspended some of the pro-Hamas rioters who blocked access
to campus buildings and threatened Israeli and Jewish students.
Instead of siding with the victims of Hamas' terror and the crude
anti-semitism of the ``protesters,'' the UE is using union dues and
union lawyers to support the perpetrators of these hateful actions.
(See Exhibit 3, a UE unfair labor practice charge against MIT for
disciplining the ``protesters''). Such union misconduct is being
repeated all over the country by other unions like the UAW, which went
on strike in California to protect pro-Hamas ``protesters'' who seized
university property and set up ``encampments'' while threatening Jewish
and Israeli students. The UAW apparently claims this is all ``protected
concerted activity'' and union free speech under the NLRA, state law,
and/or the U.S. Constitution. (See Ex. 4, a lawsuit by the University
of California against the UAW to end the strikes).
The National Right to Work Legal Foundation's attorneys have been
working with Jewish and Israeli employees to vindicate their statutory
and civil rights in the face of this union abuse, but the law as it
currently exists is woefully inadequate to the task.
For example, Foundation lawyers have filed Beck-related unfair
labor practice charges with the National Labor Relations Board because
the UE union at MIT lied to employees and falsely told them they must
join or pay full dues, with no reduction for political and ideological
expenditures, even though the union knows that its money goes to
support pro-Hamas rioters on campus. (See Ex. 5, two UE emails sent to
all MIT students to coerce them into joining and paying; see also Ex.
3). The Beck decision says otherwise, but the lies and
misrepresentations about being ``required'' to join the union and pay
full dues persist.
Unions have no incentive to tell employees about their Beck rights,
and every pecuniary incentive to hide the truth and try to get
employees to pay excessive dues. An NLRB Beck settlement with the UE
union at MIT required the union to go back and notify all 3,000
graduate students of their true legal rights (see Ex. 6, the UE
settlement in Will Sussman's case), but shortly thereafter the union
turned around and denied another graduate student's Beck objection,
necessitating yet again another unfair labor practice charge that the
NLRB regional office found to be meritorious. (See Ex. 7, Katerina
Boukin's unfair labor practice charge). I expect more such litigation
will be necessary to enforce Beck rights.
NRTW lawyers have also filed five separate charges of religious and
ethnic discrimination with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC) against the same UE union at MIT (see Ex. 8), because that union
denied several Jewish graduate students' request for a religious
accommodation, telling them, in effect, that the union bosses know more
about their Jewish religion, ethnic identity and ancestral homeland
than they do. (See Ex. 9, UE denial letter). I expect more Jewish
employees around the country will have to initiate litigation and file
EEOC charges to see their civil rights honored.
Beyond what I have learned through my conversations with Jewish
employees faced with anti-semitic unions, the attached media reports
(Ex. 10) demonstrate that this sort of harassing anti-semitic union
behavior is going on at unionized workplaces all over the country. I
also attach material showing discriminatory teaching materials being
pushed by teachers' union members in Oakland, CA (Ex. 11). Finally, I
attach anti-Israel resolutions and statements being pushed by the
SEIU's medical intern and resident division (known as CIR-SEIU), the
National Education Association, and SEIU Local 1199. (See Ex. 12).
The bottom line is this: No worker in America should be threatened
with discharge from his or her workplace for refusing to pay dues and
fees to a private organization he or she may despise. No worker should
be forced to be represented by a private organization and its officials
who perform poorly in the workplace, or place their own interests above
those they purport to represent, or act corruptly to steal from the
very employees they claim to represent, or who espouse hateful rhetoric
and pro-terrorist policies. No worker should be forced to subsidize, as
a condition of employment, the political schemes and candidates of a
private organization of which they disapprove.
That is the reality for millions of private sector workers today
under the compulsory dues and monopoly bargaining regimes of the NLRA
and the Railway Labor Act. In the face of this abuse, Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act and the Beckdecision are not nearly strong enough
protections of employees' rights. As long as unions can force workers
to pay anything to get or keep their job, employees will be denied
their full freedom of association, speech and conscience. The Janus
decision was a small step for employee freedom in the public sector.
Now this Congress must pass the National Right to Work Act in the
private sector to end the problem of coercive forced unionism, and the
particular problem of compelling Jewish and other religious employees
to fund unions whose views and activities they find hateful,
threatening and deeply offensive.
The National Right to Work Act does not complicate federal labor
law. Rather, it repeals one legal section passed in the 1940's that
restricts individual employees' free choice about funding unions.
Restoring individual employees' right to provide or withhold money from
unions would hold Hamas-supporting unions (and indeed, all unions)
accountable to the workers they claim to represent. Employees who like
their anti-semitic and anti-Israel unions can keep them. Employees who
do not want anything to do with these hateful ideologies should be able
to defund and disaffiliate from them. What could be more American than
that?
______

Chairman Good. Thank you, sir. Under Committee Rule 9, we
will now question witnesses under the 5-minute rule. I will
wait to ask my questions, and therefore I recognize Mr. Wilson
from South Carolina for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you witnesses for being here today. Particularly, I am very
grateful, Mr. Taubman, that the National Right to Work
Committee has appreciated, is truly the champion for workers'
rights, promoting freedom since 1955.
That is just extraordinary, to have such a strong life, and
so successful. It should achieve a majority of the American
states to enact right to work laws for protecting workers'
freedom of choice. In South Carolina, it was instrumental in
working with creating 10,000 jobs at the Boeing aircraft
company, with its suppliers to build 787 jetliners several
years ago in Charleston, Orangeburg, Aiken and Lexington.
I was grateful to be working with Governor Nikki Haley,
U.S. Senators Tim Scott and Lindsey Graham, and Attorney
General Alan Wilson, with the Right to Work Committee, and you
prevailed over the corrupt National Labor Relations Act, and
now 10,000 workers, thousands of families are benefiting from
what the Right to Work Committee has achieved.
The Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation is working with
Jewish and Israeli employees to protect their statutory and
civil rights in the face of antisemitism. Can you discuss these
workers' reactions to their unions, supporting antisemitic and
anti-Israel causes, despite having a legal duty to protect the
interest of all members they represent?
Mr. Taubman. Thank you very much, Congressman Wilson, for
that question. As I said in my statement, it is heartbreaking
for me, as a Jewish American, and as a Zionist, to have my
phone ringing off the hook every single day since October 7th
by students, workers, teachers, legal aid lawyers, doctors,
saying how do I get out of this?
I am surrounded by vicious people attacking me as a Jew,
attacking me as a Zionist. I have friends in Israel. I have
family in Israel. I have friends who served in the IDF, the
most moral Army in the world, perhaps second only to the United
States Army, and they are attacked in their workplace, so that
is the reaction that I am seeing.
Unfortunately, I cannot say to all of these people exercise
your Constitutional rights to get out because under the
National Labor Relations Act, they cannot get out. They are
forced to be part of a bargaining unit and forced to pay dues
to a union or be fired.
Finally, although we have heard that unions have an
obligation to tell people about their rights, in fact, few
unions do. If you look at the exhibits to my statement, you
will see that in Exhibit 5, for example. This is a pamphlet
that the union at MIT put out to students.
They say, ``You are required--required, to sign up for
either dues or agency fees as a condition of employment. The
cost of dues and agency fees is exactly the same.'' That is a
lie. The whole point of Beck is that the cost of reduced dues
is different. You do not have to fund these obnoxious,
outrageous, political actions, but the unions lie, and tell
people they do.
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you for the Right to Work Committee
for telling the truth. Mr. Sussman, thank you for your courage.
Indeed, the graduate student union had an email in December
2023, which condemned MIT administrators for setting down what
they called peaceful protests. What were these peaceful
protests?
Mr. Sussman. Thank you, Mr. Wilson. The students would
occupy buildings. They would occupy communal spaces on campus
that were supposed to be shared, and over time they would
escalate. I included in my testimony, the arrest records of
several students, many of whom are graduate students in the
union, one of whom is the Vice President who is paid by the
union.
Many of those arrests were violent. I believe one person is
charged with assaulting a 60-year-old disabled person.
Mr. Wilson. Again, thank you for your courage. I regret,
Ms. Kopmar, I do not have time, but thank you for your courage,
and indeed to have the associate legal aid attorneys to ignore,
or disregard mass murder and rape. Thank you for the courage to
stand up against that, and the Hamas puppets of the regime in
Tehran need to be addressed. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Norcross
from New Jersey for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. I want to start out by saying we
live in the greatest country in the world. We live in a
democracy, which we have elections, whether they are for
Members of Congress, or for their representatives as their
union voices, but I do want to take a moment and personal
privilege to thank the Chairman.
He and I agree on little, if anything, but I do want to
thank him for his public service and wish him well in any
future endeavors that are coming out. We really need more
public servants, and we appreciate what you have done, and wish
you well.
I will start out by saying that we are in due process, I
heard stories what is going on in this country with
antisemitism is horrific in any form. We heard in many of our
hearings what is going on in college campuses, and I could not
agree more. We live in a country that is a democracy, and
unfortunately many of those views are something that I
personally disagree with, as many of us.
In this country, and to quote our friend from the
Institute, Mr. Taubman, we did not choose, and we do not want
many of our elected officials. Some might even be in this room,
and we are forced to fund them, whether it is a union or our
government.
The idea or a suggestion that because of a few bad actors,
which we make no excuses for, are being antisemitic, and
smearing the entire representatives or workers, I think is no
different calling unions antisemites. You could call
Republicans racist. You can call Democrats socialists, but it
does not make it true.
If we look back in our history, we certainly did have
racists that served in this House, but the idea that somehow
this is breaking out--I am sorry, did you say something? You
are looking to yield time from me, Chairman?
Chairman Good. Are you finished with your time?
Mr. Norcross. No. You were talking. I thought you were
wanting me to yield some time.
Chairman Good. I thought maybe you were talking about the
Southern Democrats and the KKK.
Mr. Norcross. No. I claim back my time.
Chairman Good. That is what you are talking about?
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, you are done. In more than one
way. The idea of what we are doing each and every day is how
democracies work. My question goes back to whether they have
votes on authorizing strikes, ratifying contracts, union
leadership, the votes that go on each and every day.
This is not the top down this is a bottom up. This is
something that we believe in in our Nation, and certainly in
the unions. Dr. Lofaso, can you talk to us a little bit more
detail, what you started to talk about, where those rights of a
union member when it comes to dues, when it comes to the votes
on where that union comes together, but at the end of the day
they have a vote, whether they agree with it, or they do not,
just like we do in this country when we have votes.
Could you expand on some of those issues, particularly
right to work states versus non-right to work states?
Ms. Lofaso. Okay. First of all, no worker can be compelled
to join a union in any State. In right to work states, they
also cannot be compelled to pay their dues. I think that we
agree on that. In non-right to work states, or fair share
states, the only thing that-union represented employees have to
pay are their agency fees, which is, as Mr. Taubman pointed
out, they are reduced fees.
The Supreme Court has stated very clearly that unions
cannot force anyone to pay for their political activities, or
non-representative activities. There is a big difference in
right to work states, and non-right to work states. Also, with
respect to a national right to work law, there already is a
solution for that too, which is to lobby.
The states can do that. Every State can do that if they
want, and it would have the same effect. West Virginia was one
of the most democratic states until recently. It was not right
to work, and now it is recently right to work, sorry.
Mr. Norcross. No. We understand. The idea that they do have
a choice, they are represented by agency fees, we understand
all of that, but the idea of having a hearing, one of only
maybe a dozen a year, making this your highest priority, I have
yet to have, and I live in a very Jewish area, one person come
up to me and talk to me about unions being antisemitic.
This goes with to the case of what we are doing here.
Chairman Good. The gentleman's time is expired. Thank you,
sir.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you for giving me those additional 10
seconds, Mr. Chairman, I really appreciate it. You have a good
day.
Chairman Good. I will now recognize Mr. Walberg from
Michigan again, for 5 minutes. Thank you.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the Chair for holding the hearing
today, and again, I would State it is not anti-union. We are
anti-union abuse of their power, and violation even of the law.
That is what our concern is with today and has been. About a
month ago, this Subcommittee held a hearing where I highlighted
a Wall Street, courageous, Wall Street Journal opinion piece
written by Mr. Sussman.
I am pleased to have Mr. Sussman here today to again be
courageous and stand, and hopefully produce other young people
that are willing to stand, not for republican, not for democrat
ideals, but for American ideals, and decency that goes on--that
ought to go on with this country.
I thank the Committee for its work in highlighting this
important issue. Mr. Sussman, your written testimony notes that
the graduate student union threatened to terminate anyone who
refused to pay for their so-called activism. In all reality,
that would virtually expel you from MIT, not for academic
problems, not for disciplinary problems, but the fact that they
were not willing to be represented by an entity that spoke
against you and your beliefs.
You filed a charge against the GSU with the National Labor
Relations Board, regarding the union violating your Beck
rights, which allow workers to opt out of paying the portion of
union dues that pays for political activity. You are following
the law. My question is while the NLRB agreed that your rights
had been violated, do you believe it adequately addressed the
illegal union activity?
Mr. Sussman. I do not. They required the union to send out
a PDF stating our rights, and that was basically the last we
heard of it. They continued doing the same exact tactics that I
charged them with last November, but the NLRB closed the case
anyway, and they refused to require training of the union
agents, so that they would not make the same mistake.
Mr. Walberg. Still have not. In your written testimony, Mr.
Sussman, you detail numerous examples of the GSU, and its paid
staff engaging in extreme anti-Israel, and anti-American. We
must not forget that--anti-American activity. For example, 2
days after October 7th attack on Israel, a paid GSU organizer
told reporters, and I quote, ``Those who rebel against
oppression cannot be blamed for rebelling against that
repression.''
Despite the union that represents you engaging in behavior
that is inconsistent with your beliefs, you have no choice but
to associate with it, or to leave MIT. Question, do you think
current Federal labor law needs to be reformed to allow workers
who have moral objections to a union's political stances to
disassociate completely from the union that represents them.
Mr. Sussman. Absolutely, yes. I have tried to use the law
as it exists, and at every turn the law has failed me.
Mr. Walberg. Yes. In some ways it is absurd to think, we
are talking about a union of students, very much different than
what union, steel workers union I was a member of at one time,
and others had in mind. Mr. Sussman, an attachment to your
written testimony shows that a December 2023 email from the
graduate student union at MIT.
The email condemned MIT administrators for shutting down
what it calls a peaceful anti-Israel protest and highlighted
the importance of First Amendment rights. You responded to my
colleague, Mr. Wilson, about some of those activities. Do you
believe that the GSU has respected the First Amendment rights
of the Jewish graduate students they represent?
Mr. Sussman. No. They have not respected our rights,
specifically speech, religion and association.
Mr. Walberg. In fact, they have stepped on them. They
pushed them down, pushed them back, tried to discourage any
dissent from that, and still expected you to pay up, while
people that should be representing you fight against you, your
belief, your nationality, religion, and your American ideals as
well.
Mr. Sussman, I would encourage you to continue standing
firm. I believe others are watching. I believe there are others
that will gain strength and courage themselves to follow you.
It will not be easy, as Mr. Taubman has identified in his
efforts for 40 years, but it must be done for America, as well
as freedom, and First Amendment liberties, and I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Ms. Jayapal
from Washington for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have been appalled
at the rising level of hate crimes against the Jewish community
that followed Hamas's terrorist attack on Israel on October
7th, and I believe it is absolutely critical that we speak out
against antisemitism, that we recognize the severity, and we
condemn and confront it authentically.
President Biden's national strategy to counter
antisemitism, importantly recognizes that, ``Protecting the
Jewish community from antisemitism is essential to our broader
fight against all forms of hate, bigotry and bias, and to our
broader vision of a thriving, inclusive, and diverse
democracy.''
I am also very proud to come from Washington State, which
is the third most unionized State in the country, and because
of that we have the highest minimum wage of any State in the
country. We have an incredible paid leave policy in our State.
We have the third best environment for small businesses of any
State in the country.
Unions have been an absolute, incredible partner to
achieving justice and equality for all communities. Unions have
long recognized the interconnectedness of all our issues, and
that conditions on the job are impacted by conditions in the
world. From the civil rights movement to marriage equality, and
protections for undocumented workers, unions have been on the
forefront of social and socioeconomic progress.
UAW Local 2325, which is under scrutiny by my Republican
colleagues, has a history of activism opposing the Vietnam War,
apartheid in South Africa, the Iraq War, and instances of
police brutality. I am disappointed that my republican
colleagues are convening this hearing to question a union
exercising its First Amendment rights, especially at a time
when there are real issues of antisemitism that we all need to
address.
Unionized workers are standing up in record numbers to
secure contracts that guarantee that they receive their fair
share of corporate profits through dramatically raised wages
and increased benefits. It seems to me that this hearing is
really about criticizing unions, which has always been a
Republican position, to try to undermine unions, instead of the
real issues that we should be talking about.
We have heard a lot of attacks today directed at UAW Local
2325 for adopting a cease-fire resolution. Dr. Lofaso, can you
share the process behind how this resolution was adopted?
Ms. Lofaso. I can share the process of how it is likely to
be adopted because I do not actually have any firsthand
knowledge of the UAW local. What normally is done is that
unions have bylaws, and a constitution that they are ratified
by majority vote, so it is a democratic process.
Then they--anything--then those are the rules by which they
have to live by. After that a resolution like this would have
to go by their rules, and if they did they would be democratic.
Now, if sometimes democracies fail us, and so when there are
dissenters. We have two dissenters here. They are important.
Their voices are important, because the law in this country
has recognized that we do not need to protect popular speech.
We do, but we do not need to because it is popular. We need to
protect unpopular speech.
It is very important what they have done, and I think they
prove my point, which is they had recourse, and to the extent
they did not feel that they had recourse, which I can
appreciate, like in Mr. Sussman's case, I think part of that is
the underfunding of the NLRB. Sorry.
Ms. Jayapal. Yes. I agree with you there. I have a couple
more questions I just want--but I want to point out some
important things you said. It is a democratic process, right?
Ms. Lofaso. Yes.
Ms. Jayapal. Constitution, bylaws, democratic vote, it was
adopted through a vote, and has always been the case, I think
we have to understand that labor unions are an extension of
democracy in the workplace.
Ms. Lofaso. Yes.
Ms. Jayapal. That is the way that they are structured. Can
you discuss just briefly, because I do not have much time, how
workers are impacted, how it impacts their ability to organize
when Congress issues subpoenas over votes that the union, as a
democratic institution, has taken as the Republican majority is
doing?
Ms. Lofaso. Well, any time Congress issues a subpoena, it
is going to have effect of repressing that institution because
Congress is a scary body, right? It is the government. It is
asking, it is compelling you to come to it. That would be
something that would repress that democratic institution, and
something that is odd for an elected body to do.
Ms. Jayapal. Extremely odd, and extremely undemocratic.
Thank you so much. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Mr. Allen
from Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank the
witnesses for your courage and your honest testimony this
morning. You know, the battle rages on in the country about,
you know, like who are we? One of the values that we enjoy in
our workplace, in the greatest workforce, the greatest military
on the face of the earth, and what are those values based on?
For example, this hearing is in the House of
Representatives. In our Chamber we have above the flag etched
in stone, In God We Trust. In fact, it is on our currency. Is
that God the God of Abraham, Issac, and Jacob? Genesis 12:3 is
very clear about the circumstances that we are dealing with
right now.
We have the full face of Moses looking down on that body,
who gave us the law, which is the basis of our values that we
enjoy. Most of our leaders ask for God to bless America. Well,
that is covered very well in Genesis 12:3. God says, ``If you
bless Israel, I will bless you.''
Then he says, ``All the nations would be blessed through
Israel.'' In my State, of Georgia, we are a right to work
State, the 27 states. Lots of states are doing well, but
Georgia has had the distinct honor to being the best State to
do business in the last 10 years in a row.
Georgia has great companies, who value their employees,
both union and non-union. It is damaging to these great
companies, those who are non-union, to say that they are bad
actors because they are not union. Folks, we have a modern
workforce, and based on the values I just described, the
scriptures are very clear on how you deal with your workforce.
The folks that work for you. They are very clear, and I do
not have time to line all that up today because I have got a
lot of questions to ask. The bottom line is we have got to
decide where we want to be as a Nation. Right now, we are in
crisis because we are a lawless land, and that is why we are
having lots of these discussions, which are very difficult for
a lot of the citizens of this country.
Mr. Taubman, under Communication Workers of America versus
Beck, the U.S. Supreme Court determined that workers
represented by a union continues to opt out of paying the
portion of dues that funds union political activity. In your
experience, do labor unions respect workers' decisions to
exercise their Beck rights?
Mr. Taubman. Thank you, and the answer is absolutely not.
It demonstrated in part by what we have in this case at MIT. It
is in the exhibits to my testimony. The union tells people you
must pay full dues, or you must pay an equal amount of agency
fees, equal, which is false, and that is what they tell these
graduate students.
Mr. Allen. Are workers well informed of these rights?
Mr. Taubman. Not in the least.
Mr. Allen. Can you discuss some ways that labor unions have
used members' dues to support antisemitic, and anti-Israel
activities?
Mr. Taubman. It is all in the attachments to my statement.
The unions, instead of trying to protect Jewish students from
these pro-Hamas rioters, when the schools finally get up the
nerve to suspend or expel the pro-Hamas rioters, the unions
file lawsuits, and unfair labor practice charges against the
schools to stop them from suspending the pro-Hamas rioters.
Mr. Allen. Ms. Kopmar, I have got 30 seconds. In your
opinion, have any ALAA members stopped participating in unions
because of the rancor leading up to the passage of the
resolution calling for the cease-fire?
Ms. Kopmar. Yes, definitely, I mean, many of us have been
stifled. We are not able to be as vocal as we can. There as I
mentioned on Gaggle, Gaggle is this email listserv that members
are able to post their emails, but Zionist members are
constantly being bullied on it. It is not a safe space for any
of us.
Me, I will never go on Gaggle because I know that I am
going to be ridiculed and threatened, so I will never. My voice
is stifled. Every time we go on a Joint Council meeting, we are
also--a Joint Council meeting is a membership wide meeting,
again, our voices are stifled.
We are called despicable names. We are bullied constantly,
in front of leadership. It is not just a few bad actors.
Mr. Allen. That is why the leaders of this Nation have got
to decide to protect our citizens, and Mr. Sussman, I have more
questions for you. I will submit those for the record, and Mr.
Chairman, I apologize, I ran over my time.
Chairman Good. My apologies to everybody for letting you go
that long. Thank you, Mr. Allen. I recognize Mr. Courtney from
Connecticut. I now recognize Ms. Manning from North Carolina
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member, and I
want to thank our witnesses for sharing your stories. I am
deeply disturbed about what you have been through, and I want
to be very clear that antisemitism has no place in any
workplace, in any school, in any union, or any other facet of
American life.
It is simply unacceptable, and I want to emphasize that
President Biden's national strategy to counter antisemitism
actually requires the Department of Labor to disseminate
resources to unions on recognizing antisemitism, and the
importance of combating this hate in relation to workers'
rights.
The national strategy, which I have put into my Combating
Antisemitism Act would offer real tangible solutions to combat
antisemitism in our country, and that is why I am asking once
again, that we mark-up my legislation, and support the
President's proposed strategy to take serious action to fight
against the uptick of antisemitism, and despicable hatred in
our communities.
Both of these could also be addressed by increasing funding
to the EEOC and the OCR. With that said, Ms. Lofaso, you
highlighted the legal duty of unions to fair representation and
non-discrimination. Discrimination based on religious views in
union organizations is illegal, according to Federal law. Is
that correct?
Ms. Lofaso. Yes.
Ms. Manning. Ms. Kopmar has highlighted her case in which
four members of the Association of Legal Aid attorneys filed
charges to expel her from the union. These charges came after
Ms. Kopmar secured a temporary restraining order to stop a
union wide vote from taking place on an anti-Israel,
antisemitic resolution.
Do these filings to expel Ms. Kopmar constitute retaliation
in your opinion.
Ms. Lofaso. Under those facts as you gave them, that sounds
like retaliation to me.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. Ms. Kopmar, I want to turn you. I
want to thank you for bravely coming here today to discuss your
appalling experience in facing antisemitism within your union,
your workplace. You consider yourself generally a pro-union
person, is that correct?
Ms. Kopmar. That is very much correct.
Ms. Manning. Would you agree that unions are instrumental
in fighting for higher wages, better working conditions, and
inclusivity in the workplace? Would you agree with that.
Ms. Kopmar. Yes, I would.
Ms. Manning. Like the ALAA, other unions, including the
NEA, have weighed in on this issue. Does engaging in divisive,
political resolutions help support these goals, the goals of a
union?
Ms. Kopmar. No. It does not.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. As part of your effort to
strengthen the union, and protect yourself from antisemitism,
you mentioned that you filed charges with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission. Is that correct?
Ms. Kopmar. Yes. That is.
Ms. Manning. In your experience, would giving more funding
to the EEOC help them provide the action that they need to help
resolve claims like yours?
Ms. Kopmar. I believe so because I think I know that we
have been waiting for a while to receive a response from the
EEOC, so more funding would then lead to a quicker response.
Ms. Manning. Do you believe that legislation that increases
education about workplace antisemitism in combating anti-Jewish
hatred for union members would help address this problem?
Ms. Kopmar. I think so.
Ms. Manning. As you have emphasized, the EEOC is a much-
needed tool for union members, and all Americans who have
experienced discrimination in any form. We have had other
hearings on this topic, and it has become clear that there are
also awareness issues that workers simply do not know that they
can turn to the EEOC, or students do not know that they can
turn to the OCR, when they experience Jewish antisemitism, or
anti-Jewish hatred, so more funding would be appropriate.
Let me just close by saying that if my Republican
colleagues are serious about combatting antisemitism in the
workplace, or on college campuses, they need to do more than
holding hearings.
They need to stop presenting us with budgets that
drastically cut the funding for the EEOC, or the OCR, and they
should bring my Countering Antisemitism Act to the House floor
for a vote, so that we can give the government the tools they
need to fight this rising form of discrimination. With that, I
yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Mr.
Burlison for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Sussman, in your
testimony you noted that the GSU, the graduate student union,
they illegally threatened to terminate anyone who refused to
pay for their activism. You filed a charge against the GSU with
the NLRB regarding them violating your Beck rights.
While the NLRB did agree that your rights had been
violated, do you believe that they addressed the issue
adequately?
Mr. Sussman. No.
Mr. Burlison. Can you elaborate?
Mr. Sussman. Sure. They require that the union send out a
PDF stating our rights, and then the union officers continued
to do exactly the same thing that they had been doing all
along.
Mr. Burlison. They just continued. They are not doing any
enforcement whatsoever.
Mr. Sussman. That is correct.
Mr. Burlison. Have you noticed other examples of
politically motivated activity within the GSU where they pushed
on their members?
Mr. Sussman. They spent all of their time protesting
against Israel.
Mr. Burlison. I am sorry. I did not hear that.
Mr. Sussman. They spend all of their time protesting
against Israel.
Mr. Burlison. Okay. They are spending so much time pushing
against Israel, do they take any steps whatsoever to protect
the rights of their Jewish members?
Mr. Sussman. No.
Mr. Burlison. That you can recall?
Mr. Sussman. Not that I can recall.
Mr. Burlison. That is tragic. Mr. Taubman, in your
testimony you say that since October 7th, and the attack on
Israel, labor unions have become organizers of hateful, anti-
Jewish and anti-Israel propaganda, and resolutions. From the
discussions that you have had with workers, and it is tragic to
hear that you are getting phone calls from all over the Nation,
have unions--I will ask the same question.
Have you seen where unions have stepped in to take steps to
protect the Jewish members who are being discriminated against
at this time?
Mr. Taubman. Never once, and I have taken calls from all
over the country, universities, hospitals, legal aid, not one
employee has ever said to me oh, the union has helped me, or
oh, I can go to the union, and they will help me. None.
Mr. Burlison. Mr. Taubman, I hesitate to bring this up, but
I just--there has been--I know that in my State, for example,
there have been lawsuits and complaints against labor unions,
particularly, you know, we have areas where there are a high
percentage of minorities, and yet the labor unions have a very
low percentage of minorities in the single digits.
There has been--there has often been a history, and I do
not know if you have any comments about it, but it is just the
nature of this system to create somehow emboldens
discrimination within labor unions, and the history of that?
Mr. Taubman. Sure. I think the bottom line is the old adage
absolute power corrupts absolutely. If I can tell you pay me,
or you are going to lose your job because I can get you fired,
I would call that absolute dictatorial power in the workplace.
Unions spend other people's money.
Justice Scalia in a Supreme Court Case called Davenport,
recognized that unions have a unique privilege in this country,
the privilege of demanding other people's money, which they can
then go use on all of these sorts of far left, intersectional
woke politics, right? It is a lot more fun to go running around
and riot on behalf of Hamas, than it is to say let us do a
workplace grievance and see if we can get better wages in this
place because that is boring.
That is work. It is more fun to be intersection or leftist.
Mr. Burlison. Do you think the Beck decision was kind of a
compromise rather than throw out? I think that the forced
unionization is a violation of the First Amendment rights of
associations, so do you think the Beck decision was a way to
kind of split the baby and say you do not have to join, you do
not have to be a member, but you still have to pay.
Many of the examples are that you have to pay the exact
same amount, and so the question is do people truly have a
right of an association?
Mr. Taubman. Well, yes. All of these decisions have been
split the babies. If you go back to the original duty of fair
representation decisions, Steel v. Louisville and Nashville
Railroad, where the unions were discriminating against black
workers, and refusing to let them join, the Supreme Court said
oh, we do not want to strike down the Railway Labor Act, and
these Federal laws.
We will create this thing called the Duty of Fair
Representation, and that will fix the problem. Instead, they
should have struck down these laws which violated people's free
association rights. We are going to continue to litigate to
make that happen, and hopefully it will happen in my lifetime.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you for what you do, and I appreciate
your comments. My time is expired.
Chairman Good. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Scott from
Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Lofaso,
is it true that those who belong to unions generally get higher
pay than non-union members?
Ms. Lofaso. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Do they get safer workplaces?
Ms. Lofaso. I am sorry, I did not hear the question.
Mr. Scott. Safer workplaces.
Ms. Lofaso. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Better pay?
Ms. Lofaso. I have actually written on that.
Mr. Scott. Better benefits?
Ms. Lofaso. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Now, in paying union dues you said that they
could opt out of paying the full dues, and just pay for those
that go to representational expenses. Is that right?
Ms. Lofaso. That is in fair share states. In right to work
states they do not have to pay any dues.
Mr. Scott. They get all of the benefits of the union
efforts?
Ms. Lofaso. That is correct. There is a duty of fair
representation.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Now, if you are paying your fair share,
and not the full dues, do you have to pay for political
activities?
Ms. Lofaso. No. No one has to pay for political activities.
Mr. Scott. How about the annual summer cookout?
Ms. Lofaso. No.
Mr. Scott. How about the end of the year holiday party?
Ms. Lofaso. No.
Mr. Scott. Just the representation of what the union is
legally required for representation, the benefits that they
get?
Ms. Lofaso. That is correct, and if they do not do those
things, they can be sued, which I know Mr. Taubman knows very
well, because that is what he does.
Mr. Scott. Now, in terms of your right to pay the lower
dues, that is your Beck right, is that right?
Ms. Lofaso. That is correct.
Mr. Scott. People are--you are required to give your notice
to opt out of the union. Is there any effort to let people know
that they can opt into the union?
Ms. Lofaso. No.
Mr. Scott. Is that stacked against workers?
Ms. Lofaso. In my opinion, yes.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Now, you have heard from the gentleman
from Missouri, the well-known fact that equal opportunity in
unions is not always the case. If you find religious or racial
discrimination in a union, what agency can you go to for
relief?
Ms. Lofaso. The EEOC.
Mr. Scott. What do you think of cutting funding for the
EEOC if that is your goal?
Ms. Lofaso. It would be very difficult to enforce the
rights of people.
Mr. Scott. For those of us who are interested in protecting
workers' rights, what do you have to say about the law that
allows employers to fire workers, and often not have to pay
anything?
Ms. Lofaso. I think that that is selfish, actually, because
it puts a burden on every other person to pay for their
representation. If then that person is fired, the union still
has to represent them, and that costs them money, and that
individual does not have to pay the union anything.
Mr. Scott. For those that do not belong to the union, the
union has to represent you the same as they would a union
member?
Ms. Lofaso. Yes. Otherwise, it would be a breach of their
duty of fair representation.
Mr. Scott. Does that mean that they have to, if it is an
individualized grievance, not just a general grievance, but an
individualized grievance, a nonunion member has the right to
the same representation as dues paying union members in right
to work states?
Ms. Lofaso. Yes. Actually--the Supreme Court expressly said
that in City Disposal.
Mr. Scott. I have introduced a bill, Protecting the Right
to Organize. It says employers who fire workers who are trying
for union activities can often escape without any sanctions. Is
that true?
Ms. Lofaso. Yes.
Mr. Scott. What is the sanction for illegally firing a
worker?
Ms. Lofaso. It would be back pay and reinstatement, minus
mitigation.
Mr. Scott. Minus mitigation means if you left a nonunion
shop, and got a good union job, and made more than you were
making before, there would be no sanction?
Ms. Lofaso. That would be correct.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Dr. Foxx
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Kopmar, you
discussed in your testimony how the ALAA's pro-Palestine
resolution impacted you and other dissenting union members.
ALAA leadership later voted 124 to 18 against the resolution,
condemning Hamas, and requesting the release of hostages.
A paid union staffer said all union membership that you
sought to distract the union from its support for Palestine.
What does the outcome of the leadership vote on releasing
hostages say about those leading your union, and the
individuals they have hired to staff the union?
Ms. Kopmar. Thank you, Dr. Foxx. By voting down the release
of the--by voting down that resolution to release the hostages
in such an overwhelming manner, and overwhelming numbers, the
union showed its true face that the lives of Jews do not
matter.
They dehumanized the hostages, including American hostages,
including hostages that came from New York, from Long Island,
by not recognizing that they were abducted violently, and still
being kept in Gaza. They demonized us for showing our support
of Israel. I mean the things that were said in Gaggle, and the
Joint Council meeting that night was so shocking to all of us,
all of the Zionist members.
It showed the true face of the union on that night. They do
not recognize that hostages are entitled to freedom, and human
rights. The simple reason for that is because they are Jewish.
To us, to me, that is antisemitism in its most basic form.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. Taubman, for decades
you have litigated cases to protect the rights of individual
workers who want to limit their association with labor unions
who they want no part of. After the October 7 attack on Israel,
was there an increase in the number of calls to you from
workers seeking to associate from the union?
Mr. Taubman. Thank you for your leadership, Dr. Foxx. The
answer is that my phone has been ringing off the hook, and my
colleagues' phones have been ringing off the hook from doctors,
from teachers, from legal aid, from people all over the country
wondering how they can get out of these horrible, antisemitic
unions.
Mrs. Foxx. What were the Jewish union member's experiencing
at the workplaces?
Mr. Taubman. The other people on the panel, like Mr.
Sussman can tell you, because they are there on the frontline.
I can tell you anecdotally what I hear. Let me just read you
from what some Jewish employees at CUNY City University of New
York have said recently.
``Nails were found in their tires. Antisemitic flyers
distributed all over the campus. Malicious and relentless
campaigns to get them fired because they were Zionist.
Discussions that observing Jews were undesirable for
membership. Requests to remove observant Jewish faculty
members.'' This is virtually Nazi like from out of the 1930's,
and that is what these people are seeing on their campuses.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. Sussman, your written
testimony notes that in April the graduate student union at MIT
pushed through a cease-fire resolution that does not mention
peace, hostages or Hamas. The divisive resolution passed with
very low voter participation. Did the union ever seek out the
opinion of Jewish graduate students who they represent before
pushing this resolution forward?
Mr. Sussman. They did not, and some Jewish students
attended the general membership meeting where they discussed
the resolution, and asked the Committee members who did they
discuss the resolution with. They said they looked inside
themselves.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. I want to thank our
witnesses for being here today to shed additional light on the
antisemitism that is occurring within unions, and let the
American people understand how deep, pervasive, and harmful
this is to our Jewish citizens. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. I now recognize Ms. Houchin from
Indiana for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
Ranking Member. Thanks for being here to testify before us
today. Really appreciated all of your opening statements.
I have made very clear to this Committee my stance on
unionization, which has been heavily influenced by my own
state's success as a right to work State, the State of Indiana,
and I am supportive of Federal right to work legislation
because I recognize that under current Federal law, workers
individual liberties, and their right to make decisions
currently concerning unionization are poorly protected.
In your testimony, Mr. Taubman, you mentioned how some
American unions are now discriminating against, and threatening
Jewish workers, and that has been especially prevalent
following the October 7th attacks on Israel. What legislative
reforms do you suggest to Congress that we should consider to
protect workers' rights with respect to unions?
Mr. Taubman. Thank you for that fantastic question. No. 1,
certainly is a national right to work law. This should not be a
State issue. This should not even be a partisan issue. Nobody
tells you, you have to join a specific church, or a specific
group, or you have to pay money to a private organization.
That does not happen anywhere else in American life except
for the privileged labor unions that have been doing this since
the 1930's and the 1940's, that is the first thing. Pass a
national right to work law. The second thing is if you are not
going to pass a national right to work law, there are things
like recertification elections automatically.
Every member in this room stands for an election
automatically every 2 years. Every Senator every 6 years. Do
you know how often unions automatically stand for re-election?
The answer is zero. They never have to stand for re-election
unless the employees can band together to throw them out, and
in a place like MIT with thousands of grad students that rotate
through for one or two, or 3 years, that will never happen.
Ronald Regan said the closest thing to eternal life on
earth is a government program. I can tell you the closest thing
to eternal life on earth for these unions is to represent a
bunch of graduate students.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you. Dr. Lofaso, in your written
testimony you have a section about compelled worker--compelled
union dues, and you note that under Beck, employees who work in
right to work states can't be compelled to pay any dues or
fees. I am certainly glad that my State of Indiana is a right
to work State, so that people are not compelled to pay union
dues or fees, even the cost of representation.
However, you State that under Beck, employees who work in
non-right to work states, can only be required to pay their
``fair share'' of the cost of their representation. My question
to you is what constitutes fair share for the cost of
representation to an organization that is politically and
ideologically opposed to some of their members very being.
Ms. Lofaso. Well, under the that question, they would not
have to pay for any of those activities.
Ms. Houchin. They do have to pay for fees. Is that correct?
Ms. Lofaso. They would, but they could also withdraw, they
can withdraw, by doing a section 19 NLRB objection, so that
means they would not have to pay any of those dues to the
union.
Ms. Houchin. It seems like that we have had some
conflicting testimony to that today that there are compelled
fees that must be paid, and we will get to that. You also
mentioned in your opening statement----
Ms. Lofaso. That would be unlawful.
Ms. Houchin. Sorry, I am going to reclaim my time. You also
mentioned in your opening statement that Congress and this
Committee should focus on real problems, instead of what we are
talking about today. Do you not believe that eradicating
antisemitism from labor unions is a real problem?
Ms. Lofaso. I do actually, but I do not think that that is
the problem that is the--is what is going on here. What we have
heard today is that unions are----
Ms. Houchin. I am going to reclaim my time. Would you not
tell these other panelists that you have heard their stories,
that what they are dealing with is not a real problem?
Ms. Lofaso. My personal opinion is irrelevant.
Ms. Houchin. Would you concede that Mr. Sussman's testimony
constitutes a real problem? Yes or no? I have got only 46
seconds left.
Ms. Lofaso. I do not have--I do not wish to give my
personal opinion about anything.
Ms. Houchin. You are not going to answer whether you think
that the testimony we have heard here today from the fellow
panelists, constitutes real problems. Thank you for that. Okay.
Ms. Lofaso. I think that they are a real problem.
Ms. Houchin. I am going to move on to Mr. Sussman, your
written testimony notes that the union that represents you,
illegally threatened to terminate anyone who refused to pay for
their activism.
You filed charges against GSU with the NLRB. The NLRB
agreed that your rights had been violated. Do you think they
adequately address the illegal union activity?
Mr. Sussman. They did not adequately address it. No.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you, I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize the Ranking
Member, Mr. DeSaulnier for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. By expression, I
think a high school teacher told us that the only absolute you
should deal with is the absolute you should not deal with
absolutes. What we are dealing with here is very binary in both
instances of the labor movement, my view, in antisemitism.
Often times, and it should be binary in the sense of the
rules. You should not be antisemitic, period. You should value
workers, and their employers, in a balanced way. Doctor, you
talked about this. To the witnesses, particularly Ms. Kopan and
Mr. Sussman, we probably disagree on a lot of things, but I
agree that your minority rights should be protected.
They are minority rights. We lose elections, those of us
who believe in democracy, unless there is a demonstratable
legal analysis of unfairness, you accept the results. In that
context, Doctor, you mentioned this a little earlier. Could you
go a little bit further on how the law is meant to protect
minority rights, but also the rights of the majority through
the electoral process and the union movement.
One other thing, there was a comment earlier about unions
being historically not including equity. I am from California.
The California building trades is 85 percent minority and
women. The labor federation is a little bit below that.
Nationally, women now are a majority of the labor movement.
African Americans are at a higher percentage in a union,
and people of color than in nonunion working places,
historically we changed over time on regional bases, and other
basis, but just for clarity, unions are very, very, very
diverse right now, and that diversity is protected.
Not absolutely, so Doctor, with those comments would you
care to speak on any of that protection of minority rights, and
a level of diversity in the union movement?
Ms. Lofaso. Yes. First of all, I would like to--I feel my
testimony was mischaracterized, that I do think antisemitism is
a huge problem, but I just feel that I am here to talk about
labor law. I am not an expert in that type of thing, and
therefore my opinion does not really matter about that.
What really matters is what these people are experiencing,
and they are saying, and our great justice system, will--
they'll be able to go through it, and they will get remedies.
Now, unfortunately, NLRA remedies are very weak, and therefore
they cannot get the remedies that they need. I think if the
NLRB were funded, then they would maybe could afford training,
or more staffing to get this through.
In terms of minority rights, there are many things that if
the union discriminates against anyone, including Jews, any
type of religion, any person of any race, then that would be
against the law. That would be against Title 7, and then that
would be investigated by that agency.
They also could, and even if they do that, I think there is
a difference between what about people who are breaking the
law, and what the law is. Obviously, we have laws because
people break laws. We do not regulate things that are not a
problem, so we have solutions here for minority rights.
That is important. What we do not have, and that is what I
meant by the real problem, are workers' rights that are
meaningful, that can enforce this. Obviously, antisemitism is
absolutely wrong, just like all hate.
Mr. DeSaulnier. You have said that the majority party's
union members Right to Know Act is a solution in search of a
problem, an example of over regulation. Would you expand on
that?
Ms. Lofaso. Sure. We have already regulated this area. We
have Ronald Coase, who was a great libertarian economist said
you only regulate when there is a market failure. He has often
misstated as never regulations. We only regulate when there's
market failure.
Here what we have is what the Committee seems to be
focusing on is the stuff that is already regulated, and has
remedies, instead of what the real problem is, which is getting
remedies for unfair labor practice. Mr. Sussman had an unfair
labor practice problem. That is the real problem.
If a union actually will say that he had to join, if a
union said that he had to join them, they were wrong, and they
violated the law, and they should be prosecuted.
Chairman Good. Thank you. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes. Mr. Taubman, I am thankful to live in and represent
Virginia, a right to work State, where employees thankfully
cannot be forced to pay union dues. I certainly did not choose
to pay any union dues when I was working in a unionized auto
factory during my college time.
God forbid that we should ever have realized into law the
democrats dream of this PRO Act, which essentially says to
every employer across the country, ``Embrace a union or close
your doors,'' two options that would result from that.
You have noted, as incredible as this is today, that under
Federal law, Jewish workers who live in non-right to work
states, who suffer in non-right to work states, can be forced
to pay union dues that express hateful--pay dues to a union, I
am sorry, that expresses hateful antisemitic rhetoric or views.
You noted, but I will just ask you again, can you say any
other aspect of American life where an individual is forced to
fund a private entity that expresses speech that they find
hateful, threatening or objectionable?
Mr. Taubman. Thankfully, I know of no other example.
Chairman Good. Let us hope that this becomes the isolated
example that we have to fight versus some occurring more
broadly in our society. Ms. Kopmar, it seems that the terrible
offensive cease-fire resolution, that you have described, that
was 3 days after the October 7 brutal attack, never mentions
the Hamas terrorists, and was ultimately adopted by the union.
That was really a continuation, was it not, and an
escalation of the union having allowed antisemitism to fester
under the surface for months, was it not?
Ms. Kopmar. Yes. That is true.
Chairman Good. Can you talk about that? How it had been
allowed just to continue prior to that resolution?
Ms. Kopmar. Yes. Actually prior to the ALAA's resolution
there were two additional resolutions that had been introduced
by other ALAA chapters, namely the Bronx Defenders, as well as
Camda Chapters. Those particular resolutions were also very
antisemitic. The Bronx Defenders resolution actually was
advocating, or at least it advocated for the Hamas violence
against Israel.
There was this hostile work environment that had already
been fomented by these other chapters. There had been
interoffice emails that were at Legal Aid, the city, where
people were questioning whether or not Jewish attorneys can
actually represent our clients. There had been this, sort of
like this turmoil that had been going on that fomented itself
with this resolution that was introduced in November.
Chairman Good. You referenced in your testimony verbally,
and your written testimony about some of these terrible,
hateful, offensive messaging through the Gaggle, the internal
message board of ALAA, things as you referenced, and you said
that we were called ``fascist,'' ``genocide deniers,''
``snitches,'' and ``Zionist goals,'' we were told to ``go kill
ourselves.''
The slogan, ``From the River to the Sea,'' was routinely
used, and so forth. In light of this did ALAA leadership ever
intervene, or condemn these messages, or even call for some
semblance of civility in the face of what the Jewish members,
who they purport to represent, who having to suffer through?
Ms. Kopmar. Never. They never stopped the bullying. They
never called anyone out to stop the bullying, and to stop the
vitrail, and in fact they doubled down right after that one
Joint Council meeting that we had where we introduced the
Release the Hostage resolution.
That very next day a paid ALAA staffer actually blamed the
Zionist minority for all of the issues that it was having. They
blamed us, and so they actually have been promoting this. They
have actually been dividing the membership. They have been
fostering the hostile work environment, so no, they have done
nothing to tamp it down, and it is only been getting worse.
Chairman Good. Everyone should be concerned about the
unique, horrific situation in the world, and in the country
today, but when Israel can be horrifically attacked is blamed
for an attack, and when Jews are discriminated against,
harassed, intimidated, threatened and harmed, Jews are blamed
for that. That is unique, and it should be condemned,
unequivocally across the country, and everyone should be
concerned about that.
With that, I would like to recognize the Ranking Member for
his closing remarks.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would agree with
your overall sentiment that I found it frustrating as a long-
time supporter of Israel's right to exist and having a very
good relationship with the Jewish community in the San
Francisco Bay area in California for 35 years in elected
office.
Being a pro union in this instance, pro-democracy. One of
the reasons I support Israel's right to exist is it is a
democracy, but within that just like in America, that does not
mean I agree with the current, or at any particular time,
administration. I disagree with the policies after October 7th
of the current administration in Israel.
That does not make me antisemitic. That makes me a believer
in democracy, and we get in trouble in democracies, just my
observation of history, when we start assuming that if you
disagree with the majority party, of any democracy, that you
are inherently against their God, or you have the moral
authority.
We all have to reflect on that because I think liberals do
it, conservatives do it, we just have to reflect and
proportion. In relationship to what the testimony we have had
here today, Mr. Chairman, I would be delighted to talk to you
about how we can further minority rights to make sure they are
protected because I think it does a tremendous disservice, and
your testimony here, the disservice of a majority of people who
are in the labor movement, who I would hope very strongly would
not do what you have described in your examples.
I make that an offer. I would be happy to meet with you as
well to see if I can help make sure that the disincentives are
there to protect minority rights. Combating antisemitism and
other forms of hatred transcends political divisions. I am
being a little bit repetitive here.
It is a moral imperative that demands our unwavering
commitment. We must ensure our workplaces are not only safe,
but also inclusive, fostering environments where every
individual, regardless of their background, can thrive and
contribute fully. This hearing also importantly highlighted the
many ways that law provides recourse for workers who feel they
may have been mistreated by unions.
As I have said, I would be willing to work on remedies, if
that's not the case, including funding agencies and
disincentives for people who do violate the law, as well as the
short falls of our current law when it comes to informing
workers of their right to organize with their coworkers, free
of employer coercion. I extend my sincere appreciation to the
witnesses, experts, and advocates, whose contributions have
enriched today's discussion.
Thank you all for being here and taking the time to prepare
for this hearing over the July 4th holiday week. Moving
forward, we must strengthen our support of issues, in my view,
like the PRO Act, that bolster protections for workers, and
uphold their rights in the workplace.
By doing so, we can build an economy that prioritizes
fairness and opportunity for all, and I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. I now recognize myself for
closing remarks. I want to apologize to Jewish Americans here
today, and across the country, for the necessity of having this
hearing. The concerns here today have been specifically
directed toward union bosses and union leadership across the
country.
Again, how we got to the point where this hearing is
necessary, but it is demonstrated by the content of what has
been discussed here today, and by the testimony of our
witnesses, and what they have experienced. While this might be
a difficult topic, I am glad today's hearing could shine a
light on the continued problems of antisemitism in this
country, much of which is unique to our Jewish friends,
including again, among the leadership of our Nation's labor
unions.
For some reason, many union leaders would rather double
down on defending a terrorist organization, than focus on local
workers' issues. They would rather sow division than unite
workers around areas of common interest, and they are willing
to abandon pro-Israel, Jewish employees, that have to face who
then have to face coercion or retaliation as they fight
themselves for the rights.
It reinforces my belief that unions have long outlived
their usefulness. I will say it again. Unions have long
outlived their usefulness in this country. As always, it is
worth noting and repeating, that thankfully, private sector
unionization is at the lowest level ever recorded in America, 6
percent.
The first priority of the union should be protecting the
rights of its members, and unions that fail to do so should be
held accountable. This Committee will continue to examine ways
to strengthen current law to protect union members from abuses,
and misguided pursuits.
I thank our witnesses for taking time today to share your
stories and your insights, and your experiences today. Without
further objection--without objection, there being no further
business, this Committee stands adjourned.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 11:57 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
