- COMPETITION AND TRANSPARENCY: THE PATHWAY FORWARD FOR A STRONGER HEALTH CARE MARKET

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COMPETITION AND TRANSPARENCY:
THE PATHWAY FORWARD FOR A
STRONGER HEALTH CARE MARKET

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH,
EMPLOYMENT, LABOR, AND PENSIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE
WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JUNE 21, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-15
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-562 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virninia,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania           Ranking Member
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia                 Northern Mariana Islands
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          MARK TAKANO, California
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   MARK DeSAULNIER, California
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MARY MILLER, Illinois                PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
MICHELLE STEEL, California           SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RON ESTES, Kansas                    LUCY McBATH, Georgia
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
KEVIN KILEY, California              ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
AARON BEAN, Florida                  HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EMPLOYMENT, LABOR, AND PENSIONS

BOB GOOD, Virginia, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           MARK DeSAULNIER, California
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
RICK ALLEN, Georgia                  JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA, JAYAPAL, Washington
AARON BEAN, Florida                  LUCY McBATH, Georgia
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                KATHY MANNING, North Carolina

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on June 21, 2023....................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Good, Hon. Bob, Chairman, Subcommittee on Health, Employment,
Labor, and Pensions........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     4
DeSaulnier, Hon. Mark, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions....................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9

WITNESSES

Sachdev, Gloria, President and CEO, Employers' Forum of
Indiana....................................................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Monahan, Christine, Assistant Research Professor, Georgetown
University Center on Health Insurance Reforms..............    24
Prepared statement of....................................    26
Tripoli, Sophia, Senior Director of Health Policy............    36
Prepared statement of....................................    38
Scott, JC, President and CEO, Pharmaceutical Care Management
Association................................................    52
Prepared statement of....................................    54
Baker, Greg, CEO, AffirmedRX.................................    65
Prepared statement of....................................    67

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Chairman Good:
Statement from the American Hospital Association dated
June 21, 2023..........................................    98
Letter signed by multiple Gastroenterology Organizations
dated June 16, 2023....................................   105
Supplemental statement submitted by JC Scott dated June
21, 2023...............................................   112
Letter from the National Association of Manufacturers
dated June 20, 2023....................................   113
Statement from Representative Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter
dated June 21, 2023....................................   119
Statement from AHIP dated June 21, 2023..................   122
Letter from Better Solutions for Healthcare..............   126
Drug prices report.......................................   127
Statement from Patient Rights Advocate.org dated July 5,
2023...................................................   151
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', a Representative in Congress
from the State of Virginia:
Blog from American Academy of Pediatrics dated August 10,
2022...................................................   153
Article from American College of Cardiology dated October
14, 2022...............................................   157
Letter requesting a hearing to examine illegal employment
of children dated June 6, 2023.........................   159
Statement from the U.S. Department of Justice dated March
31, 2022...............................................   162
Report from EDLABOR.HOUSE.GOV............................   166
Article from NPR dated August 26, 2022...................   175
Article from Scientific American dated May 12, 2022......   194
Article from The Tennessean dated October 31, 2022.......   201

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Response to question submitted for the record by:
Ms. Christine Monahan....................................   205
Dr. Gloria Sachdev.......................................   221
Mr. JC Scott.............................................   231
Ms. Sophia Tripoli.......................................   236

COMPETITION AND TRANSPARENCY:
THE PATHWAY FORWARD FOR A
STRONGER HEALTH CARE MARKET

----------

Wednesday, June 21, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health, Employment, Labor, and
Pensions,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:19 a.m.,
Rayburn House Office Building, Room 2175, Hon. Bob Good
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Good, Walberg, Allen, Comer,
Burlison, Chavez-DeRemer, Houchin, Foxx, DeSaulnier, Wild,
Jayapal, Hayes, Manning, and Scott.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Nick Barley
Deputy Communications Director; Mindy Barry, General Counsel;
Michael Davis, Legislative Assistant; Cate Dillon, Director of
Operations; Isabel Foster, Press Assistant; Daniel Fuenzalida,
Staff Assistant; Sheila Havenner, Director of Information
Technology; Meghan Heckelman, Intern; Taylor Hittle,
Professional Staff Member; Claire Houchin, Intern; Alex Knorr,
Legislative Assistant; CJ Mahler, Professional Staff Member;
John Martin, Deputy Director of Workforce Policy/Counsel;
Hannah Matesic, Director of Member Services and Coalitions;
Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Seth Waugh, Director of
Workforce Policy; Brittany Alston, Minority Operations
Assistant; Nekea Brown, Minority Director of Operations; Ilana
Brunner, Minority General Counsel; Daniel Foster, Minority
Senior Health and Labor Counsel; Carrie Hughes, Minority
Director of Health & Human Services Policy; Stephanie Lalle,
Minority Communications Director; Raiyana Malone, Minority
Press Secretary; Kota Mizutani, Minority Deputy Communications
Director; Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director; Jessica
Schieder, Minority Economic Policy Advisor; Banyon Vassar,
Minority IT Administrator.
Chairman Good. The Subcommittee on Health, Employment,
Labor, and Pensions will come to order. I note that a quorum is
present, so without objection, the Chair is authorized to call
a recess at any time. I would like to make an opening
statement.
While everyone seems to recognize that healthcare costs in
the United States are continuing to rise at alarming rates, it
seems that no one wants to take responsibility. The hospitals
blame the insurance companies. The health insurance companies
blame the drug manufacturers, the drug manufacturers blame
employers, the employers blame the pharmacy benefit managers or
PBMs, and on it goes.
The American people do not want finger pointing. They want
quality healthcare that they can afford. Today, this
Subcommittee will dig deep into two broad policy ideas that
have the potential to drive down costs, expand choice, and
empower consumers.
All sectors of our healthcare system are plagued by market
consolidation, and a lack of transparency. Until these issues
are addressed patients will remain victims of a broken,
exploitive healthcare system. Hospitals are a prime example.
Market consolidation is a proven healthcare cost driver, and
hospitals are consolidating at a rapid rate. From 1998 to 2021,
1,887, 1,887 hospitals merged.
Twenty years ago, we had around 8,000 hospitals in this
country, and now we have about 6,000. Not only do hospitals buy
each other, but they also buy the physicians' offices nearby.
Physicians' offices were traditionally independent practices
reserved for checkups and screenings, but they are slowly being
replaced by outpatient facilities.
Hospitals already have an advantage over other industries.
Emergency medical care is a unique service when a patient needs
care, they do not have the time or ability to shop around for
options. Hospitals have a monopoly, and as a result there is no
accountability regarding billing practices once a hospital
takes control.
This is a major reason why employer sponsored insurance
pays two to three times what Medicare pays for hospital
services. One solution is to bring transparency and require
hospitals to disclose where and what they charge. Hospitals
should not be rewarded with high reimbursement rates for using
incorrect billing addresses.
They should not charge hospital fees for services occurring
in doctor's offices miles away. In some places, patients are
getting x-rays from their family doctor, and being slapped with
higher hospital facility fees just because the hospital is now
the owner of the family doctor's practice.
Location should not increase the price for the same
service. For too long, medical prices have been shrouded in
mystery, and patients have lived in fear of how much their
medical bills will end up costing them. The Trump
administration issued a rule to require hospitals to give
employers and consumers accurate pricing data.
Hospitals were required to file this information, but only
25 percent of hospitals fully complied. The Trump
administration issued the Transparency and Coverage Rule to
ensure that patients received the pricing information they need
from their plans. This rule has been very successful, but there
are improvements that can be made.
First, Congress should ensure the data that insurers are
submitting is highly accurate, and useable. Many of the files
currently submitted are too large and cannot be used by
employers and academics. We must push for standardized data and
make it useable so employers can effectively meet their
fiduciary obligations.
Second, Congress must codify the Transparency and Coverage
Rule to ensure the administration enforces requirements that
plans submit drug pricing data. Without this critical
information, employers and patients will be left in the dark
when it comes to navigating the complexities and costs of the
drug supply chain.
Consolidation and coverups are not only a factor for
hospital services, but they are a problem for pharmaceuticals
too. Drug makers have a large role in determining drug prices,
but the role of PBMs must also be addressed due to their
significant influence over what patients pay at the pharmacy
counter. Three PBMs own a massive 80 percent of the market.
Additionally, the big three are all subsidiaries of Fortune 500
healthcare companies that also own insurers, pharmacies, and
most recently physicians, giving them even more influence over
prescription benefits.
PBMs are also operating in a black box. Nobody knows the
details of the rebate deals they negotiate with drug
manufacturers creating perverse incentives for PBMs to choose
more expensive drugs with larger rebates. If they truly pass
rebate savings to consumers, like PBMs say they do, this would
be a non-issue.
Without transparency, the PBM business model is ripe for
abuse. Giving consumers choice works. The Trump Transparency
and Coverage Rule has already helped some large employers save
millions by rooting out waste in their health plan. Patients
would benefit from more transparency from PBMs too. Corruption
thrives in darkness, and as a conservative I believe that for
good governance we ought to strive for more transparency.
At a minimum, you should be able to expect transparency
from your elected representatives, and we in turn, need to
demand it from our Nation's healthcare industry. These types of
reforms have had widespread, bipartisan support, and I look
forward to today's discussion and charting a path forward on
robust healthcare reform to bring costs down for all Americans.
With that, I yield to the Ranking Member for his opening
statement.
[The statement of Chairman Good follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am delighted to
hear your comments in our conversations about this subject
matter. I am grateful to be here today. We are having the first
of hopefully many bipartisan hearings on how we can lower
healthcare costs for workers, families, and businesses by
promoting transparency and competition.
I will say as a progressive, I agree with you. I believe in
transparency. As we work to lower costs for all Americans,
particularly consumers, it is important that we raise the
quality of healthcare as well. These issues go hand in hand--
value. Regrettably, the United States is an outlier when it
comes to healthcare spending and quality outcomes.
As a share of gross domestic product, the U.S. spent nearly
twice as much as the next closest developed country, Germany,
in 2021. Over the past 5 years, average premiums for families
have risen 22 percent in the United States. Unfortunately, it
is clear we are not getting what we are paying for as
Americans.
While our spending is No. 1 in the world, our health
outcomes, unfortunately, are not. Americans do not get what
they pay for when it comes to healthcare. One fundamental
problem as the Chairman has said, is transparency. This limits
our ability as policymakers to improve our healthcare system.
It makes it harder for patients to find affordable, high-
quality, healthcare providers.
It prevents employers from meeting their obligation to
ensure that their workers' premium dollars are spent prudently.
Transparency is also essential for fostering meaningful
competition as the Chair has said, which keeps healthcare costs
in check for both consumers and employers.
Over the past few years, Democrats and Republicans have
made bipartisan progress to address these issues. In 2020, we
came together to pass the No Surprises Act and the Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2021 in the CAA. These bipartisan
achievements show that Democrats and Republicans can work
together to lower healthcare cost for American workers and
families.
However, there is still an urgent need for further action.
Evidence on the ground suggests that some requirements of the
CAA may not be working as intended. For example, despite the
CAA's new disclosure requirements for group health plan service
providers, entities such as pharmacy benefit managers or PBMs,
and third-party administrators, often fail to disclose their
compensation to plan fiduciaries.
Similarly, despite the prohibition on gag clauses under the
CAA, third-party administrators and other service providers
throw up roadblocks that prevent plan fiduciaries from using
the information to lower costs and improve quality.
I also hope to explore ideas for changing the incentives of
PBMs to make sure they act in the best interest of clients. As
a minimum, we should all agree that employes and consumers
deserve to know how the rebates PBMs receive from drug
manufacturers impact their decisions that raise costs for
workers and families.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to learning more
about improvements that can be made to the transparency in
coverage regulations of the Affordable Care Act, and how to
improve hospital billing policies. Without transparency and
meaningful competition, healthcare costs will be driven by who
has the most market power, not who provides the highest quality
services.
As a result, the price we pay will continue to rise while
the quality of what we receive in healthcare will decline.
Last, I want to note something that you mentioned, that
promoting transparency and competition alone will not solve the
problem of high costs of healthcare.
As the issue of surprise medical billing shows, we cannot
fully address market failure without a more direct action to
ensure our constituents have access to affordable, high-quality
care. It is my hope that this is only the first of many
conversations about how we can make our healthcare system work
for American patients and their families.
I want to thank you again, I want to thank our witnesses,
and I look forward to a robust and constructive conversation. I
yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member DeSaulnier follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. DeSaulnier. It sounds like
competition and transparency are the themes of the day, and I
look forward to this time together as well. Pursuant to
Committee Rule 8(c) all members who wish to insert written
statements into the record may do so by submitting them to the
Committee Clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format by five
o'clock, 14 days after the date of this hearing, which is July
5, 2023.
Without objection, the hearing will remain open for 14
days. The hearing record will remain open for 14 days to allow
such statements and other extraneous material referenced during
the hearing to be submitted for the official hearing record. We
will now turn to the introduction of our distinguished
witnesses.
Our first witness is Dr. Gloria Sachdev, who is the
President and CEO of Employers Forum of Indiana. Our second
witness is Ms. Christine Monahan, who is an Assistant Research
Professor at Georgetown University Center on Health Insurance
Reforms.
Our third witness is Ms. Sophia Tripoli, who is the
Director of Healthcare Innovation at Families USA. Our fourth
witness is Mr. JC Scott, who is the President and CEO of the
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association, and finally, we
have Mr. Greg Baker, who is the CEO of AffirmedRX, located in
Louisville, Kentucky.
I thank all of you for being here today, and we look
forward to your testimony. Pursuant to Committee rules, I would
ask that each of you limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute
summary of your written statement, and I would also like to
remind the witnesses to be aware of their responsibility to
provide accurate information to the Subcommittee. We will first
recognize Dr. Sachdev for 5 minutes.

THE STATEMENT OF DR. GLORIA SACHDEV, PRESIDENT AND
CEO, EMPLOYERS' FORUM OF INDIANA

Ms. Sachdev. Thank you, Chairman Good and Ranking Member
DeSaulnier. I really appreciate the opportunity to be up here
before this Committee today. My name is Gloria Sachdev, and I
serve as President and CEO of the Employers' Forum of Indiana.
My testimony today and my comments represent my own views, not
those of forum members or organizations.
Indiana employers, large and small, are deeply invested in
the well-being of their employees and their ability to receive
the highest quality for the best price. Employers provide
health insurance coverage to retain and recruit employees. They
understand a healthy workforce is a productive workforce, and I
appreciate this Committee's interest in helping working
families and employers.
Just a few stats, as I expect my co-panelists will have
some to share as well. Nationally, employer-sponsored health
insurance covers 179 million people, representing 55 percent of
the U.S. population. While Medicare spending on healthcare is a
hot topic in Congress, working families and their employers are
paying on average 2.5 times what Medicare is paying for the
same services at the same hospitals.
If a particular hospital is charging a Medicare patient
$1,000.00 for an MRI, the private sector for employers and
employees is $2,500.00 for the same MRI at the same hospital.
Some employers are paying $8,000.00 for that MRI at a different
hospital. These high hospital prices harm workers and employers
as it takes money away from other aspects of their lives and
businesses.
Thankfully, some hospitals have lower prices and high
quality, and that is where we all want to go. We all want to go
to the best quality at the best price. We need more easily
accessible price and quality data, which can be achieved by
codifying the Transparency and Coverage Act, excuse me, and
adding a few additional pieces to make the data more robust and
usable.
Sadly, high healthcare prices have resulted in one in 8
adults in the U.S. being in collections for medical debt. One
in 8 adults are in collections for medical debt. In Indiana,
one in 6 adults are in collections due to medical debt. This is
tragic. Being in collections ruins one credit score, which then
makes it difficult to get a car loan, or a home loan, and thus
can cause generational harm.
I would like to share a bit about some recent successes in
Indiana and thoughts on how you can help. Per the RAND 2022
price transparency study, employers in Indiana were paying the
fourth highest hospital facility prices in the country. Over
three times what Medicare was paying for the same services.
As such, the Indiana House Speaker and Senate President Pro
Tempore wholeheartedly committed to addressing hospital prices
in 2023. With bipartisan support House-enrolled Act 1004 passed
and includes many of the things that were just mentioned during
these opening comments, including prohibiting hospitals from
billing additional hospital facility fees for off-campus
services.
Just because a hospital buys a physician clinic in a strip
mall does not mean they should be allowed to add on hospital
facility fees when nothing about the service, doctor, or
location has changed. Tacking on hospital facility fees can
easily double the price for no reason. We should pay the same
amount for the same service regardless of who owns it.
I was honored to support our leadership by providing them
with hospital price, quality, and cost data. This data allowed
them to stand strong and do what is in the best interest of
people despite fierce, and I mean fierce, opposition.
Prohibiting unwarranted facility fees was not just passed in
Indiana, but also in Colorado in 2023.
Texas had a bill too, but unfortunately it died.
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, and North Carolina have
bills currently in progress, or they did at least as of last
week. There is bipartisan Federal interest, too. There is the
House PATIENT Act and the Senate SITE Act, among others.
While hospital prices are high, I would be remiss not to
mention that drug price transparency is desperately needed in
the entire drug supply chain, particularly in the PBM space. I
am a pharmacist by background and training, managed patients
for 12 years in physician office clinics, and really have seen
firsthand the detriment that these high hospital prices and
drug prices are causing to patients.
In closing, as we explore the pathway forward for a more
functional healthcare market, let us not forget the human
aspect of our decisions. Every American deserves access to
affordable, high-quality healthcare that meets your unique
needs.
By embracing competition and transparency, we can lay the
foundation upon which evidence-based policy and purchasing can
occur to create a healthcare system that ensures a healthier,
more prosperous future for our Nation.
Thank you, Chairman Good and Committee members, for your
attention.
[The Statement of Dr. Sachdev follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, Dr. Sachdev. Now we will hear
from Ms. Monahan.

STATEMENT OF MS. CHRISTINE MONAHAN, ASSISTANT RESEARCH
PROFESSOR, GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY CENTER ON
HEALTH INSURANCE REFORMS

Ms. Monahan. Good morning, Chairman Good, Ranking Member
DeSaulnier, and members of the Subcommittee on Health,
Employment, Labor, and Pensions. My name is Christine H.
Monahan, and I am an Assistant Research Professor at the Center
on Health Insurance Reforms within Georgetown University's
McCourt School of Public Policy.
I am honored to testify today regarding competition and
transparency in our healthcare markets. Consolidation in the
U.S. healthcare system is growing--to the detriment of everyone
who uses and pays for healthcare. In both the provider and
insurer markets, we have seen significant horizontal and
vertical consolidation over the past decade, contributing to
rising prices for healthcare.
The expansion of large health systems with multiple
hospitals, outpatient departments, and physician practices
under the same roof has been significantly increasing what
commercial insurers, and ultimately consumers and employers,
pay for care. One egregious example of this is the addition of
outpatient facility fee charges for healthcare services that
can be safely and effectively provided outside of a hospital.
These charges often come as a surprise to patients who go
in for a routine doctor's visit, and they can lead to
significantly higher out-of-pocket costs than consumers have
traditionally paid for such care. Some states, from Connecticut
to Maine, to Indiana, have started to tackle this issue by
prohibiting these charges in certain circumstances.
A handful of private insurers and at least one State
employee health plan have also taken steps to limit these
charges and protect consumers from these bills. One challenge
to targeting and implementing these reforms, however, is a lack
of transparency in the claims providers submit to insurers
which can obscure where care was actually provided.
For example, a State or insurer may want to end hospital
facility fee charges for care provided in off-campus
departments or physician offices, since this care inherently
does not need to be provided in a hospital setting. All of the
claims from a hospital system may look like they are coming
from the main campus of a hospital.
There are simple reforms the Federal Government can take to
address this issue and set the stage for additional action to
limit what commercial insurers pay for care in these
circumstances, and ultimately move toward site neutral
payments, as we are seeing in Medicare. These reforms include
requiring that each separate facility or office where care is
provided, like a hospital off-campus department, acquire a
unique national provider identifier, or NPI, and that both the
hospital and all healthcare practitioners include this NPI on
their claims for any care they provide there.
This would give insurers, as well as regulators and
policymakers relying on claims data, a much better sense of who
is charging outpatient facility fees, and when they are
charging them, and take appropriate action.
More broadly, it would also allow insurers to better tailor
other reimbursement decisions based on the location of care,
considering factors like quality and cost. Let us not be naive
about how far relying solely on private insurers to contain
costs will get us.
They too have consolidated horizontally and vertically, and
it is often in their interest to not push back strongly against
provider prices. This may be because the providers charging the
highest rates are considered must-have providers for their
networks, or these providers have demanded that their insurer
include anti-competitive clauses in their contracts.
The major insurers also have little incentive to use what
negotiating power that they do have. This is a particular
problem in the employer-sponsored insurance market, the
majority of which is insured through self-funded health plans
with the major insurers serving as third-party administrators,
or TPAs.
In this role, the insurers have little incentive to
negotiate competitive provider reimbursement rates due to the
relative market power and information monopoly vis-`-vis
employers. What is more, employer contracts with TPAs and
pharmacy benefit managers or PBMs are often rife with hidden
fees and overpayments, while the consultants and brokers
employers hire to help arrange the contracts are taking in
massive commissions.
This is all happening despite the fact that employers, as
plan sponsors, have a legal duty under ERISA to act solely in
the interest of plan members, and to ensure that they are
paying reasonable compensation to service providers and no
more.
Thankfully, the employer community is starting to awaken to
these problems due in large part to recent efforts by Congress
and the executive branch to bring more transparency to our
healthcare system. More still needs to be done to give
employers the information they need to become more prudent
purchasers in this system.
This includes codifying and strengthening Federal price
transparency rules, revisiting the Consolidated Appropriations
Act's ban on gag clauses, and clarifying and expanding service
provider disclosure requirements.
Given their critical role and power in the system, it is
also worth exploring whether entities like TPAs and PBMs
themselves should be treated as plan fiduciaries when
performing functions where it is more important that they act
in the best interest of plan members than their own business
interests. Thank you for your time. I welcome your questions.
[The Statement of Ms. Monahan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, Ms. Monahan, and now we will hear
from Ms. Tripoli for her testimony.

STATEMENT OF MS. SOPHIA TRIPOLI, SENIOR DIRECTOR OF
HEALTH POLICY

Ms. Tripoli. Chairs Good and Foxx, Ranking Member
DeSaulnier and Scott, members of the Committee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify today. It is an honor to be with
you. On behalf of Families USA, a leading national non-partisan
voice for healthcare consumers, working to ensure the best
health and healthcare are equally accessible and affordable to
all, I want to thank you for this critical discussion on
healthcare affordability, transparency, and competition.
Today's hearing is urgently needed. Our healthcare system
is in crisis, evidenced by a lack of affordability and poor
quality. It will take all of us working together across
political parties from rural and urban communities alike to fix
it.
Every person in the United States should have high-quality
healthcare that prevents illness, allows them to see a doctor
when needed, and keeps their families healthy at a price they
can afford.
Almost half of all Americans are foregoing medical care due
to the cost. A third say that the cost of care affects their
ability to secure basic needs, like food and housing, and over
40 percent of American adults, 100 million people, face medical
debt. Every American knows we pay too much for the healthcare
that we get.
Healthcare accounts for one-fifth of our Nation's economy,
yet our health is not better. Our moms and babies die at high
rates, and a quarter of a million people a year are killed by
the healthcare system, from medical errors, infections, and the
like.
Over the last 40 years, workers' wages have remained
virtually stagnant, while employer health insurance premiums
have risen dramatically, crippling the ability of working
people to earn a living wage. 90 percent of large employers now
say healthcare costs threaten the ability to provide healthcare
benefits to employees.
This crisis is driven by misalignment between the business
interests of the healthcare sector, and the health and
financial security of our Nation's families. The healthcare
sector siphons money out of workers' paychecks and into
building C-suites of big healthcare corporations to increase
healthcare prices, rewarding building local monopolies and
price gouging, instead of promoting the health and well-being
of our Nation's families.
The economic freedom of American families is eroding right
before our eyes. We cannot afford to retire when we want, live
in the homes of our choice, send our kids to college, or even
meet basic needs like paying for rent or heat. Healthcare
industry consolidation has eliminated competition and allowed
monopolistic prices to push our Nation's families to the brink
of financial ruin.
Nowhere is this clearer than looking at the prices of drugs
and hospital care. For more than a decade, drug prices
increased 20 percent per year, far exceeding inflation. Just
since 2015, hospital prices increased 31 percent nationally,
accounting for one-third of U.S. healthcare spending, and
growing more than four times faster than workers' paychecks.
These higher prices are passed on to families as annual
increases in insurance premiums and cost sharing become profit
margins for large healthcare corporations. Particularly
concerning is that healthcare is one of the only sectors in the
U.S. economy where consumers are blinded to prices until after
they have received a service and a subsequent bill.
This lack of transparency is a major barrier to the
healthcare sector competing based on fair prices and high-
quality care. It does not have to be this way. We know what is
driving the crisis and how to fix it. Solutions can be deployed
right away to end these pricing abuses, restore competition,
and make healthcare more affordable.
We urge the Committee to consider well-vetted, bipartisan
solutions to increase price transparency, address hospital
billing practices, and payment differentials that drive
consolidation and increase costs, and limit anti-competitive
behavior in provider and health plan contracts.
Ultimately, the sector's economics must change to align
with the health and financial security of the American people.
Congress has overwhelming support to do this. 93 percent of
Americans agree that we pay too much for the quality of
healthcare we get. I would like to finish my remarks with the
story of Brittany Tesso and her son, Roman, from Aurora,
Colorado to illustrate the impact of these abusive pricing
practices on people.
Roman's pediatrician referred him to a hospital to receive
an evaluation for speech therapy. Because of the COVID-19
pandemic, the Tessos met with a panel of specialists via
videoconference. The specialists, who appeared to be calling
from their homes, observed Roman speaking, playing, and eating.
Later, Mrs. Tesso received a $700.00 bill for the 1-hour
video appointment. Then she received another bill for nearly
$1,000.00. Thinking it was a mistake, Mrs. Tesso called the
hospital. Despite the fact that the Tessos never stepped foot
inside the hospital, he was told the bill was a facility fee,
designed to cover the costs of being seen in a hospital-based
setting.
This is a national scandal. This Committee has the power
and responsibility to stand up for our Nation's families and
stop pricing abuses driven by big healthcare corporations. I
thank the Committee for your time, and I look forward to
answering any questions.
[The Statement of Ms. Tripoli follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, Ms. Tripoli, and now we will hear
from Mr. Scott.

STATEMENT OF MR. JC SCOTT, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
PHARMACEUTICAL CARE MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION

Mr. JC Scott. Good morning, Chairman Good, Ranking Member
DeSaulnier, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify. The questions the Subcommittee is
raising today on transparency and competition in healthcare
markets are important, and we agree that thoughtfully applying
these tools to the prescription drug market is aligned with
what should be our ultimate objective: securing greater
affordability, which translates into greater access to
medications and better health outcomes.
Too often, what we are trying to solve gets lost in all the
rhetoric and misinformation around this issue, and we lose
focus on how to do better for patients, employers, and other
payers. I hope today's discussion can stay focused on positive
solutions, and the legislative proposals avoid the unintended
consequences of increased cost and limited choices for
employers and patients.
Efforts to lower drug costs must start with an
understanding that drug prices are set by drug companies and
that in the prescription drug market, as in many markets,
competition is vitally important. Lawmakers must ensure that
the misuse of the patent protections originally put in place to
balance rewarding innovation and ensuring affordable access for
patients is not blocking competition and keeping prices high.
Pharmacy benefit companies both harness that drug company
competition, and also compete with each other for employers and
health plan sponsors to hire them. Our companies are hired to
administer prescription drug plans for more than 275 million
Americans who have health coverage through public and private
employers, labor unions, retiree plans, and Federal programs.
Our company secures savings through negotiations with drug
companies, serving as the only actor in the private market
putting downward pressure on drug costs. Pharmacy benefit
companies also partner with over 60,000 lower cost, higher
quality pharmacies on behalf of employers.
In addition, pharmacy benefit companies promote a variety
of clinical programs to improve medication adherence and
healthcare outcomes. To be clear, no employer, union, or other
plan sponsor is under any obligation to hire or use a pharmacy
benefit company, but virtually all choose to do so because it
brings them significant savings and enables them to better
serve the patients in their plans.
The employers choose how to best use those savings, whether
to lower premiums, lower cost at the pharmacy counter, or make
benefits more robust. This is a key point. The pharmacy benefit
company delivers the savings and the employer decides how to
use them. Employers and other plan sponsors select a pharmacy
benefit company through a transparent and highly competitive
bidding process, with 73 full service pharmacy benefit
companies operating today, and new entrants with competing
models coming into the market regularly, employers can choose
to contract with a company that best meets their unique needs.
In the last 2 years, we have seen close to 9 percent growth
in the number of pharmacy benefit companies competing in the
market. Employers and plan sponsors may choose a pharmacy
benefit company based on scale and ability to negotiate deep
discounts. Others prioritize innovative care management
programs or different levels of service.
The various pharmacy benefit companies in the market
compete fiercely based on the strengths of their individual
business models and innovative offerings. As part of their bid
requests, employers determine what information, transparency,
and audit rights they need, and those are memorialized in their
contracts.
Our companies provide a broad array of actionable
information on price and quality, so employers can make
informed decisions on how to design their benefits and how to
deploy the value delivered by their pharmacy benefit company.
Our companies offer additional data and information, including
tools with real time information on cost and drug coverage, to
patients and doctors to help informed prescribing decisions. In
recent years, Congress has added more requirements for pharmacy
benefit companies to report to Federal agencies, as well as
public reporting.
These laws included guardrails to prevent enabling drug
companies from raising costs, and we supported that approach.
We also supported enacted legislation to provide Congress with
access to claims data to inform oversight and policymaking.
As we work on our mission to lower costs, the principles of
informed employer choice and flexibility in selecting a
pharmacy benefit company, designing the benefit, and choosing
how best to use the savings, are key to keeping the private
market evolving and delivering more affordable drug coverage.
Given that, and to avoid increasing costs for employers and
patients, we would caution against policies that have the
government dictating and locking in terms of private business
contracts, limiting choices for employers, or otherwise
narrowing how we can achieve more affordability for patients.
PCMA and the companies we represent are proud of our record
in constraining prescription drug cost growth, improving access
to medications, and helping improve health outcomes, and we
look forward to working with this Subcommittee, and
constructively engaging to build on this record.
Thank you for inviting me to testify today, and I look
forward to the conversation.
[The Statement of Mr. JC Scott follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. Scott. Finally, we will hear
from Mr. Baker.

STATEMENT OF MR. GREG BAKER, CEO, AFFIRMEDRX

Mr. Baker. Good morning, Chairman Good, Ranking Member
DeSaulnier, and distinguished members of the House
Subcommittee. I would like to thank you for the invitation to
speak here today and discuss this increasingly important topic
of competition and transparency in healthcare.
My name is Greg Baker. I am first and foremost a
pharmacist. I am also the CEO of AffirmedRX, which is a
transparent PBM I founded, and we are headquartered in
Louisville, Kentucky. I have spent 30 years working in
different areas of healthcare, mostly pharmacy. The last 11 of
which, working directly with jumbo self-funded employers who do
design and develop their own pharmacy benefit programs.
Our goal at AffirmedRX is to partner with these employers
to deliver patient-centric pharmacy benefits with a mission to
improve healthcare outcomes by bringing clarity, integrity, and
trust to pharmacy benefit managing. As a pharmacy benefit
management company though, and consistent with our corporate
values, we are not members of PCMA.
PCMA does not represent who we are as an organization. We
have founded a new not-for-profit organization with numerous
other PBMs, who also do not want to be represented by PCMA,
called Transparency RX. Just as transparency offers a better
way on managing prescription drug benefits, Transparency RX
represents a step forward to sound policy solutions,
galvanizing true affordable prices as a counterweight to the
status quo and the stale and outdated ideas of traditional PBMs
and their lobby.
At a high level then, this may come as a surprise to some
at the outset. I would like to embrace many of the much needed
reforms gaining steam in Congress on a bipartisan basis. PBMs,
especially traditional ones, and especially the big three,
deserve scrutiny and reform.
More importantly in my opinion, their approach is a central
feature to sustaining unnecessarily high drugs costs in
America. We have a broken system which hides profits and
inflates prescription costs, harming the interest of diverse
communities, working families, and seniors.
With my expertise being in the pharmacy benefit space, I
will focus my comments on competition and transparency within
this industry here today. I have thoroughly read the
testimoneys of my fellow witnesses. I find it interesting that
many of us call out the increase in cost and the decrease in
quality of healthcare.
While some of the fellow witnesses here also talk about the
savings that PBMs always generate. We save 145 billion dollars
as an industry, supposedly, over the course of the next 10
years. I always think about that in the context of my wife
going shopping. I love my wife to death, she always goes
shopping and comes home and tells me how much money she saved
me, which I know really means she cost me a lot of money in the
first place. I am sure she really enjoyed that thing she
bought, but when you leave with savings I worry.
I always worry about organizations that want to talk about
how much you save. Additionally, there is a lot of conversation
around these savings saying we promote generic drugs as an
industry. That also is a falsehood. You can look at any
traditional PBM formulary that is publicly available online,
and consistently see where brand drugs are put in place on the
formulary over generic drugs.
When you consider the fact that of the 160 plus Americans
who take private insurance, 55 percent of those people have a
coinsurance or a high deductible plan. That means they are
subject to a higher cost at the pharmacy counter. That is not
acceptable in our opinion.
Biosimilars is a very consistent theme within the pharmacy
benefit industry today as well. We consistently see a lot of
the traditional PBMs picking higher cost biosimilars, over the
lower cost versions as well. Last, it has been noted that there
is a transparent and highly competitive marketplace out there
for these jumbo and self-funded employers to pick their
benefits.
I challenge that contention as well. There is an awesome
article that Bob Herman and Staten News put out just yesterday
talking about the collusion that could exist between benefit
consultants who are helping these benefit employers and their
PBMs based off of back-end payments that are not transparent.
In closing, I would like to go back to my Kentucky roots. I
started practicing in Kentucky in the late 90's. That is when
Oxycontin came out. It was a great drug, we thought at the
time, because we had been told that for years.
Twenty years down the road, we all know how bad Oxycontin
was for our society. At the same time, opioids kill about
80,000 people in America today. Over 100,000 people in America
die every year because they are not adherent to their
medicines. The No. 1 reason people are not adhering to their
medication is because of cost.
I look forward to having further conversation working with
the Committee to bring more transparency and competition to
this PBM marketplace and look forward to your questions today.
Thank you, Chairman.
[The Statement of Mr. Baker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. Baker. Under Committee Rule
9, we will now question witnesses under the 5-minute rule. I
will wait to ask my questions at the end and therefore
recognize Mr. Walberg from Michigan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
panel for being here. As I understand it, Mr. Chairman, you
have a document from our colleague Representative Buddy Carter
to submit to the record on this issue. I will leave that to
you.
The United States spends more on healthcare as a percentage
of the economy than any other developed nation, and CBO
projects that spending will continue to grow. A recent NFIB
survey showed that while employers by and large believe
offering health benefits is important, 98 percent of small
businesses are concerned that healthcare costs will become
unsustainable within the next five to 10 years, if they are not
already.
I thank the Committee for holding this bipartisan hearing
today on what the Federal Government can do about the high cost
of healthcare. Mr. Baker and Mr. Scott, many employers say they
are not able to obtain accurate cost and pricing information
despite laws which mandate that third-party entities provide
this information to plan sponsors.
Many PBMs say that employers can receive cost and quality
information at any time through an audit. What is the
disconnect? Mr. Scott first, then I will go to Mr. Baker.
Mr. JC Scott. Thank you for choosing one to go first, so we
did not just sit here for 5 minutes. Thank you for the
question. I would start by saying at PCMA, all PBMs, all
pharmacy benefit companies, are welcome at our table as long as
there is alignment around the mission of preserving the free
market and the approach that does not have government dictating
terms or asking Congress to come in and prefer one business
model over another.
We have a fairly simple set of principles, where we are not
here to advocate for one company to get a favorable approach
over another. One thing that is consistent across our members
is that they are hired by employers who choose to use them
under no obligation, and that they want those employers to have
all the information that they need to make informed choices
about how to design their benefits, so that they can best serve
the patients that they represent.
All of that is built into the request for a proposal, or
RFP process, and I still have not fully understood where the
RFP process may be failing some employers who are expressing
that sentiment to you, Congressman. That is how PBMs compete,
when they put in those RFPs, the kind of information that a
given employer may need.
If there is more work to be done in that space to make sure
the client is informed, we would be happy to work with the
Committee on that.
Mr. Walberg. Mr. Baker.
Mr. Baker. Yes. Thank you for your question, and I think
you are spot on. In general, we consistently work with jumbo
self-funded employers who do not have access to their data. I
do not know of one employer who knows at the claim level how
much they are getting back in rebates from the pharmaceutical
manufacturers.
While I do appreciate the comments of my esteemed
colleague, Scott, I do not agree that there is a competitive
marketplace that is working today. I think the status quo has
existed for the last 15 or 20 years. I think that consultants
and PBMs are focused on how they continue to drive profit at
the detriment of the American public, and that data that you
are asking for we agree should be present to all self-funded
employers and it is not today.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Thank you. Dr. Sachdev, would you care
to comment as well since you mentioned in your written
testimony that employers have trouble accessing their own price
and quality data. Then second, how are third party entities
circumventing current data sharing requirements?
Ms. Sachdev. Thank you so much for the question. I would
concur with Mr. Baker that none of our employers have seen any
pharmaceutical claims data at the drug level. When they get
rebate information, they get it in aggregate, so that is not
helpful to the employer because then they cannot shop for it.
They are told if you want to change the formulary, and this
might be a little in the weeds here, but if you want to change
the formulary, then you are going to, you know, that might
impact the rebates that we give you. They might have, let us
say I do not know, 500 drugs that they are covering, maybe
more, and we would want to see what the rebates are at the drug
level.
We do not get that level of information at the drug level.
No employer I know gets that level of information from the
largest PBMs. Regarding your question about audits, the audit--
the language in these contracts is confusing, and they put a
lot of restrictions on the audit. Yes, you can do an audit, but
they might, and it can vary depending on the contract, that
they might restrict audits, so the audits need to be unfettered
access.
If the employer has fiduciary responsibility to do what is
in the best interest of the client, they should be able to
audit their own claims data all day long as many times as they
want. They have restrictions on who the auditor can be, how
many times per year they can do an audit. Maybe it is just once
a year, or maybe twice a year.
How far back they can even look at their claims data. Maybe
only 1 year back, so they cannot compare data over time. What
drug classes they can even look at, et cetera, et cetera. There
are just all these restrictions.
Mr. Walberg. I thank you all for your answers. I have
further questions that I will submit for the record, and I
yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Representative Walberg. Our
Ranking Member DeSaulnier has also elected to defer to the end,
so we will recognize Representative Wild from Pennsylvania.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Greetings everybody.
There has been a lot of discussion for decades now about
pharmaceutical prices generally, but recently the even more
common subject of discussion is shortages of medications.
Adderall has been written about in all the major
newspapers. I just looked online, there is a list of hundreds
of medications that are apparently in short supply. What I have
been told by a number of my constituents, and by the way, I am
in Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania 7 in the Lehigh Valley, but it is
probably typical across the country, is that they find that
when they go to the local pharmacy with their script, and the
pharmacy says, ``I'm sorry, we're out of that medication, we're
not going to be able to fill it until we don't know when'',
they are then advised by their insurance company that if they
get their medications by mail order, they will likely be able
to fill it, and indeed. Optum RX, I believe, is the PBM for
United Healthcare. CVS, I think is affiliated with either Aetna
or Cigna. First and foremost, and I am going to ask you first,
Mr. Baker, why is it that PBMs are able to supply medications
when local pharmacies cannot, when there is a shortage?
Mr. Baker. Yes, thank you for the question. I cannot
specifically address that. I am not exactly sure. Usually the
pharmacy supply chain, the bigger actors might get more limited
quantities than say a small independent would, so it could be
the fact that they just got a tighter supply relationship with
the wholesaler.
Ms. Wild. The bigger pharmacies may get a smaller supply.
Is that what you said?
Mr. Baker. The bigger. No. The bigger pharmacies would have
better access to the wholesalers limited amount of medication.
Ms. Wild. Okay. Are you saying that a PBM is sort of the
biggest pharmacy of all, and therefore they are likely to have
more?
Mr. Baker. That would be my contention, yes ma'am.
Ms. Wild. Mr. Scott, what are your thoughts on that?
Mr. JC Scott. Yes. I agree with your concern. I would
reflect my mom lives down in Pensacola, Florida and suffers
from depression and has encountered exactly the situation that
you have just described. It is a real issue. As Mr. Baker
implied, I think it does get to the wholesaler relationship
with the pharmacy, what is the acquisition, how much are they
purchasing and making available in terms of that supply.
Ms. Wild. It is the reason that say Walmart is able to have
large supplies. I am not even going to talk about medications,
of certain products that a smaller retailer might have trouble
buying.
Mr. JC Scott. It is all about that relationship with the
wholesaler.
Ms. Wild. It is all about that relationship. The result of
that, if I am correct, is not only that the consumer is then
forced into the mail order or PBM model, but also that it
continues the problems of the small, local independent
pharmacies staying in business, which let us face it, small,
local independent pharmacies are almost a thing of the past.
I can tell you that in my district many of them have closed
much to the sadness and detriment of many consumers around my
district who had personal relationships with their local
pharmacist and were able to talk to him or her about
interactions, and that kind of thing, which of course, when you
are doing mail order, you do not have.
That just really concerns me, and I am trying to figure
out--based on your answers, PBMs have greater purchasing power,
right? That is because they have so many.
Mr. JC Scott. Some pharmacies have greater purchasing power
than others, and it depends on the relationship with the
wholesaler, and the pharmacy services administrative
organization, the PSAO, that represents about 83 percent of
independent pharmacies.
Ms. Wild. Who exactly is a client or customer of a PBM? Is
it the ultimate consumer, or is it the employer who holds the
insurance plan?
Mr. JC Scott. The employer or retiree plan, government
program, union plan is who hires the pharmacy benefit company
to do the work to serve the patients they represent.
Ms. Wild. Let me just ask you then the Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2021, which we passed last year. I was
proud to vote for it, indicates that pharmacy benefit managers
are described as covered service providers who must provide
information to responsible plan fiduciaries. You are familiar
with that requirement?
Mr. JC Scott. Yes, Congresswoman.
Ms. Wild. Do you believe that PBMs provide plan
fiduciaries, meaning somebody within the employer, with enough
information to ensure that the compensation they are paying is
reasonable?
Mr. JC Scott. Yes. I believe our companies all comply with
the requirements of the law.
Ms. Wild. Now you are shaking your head. How about you?
Mr. Baker. I think it was a carefully worded answer that
they are complying with law, yes. What they are doing is they
are aggregating numerous employers' data and they are sending
it in to comply with CAA. That data is not going to the
employer to make the right decision.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. Unfortunately, my time has run out. I
have many more questions I would love to submit, and with that
I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Ms. Wild. Now we will recognize
Mr. Allen from Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this important hearing, and thank you to our witnesses
for providing us the expertise that we need to address this
critical situation. Obviously, there is no private healthcare
system in this country.
The government has its fingers in every area of healthcare.
What is happening to our healthcare system, it has become a
complex, expensive made, fueled, a heavy-handed regulation,
provided consideration and a lack of transparency. You are
going to hear that over and over again today. The growth in
healthcare spending is expected to outpace growth in gross
domestic product over the next 10 years, forcing insurance
premiums and out of pocket costs to remain too expensive for
working families.
We cannot sustain what is happening with the costs, rising
costs of healthcare. Dr. Sachdev, many in Congress, and you are
going to hear more. We are going to drill down here about PBMs,
and the consolidation of PBMs. This consolidation is taking
away options for plan sponsors and patients. This includes what
seems to be a push toward practices like mail order
prescriptions, and the use of larger retail pharmacies, rather
than on local community pharmacies.
While that may work for many Americans, I value options,
and I think the American people want options in healthcare, the
healthcare market, because they have actually a relationship
with their pharmacist. Do employees have flexibility when
designing their prescription drug benefit programs?
Ms. Sachdev. Thank you so much for the question. Was your
question, just to clarify, do employers have options when yes,
designing their drug benefit programs?
Mr. Allen. Yes.
Ms. Sachdev. They do have options. Self-funded employers
have benefit options, the options have become limited now
because there's been so much consolidation in the PBM space, as
Chairman Good mentioned, three big PBMs represent 80 percent of
the market right now.
In some, because there has been so much consolidation
between PBM and insurance companies and mail-order pharmacies,
and physician groups, some insurance companies', PBMs say, if
you are going to use our insurance company, you have to use our
PBM. That is a real problem.
Mr. Allen. Yes. That is what I wanted to hear.
Ms. Sachdev. While there appears to be choice, there are
limited choices.
Mr. Allen. Of course, what choices do employers have when
working with pharmacy benefit managers, meaning that those
pharmacy benefit managers can dictate to the employee if you
want this cost of health insurance you have to use my mail
order service.
Ms. Sachdev. That is correct.
Mr. Allen. Okay. Dr. Tripoli, or Ms. Tripoli, one of the
main drivers of rising healthcare costs is increasing
consolidation among hospitals and hospital systems, including
horizontal, vertical, and cross market integration. In fact,
hospital care services make up about 31 percent of our national
healthcare expenditures, and hospital spending growth is
projected to accelerate 9.3 percent in 2023.
That is precisely why one of my main goals of the Healthy
Future Task Force last Congress was to increase choices through
competition, which meant addressing matters such as site
neutral rules, physician on hospitals and consolidation. What
impact does consolidation among hospitals have on prices and
access to care?
Ms. Tripoli. Thank you very much for the question. I would
say the single biggest driver right now of rising premiums and
increased cost sharing for consumers is increased
consolidation, particularly among in the provider market among
hospitals, that directly drive-up prices and results in higher
costs to the employers, which of course gets shifted onto
employees and consumers in the form of stagnant wages, and
higher premiums and cost sharing.
Mr. Allen. A large part of my district is rural. What has
this hospital consolidation--has--it impacted our rural
communities?
Ms. Tripoli. I would say it has a very similar impact in
terms of consolidation. We are seeing consolidation across the
country, across U.S. healthcare markets within them. 90 percent
of metropolitan statistical areas are now considered highly
concentrated hospital markets. All for the same purpose of
increasing prices and generating the highest priced volume of
services that hospitals can.
Mr. Allen. Okay. I have some additional questions, and
Chairman I will submit that to our panel later.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. Allen. We will now hear from
Ms. Jayapal from Washington. Are we--actually, we will go with
Ms. Manning for 5 minutes.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Scott, I
represent Caswell County, a rural county in North Carolina that
has only one pharmacy for the entire county. A small,
independent pharmacy that is family run, and is struggling to
stay open because they make so little money on the
prescriptions they fill.
I understand that PBMs negotiate with insurance companies
over how much patients pay for their medications at the
checkout counter, and also how much pharmacists make for the
prescriptions that are filled. Generally, chain and corporate
pharmacies have better buying power, and receive better
reimbursements from PBMs. Is that true? Do PBMs negotiate how
much pharmacies get paid per prescription filled?
Can independent pharmacies get paid less per prescription
than the big chain pharmacies?
Mr. JC Scott. PBMs negotiate with pharmacies to incentivize
higher quality and lower cost, and about 40 percent of
pharmacies that are part of PBM networks on average are
independent pharmacies. What we have seen, the data we have
seen, is that often the independent is getting paid slightly
more than the chain.
Ms. Manning. You are saying that what I have read in
articles that affect independent pharmacies is not true. That
independent pharmacies get paid more than chain pharmacies.
Mr. JC Scott. On average that is the data that we have
seen.
Ms. Manning. Why is it that from 2003 to 2018, more than
1,200 independently owned rural pharmacies closed in the United
States?
Mr. JC Scott. The data from the community pharmacy lobby,
NCPA, actually shows that across the country there has been a
steady increase over the last 10 years in the number of
independent pharmacies. Now, I would recognize--
Ms. Manning. Not necessarily in rural areas?
Mr. JC Scott. That is across the country. I think the rural
question is the one to focus on because often times, not only
is that the only pharmacy, it is the only access point of care
for patients, and it seems certainly for our industry, we
believe we need to empower pharmacies to do more for patients,
be able to practice at the top of their license.
We experienced some of this during COVID. That they can
deliver more value to the patient, and as a side effect of
that, develop more revenue stream for the pharmacy.
Ms. Manning. If we had more transparency, we would be able
to tell whether large chain pharmacies get more per
prescription filled than small, independent pharmacies?
Mr. JC Scott. That data is available. I guess the point I
am making is we need to adjust the law to allow the pharmacies
to do more for patients.
Ms. Manning. Okay. That does not really go to how much
pharmacies get paid per prescription filled. That is a separate
issue. What you are saying is let pharmacies do more, so they
can make money other ways.
Mr. JC Scott. Correct.
Ms. Manning. That does not really address the question of
whether small, independent pharmacies actually get paid less
than large pharmacies.
Mr. JC Scott. I would be happy to followup with you on that
data that we have seen.
Ms. Manning. Okay. Let me ask you another question. In your
testimony, you detail a variety of services that your member
PBMs provide beyond negotiating for lower drug costs. For
example, you said that PBMs provide clinical support in the
form of services to plan and release, provide internal clinical
expertise to support business operations, and assemble clinical
experts to evaluate drug therapies, and make coverage
recommendations to plan sponsors.
Are these all duplicative services that simply add to the
costs of our healthcare system? For example, when you say that
you assemble clinical experts to evaluate drug therapies and
make coverage recommendations to plan sponsors, doesn't the FDA
already evaluate the safety and effectiveness of every drug
before they approve a drug for use?
Mr. JC Scott. That is correct. We are adding to that value
proposition of what the FDA does, and often times the pharmacy
benefit company, for a given patient, who I think of my dad's
experience at the end of his life. Alzheimer's, cancer,
multiple doctors, multiple medications, doctor's offices not
always communicating with each other.
The PBM was able to act to see if there's going to be any
problematic medication interaction for him as the patient.
Ms. Manning. The PBM does that, not the pharmacy?
Mr. JC Scott. Often times the pharmacy may not have
visibility into every place the patient has gone to fill a
script, or a medication has been prescribed.
Ms. Manning. Are doctors----
Mr. JC Scott. The payer may.
Ms. Manning. Are doctors already evaluating which
medications they want their patients to use?
Mr. JC Scott. Absolutely, we provide information to empower
them, but my dad's cancer doctor, and my dad's doctor who was
helping him treat Alzheimer's at the end of his life may not be
communicating across all the prescriptions that they are
refilling.
Ms. Manning. I am glad your dad had a good experience, but
I have to tell you when I was using an eye medication that I
had gone through multiple trials with my doctor to get used to
save my sight, and my pharmacy benefit manager told me I could
not use that drug until I failed forward. That was not a good
result for me, and people all across the country have the same
experience. My time is expired, I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Ms. Manning. Now we will go to
Mr. Burlison from Missouri for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
this hearing. I think it is very important. I think the
American people want to understand why their healthcare costs
are sky high. Sadly, I think, and I will say this. I think
their healthcare costs are sky high because of this place.
This place regulates the hell out of the healthcare
industry to the point where there is no choice, right? We
talked about the driving costs that we have consolidation. Well
normally, if people are making obscene profits in any
marketplace that would be a great opportunity for a new
entrant.
We have regulated the healthcare industry to such an extent
that no one can enter into the market to compete and provide
more choices. Now, the one thing that I have seen, because I
served on a board at Missouri Consolidated, where it was my
responsibility as the board to buy the health insurance for
over 100,000 lives. You know what?
What we did, we found that using a PBM dramatically drove
down our costs for the entire group, okay? I have heard
testimony here that it is a false choice. I can tell you when
you are actually writing the checks, it is not a false choice.
It did save money. It is good to hear that there are choices.
Mr. Baker, I am going to ask you. Your PBM model works
differently. Can you describe that?
Mr. Baker. Yes. I think it is functionally three different
things. One, we do think profits are a problem in driving bad
decisionmaking in healthcare, so we are not a for-profit entity
like a C corp or a public--
Mr. Burlison. Do you think profits are evil or something?
Mr. Baker. I think if everybody knows what you are paying
for an item, and the American consumer can make a decision on
that profitability that they are contributing to, that is fine.
That does not exist in the pharmacy benefit space.
Mr. Burlison. Okay. We can have a long conversation about
that. My question at the end of the day is when a company like
Missouri Consolidated, or other businesses are choosing a PBM
at the end of the day, they just want to know what you cost,
and what they are getting back from it.
Why are you--to me the question is if American Airlines
were here and they were, you know, had one rate, and their
mileage system is different than United, which it is. Can you
imagine the scenario where American would have the temerity to
come to Congress and say our mileage system is better and more
transparent, therefore everyone should--all--the other airlines
should have to move to our business model. Can you imagine
that?
Mr. Baker. I do not imagine that, but in the pharmacy space
it is fundamentally different. I know if I want to buy a flight
to come here to Washington, DC. I can look at American site, I
can look at United's site and I can make a decision on costs.
Mr. Burlison. I beg to differ. At the end of the day, Mr.
Baker, you are competing with other PBMs, correct?
Mr. Baker. Correct.
Mr. Burlison. The businesses that are making these choices,
they are deciding based on quality and costs, correct?
Mr. Baker. I do not always agree with that statement.
Mr. Burlison. To me, it is regulatory capture to come to
Congress and abdicate that your competitors participate and run
their businesses the exact same way. With that, Mr. Scott, let
me ask this. We have talked about the consolidation. What kind
of things can be done? I am intrigued by the idea that you had
to let pharmacies do more. Can you elaborate on that?
Mr. JC Scott. Yes. Thank you for the question. Think back
to all of our collective experience during COVID where we had
to go to get our testing, where we had to go to get our
vaccinations. The rules were eased to allow us to use the
pharmacy as a site of care. There are so many things that a
licensed pharmacist should be able to do, and particularly in
rural counties where your doctor's office, your hospital may
not be close, administering vaccines, administering shots,
checking your blood pressure, some of those routine healthcare
screenings where they can add value by interacting with the
patient.
Mr. Burlison. Right.
Mr. JC Scott. Instead of simply the revenue model being
primarily the pill in the bottle, which remains critically
important, but we think there is so much more they can do,
which adds revenue for them and value for the system.
Mr. Burlison. My time is getting close, but it appears to
me that just the common theme is that centralization causes
skyrocketing costs. In my opinion, decentralization could be
the answer, but with that we have to trust mid-level providers
to do more. We have to trust pharmacists to be able to
administer some of the healthcare that patients need.
Then my last question, Ms. Tripoli, has to do with
transparency. If I am going to go shop for where I am going to
have dinner tonight, I can see on Yelp amazing information,
costs, the value, the ratings of different restaurants. Why can
we not get to that point in healthcare?
Ms. Tripoli. Part of the reason is because of the way that
prices are negotiated, and the way they are set is in closed-
door negotiations between plans and providers. That price, the
negotiated rate, is buried in the proprietary contract, never
to be seen by the public. Now, with these regulations,
transparency in coverage and hospital price transparency, we
are seeing for the first time what the actual underlying price
of a healthcare service is, so now we can actually get the data
and look at it, pull it down and understand where are prices
needlessly high, where are they competitive, and we can make
more informed policy decisions.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you. Sadly, my time has expired.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. Burlison, and now we will
hear from Ms. Jayapal from Washington.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, so much Mr. Chairman. Recently, two
of the largest health clinics serving my district were bought
by United Health Group, a prime example of consolidation of our
healthcare system. United Health then demanded a significant
increase in payments from another health insurer, during tense
negotiations in a highly consolidated health market.
As a result, over 19,000 of my constituents were notified
that they would likely lose access to their doctor. As hospital
consolidation in situations like this are becoming more common
nationwide, it is just important that we take a look at the
impacts of hospital consolidation on people's health and
medical cost.
Seattle is not alone in experiencing these hospital
mergers, and we have seen a concerning increase of mergers
across the country. A recent report by the New York Times found
that areas with the highest rate of hospital consolidation had
prices go up between 11 and 54 percent.
Ms. Tripoli, can you describe what typically happens when
there is a high rate of hospital mergers in a region?
Ms. Tripoli. Absolutely. It really comes down to when you
see increased concentration in a market, it gives greater
negotiating power over being able to set prices, essentially.
What we have seen in the hospital business model is a complete
shift, and it is based on two things. Buying up local
competition, so you can gain more negotiating leverage over how
to demand higher prices and generating high volumes of high-
priced services.
The result of course, the prices get passed on,
particularly in the commercial market, to employers. We see
stagnant wages. We see increased premiums and cost sharing for
consumers, and we are stuck with unaffordable healthcare care.
Rising levels of medical debt.
Ms. Jayapal. One of the things that we hear from the
hospital industry, they often claim that hospital mergers
increase the quality of care. Is that true?
Ms. Tripoli. I think what the data shows us is that that
typically is a claim, but the data shows us that quality either
stays the same, or in many cases gets worse.
Ms. Jayapal. It is really not true at all. Hospitals also
claim that mergers lead to lower healthcare costs. Is that
true?
Ms. Tripoli. That is definitely not true.
Ms. Jayapal. Definitely not true. Ms. Monahan, these
hospital practices often lead to people losing access to their
medical providers. What do experts say about the impact of
losing access to your care provider and then having to find new
providers, new specialists?
Ms. Monahan. I think it is a huge problem for consumers,
and one thing that we see, for example, it is kind of this
intersection of hospitals merging and acquiring physician
practices, and then how the insurers have to respond. One
example is that you know, insurers are trying to lower costs,
and so they will say, you know, if you go to an independent
practice, it will cost you less than if you go to this now
hospital owned location.
That puts the consumers in a really tight spot because they
may want to prefer to continue to see the doctor they have been
seeing, maybe they are in the middle of a course of chemo. They
now have to pay maybe several hundred dollars more for every
time that they go in because the hospital owns this practice
now and is charging a lot more for that.
Ms. Jayapal. It really reduces freedom of choice to see the
doctors and specialists that you want. Representative Spartz
and I have championed bipartisan efforts to expand antitrust
enforcement to nonprofit hospitals through our legislation, the
Stop Anticompetitive Healthcare Act. Ms. Tripoli, can you tell
me a bit about how increased antitrust enforcement would affect
competition in the healthcare system?
Ms. Tripoli. Yes, and thank you for your legislation. It is
very exciting to see. As I understand it, the FDC currently
does not have the ability to intervene and investigate mergers
and acquisitions among non-profit hospitals in particular. As
far as consolidation, we are seeing increased consolidation
across all types of hospitals, non-profit, for profit.
Giving FDC the authority to actually be able to investigate
would go a long way in helping us to address the parts of the
markets that are still not consolidated.
Ms. Jayapal. I really appreciate that, and I invite all of
my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to join our bipartisan
legislation. Hard-working Americans are bearing the brunt of
increased healthcare costs from hospital consolidation, and I
think it is really important that we work to prohibit these
anticompetitive practices in healthcare.
Also go further, in my view, and enact a universal single
payer healthcare system that would remove insurance middlemen
who often perpetuate anti-competitiveness. I have that bill of
course, it is Medicare for All Bill. The only competition in
healthcare should be providers competing to provide the best
possible care for their patients.
That should be the only objective, the only goal. I thank
you all for your work, and I yield back Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Ms. Jayapal. Now we will
recognize Ms. Houchin from Indiana.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the
witnesses for coming to testify before us today. This is an
important opportunity for us to focus on issues pertaining to
transparency in the cost of healthcare. Dr. Sachdev, as a
fellow Hoosier, you know, that Indiana has recently passed
important legislation as you noted in your opening statement,
such as AGA 1004.
Requiring at least 85 percent of each drug rebate, which is
probably defined to include fees and other remuneration, to go
to certain patients at the point of sale at the pharmacy
counter, or ERISA exempt employers get 100 percent of the
rebates.
You mentioned in your testimony several policy ideas
addressing PBMs. Could you talk through your ideas that you
think this Committee should consider legislating, and how
Indiana is leading in this regard?
Ms. Sachdev. Thank you so much. Yes, we passed a PBM
legislation is in SEA 8, so that is where that particular
language comes from. We need to codify the Transparency in
Coverage Act and include the pharmacy information in that.
Prohibiting gag clauses with all parties, including insurers,
but now that they have merged it has to be all parties,
including those group purchasing organizations, those GPOs that
they contract with.
A lot of the legislation around the country at the State
level is focused on PBMs and the rebates that they have
negotiated with the drug manufacturers. Now there is this other
entity over here called the GPO and they are negotiating. If
you are just targeting the PBM you miss the GPO, so that is an
opportunity.
Spread pricing is a huge problem. We have heard about
pharmacies, independent pharmacies getting paid less. There are
issues you can pay a pharmacy a certain amount, but then the
PBM can claw it back, which is like I paid you 100 bucks, but
now you have got to pay me 50 back. We need some insight into
claw backs.
This is a particularly shady process, where they will pay
the pharmacy a price for a certain drug claim, but they will
charge the employer much more for it. That is why we need total
transparency through the whole supply chain, so the employer
can do that audit all the way through.
Merger and acquisition oversight, and because we have seen
all of this vertical integration, we really need to think about
how to prohibit self-dealing. You know, I am the insurance
company, I am the PBM, I am the pharmacy, but the employer and
the patient pays for everything, so I am just taking money out
of one pocket, and putting it in the other.
They really should not be allowed to self-deal.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you. Like you, I continue to be
frustrated. I hear from constituents a lot on concerns about
the practices of pharmacy benefit managers, how consolidation
of PBMs has taken away options for plan sponsors and patients.
Do employers have flexibility when designing their prescription
drug benefit programs?
Ms. Sachdev. They have limited flexibility. Sometimes the
PBMs will say if you--here is your drug formulary. If you want
to make any changes to it, you can, but we are going to charge
you a huge fee to make any changes. When they do the math, they
are like gosh, I just wanted to take a few drugs off, or get
biosimilars on because there are no biosimilars on the
formulary.
Now you are going to charge me a million dollars to do
that. That is ridiculous. They should not be able to charge
fees because you are really handcuffing employers by doing that
if you are not going to say hey, you can do this, but then
these fees, and they have so many fees really for doing
anything.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you. I think that is why this
transparency piece is so important.
Ms. Sachdev. Yes.
Ms. Houchin. I have heard from constituents that they can
no longer get long-term supplies. They can only get a month's
supply of their prescription drugs, and then the cost is three
times higher than if they had a 3-month supply. We are
currently investigating if it is a PBM issue, or another issue
that is causing their prescription prices to go up.
When we have increased costs of healthcare like going to a
different facility, you know, buying a facility, going across
the street, and then it costs more, consumers know that there
is something not right about that. That it is incumbent upon us
to try to contain these costs when possible. Nearly every
healthcare related constituent meeting someone brings up PBMs,
so I look forward to this Committee considering serious
legislation addressing PBMs, and their role as the middleman.
Thank you for being here today, I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Ms. Houchin. Now we will
recognize Mr. Scott from the great State of Virginia.
Mr. Bobby Scott. Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms.
Tripoli, you responded to a previous question by saying that
the costs did not go down when there are mergers. By costs, do
you mean charges, or costs of providing services?
Ms. Tripoli. I mean the underlying price of healthcare.
After there is a merger and acquisition, particularly in the
hospital setting, we see prices go up.
Mr. Bobby Scott. You are talking about the charges, not the
costs of providing the services.
Ms. Tripoli. The charges, of course, the charges to the
patient, the out-of-pocket costs of course depend on whether
they are insured, what type of insurance.
Mr. Bobby Scott. Yes, but I mean the costs of the hospital
providing the services could go down, but the charges could go
up?
Ms. Tripoli. The price of medical services after markets
consolidate, after two hospitals merge together, goes up.
Mr. Bobby Scott. The price?
Ms. Tripoli. The price does.
Mr.  Bobby Scott. The charges. Okay. We are dealing with
costs of services, we are dealing with surprise billing, and it
seems that when you land in an emergency room, providers could
charge whatever they want. We heard one service was $1,000.00,
or $2,500.00 in the same hospital, or $8,000.00 down the
street. There used to be a term called UCR, usual, customary,
and reasonable. Is that still a limitation on what you can
charge? Anybody want to answer that?
No? Can you still just make up whatever you want unrelated
to anything?
Ms. Tripoli. Just to make sure I understand the question.
Is the question about the charge master price where hospitals
are essentially setting, pretty much a price, they are building
to price, and then is that what you are asking?
Mr. Bobby Scott. Yes. I mean, if I take my car to a
mechanic and say change the oil, he cannot come back and say
well I will charge you $750.00, and I am going to keep your car
until you pay. It has got to be a reasonable price.
Ms. Tripoli. It should be a reasonable price. I think what
we are seeing as a result of heavily consolidated markets is
that the underlying price is not reasonable. It is not only
high, and increasing, but there is incredible variation across
the market. In one hospital system you can, depending on your
plan, on your health insurance plan, the MRI can be $1,000.00,
or it can be $3,500.00.
That MRI should be one price because it is an MRI. It is
the same service. It is the same across the whole country.
Mr. Bobby Scott. That is not the case right now.
Ms. Tripoli. Exactly.
Mr. Bobby Scott. One of the--we have had a lot of
complaints of PBMs and TPAs, how much of this could be solved
if they were considered fiduciaries?
Mr. Baker. Thank you for the question. I think it would
have frankly limited value for the reasons that Dr. Sachdev
brought about earlier, because of self-dealing. You could say
PBM you have to be the fiduciary, but within the corporate
umbrella of that PBM, they also own their mail pharmacy, their
specialty pharmacy, the GPO, there is all of these other
corporate entities that they could still bury these profits in.
I think it is important to really look at the global
entity, and make sure that you are putting regulation in place
that makes sure that all of the entity needs to be driving the
best interest of its clients.
Mr. Bobby Scott. Do you want to answer that?
Ms. Monahan. On the fiduciary question. I think there is
potential for value in having PBMs or TPAs be fiduciaries, but
we want to just think about it from kind of the functional
sense of kind of, what service is being provided here, what
activity are they performing. Then with respect to that
activity, is there something that we think is really very
important that they be acting in the best interest of the plan
members.
I totally recognize these are really complex companies and
structures, and so I do not--I think the idea here is that we
want them to be working and to contain costs, and not just be
acting in their own self-interest. I do not think it is
necessarily like clean, put the label on. Done. Thinking
through, like yes, there might be some value in thinking of
them as fiduciaries as well.
Mr. JC Scott. I would just add the fiduciary label in law
implies that there is decisionmaking authority, and ability to
control the other entities' decision and financing. A great
example, the PBM does not hold that decisionmaking authority on
behalf of the employer, and a great example is the conversation
we just had about rebates where the employer is making the
choice whether that goes to the point of sale at the pharmacy
counter, to defray premium, to make the benefit more robust, or
to apply it elsewhere in the employer's finances.
The PBM does not control that decision. As you look at that
fiduciary label, that decisionmaking authority does not exist.
Mr. Bobby Scott. Let me try to get in one other question.
What is the rationale for facility fee to determine whether the
procedure is performed in a hospital or a physician's office,
particularly when they are charging these facility fees in a
corporate owned physician's office?
Ms. Tripoli. I think there is very little rationale for
facility fees for a certain group of services. Ultimately what
is happening is you're seeing large healthcare corporations
buying up physician practices, rebranding so that they can get
a higher reimbursement. How that plays out in the commercial
market is that consumers are experiencing a facility fee.
In the story of the woman I told, Ms. Tesso and her son,
they did a 1-hour videoconference, and they got a $1,000.00
bill facility fee, but they never stepped foot in the hospital-
based setting.
Mr. Bobby Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. Scott. Now we will go to
Chairman Foxx from North Carolina.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to our
witnesses for being here today. Dr. Sachdev, the Employers
Forum of Indiana has continued to push for change in Indiana,
which has among the most hospital consolidations in the
country. Kaiser Family Foundation has discussed challenges with
hospital price transparency data.
How has your organization surmounted these challenges?
Ms. Sachdev. Thank you for the question. I am not sure that
we have fully surmounted those challenges, but we are doing our
very best. It is beginning with transparency. We are requiring
financial transparency of all the hospitals in the State, they
have to submit all of their finances. We have hospitals that
have between 2 billion and 7 billion dollars in cash and
reserves, and so when they come to legislators claiming
poverty, they have the data, and we were able to supply that.
It needs to be more readily available to them.
Mrs. Foxx. How has the recently passed legislation
prohibiting hospital off-campus facilities fees been
implemented?
Ms. Sachdev. We looked. We did not want a blunt instrument
across all of the hospitals. We want to make sure all of our
rural hospitals are successful. It did not apply to all
hospitals. It applied to certain hospitals, and those were our
largest hospital systems, and they simply do not fill out a
hospital facility fee form, they just fill out an independent
form.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Monahan, the No Surprises Act
prohibited gag clauses in contracts between health plans and
third-party administrators to ensure that plan sponsors can
access cost and quality data. Despite this, plan sponsors still
struggle to access needed information. What can be done to
allow plans to access cost and quality data.
Ms. Monahan. I think we need to revisit the gag clause
prohibition and think about kind of where the burden falls.
Right now, the TPAs are kind of looking at this and responding
saying it is on the employer to kind of negotiate a contract
where they get rid of the gag clauses.
There is no kind of real hook on the TPAs themselves to be
eliminating these.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Baker, I would like to pose the
same question to you. What can be done to improve plan sponsors
access to their own cost and quality data?
Mr. Baker. I think the Consolidated Appropriations Act has
been a very good start. It is really trying to put more data
out there, but that law really says the data needs to go to the
Federal Government, and it can be done in an aggregate fashion.
Where these employers see exactly their data, know exactly
their costs, and where their money is going would be incredibly
helpful.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. Scott, many in Congress
believe that large pharmacy benefit managers are not
transparent and are driving higher drug prices through the use
of rebates and spread pricing. Do you agree that plan sponsors
should be able to audit their plan data without interference,
and should they be made aware of any indirect compensation the
PBM receives for its contracted services?
Mr. JC Scott. Yes. I would agree. We need our clients and
employers to have all the information they need to make
informed decisions.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Dr. Foxx. We will now recognize
Ms. Hayes from Connecticut for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Hayes. Millions of Americans across the country are
hit with unexpectedly high medical bills because of increased
hospital consolidation. Studies show that consolidation has
consistently produced higher prices for care. According to the
American Hospital Association, between 1998 and the end of
2021, there were 1,887 hospital mergers, reducing the number of
hospitals from 8,000 to just over 6,000.
This consolidation includes hospitals acquiring independent
physicians' offices and converting them to hospital outpatient
departments. Under the current system, these departments can
fully charge facility fees, and receive higher reimbursements
than freestanding physicians' offices than other lower cost
settings.
There is little evidence that the quality of care is
higher, and that in many cases physicians' practices were
brought by hospitals, and designated part of the outpatient
department, just to take advantage of this rule. Ms. Monahan,
you discussed hospital billing practices that make it difficult
to determine which setting is providing the service.
This includes when a service is provided in what is
effectively a doctor's office but is billed at the hospital
rate. While the plan has no way of distinguishing the setting
in which the care took place, can you tell us a little bit
about if you do not know the location of where care is
provided, how is a plan supposed to determine the rate of
payment?
Would providing accurate information on the site of service
improve transparency?
Ms. Monahan. Absolutely providing this would improve
transparency, and the payers as well as State officials, State
regulators, Federal regulators, looking at this really just
cannot see the actual location where care took place, and they
cannot make their decisions to say this is an off campus, a
physician's office that is miles off campus. It looks like a
hospital to us, and figuring out what to pay then becomes much
more difficult.
If you want to adjust, this is a lower quality practice
that a hospital now has acquired and maybe we do not want to
contract them, or we do not want to pay them as much if we
cannot see that that is where the care is being provided,
rather than it all just looks like it is on a main hospital
campus. It makes it a huge challenge to implement reforms.
Mrs. Hayes. Can you just help us understand a little why it
would make a difference, I think to Mr. Scott's question, if a
service is being provided. Does the setting, should the setting
determine the rate of reimbursement for that service, whether
it be an MRI, an ultrasound, or whatever.
Ms. Monahan. Ideally, no. I think that is a system we want
to move to where for care that can be safely and effectively
provided in a physician office, we should not be paying more
when it is being provided in a hospital owned setting. Right
now, what you see is states trying to do, like Indiana, to say
at least off campus physician, or a physician's offices. Let us
not pay more, let us not pay facility fees there.
Payers may have difficulty implementing that if they cannot
see where the care was provided.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. Ms. Tripoli, in your testimony you
discussed the lack of transparency concerning the business
practices of PBMs, or pharmacy benefit managers. As you know,
in 2022, 80 percent of all equivalent prescription claims were
processed by three companies. CVS Health, Express Scripts
through Cigna, and Optum RX through United Healthcare Group.
What are some of the problems that may arise because of how
PBMs are currently compensated, and how would transparency help
in these issues?
Ms. Tripoli. Thank you very much for the question. I think
the first thing to say is the reason we have a drug
affordability crisis is because of price gouging from drug
companies. It is also important to note that PBMs, of course,
have a role to play. There is just an incredible amount of
opaqueness around the PBM business practices and contracting
practices.
They are, to your point, three major PBMs owning 80 percent
of the market. Giving them this market power gives them
increased negotiating leverage with the drug companies, to get
price concessions. The result of pricing structures that are
not always in the interests, in the financial interests and
health interests of the American people.
Increased transparency, pulling back the curtain,
understanding what is happening around the rebates, the actual
negotiated rates is going to empower employers to actually be
able to negotiate to get a better deal for the employees.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. That was one of the things that
Democrats tried to do was Medicare negotiating the price of
prescription drugs, increasing competition in many of these
workplaces. How does the lack of competition impact an ability
to better deal with PBMs in 15 seconds?
Ms. Tripoli. The main thing that I have not said is that
PBMs can actually steer patients to their own pharmacies,
taking away choice from consumers, which is hugely problematic
for their access to pharmaceuticals.
Mrs. Hayes. Pretty basic. Thank you. That is all I have. I
yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Mrs. Hayes. Now we will go to
Representative Chavez-DeRemer from Oregon.
Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for the witnesses for being here today. We have heard a lot
about pharmacy benefit managers, PBMs, and so just for a quick
refresher, while we asked several questions over and over
again. I think it is fair to the American people to hear it
over and over again what your answers are.
PBMs decide which medications are covered by health
insurance plans, which pharmacies patients can use, and all are
owned by insurance companies who in turn also own the
pharmacies. The discounts acquired by PBMs notice rebates are
often not passed down to the patients.
In other words, a PBM could get $100.00 rebate from a
pharmaceutical company, pass along the $15.00 to a patient, and
pocket the remaining $85.00. Meaning the insurance company is
forcing a larger copay on a patient, so they can pay themselves
more than if there was no rebate at all.
It is really a system beating down on the patients, and
that is who we hear from. Mr. Baker, how could we require PBMs
to pass through the discounts from rebates onto the patients,
and avoid insurance companies jacking up the premiums because
they are losing profits from these rebates?
Mr. Baker. That is a great question. I think it goes back
to the theme of the conversation here today, transparency and
data--to make sure that at that claim level the ultimate plan
sponsor can see exactly what is being charged, what they are
getting back in rebate dollars from the pharmaceutical
manufacturers in aggregate.
I think you also bring up another very important point
about the PBMs owning their own pharmacies and having that
control. Just for perspective, a drug cost is not a drug cost,
and this is where we have got to look at that major corporate
umbrella that these PBMs are part of.
For example, Mark Cuban's cost plus drug company, there is
a drug called Imatinib. You can buy it from him for a year's
supply for $866.00. There's one PBM that works with four large
State health plans. If you are part of the State health plan of
Kentucky, that drug is going to cost you $26,000.00. If you are
part of Louisiana's health plan, it is $57,000.00.
If you are part of Georgia's health plan it's $170,000.00,
and if you are unfortunate enough to be a taxpayer in
Tennessee, you are paying $212,000.00. Exact same drug, exact
same PBM, the price changes depending on how they want to do
that and the arbitrage that is in the middle, how they want to
move that money around.
Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer. I appreciate the answer, especially
being here today given that you are a competing industry
dominated by the monopoly. How can Congress disrupt this
vertical integration in the industry so that insurance
companies cannot distort our healthcare system and force
devastating costs on what I would call vulnerable Oregonians?
Mr. Baker. I think the vertical consolidation has been 5
years on and is very obviously not helping. Costs continue to
go up, and quality continues to go down. You know, I think
really delinking how PBMs make their profit from a percentage
of acquisition costs and sales costs because then if I am a PBM
and I make 7 percent, do I want to make 7 percent off of
$5,000.00 drug or off of a $50.00 drug?
Again, these are large corporations who are driven to
profit. I think it starts with creating the right incentives,
getting the right data out there, and then making sure that all
of that is completely visible.
Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you, Mr. Baker. Let us move now
to the relationship between PBMs and employers. A whole lot of
employers have said they are not able to get accurate costs and
pricing information as was stated earlier, from PBMs, despite
laws which mandate the sharing of this information. PBMs deny
this claim and say that employers can receive cost and quality
information at any time through the audit.
It seems almost coy, really, for certain PBMs to say if you
want to know whether we are following the law, audit us.
Knowing small businesses do not have that kind of time, let
alone really the resources to do so. With that disconnect, Mr.
Baker, answer me this. How can we bridge this issue so that
there is seamless transparency between the PBMs and the
employers?
Then to followup to that, Ms. Monahan, what can Congress do
to make sure that PBMs comply with the law, and meet their
reporting requirements, insuring the disclosure of direct and
indirect compensation for their services? I will wait for
those, because I will be running out of time, so make it quick.
Mr. Baker. I will go very quickly. I think it goes to the
status quo. Basically, PBMs say you cannot audit, but then they
say only certain auditors can come in, and only certain data is
available. The term audit is very loose, and it is not as
comprehensive as it needs to be, and it should be able to be
done by anybody that the employer chooses.
Mrs. Chaves-DeRemer. Thank you, Mr. Baker, Ms. Monahan?
Ms. Monahan. This Committee sent a letter last December
encouraging DOL to issue guidance clarifying that the service
provider compensation disclosures applied to PBMs and TPAs. At
this point that guidance has not happened, but so further
action may be warranted to make sure that is clear.
Mrs. Chaves-DeRemer. Great. That was quick. Thank you. Dr.
And Ms. Tripoli, but I do not think we are going to have time.
If PBMs disappear tomorrow, how do you believe employer health
plans would be able to negotiate those drug prices with
pharmaceutical companies? I know the answer will be long, so I
will go ahead and ask this question to the Chair, submit it,
and I appreciate I just wanted to get that for the record, and
with that I yield back my time.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now go the Ranking
Member, Mr. DeSaulnier, for his questions.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to followup
on the Chairman's, Chairman Foxx's questions about the
prohibition on gag rules. Starting with Ms. Monahan, and then
Dr. Sachdev. If we required a plan's data to be treated as a
plan asset under ERISA, how might that help with getting the
information that Dr. Foxx was talking about?
Ms. Monahan. That would effectively kind of flip the
framework we currently have on its head, so rather than the
PBMs and TPAs kind of owning the data and setting the terms by
which an employer can access it. It would say this is the
employer's data, and the employer can then set terms, or
Congress could set terms under which, you know, the TPAs, or
PBMs could be using that. There are certain important functions
that they would perform, so we would want to make sure that
would still happen in some sense.
The employer, that would be their data, and they could have
access to it. The one thing I would want to make sure is that
there are the appropriate privacy protections to protect the
plan members whose health information would be accessible.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Doctor, any comments?
Ms. Sachdev. Yes. In addition to the gag clause where you
say we are going to remove this, there is--it is one thing to
say the gag clauses are gone. It is another thing, there is a
lot of stalling that happens and getting the data to the
employer.
It can take, you can make the request that they might give
you the wrong data, it may take 18 months to get the data. I
would really encourage you to think about a timeframe by which
they have to give the data back. In Indiana, we put 15 business
days in statute.
Again with the audits, we have a law now that says 85 to
100 percent of rebates have to go to patients or employers. How
do we know that 100 percent or 85 percent, or any percent is
actually getting? We have to have those audits at the drug
level, not in aggregate.
I think what would be perhaps most transformational is with
the Transparency in Coverage Act, all the insurance
information, all the PBM direct pricing information, as these
insurance companies have to put those prices on their machine-
readable files on their own websites, the hospitals have to put
it on their own websites.
They should all send a copy to you. You could put it in a
master data base. You would be able to see how prices compare
when policies change, monitor it, look for compliance. Also
give the public access, and researcher's access. That way we
would all be making evidence-based decisions in a policy
manner, in a purchasing manner.
As mentioned, as you mentioned, employers do not have a lot
of resources to do all this deep dive data analysis, so the
Federal Government just getting a copy of these machine-
readable files could really go a long way to help them.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you. Ms. Tripoli, would you talk a
little bit more about hospital facility fees and the cost to
hospitals? It is interesting listening to this happening many
years ago, 20 plus years ago, being on the governing body of a
public hospital clinic in an area in the San Francisco Bay
area, the east bay where Kaiser is very, a closed system, is
dominant.
We were trying to move the high cost of what we called the
aircraft carrier of the hospital, and so it was Kaiser, and so
was Sutter, and so was Anthem is affiliated, into primary care,
and into community-based clinics.
Now I am listening to this testimony, I am reading, and the
hospitals seemed to have changed that model to sort of capture
even lower cost at a higher cost reimbursement. Is that
accurate?
Ms. Tripoli. That is. That is accurate. I completely agree.
I think we want to make sure, as was mentioned earlier, that
services are provided in the most safe and effective location
possible, but what we are seeing is a complete shift to
outpatient care where it is higher priced, higher cost
services, to take advantage of a higher reimbursement.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Ms. Monahan, as a consumer, as personally
as a consumer, as a survivor of cancer, and non-curable cancer,
trying to navigate this is basically just giving up to a
certain degree, and trusting your primary care doctor.
Fortunately, I have a really good one. He has to advocate and
figure out where are we sending you.
To get started on the pharmaceutical industry and going to
Walgreens as opposed to a personal local pharmacy is just a
hugely different world. Sticking to the just--the access to the
facility. What does this mean for the consumer? I know my
perspective; you just really count on your primary care
physician.
Ms. Monahan. Very much so, and I think it really means that
consumers are going to be paying a lot more because so many
physician practices are now being purchased by hospitals and
large health systems, and it is not really necessarily up to
the physician, you know, but when they go and they see you out
at this location that is owned by the health system, the health
system is going to tack on a bill.
That bill, how it is being processed under your insurance
will often mean you are paying a lot more when you would go to
see your physician. You might just have a copay, but now you
have an additional hospital bill, and that might be a
coinsurance charge, or you are paying for all of it under your
deductible, so it is a lot more money just to go to your
doctor.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Yes, it is awful for the consumer. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to mention my oncologist, in
case he was listening, I rely on him too. I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. DeSaulnier. Now we will go to
Representative Comer from Kentucky.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Scott, it is good
to see you. Following PCMA's statement regarding our recent
oversight hearing on this topic, which criticized having a new
entry to the market, Mr. Baker testified about the challenges
he has faced. I wanted to give you a chance to answer a few of
the same questions that were discussed during that meeting,
during that hearing.
However, I first want to acknowledge that the Chief
Financial Officer of CVS Caremark Aetna was quoted on May 31st
at an industry conference when asked about potential reforms
proposed in Congress as saying, ``There's other ways in the
economic model that we could adjust if one of those things
changes.'' Advised his peers to ``not worry about Congress.''
Now your presence before us today and insistence on being
the only voice testifying to Congress on potential reforms,
leads me to believe you might have a different opinion of the
importance of Congress. Mr. Scott, this poster shows Imatinib,
a generic chemotherapy drug used to treat Leukemia.
Can cost the patient at CVS more than $17,000.00 for a 30
day supply. An identical prescription, a 30 day supply of
Imatinib would only cost $72.00 at Cost Plus Drugs. Obviously,
Imatinib does not cost $17,000.00 if Cost Plus Drugs can sell
it for $72.00.
How would you explain to any patient or payer such as the
Federal Government the benefit in CVS charging $17,000.00 for a
drug that can be sold for only $72.00?
Mr. JC Scott. It is good to see you Chairman Comer, and I
appreciate the opportunity to visit with you again. We have
spent time together before, and I am glad that Mr. Baker is
here, and has been able to testify in other forums, because I
do believe to your point it is important we hear from a variety
of voices.
PCMA certainly celebrates every new entrant into the market
because we want a very competitive marketplace with a lot of
choices. We have heard a lot today about frustration from
employers that they cannot get the information they need from
their current PBM. That is great. I can assume that they can
flock to different business models as those develop in the
marketplace.
I believe Congress has an incredibly important role to
play, which is why I am here, and why we want to engage,
because we all need to be working together toward trying to
bring down the cost of prescription drugs. I cannot speak as to
what the CVS representative was saying to his shareholder
audience, other than to say I recognize that as policy change
occurs, the importance of having a pharmacy benefit company in
existence to help employers and other plan sponsors manage
their prescription drug cost, that value proposition is going
to continue to be present.
That work needs to be done because if you disaggregate
that, you lose that value of scale and being able to negotiate
and harnessing group purchasing power. It is only going to
increase costs if every employer and every plan sponsor has to
do that on their own.
For your example on the chart, I cannot speak to the
specific example with not having more knowledge of the
patient's health plan, the cost sharing, the benefit design.
Mr. Comer. It is the same example I used in the oversight
hearing on the PBM. Let me ask another question because my time
is running short. Mr. Scott, CVS Caremark underwent a system
enhancement last week, which removed the plan cost column,
including for our example here, Imatinib.
Plan sponsors were previously able to see the total cost of
the medication, and the total cost to their plan.
Unfortunately, as PBMs professed to want transparency, and have
a focus on providing plan sponsors with information, they are
actively suppressing information available to plan sponsors.
Thankfully, this information magically became available
again last night right before this hearing. Mr. Scott, I am
having trouble reconciling these two things. We continually
hear about how PBMs would like to provide transparency, but
then see intermittent or incomplete information provided to
plan sponsors.
Can you provide some insight into voluntary actions PBMs
could take right now to provide this data to PBM clients?
Mr. JC Scott. Yes, sir. If a pharmacy benefit company is
not providing the information that a client is requesting when
they're drawing up their RFP, when they are designing their
contract, then that client is going to move to another PMB. It
is in the interest of the PBM to make sure they are providing
the data.
Mr. Comer. Well, why have they not taken those actions?
They talk about transparency, and that is what we have got
other committees looking into this. We are going to have
legislation to be more transparent. The Secretary testified in
a committee hearing; transparency is the answer. Well, why will
not the industry just be transparent?
Mr. JC Scott. I believe the industry is transparent.
Mr. Comer. I disagree. Respectfully.
Mr. JC Scott. I understand that. If the companies are not
providing what the client is asking for, the client is going to
move elsewhere. That is why we see new business models able to
enter into the marketplace and differentiate in the kinds of
contracts they're willing to offer.
Mr. Comer. The problem with the client is the industry is
exhibiting vertical and horizontal manipulation of the
pharmaceutical market. That is the problem, and that is what
Congress is going to have to do, Mr. Chairman, to fix the
problem. Transparency is a great political talking point, but
Congress has been talking about that for years, and nothing is
happening. I appreciate this Committee hearing. I look forward
to working in a bipartisan way to try to get resolution to this
problem. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Mr. Comer, and again thanks for
all of our witnesses here today. I represent a predominantly
rural district, and I regularly hear, as I am sure many of my
colleagues do about the importance of local, independent
pharmacies, and how they're under attack from big pharma, and
dying out, or struggling to survive.
Mr. Scott, your testimony cites data that would seem to
disagree with what I am hearing from my constituents, and why
do you think that is, or how would you counter that argument
about the impact on local pharmacies?
Mr. JC Scott. Yes, sir. It is not our data, or not our data
alone, this comes from the NCPA, the community pharmacy lobby.
That is documented that we continue to see a stable marketplace
when it comes to independent pharmacies across the country.
What we've talked about a little bit here before during the
course of the hearing is isolating those rural pharmacies,
right?
Not the independents, the 83 percent independents, who are
serviced by wholesalers through their pharmacy services and
administrative organizations, or PSAOs that do a lot of
negotiating work on their behalf. You have got these stand-
alone rural pharmacies, often the only point of care where we
really have to focus on making sure that they are able to have
a sustainable business model, so that they can be there to
serve patients.
That gets to the conversation we were having earlier about
making sure there is a lot of different ways they can provide
value to patients.
Chairman Good. One of the things that a lot of people in my
district talk about is how Express Scripts, in particular, is
offering a reimbursement rate that's so low that it is
unaffordable for these small pharmacies to fulfill Tri-Care
prescriptions. What would your response be to that?
Mr. JC Scott. A lot of this gets to the setting of pharmacy
networks, so just like you said, a provider network on the
hospital side. We work with our clients--our companies work
with our clients to develop networks of pharmacies. Always with
the goal of making sure that there is an access point nearby
the patient's home where they can get access to their
medications at a retail pharmacy.
In the Tri-Care system, the Department of Defense is
involved in helping to set very specific network adequacy
requirements that dictate like how far they have to be, as it
is in the Medicare program, and in the commercial marketplace.
That's the objective of the plan sponsor, is to develop a
robust network to serve the patients that they represent.
Chairman Good. I switched gears in the interest of time to
Mr. Baker here. Mr. Baker, some have claimed that increased
transparency, which we talked a lot about today, actually
causes prices to increase, and can result in collusion because
it inhibits a payer's ability to privately negotiate discounts.
What's your opinion on this?
Mr. Baker. I think that transparency would do nothing but
drive down costs. I think it is a fear tactic. I find it very
interesting that we want to continue to point to the system as
working, but again, costs have gone up every year. Quality is
going down every year. What we have been trying, and how we
have allowed the gate keepers to run is not working.
This lack of transparency is driving a lot of those poor
outcomes. I think people being able to really see like the poor
State of Tennessee. I am paying $212,000.00 for this drug that
your neighbor to the north, Kentucky, only gets $26,000.00. If
that information is out there, and people then can say I do not
want to pay $400.00 for a gallon of milk at, you know, my
grocery store.
I am going to go over here because I know what a gallon of
milk should cost, we are going to see a significant drop in
pricing.
Chairman Good. There is no question. Your company's
business model is to provide a transparent, cost-effective PBM
option for employers. You have talked about how yours is
different. What benefits have you seen to the industry and
consumers from what your PBMs offer?
Mr. Baker. I would say three things. One, we have seen
decreasing costs for all of the clients that we work with, so
because we are transparent, and we sit down and have deep
conversations with them about the decisions they should make in
the best interest of their plan, their costs go down.
Two, technology matters. We talk a lot about healthcare,
and the poor technology in healthcare, and that is the same
thing in the PBM industry. Most PBMs are still dealing in 35-
year-old DOS based technology which makes reporting very
limiting, makes the ability to customize very hard.
Technology then gives employers much more flexibility, and
then finally, we inject a lot of pharmacy technicians and
pharmacists that we hired from community pharmacy back into the
system. PBMs have created a tremendous amount of exclusionary
formularies and utilization management criteria.
Basically, what those words mean is they do not let the
doctor write for the drugs that the doctor wants. They say no,
doc, you cannot write for that drug. We, PBM, will not cover
it. That puts a significant administrative burden on physician
practices to try to figure out oh, Express Scripts has this
drug. CVS has this drug.
We want to make sure that we help those physician offices
out by saying here are the right drugs, and then work with the
member to stay on that drug through the course of their
therapy.
Chairman Good. Well again, I want to thank all of our
witnesses today, and for your investment of time to be with us
today, and I would like, without objection, there being no
further business, the Committee stands adjourned. Thank you.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon at 12:08 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
