- CUTTING CORNERS AT WHD: EXAMINING THE COST TO WORKERS, SMALL BUSINESSES, AND THE ECONOMY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CUTTING CORNERS AT WHD: EXAMINING THE
COST TO WORKERS, SMALL BUSINESSES,
AND THE ECONOMY

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WORKFORCE PROTECTIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JULY 18, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-18

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-760 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WORKFORCE PROTECTIONS

KEVIN KILEY, California, Chairman

GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina,
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York            Ranking Member
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
MARY MILLER, Illinois                HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              MARK TAKANO, California

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on July 18, 2023....................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Kiley, Hon. Kevin, Chairman, Subcommittee on Workforce
Protections................................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Adams, Hon. Alma, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Workforce
Protections................................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11

WITNESSES

Wolfson, Jonathan, Chief Legal Officer and Policy Director,
Cicero Institute...........................................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    15
Milito, Elizabeth, Executive Director, National Federation of
Independent Business (NFIB), Small Business Legal Center,
Washington, D.C............................................    21
Prepared statement of....................................    23
Sojourner, Aaron, Senior Economist, W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan...................    29
Prepared statement of....................................    31
Greszler, Rachel, Senior Research Fellow, The Heritage
Foundation, Washington, D.C................................    39
Prepared statement of....................................    41

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Chairman Kiley:
Letter dated July 18, 2023 from the National Restaurant
Association............................................    79
Letter dated July 18, 2023 from Flex.....................    81
Ranking Member Adams:
Letter dated July 18, 2023, from the Construction
Employers of America...................................    66
Foxx, Hon. Virginia, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina:
Memo dated April 21, 2023 from Tammy McCutchen...........    87
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', a Representative in Congress
from the State of Virginia:
Wage Inequality and Labor Rights Violations dated
February 2021 from the NBER Working Paper Series.......    89
Letter dated July 26, 2023 from Center for Progressive
Reform.................................................   138
Letter dated July 27, 2023 from National Employment Law
Project................................................   143
Article published on May 2, 2019 from The Quarterly
Journal of Economics...................................   145
Letter dated June 6, 2023 from The Coalition for Sensible
Safeguards.............................................   195

CUTTING CORNERS AT WHD: EXAMINING THE
COST TO WORKERS, SMALL BUSINESSES,
AND THE ECONOMY

----------

Tuesday, July 18, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Workforce Protections,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m.,
2175 Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, DC, Hon. Kevin
Kiley [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Kiley, Grothman, Burlison, Adams,
Omar, Stevens, and Scott.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Mindy Barry,
General Counsel; Hans Bjontegard, Legislative Assistant;
Michael Davis, Legislative Assistant; Isabel Foster, Press
Assistant; Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant; Sheila Havenner,
Director of Information Technology; Clair Houchin, Intern; Alex
Knorr, Legislative Assistant; Trey Kovacs, Professional Staff
Member; Andrew Kuzy, Press Assistant; Georgie Littlefair,
Clerk; John Martin, Deputy Director of Workplace Policy/
Counsel; Hannah Matesic, Director of Member Services and
Coalitions; Audra McGeorge, Communications Director; Kevin
O'Keefe, Professional Staff; Mike Patterson, Oversight Counsel;
Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Kelly Tyroler, Professional
Staff Member; Seth Waugh, Director of Workforce Policy; Joe
Wheeler, Professional Staff Member; Jeanne Wilson, Retirement
Counsel; Savoy Adams, Minority Intern; Brittany Alston,
Minority Operations Assistant; Ilana Brunner, Minority General
Counsel; Kristion Jackson, Minority Intern; Malak Kalasho,
Minority Intern; Raiyana Malone, Minority Press Secretary;
Kevin McDermott, Minority Director of Labor Policy; Veronique
Pluviose, Minority Staff Director; Jessica Schieder, Minority
Economic Policy Advisor; Bob Shull, Minority Senior Labor
Policy Counsel; Banyon Vassar, Minority IT Administrator.
Chairman Kiley. The Subcommittee on Workforce Protection
will come to order. I note that a quorum is present. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to call a recess at any
time. The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
the Department of Labor's Wage and Hour Division's rulemaking
during the Biden Administration, including the division's
failure to analyze the impact of its rules properly, and the
costs and burdens imposed by regulation, by the regulations on
workers and businesses, especially small businesses.
Good morning, everyone, and welcome to today's hearing.
There is broad agreement across all party lines that the
American economy is on the wrong track. After two and a half
years of unprecedented spending, and unconstrained regulation,
90 percent of Americans remain worried about high prices, and
88 percent are worried about the future of the economy.
Fewer than 1 out of 3 Americans approves of President
Biden's handling of the economy. Rather than correct course,
this administration has decided to brand its record of failure
with a new moniker, Bidenomics. The administration is engaged
in an extensive public relations campaign asking Americans not
to believe their eyes when they go to the grocery store or the
gas pump, or their ears when they hear of small businesses
closing, paychecks shrinking, young people dropping out of the
workforce, supply chains in chaos and U.S. competitiveness on a
steady decline.
This exercise in delusion was captured in a recent tweet by
the President which said that right now real wages for the
average American worker is higher than it was before the
pandemic with lower wage workers seeing the largest gains. That
is Bidenomics, he said.
Community notes commentators were quick to correct the
record with a consensus stating real wages remain lower, not
higher, than before the pandemic. In fact, workers have
suffered a 3.16 percent decline in real earnings during the
Biden Presidency. That is why 58 percent of Americans are
living paycheck to paycheck, and 70 percent are stressed about
their finances.
The bottom 50 percent of households need to earn $5,000.00
more this year just to have the same purchasing power as they
did in 2019. In a recent study by the Federal Reserve, the
share of adults who said they were worse off financially than a
year ago rose to 35 percent, the highest level since the
question was asked.
Wealth and equality meanwhile is at one of its highest
levels since the Fed began measuring it 34 years ago. The
failure of Bidenomics is not just the result of misconceived
economic ideas. The administration has also aggressively
availed itself of any and all available tools to impose its
agenda, whether lawful or not.
Indeed, a disturbing habit of this administration has been
to do by undemocratic means that which it cannot accomplish by
Democratic means. For example, on student loan forgiveness,
President Biden originally said I do not think I have the
authority to do it, and then went ahead and did it anyway, by
executive order.
The Supreme Court, of course, recently struck that order
down. With the new Congress declining to pass further harmful
economic policies, the administration has increasingly relied
on aggressive agency rulemaking. One of the rules to be
discussed today concerning independent contracting was offered
by the administration after Congress chose not to enact a
functionally similar proposal contained in the Pro Act.
Perhaps worst of all, President Biden has kept his nominee
for Labor Secretary, Julie Su at the helm of the Labor
Department as Labor Secretary, even as the Senate has declined
to confirm her for nearly 5 months. Today, I am again calling
on the President to withdraw the nomination of Ms. Su and
nominate a Labor Secretary who will be on the side of American
workers.
These then are the key features of Bidenomics, policies
that increase the size, scale and intrusiveness of the Federal
bureaucracy, that are implemented without regard to lawful
authority, that diminish opportunity to the detriment of
workers, small businesses and consumers, and that are justified
based on delusions and misrepresentations.
Today's hearing focuses on an agency that epitomizes these
key features of Bidenomics and is doing substantial damages all
on its own; the Department of Labor's Wage and Hour Division.
As an initial matter, it should be noted that the WHD's
rulemaking process has departed substantially from the legal
obligations imposed by Congress.
Repeatedly, WHD has refused to comply with the Regulatory
Flexibility Act. That law requires Federal agencies to submit a
report, called an initial regulatory flexibility analysis, upon
making rules which impose significant economic costs on small
businesses. The analysis must be comprehensive, including
descriptions of who and what are impacted by the law, and why
and how the agency is acting.
Biden and Julie Su's WHD acts as though this law does not
exist. In at least four rulemaking cases, it has neglected to
produce the required analysis before imposing economic costs on
American small businesses. Each of those rules, by the way, was
repudiated by the Small Business Administration Office of
Advocacy.
President Biden also signed an executive order in April to
redefine what constitutes a significant regulatory action. The
President doubled the threshold from 100 million to 200 million
with the stroke of a pen. The effect of this is to exempt
potentially dozens of regulations from a meaningful economic
impact review.
Our witnesses today will be discussing four specific WHD
rules that are characteristic of Bidenomics and will have its
characteristically damaging economic effects. The first is the
previously mentioned independent contractor standard, which
nationalizes and mirrors my home State of California disastrous
AB5 law.
In previous hearings we have heard testimony from
California freelancers about all of the livelihoods that have
been destroyed by that law. Turning AB5 into national policy
would multiply these losses. The Chamber of Progress published
an economic analysis which shows that an AB5 like Federal
policy would cost the full-time or part-time jobs of between
3.2 and 3.8 million independent contractors.
WHD's delusional, legally deficient analysis fails to even
consider these far-reaching horrors, even though the experience
of California has already proven they will be the reality. The
second WHD rule is an update to Davis-Bacon regulations that
impermissibly expands coverage to new industries without the
required analysis.
The third rule regulates tipping, putting the burden on
employers to determine when employees are doing tip producing
work and when they are not, and then meticulously track their
work minute by minute.
The final rule increases to $15.00 the minimum wage for
Federal contractors, or any business that contracts with the
Federal Government, even, say, a small restaurant in a national
park. Each of these regulations embodies the fundamental
failings of Bidenomics.
This Committee will continue to do everything in our power
to mitigate the damage by providing robust oversight, insisting
on adherence to the law, and advocating for a new economic
direction, one that empowers workers, expands opportunity,
supports small businesses, and unlocks the limitless potential
of the American workforce.
With that, I look forward to the hearing today and yield to
the Ranking Member.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Kiley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Adams. Thank you, Chairman Kiley, and good morning. I
do want to first of all thank our witnesses for their time. I
look forward to your testimoneys this morning. Since President
Biden took office, the administration and congressional
Democrats have made great strides to grow our economy from the
bottom up and the middle out.
In January 2021, the unemployment rate stood at 6.3
percent. As of last month, it is 3.6 percent. The unemployment
rate has now been below 4 percent for the longest stretch in 50
years. Between 2019 and 2022, some of our lowest wage workers
experienced the fastest, real wage growth they had seen since
1979.
The share of working age Americans who have jobs is at the
highest level in over 20 years. For women between the ages of
25 and 54, the labor force participation rate has never been
higher, reaching 77.8 percent in the latest jobs report. Black
Americans are participating in the workforce at a higher rate
than ever. In short, workers and families are experiencing
historic wage growth, historically low unemployment rates, and
a booming job market, 13.2 million jobs since President Biden
took office, and counting.
This historic economic growth is no accident. It is the
result of congressional Democrats' and President Biden's smart
policy choices to support both workers and businesses. My
Republican colleagues do not want to hear this evidence of a
strong economic recovery. Instead, they prefer to paint a bleak
picture of the economy and argue that now is not the time for
regulations to safeguard the economic security of working
families.
Our Republican colleagues may be quick to attack the
Department of Labor's Wage and Hour Division, but the most
dangerous proposals for our economy are the ones coming from
extreme MAGA Republicans who want to turn back the clock and
reinState failed Trump era policies.
For instance, the prior administration gave unscrupulous
employers a free pass to misclassify workers and deny them
critical protections such as minimum wage, overtime, health and
safety standards, unemployment workers' compensation, and the
right to organize.
It is time to face the facts. Without strong safeguards in
place, workers will continue to be vulnerable to
misclassification, to wage theft, and other violations of their
rights that wind up costing working families and all taxpayers
billions of dollars. We need a Wage and Hour Division that is
stronger, not weaker, and has the resources it needs to fulfill
its promise to working families and law-abiding businesses.
Let us be clear, our Republican colleagues might not like
the economic analysis being done by the Wage and Hour Division,
but each of the rulemakings being discussed today were
accompanied by pages of economic analysis, including impacts on
small business. No corners were cut, period.
If the Biden administration's rulemakings are so
catastrophic for small business, then why have Americans filed
record numbers of applications to start small business in 2021
and 2022. If the sky was really falling, as some might suggest
today, would there be a chilling effect on those rushing to
start small businesses?
Last week, the House Appropriations Committee advanced its
Fiscal Year 2024 Labor H Appropriations bill that proposed
slashing the Wage and Hour Division's budget by 75 million
dollars. My Democratic colleagues and I strongly oppose this
cut to the Wage and Hour's Division's budget, and anyone who is
legitimately concerned about Wage and Hour's ability to conduct
their vital mission should be as well.
My Democratic colleagues and I believe that we do not have
to choose between a robust economy and one that affords workers
basic dignity and respect. This is why we will continue to put
people over politics that support an economic recovery that
grows from the bottom up and the middle out.
I want to thank our witnesses again for their time. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Adams follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Pursuant to Committee Rule 8(c), all
Committee members who wish to insert written statements into
the record may do so by submitting them to the Committee Clerk
electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5 p.m. after 14 days
from the date of this hearing, which is August 1, 2023.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days after the date of this hearing to allow such statements
and other extraneous material referenced during the hearing to
be submitted to the official hearing record. I will now turn to
the introduction of our distinguished witnesses.
The first witness is Mr. Jonathan Wolfson, who is the Chief
Legal Officer and Policy Director at the Cicero Institute,
which is located in Austin, Texas. The second witness is Ms.
Elizabeth Milito, who is the Executive Director of the National
Federation of Independent Business Small Business Legal Center,
which is located in Washington, DC.
The third witness is Dr. Aaron Sojourner, who is a Senior
Researcher at the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment
Research, which is located in Kalamazoo, Michigan. The fourth
witness is Ms. Rachel Greszler, who is a Senior Research Fellow
at the Heritage Foundation, located here in Washington, DC.
We thank all of the witnesses for being here today and look
forward to your testimony. Pursuant to Committee rules, I would
ask that you each limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute
summary of your written statement. I would also like to remind
the witnesses to be aware of their responsibility to provide
accurate information to the Subcommittee. I will first
recognize Mr. Wolfson.

STATEMENT OF MR. JONATHAN WOLFSON, CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER AND
POLICY DIRECTOR, CICERO INSTITUTE

Mr. Wolfson. Thank you, Chairman Kiley, Ranking Member
Adams, and members of the Subcommittee. Good morning and thank
you for letting me testify today. It is an honor to testify
before this Subcommittee on agency responsibility to fairly
analyze the costs and benefits of potential regulations and
Congress' role in scrutinizing those analyses.
My name is Jonathan Wolfson, I am the Chief Legal Officer
and Policy Director at the Cicero Institute. Previously, I had
the honor of serving as the head of the Office of the Assistant
Director of Policy at the U.S. Department of Labor. I will
focus my remarks on four key points.
First, we need transparent, accountable, regulatory
processes. Second, DOL's Wage and Hour Division is not fully
evaluating the likely outcomes of its newest rules. Third, DOL
is improperly using past guidance as evidence that the public
is already on notice of its new regulations.
Finally, Congress has an ongoing role to play to reign in
DOL and other agencies to ensure proper constitutional balances
of power. Regulatory agencies hold a unique role in our
constitutional republic. They implement and enforce legislation
passed by Congress and signed by the President.
They play a quasi-legislator role filling in the blanks
where statutes leave things unclear, but unlike legislators,
regulators can only act under the authority Congress has given
them, and they are not accountable to voters if they write bad
regulations. In light of these challenges, past Congresses and
Presidents have created a robust scheme of regulatory processes
that must be followed.
These processes encourage transparent rulemaking.
Transparency means clearly articulating the need for a proposed
or final rule, providing the legal basis for the rule, the pros
and cons of the rulemaking, including the estimated cost and
real benefits expecting to be incurred. This allows the public
to review the proposed regulations, submit comments, and fully
participate in the rulemaking process.
Even when the agency opts to make law with guidance that
circumvents the real purpose of the rulemaking process. When
they dismiss criticism or misconstrue research to paint a more
favorable picture of the process, the entire process will
breakdown.
The regulatory process protects the public from a system
that would let unaccountable bureaucrats make laws, and
Congress should do everything in its power to maintain these
protections, even if those protections wind up slowing
regulator changes that Members of Congress or their
constituents might prefer.
The Wage and Hour Division has issued multiple proposed
rules over the last year and a half. Generally, they argue that
the costs of these regulations are low, and that the benefits
would far exceed the cost. Unfortunately, DOL is failing to
fully evaluate the costs and benefits of these rules, which
limits the opportunity for the public and Congress to decide
whether and how to comment.
For example, in the independent contractor proposed rule,
DOL claims a benefit because some current independent
contractors will be reclassified as employees but fails to
acknowledge that many other independent contractors will have
their contracts canceled, as exactly what happened when
California passed AB5.
In the Federal contractor minimum wage final rule, DOL
rejected a comment from Chairwoman Foxx and Representative
Keller about the disemployment effects from a higher Federal
contractor minimum wage, even though the Department admits that
the result of their proposal would depend on the size of the
increase in the minimum wage.
If you take the Department's own calculation into account,
you will see a reduction of between 39,000 and 210,000 jobs
among Federal contractor employees. In sum, the Department's
analysis to highlight the benefits and ignore the costs makes
it more difficult for citizens to evaluate regulations, and it
also greatly hinders Congress' oversight responsibility.
Finally, Congress far too often is in a situation where
agencies use guidance documents instead of going through a full
rulemaking, but uniquely the Department of Labor is now
claiming that current guidance documents are actually the law,
and therefore they do not have to evaluate the costs and
benefits of an agency implementing and finalizing those
guidance documents as if they are the law.
What can be done? In light of these challenges, Congress
can and should take three steps. First, Congress should pursue
oversight to ensure that agencies stay within their authority
and follow every required regulatory process. Congress must
intervene if the executive branch tries to alter the process
and make it easier for a regulator to ignore costs or
exaggerate benefits.
Second, Congress should write clearer and more detailed
laws, and add greater detail to statutes to leave less room for
agency interpretations that can have a dramatic effect on the
economy. Finally, Congress may want to consider its own
regulatory analysis body to evaluate significant regulations
before they become legally binding.
Complaining about overly burdensome regulation written by
unelected bureaucrats is easy, but the American people need
good regulations that are put in the most cost-effective manner
possible. They need the opportunity to participate in the
process and need legislators who will write clear laws and step
in when agencies exceed their authority.
Thank you so much for having me. I look forward to any
questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wolfson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you very much. I will next recognize
Ms. Milito.

STATEMENT OF MS. ELIZABETH MILITO, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT BUSINESS (NFIB) SMALL BUSINESS LEGAL
CENTER, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Ms. Milito. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Kiley,
Ranking Member Adams, and members of the Committee. Thank you
for inviting me to participate on behalf of the National
Federation of Independent Business. NFIB represents nearly
300,000 small and independent businesses nationwide.
It goes without saying that regulations often impose
heavier burdens on small organizations than on big ones. Small
businesses struggle to decipher overlapping, and sometimes even
conflicting Federal, State, and local employment and labor
laws.
Added to the stress of comprehending the laws is the cost
of implementing the laws. Workplace regulatory compliance in
particular costs small business much more per employee than it
costs larger businesses. The Regulatory Flexibility Act, a
bipartisan law passed in 1980 and signed by the President Jimmy
Carter, recognizes that regulations need not be uniform to be
effective, and it requires agencies when appropriate to tailor
rules to the size and resources of those affected.
The intent of the RFA is clear, when promulgating
regulations, Federal agencies must consider and minimize the
impact of rules on small businesses. However, in the 40 plus
years since the RFA became law, agencies have found ways to
disregard to bypass many of the RFA's requirements. In fact,
NFIB's small business legal center recently analyzed the Small
Business Administration Office of Advocacy's comments letters
over a 2-year period to Federal agencies, and found significant
non-compliance with the RFA.
In these letters, the Office of Advocacy highlighted 28
instances where agencies failed to adequately examine the
economic costs of regulations, and disregarded RFA requirements
to examine alternatives to regulation, or the indirect costs of
regulations.
The Department of Labor has been called out by Advocacy as
a perpetual RFA violator, for improperly considering the
economic impact its rules will have on small businesses. For
instance, in proposing the employer independent contractor
rule, which Mr. Wolfson also just referenced in 2022, advocacy
observed that, ``DOL's initial regulatory flexibility analysis
is deficient for this rule.
DOL significantly underestimates the economic impacts of
this proposed rule on small entities at less than $25.00
annually per business. ``Small businesses told Advocacy that
they are very confused on how to classify their workers and
comply with DOL's regulations. DOL's proposed rule may be
detrimental and disruptive to millions of small businesses that
rely upon independent contractors as part of their workforce.''
Congress should take steps to ensure that DOL considers
small businesses more seriously during the regulatory process,
as required by the RFA. In my written testimony, I outlined a
handful of policy changes that NFIB believes would improve
Federal rulemaking to better account for the needs of small
businesses.
While these recommendations will not fix all that is wrong
with DOL's regulatory process, they are a good starting point,
and will encourage regulators to at least pause and think about
the real-world impact of their regulations.
Small businesses are under incredible pressure to ensure
that they provide safe and fair workplaces for their employees.
They are competing with big businesses for the best workers out
there. The small business owners who NFIB represents, work hard
to do what is right, but their informal and unstructured nature
and more limited financial resources means that they sometimes
require greater flexibility in creating policies and solutions.
Our members concerns are captured in five principles that
NFIB frequently asks lawmakers and regulators to remember. One,
small businesses are half of the U.S. economy. Two, one size
rulemaking does not fit all. Three, small businesses largely do
it yourself with compliance.
Four, assistance with compliance is more valuable than
punishment and enforcement. Finally, five, listen to small
businesses before issuing commands. Adherence to requirements
of the Regulatory Flexibility Act would go a long way to
addressing NFIB's five principles, thereby allowing small
business owners to expand, contribute to the national economy,
provide fair faith, and fair workplaces, and remain employers
of choice in their community.
I appreciate your time and attention to these concerns.
Thank you again for providing me the opportunity to testify on
behalf of small businesses.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Milito follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you for your testimony. I will now
recognize Dr. Sojourner.

STATEMENT OF DR. AARON SOJOURNER, SENIOR ECONOMIST, W.E. UPJOHN
INSTITUTE FOR EMPLOYMENT RESEARCH, KALAMAZOO, MICHIGAN

Mr. Sojourner. Thank you, Chairman Kiley, Ranking Member
Adams, and members of the subcommittee for the invitation. I am
a senior economist at the Upjohn Institute for Employment
Research and a former senior economist at the Council of
Economic Advisors during the Trump and Obama administrations.
Improving workers job quality enough to attract potential
workers from out of the labor force is a key challenge and
strategy for continuing to grow our economy. Vigorous, even-
handed enforcement of labor standards by the Wage and Hour
Division can help.
The US has enjoyed the strongest economic growth of any
major G7 economy coming out of the pandemic recession with the
fastest real GDP growth. Our core inflation rate is now lower
than any other G7 economy's rate, so inflation is falling, even
as we add jobs quickly.
The employment rate of Americans in our prime working years
is at its highest level in over two decades. Employment rates
are now about the same, or higher, for every age group of
Americans than before the pandemic, except for senior citizens.
Adjusting for inflation, average hourly wages are higher than
before the pandemic, and wages are growing faster than prices.
Employers are seeing a lot of profitable production
opportunities out there, and workers are seeing a lot of
improved earnings opportunities. Well-functioning rules for the
labor market will cement the improvements we have made and
deprive law breaking employers of unfair competitive advantages
they use to prosper at the expense of workers, law abiding
employers, and all taxpayers.
Violating wage and hour law currently pays, and employers
do it because enforcement is too weak, narrow, and unreliable.
Economist Anna Stansbury of MIT's Sloan School of Management
analyzed the extent to which employers have an incentive to
comply with wage and hour laws.
She compared the extra profits they can make through
noncompliance against the expected costs they face from
potential sanctions. Given typical penalties, cheating would be
profitable unless the probability of violation detection
exceeds 78 percent.
The expected probability is likely much, much lower than
that because there are well over 100,000 workers for every
enforcement staff for the Wage and Hour Division.
Many firms avoid paying overtime wages by exploiting an
exemption in Federal law for employees classified as
executives, who have a salary above a prespecified threshold.
Studying millions of job listings, a team of economists
found that salaried positions with managerial titles increased
almost fivefold when you crossed that threshold.
An employer might call a front desk assistant a manager of
first impressions, and then not pay them overtime for instance.
On each strategic manager hired, employers are avoiding an
average of 14 percent of their overtime expenses. Many
employers, large and small, are doing this, and it is just one
example of a larger pattern.
Another example comes when employers misclassify employees
as independent contractors. A firm can save 15 percent to 30
percent of their labor costs by doing this. An analysis I did
for the DC Attorney General's Office found that when
construction employers misclassify their employees as
independent contractors, they stop paying into the workers'
comp system. That gives them a 5 percent cost advantage.
They stop paying into the unemployment system that gives
them another 5 percent cost advantage. They stop paying the
employer's contribution to social security, to Medicare, to
Medicaid systems. That is another 7 percent cost advantage.
They stop paying overtime after 40 hours of work, another
couple percentage points.
They stop ensuring they pay an hourly wage above the
minimum. That is a big deal for some employers. All those
advantages add up, and to a big, unfair competitive advantage,
the losses for workers, for increased financial burdens on
other taxpayers who have to make up the difference.
When law-abiding employers are squeezed out of business
opportunities by competitors that illegally misclassify
employees, they feel pressure to cut corners, and may start
misclassifying themselves. It can spread from a few bad apples
to the become a sector standard practice.
Attempts to misclassify employees as contractors undermine
the fundamental right of American workers. Congress granted
these rights to employees. Denying employees that status
attempts to push them outside the circle of labor standards,
and DOL's current proposal to move back to the Supreme Court-
approved, six factor economic realities test that was used for
decades to distinguish who is in business from who is an
employee will strengthen the labor market and the economy.
It will improve job quality and shared prosperity by
reducing incentives to excluding workers from employment rights
and engage in a race to the bottom. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sojourner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you very much. Our final witness is
Ms. Greszler.

THE STATEMENT OF MS. RACHEL GRESZLER, SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW,
THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Ms. Greszler. Good morning and thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. I would like to discuss four
rules of the Department of Labor's Wage and Hour Division, each
of which relies on flawed economic analysis, and will likely
impose significant consequences.
My written testimony provides greater detail as these rules
exceed over 300 pages in total. First, the Division's analysis
of the tip to minimum wage rule appears oblivious to how small
businesses operate, and it is unreasonably dismissive of
stakeholder's legitimate concerns.
The tipped rule requires employers to track a minutia of
employee's actions, and to classify those into three indistinct
buckets. For example, a server making a salad must be paid the
regular minimum wage, while a server putting dressing on a
salad can be paid a tipped wage. A server who wipes up a spill
would be paid different rates depending on the timing and
location of that spill.
Short of employers purchasing sophisticated payroll systems
to classify hundreds of different actions, and then installing
AI monitoring system to track employees' actions, compliance is
likely impossible. The second rule increase the minimum wage
for Federal contractors to $16.20 per hour as of this year.
In its analysis the Division acknowledged, and then it
ignored something called spillover effects, claiming that it
could not estimate such effects, yet the Division cited CBO
analysis that provided an easy way for the Division to
calculate those effects. Then the Division effectively refuted
the purpose of a regulatory analysis, claiming that it did not
need to include spillover effects because the rule did not
mandate those to occur.
The Division also failed to consider how its minimum wage
rule will disproportionately hurt workers and employers and
lower cost workers because $16.00 per hour in Mississippi is
like $37.00 an hour minimum wage in D.C. Minimum wage increases
also have consequences for workers that the Division failed to
recognize, such as lost jobs, lost health insurance, fewer
hours, and irregular scheduling.
Third, is the rule regarding Davis-Bacon Act, or DBA wage
rates. Both the GAO and the Inspector General have criticized
the Division's calculation of DBA rates for relying on
unscientific methods, and the proposed rule exacerbates those
problems. For example, a scientifically sound sample size has
at least 30 observations.
The DBA's proposed rule would cut the minimum sample size
down from only six today to a mere three observations. When
assessing the costs, the Division estimated that just one
component of the DBA rule would increase compensation by
$7,300.00 for each affected worker, but then it claimed it
could not extrapolate that figure. It could have.
For example, if just 10 percent of construction workers
were affected, employer costs would have increased by $876
million. The DBA rule also fails to acknowledge how it will
further exclude small businesses, and 83 percent of
construction workers who are not unionized from participating
in Federal construction projects.
Moreover, the DBA rule would further drive-up taxpayer
costs, add to inflation, and exacerbate labor shortages, none
of which the Division acknowledged. Finally, in redefining how
independent contractors and employees are classified, the
Division's IC rule would create tremendous confusion and
uncertainty for millions of businesses and upwards of 50
million Americans who perform independent contract work.
For example, while most employers currently consider just
two factors when determining a worker's status, the rule
requires that the consider at least six factors, and a number
of possible combinations that can lead to a determination would
jump from 18 today, to 256.
That math is irreconcilable with the Division's claim that
the IC rule provides more consistent and clear guidance. On
costs, the Division estimated only $25.00 in costs for small
businesses, and $5.00 in costs for workers to familiarize
themselves with the 58-page proposed rule.
It provided no consideration and no estimate of at least
seven other significant costs that would almost certainly total
billions of dollars. Consequently, the proposed IC rule will
hurt workers, employers, and consumers. It will take away
income opportunities from parents, caregivers, and individuals
with disabilities who rely on independent contracting for the
flexibility that it provides.
It will hurt small businesses that rely on contractors to
compete with bigger companies, and it will hurt lower income
families who do not own cars, and rely on contractor-based apps
for transportation, and for grocery and diaper delivery. To
prevent the Division from enacting economically destructive
rules based on their flawed regulatory analysis, Congress
should consider passing legislation to further specify its
intent under the Davis-Bacon Act, and the Fair Labor Standards
Act. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Greszler follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. I thank the witnesses for their testimony,
and under Committee Rule 9, we will now question witnesses
under the 5-minute rule. Mr. Grothman is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Grothman. We will start out with Ms. Milito and the
independent contractor changes. Could you give me some examples
of ways in which people work as independent contractors right
now, and will not be able to if this rule goes into effect?
Ms. Milito. Yes. Thank you for that question. I am coming
at it from the perspective first, if I can, with my hat on
representing small businesses that use independent contractors,
and rely very much on them for finite projects, like for
instance, take a small law firm that uses an IT person coming
in maybe once a month to maintain their website and use their
IT.
On the flip side, you have the IT person who has their own
business, and who services maybe a lot of law firms and
accounting firms in the town there, who under the DOL's
proposed rule would now question whether or not they would be
able to continue as an independent contractor.
The confusion over the classification, I mean, it hits both
sides. The business owners that rely very much on independent
contractors, and just cannot afford to take on a full-time
employee, another employee on their payroll, but at the same
time you have the business owners, the small one shop person
who wants to go out and continue to work and do their own
thing, and be their own boss, and have their own business
there. It cuts both ways and would be very challenging for
small businesses.
Mr. Grothman. Can you give me examples in which people who
want to work more and make more money benefit from being
independent contractors?
Ms. Milito. Where they benefit from being independent
contractors? Yes. When they can go out and work extra hours,
work on weekends, take on added work, and some of them may
start out as an employee at a firm, and then you know, they
decide you know what, I do not want to just work for one law
firm.
I want to go out and work for a lot of different law firms.
I can make more money. I can do more, I can be more creative. I
can be my own boss. I do not have to--I can work the hours I
want to work.
Mr. Grothman. If my goal is to make $100,000.00 a year, I
may benefit by the independent contractor designation. It may
give me more freedom to achieve my economic goals. Is that
right?
Ms. Milito. That is correct, and you can do it on your own
time with more flexibility too.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Ms. Greszler, let us talk about minimum
wage a little bit. If we raise the minimum wage to $15.00 an
hour what type of person is going to be hurt? By that I mean
which type of person will be less likely to be employed?
Ms. Greszler. Minimum wage is not meant to be a career
wage. The reason that we have minimum wages, or lower wages, is
it is a steppingstone. Who do you hurt? You hurt the people who
are just starting out in their careers. You hurt individuals
who have disabilities, somebody who might have a criminal
record, somebody who has come here and doesn't yet have strong
English-speaking skills.
The problem with the minimum wages is it hurts the workers
at the bottom end of the career ladder who are trying to get
that experience to climb up.
Mr. Grothman. OK. In other words, if I had a criminal
record, and in some states, including Wisconsin, it is against
the law to discriminate on the basis of a criminal record, but
people do. We know that. If I have a record and I want to get
back in the workforce, it is important for me to find an
employer who will take a chance on me.
You are saying going to $15.00 on minimum wage will
specifically harm the type of people with a spotty record?
Ms. Greszler. That is one of the groups it will harm.
Mr. Grothman. Right. How about older people? I always kind
of wonder, you know, if you are 70 years old and want to get
back in the workforce, a lot of people, they balk at hiring
somebody who is 70 years old. Will raising the minimum wage to
$15.00 an hour, do you think that will say specifically harm
older people?
Our seniors, kind of targeting them, making it more
difficult for them to find jobs? When you are dealing with
seniors, of course, you are dealing with people who already get
social security, so they do not have to make 40 grand a year on
the job.
Ms. Greszler. Yes. I think it would harm them because there
might be some discrimination in thinking they would not be as
capable as a younger worker, and even more so the independent
contractor role would hurt those older Americans who might not
want to be participating in a 9 to 5 job anymore, and might not
be able to, but are able to work if it is on their own terms,
and if they can be their own bosses.
Mr. Grothman. They are a little bit slower, right? Let us
face it, if you are 72, 73 years old and want to work, you are
a little bit slower.
Ms. Greszler. They might be physically slower, but they
might be sharper as well.
Mr. Grothman. OK. OK. I will ask Ms. Milito one more time
on the independent contractor thing. Can you give examples in
businesses in which somebody by being an independent
contractor, say in the sales area, financial services. Is that
an area where people right now are independent contractors and
enjoy the freedoms of that, and quite frankly are sometimes
very financially successful? Would you comment on the
independent contractor and the people in financial services?
Ms. Milito. Yes. That is a great point. In some industries,
like for instance, in the insurance industry where some
insurance agents are independent contractors, so you know, they
are affiliated with----
Mr. Grothman. Some of them are making over--are making six
figures. A lot of them are making six figures.
Chairman Kiley. The gentleman's time has expired. The
witness can answer.
Ms. Milito. Yes, yes, very much.
Mr. Grothman. They are going to lose that opportunity.
Well, that is too bad. OK. Thank you.
Chairman Kiley. The Ranking Member, Ms. Adams, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again thank you to
the witnesses. You know, Republicans talk a lot about the
market, but it is really important that we have healthy
competition in the labor market. Mr. Sojourner, you published a
paper recently that found higher labor market concentration led
to lower wages.
Why are competitive markets so crucial to ensure that
workers are paid fairly for their labor? Can you respond?
Mr. Sojourner. Yes. Thank you. That is a great question.
Yes, competition between employers is crucial for a healthy
labor market, and for workers to have strong earning
opportunities. The labor market by its nature, a lot of things
push it against competition because where you go, you have to
work, in a physical place often.
Labor markets can be very local, and you might have a lot
of skill in a particular area, and there might not be a lot of
employers who need that skill in that local area. We think
about the labor market as one big market, but actually it is a
lot of little markets. They can be quite thin and
noncompetitive.
More competition gives workers power to achieve
improvements in their job quality either by negotiating
improvements with a credible threat to take a better job
outside, or by actually taking one of those better jobs
outside, and leaving them.
Ms. Adams. Let me move on. I have got a series of questions
for you.
Mr. Sojourner. Sure.
Ms. Adams. It is really not enough to just have folks with
bachelor's degrees doing well in the economy, but in the same
paper you found that employees were posting job vacancies for
higher skills, but lower wages in less competitive local job
markets. Why do these employers in more concentrated labor
markets think that they can get away with hiring higher skilled
workers for less, and how do we make sure that all workers have
access to good paying jobs?
Mr. Sojourner. Thank you. Yes. Again, the employers in thin
labor markets where there is not a lot of competition, where
there are maybe a few big employers who are the only place you
can work with those set of skills. There is not enough
competition. There are not enough potential employers to
counteroffer, and so those employers have some wage setting
power. It is not a very competitive market, and they can
underpay workers below what they produce, and we should try to
get more competition in labor markets, and you know, restrict
non-compete agreements, do more antitrust enforcement,
encourage more entrepreneurship, all these things contribute.
Ms. Adams. The competition would increase availability
then. Let me ask you--before I do that, let me just say that an
analysis of the construction industry revealed that 12.4
percent, or 20.5 percent of the workforce on an average month
of 2017 were misclassified as independent contractors, or
working off the books, and putting law abiding employers at a
disadvantage.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter a letter from the
Construction Employers of America supporting actions taken by
the Wage and Hour Division to level the playing field if I may
do that.
Chairman Kiley. Without objection.
[The information of Ms. Adams follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Adams. Thank you. Dr. Sojourner, you participated as a
working group member for the job quality measurement initiative
in which the Department of Labor solicited input from external
partners. When you think of what it means to have a good job,
what principles do you think are important, and how does that
inform how you think of the health of today's labor market?
Mr. Sojourner. We have to pay attention to what workers
value, and measure it, monitor it, and try to make sure they
are getting it. They care about wages. They also care about
fringe benefits, health and safety at work, control over how
they do their work, their schedule, their location, their pace.
These things tend to move together, but they are not always
the same, and these administrative actions can help promote
fair competition that make sure workers get the things they
value, and they are entitled to.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, sir. What do you say about the
implications of deregulation for our workers, and how does not
enforcing the law impact workers' loss in pay? You have got 10
seconds.
Mr. Sojourner. When the rules do not get enforced and are
ignored, competition gets rough and people get hurt, and it is
not fair. Thank you.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Kiley. Ms. Stevens is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I find this hearing very
interesting in part because we are on the heels of a pretty
historic, sweeping set of legislative victories. One was the
bipartisan Infrastructure Act, and Dr. Sojourner, is it true
that the bipartisan Infrastructure Law that was signed in 2021
has yielded dividends to our economy and created jobs? Would
you agree with that, Dr. Sojourner?
Mr. Sojourner. I would. Yes.
Ms. Stevens. Yes.
Mr. Sojourner. Yes.
Ms. Stevens. We have prioritized unionized labor work at
the Davis-Bacon wage, right?
Mr. Sojourner. Yes.
Ms. Stevens. Is it true that we are in a very tight labor
market right now?
Mr. Sojourner. Yes, that is true.
Ms. Stevens. What do you suppose is the reason for that
tight labor market?
Mr. Sojourner. We have a lot of strong investment by the
Federal Government in recent years that have said we are going
to lower the cost of doing business by lowering transportation
costs, making energy more affordable, and you know, subsidized
investment in local manufacturing and American manufacturing.
Ms. Stevens. Manufacturing is on the rise.
Mr. Sojourner. It is.
Ms. Stevens. In fact, we have more manufacturing job growth
than any other time in a President's service, which is great to
see. We know that 13.2 million jobs are being created, but for
some reason we are having a hearing about cutting corners at
the Department of Labor, and its costs to workers. I am just
very confused about that as somebody who has regular townhalls,
and I do this program called Manufacturing Monday.
I regularly sit down with small businesses. I think I am
one of the only Members of Congress that goes and visits the
small businesses in my district. The No. 1 thing I hear, I do
not hear anything about the Department of Labor, but I hear
about the need for skilled job training. I hear the push for
STEM education, and increasing our skilled trade workforce.
The other thing I wanted to ask you about, Dr. Sojourner,
is what do we know about the data that we have about the
prevalence of worker misclassification? I know that data has
been spotty over the years.
Mr. Sojourner. Yes. It is difficult to measure. This is an
illegal behavior, and so it is hidden. Unemployment insurance
agencies in different states have done audits of random
representative employers, which is kind of the best way to get
a sense of the prevalence, so they invest in actually going
carefully through and assessing it.
You can find estimates of 20 percent in construction, and
you know, things of that magnitude, but we do need better data.
Ms. Stevens. How would more current and comprehensive
national data help us combat employee misclassification, which
we do know is contributing to wage theft?
Mr. Sojourner. Yes. I think investing in systematic random
audits, just to make sure that they do not have to be large,
they can be quite small, and employers can be compensated for
going through them to alleviate that burden, but that gives us
a sense of how prevalent these things are, and in different
parts of the economy.
Ms. Stevens. Any other points that you can address about
the consequences for workers when they are misclassified?
Mr. Sojourner. I think a lot of workers do not appreciate
the value of social insurances until they need them. Appreciate
the value of workers' comp system. Young workers think they are
invincible until you need it. Until you get laid off, you do
not need unemployment insurance. People tend to undervalue
insurances.
Ms. Stevens. What role does the Wage and Hour Division play
in helping workers by reducing instances of misclassification?
Mr. Sojourner. They have inspectors who engage with
employers and workers, and followup on complaints, when workers
think their rights are being violated, who actively monitor the
economy and look for evidence that the laws are being violated,
and help get workers paid the wages that they earned.
Ms. Stevens. We are helping workers get paid. Thank you.
Mr. Sojourner. That is it, that is it.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Dr. Sojourner. With that, Mr.
Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Sojourner. Thank you.
Chairman Kiley. Chair Foxx is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank our witnesses
for being here today. Ms. Milito, in March 2022, the Wage and
Hour Division, WHD, published a proposed rule to update the
Davis-Bacon and related acts regulations. The proposed rule is
more than 100 pages long, contains more than 50 significant
changes, and by DOL's own admission is one of the most sweeping
overhauls to the Davis-Bacon program in decades.
WHD, absurdly estimates that its proposed rule will cost
businesses $78.97 to comply annually, including 1 hour to read
the regulations, and one-half hour to implement the regulation.
Do you think this estimate accurately captures the amount of
time and resources necessary for a small business to comply
with the sweeping overhaul of the Davis-Bacon regulations?
If not, would you agree that DOL has an obligation to
assess the cost of compliance accurately for small businesses
before issuing a final rule?
Ms. Milito. Thank you, Chair Fox, for that question, and I
think in response it would be a yes and a yes, but I will go on
a little bit. Absurd is a great way to characterize DOL's
regulatory analysis of this, and I have got some numbers here
too. The whole MPRM, including the appendixes, was actually 432
pages, or 118,450 words. As you, I think said, they estimated
regulatory familiarization would take 1 hour.
I think if you are reading 118,000 plus words would
probably take over 8 hours at most. The other thing too, with
regards to Davis-Bacon, this is going to hit small businesses
the most. 82 percent of all construction firms employ under 10
employees. Construction companies that employ fewer than 100
employees comprise 99 percent of construction firms in the U.S.
I think DOL should withdraw the rule because their analysis
was so flawed. Thank you.
Mrs. Foxx. Well, thank you very much. Ms. Greszler, DOL's
tipped minimum wage regulation imposes an extremely complicated
and cumbersome timekeeping mandate on employers that requires
them to track their workers tasks minute by minute.
With such onerous requirements, is it feasible for a small
business owner who runs a restaurant to comply with such
unreasonable timekeeping requirements?
Ms. Greszler. No. I do not think it is reasonable at all,
and I think that the Division did not consider the stakeholders
who were giving them examples. For all of us here today, you
are members, you run offices. Consider what it would be like if
each of your staffers had to be classified into the work that
they are doing to be direct constituent services, constituent
services supporting, and not related to constituent services
down to every minute they are doing that.
That is impossible for an employer to know what each
individual is doing, and so the ways that they will respond
will directly hurt workers. Just one of those could be to
automate more jobs so that you do not have to deal with
tracking actual people.
Mrs. Foxx. Well, thank you again. Mr. Wolfson, numerous
independent workers have raised concerns that the net effect of
DOL's independent contractor proposed rule will be to
jeopardize their ability to continue operating their own
businesses. In contrast, DOL provides an extremely low estimate
of the cost of regulatory compliance, and completely fails to
provide an analysis of the economic impact of the proposed rule
on the small businesses.
Can you discuss some of the flaws in DOL's economic
analysis of the independent contractor proposed rule?
Mr. Wolfson. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx, it is a great
question. I think what is interesting is the Department of
Labor tries to have it both ways. They try to say that
misclassification is a huge problem, but there is not going to
be a lot of change in people's status, so there really will not
be a lot of cost. You cannot have it both ways. Either the data
that Dr. Sojourner is citing is accurate and there are millions
of workers who are misclassified, who under the new Department
of Labor rule would suddenly either lose their opportunities to
work in the job they're working, or would be reclassified as
employees, which would have massive costs for the businesses.
Whether those workers would keep their job becomes a big
question. Most of these workers are properly classified and
there is not a big change, in which case there would not be a
big cost. If there would not be a big cost, then why do we need
to go through a process of changing the regulation? I think you
are exactly right.
The Department of Labor needs to decide to admit that there
are going to be significant costs. They are going to need to
look at the data from California with AB5 where millions of
workers were told--tens of thousands of workers were told by
companies from all ends of the political spectrum, the New York
Times told freelance photographers and writers in California
that they were no longer going to work with them unless they
left the State of California.
That was not a bunch of far-right extremists who said we
are not going to work with you. These were people who had very
similar ideology to the people in California who were coming up
with those rules, saying we cannot work with you because we are
not willing to live under those rules.
These are the things the Department of Labor should have
considered when they put their rule together. Now the
Department of Labor can evaluate this if they decide to try and
finalize the rule, but they should have, and they had an
obligation to provide this information in the proposed rule,
and their failure to do that, as I mentioned in my written
testimony, really breaks down the required transparent process
that is supposed to exist, so everybody could evaluate whether
it is a good or a bad proposed rule.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Kiley. Mr. Scott is recognized for 5 minutes.
Actually, we will go to Mr. Burlison first, then Mr. Scott.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Wolfson, I want
to continue on that line of discussion about the transparency
in that rulemaking process. In your testimony, you said that
the Department of Labor evaded transparent rulemaking and
public scrutiny for its regulatory actions. Can you elaborate
how exactly did they evade that?
Mr. Wolfson. Yes. There are two different ways that the
Department of Labor, or any Federal agency can go about doing
it. One, is to call something guidance that is actually a
regulatory change. You claim that you are just putting out some
assistance to companies on here is how you are supposed to
comply with regulations that exist.
If that guidance actually creates new obligations then that
should go through the full notice and comment process. There
was a big fight about this. President Trump signed an executive
order that President Biden got rid of. The Department of Labor
was required under that executive order to post all of its
guidance documents online, the Wage and Hour Division hasn't
posted a single document on that guidance portal in 2023.
Mr. Burlison. For anybody that might be a nerd and watching
C-Span, the distinction between a guidance document, and the
rulemaking process is significant because of what has to be
done to actually pass a rule or law, versus what is done in
guidance. Correct?
Mr. Wolfson. That is exactly right. A guidance document can
be written literally in 5 minutes on an email sent out to the
whole world. There is no obligation that that go through the
Administrative Procedures Act process. To get that struck down
by a court is really challenging.
Mr. Burlison. The assumption is that these are harmless,
that they are essentially creating best practices, but the
actual outcome is you have State agencies who are charged with
enforcing some of these guidance documents, and so it ends up
becoming, in effect, law.
Mr. Wolfson. Absolutely. Unfortunately, some of these
guidance documents we found when we were evaluating the
guidance documents at the Labor Department, existed in one
place and one place only. They were in hard copy in the U.S.
Department of Labor's library. That would mean that if you are
a small business in Wisconsin or in Tennessee, you would have
to send a lawyer to Washington, DC, read through hundreds of
pages of paper documents to figure out whether you are, or are
not in compliance with this kind of hidden set of laws.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Mr. Wolfson. Ms. Greszler, is that
right? In your testimony you explained in the proposed
rulemaking for the Davis-Bacon Act, they significantly
underestimated the costs to businesses, and it appears that it
is because we now have new businesses that are being lumped
into the Davis-Bacon Act, correct?
These are suppliers, manufacturers, so if you are building
a building, and the truss company, the company that makes
trusses is supplying those, they suddenly have to now comply
with the rules of the Davis-Bacon Act?
Ms. Greszler. Correct. It is including anything associated
with that construction into it, and so they are saying we know
that this will drive up costs, maybe by as much as $7,300.00
per worker, from one small component, maybe by a couple
thousand for another of the 50 components, b ut we are not
going to extrapolate that because we do not know how many
workers it will affect. They do know that already it is
affecting 1.2 million workers that are governed by these wage
rates, so they could have at least provided analysis to say
here is a range of how many it could affect, and they failed to
do that.
Mr. Burlison. The increased costs, who pays that increased
cost?
Ms. Greszler. Well, the Division does point out that a lot
of these costs will just be passed on to the Federal
Government.
Mr. Burlison. To the taxpayer.
Ms. Greszler. The taxpayers, who are behind this, but it
also is going to result in reduced quality of service and
quantity of service because you have more money that is having
to be paid when Congress has allocated a certain amount of
spending. A prior Heritage Foundation analysis is estimated
that the DBA Act as it stands today, without these increased
costs, is already driving up Federal construction costs by 10
percent.
Mr. Burlison. Sadly, it benefits some areas more than
others. I come from a deeply red district, where labor union
prevalence is very small, and yet if you talk to employers they
sometimes will turn down contracts because it completely
disrupts their normal business operations with their employees,
throws them into situations where employees get paid
dramatically more.
Then what happens is those employees then take a few, a
couple months off, right?
Ms. Greszler. Yes. This is a deterrent. Over 80 percent of
construction companies are not unionized. 83 percent of
construction workers are not unionized. To have to comply with
those laws. It is difficult, and then further----
Mr. Burlison. Is it safe to say that the taxpayers get less
for their money under Davis-Bacon?
Ms. Greszler. Exactly, yes.
Mr. Burlison. They get less schools, less post offices,
less roads under this?
Mrs. Greszler. Correct.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you.
Chairman Kiley. Mr. Scott is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Sojourner, we have
heard a lot of complaints about this economy and how bad it is.
Do you know the No. 1 and No. 2 best job creating years in the
history of the United States?
Mr. Sojourner. I am going to go with 2021 and 2022 maybe?
Mr. Scott. The first year of the Biden administration, and
the second year of the Biden administration, No. 1, and No. 2,
best job creating years in the history of the United States,
and that the unemployment rate has not been under 4 percent as
long as it has in about 50 years?
Mr. Sojourner. That is correct.
Mr. Scott. Um-hmm. Is that a bad economy?
Mr. Sojourner. It is a very strong economy.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. When we considered the minimum wage
about 2 years ago, we found out that there is no county in the
United States where a full-time minimum wage worker could
afford a modest two-bedroom apartment. Ms. Greszler, you
indicated people who would be hurt by an increase in the
minimum wage. congressional Research Service had issued a
report at that time that showed there would be no job loss. Do
you have studies that show job losses as a result of the
increase in the minimum wage?
Ms. Greszler. Yes. The overwhelming economic literature
suggests that increases in the minimum wage reduce the number
of jobs. A recent CBO study in 2019 that looked at a $15.00
minimum wage estimated that it would cost millions of jobs.
That is just the direct impacts. There are also impacts for the
workers.
Mr. Scott. The most recent studies in that analysis showed
no loss in wages. Is that right?
Ms. Greszler. Some studies have shown that actually the
people who do also receive a higher wage end up having less
income. There was a study that looked at California and Texas
and compared similar jobs.
One experienced an increase in the minimum wage, and
actually found that their net income for the year went down by
almost 12 percent because employers reduced their hours so
much, and also cut back on health insurance, retirement
benefits, and led to more irregular schedules.
Mr. Scott. Dr. Sojourner, are you familiar with the most
recent studies on job loss and minimum wage?
Mr. Sojourner. Generally. Yes. My sense of the literature
is that there is evidence around zero effects on employment.
There is strong evidence that on average low-wage workers gain
income on net from increases. They are making more per hour. If
they are losing hours. They are getting other things they can
do in that time, but the disemployment effects are very small,
if at all.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. I think you implied, Dr. Sojourner,
about the incentives for employers to misclassify employees. It
is my understanding that employees are entitled to certain
benefits, but independent contractors are not, like minimum
wage, overtime, health and pension benefits provided by the
employer, OSHA coverage, workers comp, and unemployment
compensation. Is that right?
Mr. Sojourner. That is exactly right. EEOC,
antidiscrimination, there is a long list.
Mr. Scott. Does the Wage and Hour Division have enough
staff to track people down who are being misclassified, and
employers saving money by misclassifying?
Mr. Sojourner. They have for each, there is about 1,000
Wage and Hour enforcement officers to cover the whole economy,
which is about 156 million workers. It is well over 100,000
workers per inspector. That is very heavy odds against finding
all the violations, and in fact we have a lot of evidence they
cannot find all the violations. There are a lot of violations
that happen every day that cheat workers out of earned income.
Mr. Scott. You also mentioned violations and wage theft?
Mr. Sojourner. Yes. Exactly.
Mr. Scott. We need more Wage and Hour inspectors, not
fewer?
Mr. Sojourner. That is for you, Congress, to decide, but it
is very thin, yes. I would support that.
Mr. Scott. Regrettably, the budget now is contemplating
cuts in inspectors, so I think we are going in the wrong
direction.
Mr. Sojourner. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Kiley. The testimony from the witnesses today has
been very illuminating as to the real-world impact of these
rules and regulations, and how the Department of Labor is
defying the will of Congress and not properly accounting for
the costs of the regulations in the rulemaking process.
When I hear about what has been proposed, and what has
already been implemented, for me coming from California, it is
like deja vu because a lot of these very harmful policies
already exist in our State. That raises the question how has
California fared under this regime of labor law that the Biden
administration appears intent on copying?
The answer is not very well. California has the second
highest unemployment rate of any State, has the lowest level of
wage growth of any State, has the highest level of real poverty
in the entire country, some of the highest levels of
inequality.
I really find it difficult to understand why that is the
model for this administration. Another thing that we have
learned in California is that the text of a statute or
regulation is one thing, but then the identity of its enforcer
is another still.
As bad as AB5 was, as a matter of policy, it became even
more devastating in the hands of a labor secretary who is
intent on enforcing it as aggressively and ruthlessly as
possible, even exploiting the COVID shutdowns to enforce it
even more, put more independent contractors out of work, shut
down more small businesses.
Of course, I have not chosen that example at random,
because right now we have a policy being proposed at the
Department of Labor that copies that very law, AB5, and the
individual that the Biden administration wants to enforce it,
is the very same person who was the Labor Secretary in
California, that of course being Julie Su.
Mr. Wolfson, can you shed a little light on how the
identity of the enforcer matters so much in these
circumstances, and what the ultimate impact of these rules is
going to be?
Mr. Wolfson. That is a great question, Mr. Chairman. I
think that if you look at an agency that, you know, to Dr.
Sojourner's point, there are a number of enforcement agents,
and every one of those agents is going to look at a situation
slightly differently.
The problem then becomes if you have regulations that are
not clear, you have guidance that is making law, that is not
just providing clarity so that businesses know what they can
and cannot do.
Then each individual enforcement agent is empowered to
decide that they do or do not like particular behaviors. So
that is not helpful when you go down to the lowest level of
each individual enforcement agent.
It goes all the way up to the top of a department or an
agency because those people have sufficient flexibility to
enforce or not enforce laws that they like or don not like, or
enforce it in ways that they do or do not like, then that makes
it even harder for businesses to know whether they are in
compliance.
As Ms. Milito said, the businesses really just want to know
what the rules are. When I was at the Department of Labor, we
did not hear various businesses say to us, ``hey, you know,
this rule is impossible to comply with.'' That was not usually
the concern.
It was, ``we keep getting different stories from different
enforcement agents when they walk in. Can you tell us what the
standard is, and then we're happy to follow it,'' because they
do not want to misclassify. They do not want to steal wages
from their workers, they just do not necessarily know how to
keep track of all the people who are tipped and deciding
whether or not at salad dressing or making the salad.
Chairman Kiley. That uncertainty is a really key point. Ms.
Milito, you represent small businesses and can tell us how
damaging uncertainty is. Right now, we have a potentially
enormous cloud of uncertainty that is going to be cast over all
of the rules and regulations coming out of the Department of
Labor.
As the Biden administration appears intent on keeping
Acting Secretary Su in that role, perhaps indefinitely, even as
the Senate has not confirmed her, and her nomination has been
pending for nearly 5 months. Indeed, her top supporter in the
Senate, Senator Bernie Sanders, recently said she should stay
in that role whether she has the votes or not.
Now we have a number of stakeholders who are watching this,
and I believe are prepared to challenge the rules and
regulations that are issued in that situation. Could you tell
us a little bit about the effect that would have on small
businesses having that cloud of uncertainty?
Ms. Milito. Thank you, Chair, for that question. Yes. DOL
seems intent on creating more rules under the misguided
thinking that more rules are going to make everything better,
and that is certainly in the workplaces, and that is certainly
not the case. I mean we have had a lot of conversation today
about how the unemployment rate now is under 4 percent.
How small businesses are competing for workers. There is no
benefit in treating your workers and your employees unfairly
and not having a safe workplace. More rules, however, are a wet
blanket on innovation and expansion, and they add costs and
anxiety in a business. They only make it harder for small
businesses to comply with existing, local, State, and Federal
law.
It does seem, unfortunately, that we are going to have
California policies transferred here to D.C., and that is very
unfortunately for small business owners.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you very much. Without objection, I
enter into the record letters from the National Restaurant
Association, and the Flex Association.
[The information Mr. Kiley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. I would now like to recognize the Ranking
Member of the--oh, we have actually one more new arrival.
Representative Omar, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Omar. Thank you so much. I am so proud to see a
constituent testifying here today, who has dedicated his career
to building a fairer, worker centered economy. It is also very
refreshing to hear from the perspective of an economist with
roots in the labor movement. Dr. Sojourner, thank you so much
for joining us and sharing your important research.
You recently conducted a study using enforcement data on
workplace violations across OSHA, WHD, and NLRP that found
workers with lower wages were more likely to experience labor
rights violation. Why did you choose to look at workplace
violations compared with wages, and what should policymakers
take away from this research?
Mr. Sojourner. Thank you, Representative. We looked at this
because you know employers have power in the labor market, and
sometimes they use that power to push down wages, and sometimes
they use it to violate other kinds of rights, like health and
safety violations, or violations of workers' rights to
organize.
What we see is that when wages rise within the labor
market, violations tend to decrease. When workers have more
bargaining power in the economy, they are able to push up
wages, and push down rights violations. When employers have
more bargaining power, they are able to extract more value from
the relationship through lower wages and other kinds of changes
that sometimes violate workers' rights.
We just wanted to enrich our understanding of the economy.
Too often we focus just on wages because they are easy to
measure relatively, but other aspects of workers' experiences,
like healthy and safe jobs, or you now, right to speak out
freely about working conditions, are also important in their
lives and in their work to try to improve their work.
Ms. Omar. In that same study you also found that unions
were found to decrease labor rights violations. Can you tell us
how unions help in protecting workers in the workplace?
Mr. Sojourner. Yes. Unions are a way for workers to have an
independent voice where they do not fear retaliation because
they are not alone when they are speaking up about issues that
they are confronting in the workplace, and issues that they
share with their coworkers often involving bad management
decisions, or things like this.
Instead of being alone, you have somebody standing beside
you, and workers are more free, feel more empowered to speak
up, to speak out publicly, to speak up to management, to speak
up to enforcement agencies and they have less fear of
retaliation.
Yes, we can see that. If we compare companies that where in
all the companies the workers wanted to unionize, but in some
of them the union just lost the election compared to in other
ones the union just won the election.
There is nothing really that different. They all wanted to
unionize. Some did successfully, and some failed. Years later,
you can see that workers in those unionized work places are
more likely to speak up and file complaints.
Ms. Omar. I have worked in places where we had a union, and
places where we did not. I could definitely see that. Dr.
Sojourner, you also conducted an interesting study looking into
the availability of early childhood education in Minnesota.
Mr. Sojourner. Yes.
Ms. Omar. You found that the average family in Minnesota
lives in a location where there are nearly two children for
every nearby slot of licensed capacity. Can you talk a little
bit about what families had lower levels of access, and how
this impacted them?
Mr. Sojourner. Yes. Thank you. This is an important
workforce issue too, in terms of especially equitable access to
earnings opportunities for women and mothers and parents
generally in the economy, having access to affordable, high-
quality care is a huge barrier to work and earning for a lot of
them.
In Minnesota, what we found was yes, Minnesotans living in
low-income communities had less access, communities of color
had less access, and you know, there are moves to try to
address those inequities, yes.
Ms. Omar. Yes. I am sure there is a policy recommendation
for us to close that gap, so thank you so much for being here
today and for your work.
Mr. Sojourner. Thank you.
Ms. Omar. I yield back, Chairman.
Chairman Kiley. I now recognize Mr. Scott for a brief
closing statement.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, very much Mr. Chairman, and thank you
again to our witnesses for joining us in this discussion.
Today's hearing reaffirms the historic progress that
congressional Democrats and President Biden have made to
strengthen our economy. Complaints about the economy cannot
diminish the historic job growth that we've experienced in the
last 2 years.
When we invest in our economy and workforce, we help ensure
that businesses, and working families see a return on the work
they do each day. Workers should be able to go home confident
that they have a government that works for them, and helps them
focus on their families, instead of worrying about whether they
can put food on the table, and whether they will be cared for
if they are injured on the job, which they are not cared for if
they are injured on the job as an independent contractor, as
opposed to an employee.
Moreover, our discussion reminds us that we still have more
work to do, so instead of weakening protections for working
families, I hope my colleagues will join us in continuing to
grow our economy from the bottom up and the middle out, and
continue to build on our historic job growth. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you very much. We have heard a lot
today about how the Biden administration has exceeded its
authority and neglected its legal obligations at the Department
of Labor. It is only fitting, in sort of a perverse sense, that
they are now doing the very same thing with the leadership of
the Department.
We have a nominee whose nomination has been pending for
nearly 5 months. There is opposition in the Senate across party
lines, Democrat, Republican, and independent, and yet the
administration seems intent now on keeping the Acting Secretary
there indefinitely, and is now resuming the rulemaking process.
Allies of Ms. Su have tried to claim that somehow there is
legal authority for this, given the interplay of the Federal
Reform Vacancy Act, and the statute that created the position
of Deputy of Labor Secretary. However, neither statute
contemplates a situation like this.
They refer to a temporary appointment, not someone who is
nominated and then keeps the job even though they are not
confirmed. I am again today calling upon the President to
withdraw the nomination of Ms. Su, and to appoint a new Labor
Secretary who will be on the side of American workers, who will
take us down the path that states with the good economic growth
they have had, not down the path of California; who will listen
very carefully to the analysis that we have received today
about these proposed rules, will take it to heart, and will
come up with different rules that actually fulfill the mission
of the Department of Labor to protect the rights of workers,
and to be a steward of economic prosperity.
If we do that then we can hopefully turn things around.
Americans will see their wages rise. We will see a turn in the
record levels of dissatisfaction we have right now with the
economy, and we can get things back on track. Without
objection, there being no further business, the Subcommittee
stands adjourned.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 11:35 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned
at 11:35 a.m.]

[all]
