- AMERICAN EDUCATION IN CRISIS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AMERICAN EDUCATION IN CRISIS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, FEBRUARY 8, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-1

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
51-623 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on February 8, 2023.................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Foxx, Hon. Virginia, Chairwoman, Committee on Education and
the Workforce..............................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', Ranking Member, Committee on
Education and the Workforce................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6

WITNESSES

Gentles, Virginia, Director, Education Freedom Center,
Independent Women's Forum, Winchester, Virginia............     8
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Sullivan, Monty, President, Louisiana Community and Technical
College System.............................................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Polis, Jared, Governor of Colorado...........................    24
Prepared statement of....................................    26
Pulsipher, Scott, President, Western Governors University....    28
Prepared statement of....................................    31

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Chairwoman Foxx:
Statement for the record dated February 16, 2023 from
Thomas Edison State University.........................   107
Bonamici, Hon. Suzanne, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon:
Statement for the record dated February 16, 2023, from
the National Parent Teacher Association................   110
Houchin, Hon. Erin, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Indiana:
Statement for the record from the Dyslexia Institute of
Indiana................................................    81
Omar, Hon. Ilhan, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Minnesota:
Article dated October 24, 2022 from Florida Phoenix by
Danielle J. Brown......................................    93
Takano, Hon. Mark, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California:
Open Access article dated February 25, 2022 from JAMA
Network Open...........................................   116

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Response to question submitted for the record by:
Governor Jared Polis.....................................   129
Dr. Monty Sullivan.......................................   132
Mr. Scott Pulsipher......................................   135
Mrs. Virginia Gentles....................................   136

AMERICAN EDUCATION IN CRISIS

----------

Wednesday, February 8, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m., Room
2124 Rayburn Building, Hon. Virginia Foxx [chairman of the
committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Foxx, Wilson of South Carolina,
Thompson, Walberg, Grothman, Stefanik, Allen, Banks, Owens,
Good, McClain, Miller, Kiley, Bean, Burlison, Moran, Chavez-
DeRemer, Williams, Houchin, Scott, Courtney, Wilson, Bonamici,
Takano, Adams, DeSaulnier, Norcross, Jayapal, Wild, McBath,
Hayes, Omar, Stevens, Leger Fernandez, Manning, Mrvan, and
Bowman.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Nick Barley,
Deputy Communications Director; Solomon Chen, Policy Advisor;
Michael Davis, Legislative Assistant; Tyler Dufrene, Research
Assistant; Cate Dillon, Director of Operations; Amy Raaf Jones,
Director of Education and Human Resources Policy; Alex Knorr,
Staff Assistant; Marek Laco, Professional Staff Member; John
Martin, Deputy Director of Workforce Policy/Counsel; Hannah
Matesic, Director of Member Services and Coalitions; Audra
McGeorge, Communications Director; Eli Mitchell, Legislative
Assistant; Ethan Pann, Press Assistant; Gabriella Pistone,
Staff Assistant; Krystina Skurk, Speechwriter; Mary Christina
Riley, Professional Staff Member; Katy Roberts, Staff
Assistant; Mandy Schaumburg, Chief Counsel and Deputy Director
of Education Policy; Brad Thomas, Senior Education Policy
Advisor; Kelly Tyroler, Professional Staff Member; Joe Wheeler,
Professional Staff Member; Amaris Benavidez, Minority
Professional Staff; Ilana Brunner, Minority General Counsel;
Scott Estrada, Minority Professional Staff; Rashage Green,
Minority Director of Education Policy; Christian Haines,
Minority General Counsel; Rasheedah Hasan, Minority Clerk and
Member Services; Stephanie Lalle, Minority Communications
Director; Andre Lindsay, Minority Policy Associate; Kota
Mizutani, Minority Deputy Communication Director; Veronique
Pluviose, Minority Staff Director; Banyon Vassar, Minority IT
Administrator; and Sam Varie, Minority Press Secretary.
Chairwoman Foxx. Good morning. The Committee on Education
and the Workforce will come to order. Welcome everyone. I note
that a quorum is present. Without objection, the Chair is
authorized to call a recess at any time. The committee is
meeting today to hear testimony on the State of our education
system.
I am going to give a quick explanation for why we are
meeting in the Judiciary Room. We had a broken water main in
the Education Committee, and all our electronic equipment is
inoperable. We are thankful to the Judiciary Committee for
allowing us to use this room today for this very important
hearing.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 8(c), opening statements are
limited to the Chair and the Ranking Member, so that we may
hear from the witnesses sooner and provide all members with
adequate time to ask questions. I now recognize myself for the
purpose of making an opening statement.
From elementary school to law school, the State of this
Nation's education system is deeply troubling at every level.
Republicans want transparency and innovative solutions to the
problems in our education system, while Democrats want
taxpayers to fork over their hard-earned paychecks to empower
the D.C. bureaucracy.
One of my top priorities as Chairwoman of the Education
Workforce Committee is to protect parental rights. During the
pandemic, parents saw first-hand how poorly our current K-12
education system is serving students. These parents witnessed
the education establishment put the interest of teachers'
unions over the interest of their children.
Parents witnessed the educators writing political ideology
instead of teaching fundamental subjects like mathematics and
reading, and parents witnessed their children fall further and
further behind academically. This learning loss has been
devastating, causing millions of students to lose years of
academic progress.
The 2022 National Assessment of Educational Progress, NAEP,
saw scores for 9-year-olds decline 5 points in reading, and 7
points in math compared to 2020. This is the largest average
decline in reading since 1990 and first ever decline in math.
Parents have reason to be angry and should have every
opportunity to express the concerns.
Instead, they were stone wall silenced and intimidated.
Some parents were even forcibly removed from school board
meetings, investigated by the FBI, and called domestic
terrorists. This must change. That is why we will champion the
Parents Bill of Rights introduced in the last Congress, by most
members of this committee led by Julia Letlow of Louisiana.
This legislation will protect the right of parents to know
what their child is being taught in the classroom, as well as
their right to be heard. It is time for the education complex
to understand that children belong to their parents, not the
State. Extending education freedom to more students will also
be one of my top priorities as it has been since I came to
Congress, and I am pleased to see more parents taking their
child's education into their own hands since the pandemic.
There is been a surge in the creation of micro schools,
home school, co-ops, and other innovative forms of education.
There has also been a surge in enrollment in charter schools
and private schools. This is a good thing. More competition and
disruption in the modern education system means all schools
will have greater incentives to serve their students well.
I am hopeful that this is a topic Republicans and Democrats
can work on together, as I know we all want what is best for
students. I will also be working to protect the integrity of
Title IX. We must maintain a level playing field for women and
girls in sports. This is no game. Many opportunities for girls
and women hinge on their participation in sports, allowing men
to take the place of women on sports teams erodes decades of
accomplishment and deprives women of these opportunities.
Post-secondary education means just as much transformation
as K-12 education, yet the Biden administration is turning our
student loan system on its head. Instead of addressing problems
like the rising cost of college and poor student outcomes,
Republicans will not stand by while the Biden administration
attempts to enact its retroactive free college agenda.
As the institution that holds the power of the purse, we
have a responsibility to protect the interest of taxpayers and
ensure that students are receiving a high-quality education
that enables them to repay their loans and be career ready.
Republicans plan to pass common sense legislation that fixes
the inherent problems in our Federal student loan and
accountability systems to protect most Federal student loan
and--to protect, pardon me, both borrowers and taxpayers.
You will also hear about the necessity for college cost
transparency and innovation here today. We have a tremendous
opportunity to advance bold, post-secondary education
solutions. Finally, Republicans will also work to improve our
Nation's workforce development programs, and ensure they are
delivering the skills development opportunities that workers
seek and employer's demand.
We recognize that a Baccalaureate degree is not the
appropriate or necessary path for everyone, and we must support
all pathways to achieving the American dream. Once again,
welcome to all new and returning members. I look forward to
working with you. Let us make this a productive Congress. I now
recognize the distinguished Ranking Member for the purpose of
making an opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Foxx follows:]

Statement of Hon. Virginia Foxx, Chairwoman, Committee on Education and
the Workforce

From elementary school to law school, the state of this nation's
education system is deeply troubling at every level. Republicans want
transparency and innovative solutions to the problems in our education
system, while Democrats want taxpayers to fork over their hard-earned
paychecks to empower the D.C. bureaucracy.
One of my top priorities as Chairwoman of the Education and the
Workforce Committee is to protect parental rights. During the pandemic,
parents saw firsthand how poorly our current K-12 education system is
serving students. These parents witnessed the education establishment
put the interests of teachers unions over the interests of their
children. Parents witnessed educators spreading political ideology
instead of teaching fundamental subjects like mathematics and reading.
Parents witnessed their children fall further and further behind
academically.
This learning loss has been devastating, causing millions of
students to lose years of academic progress. The 2022 National
Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) saw scores for nine-year-olds
decline five points in reading and seven points in math compared to
2020. This is the largest average decline in reading since 1990 and the
first-ever decline in math.
Parents have reason to be angry and should have every opportunity
to express their concerns. Instead, they were stonewalled, silenced,
and intimidated. Some parents were even forcibly removed from school
board meetings, investigated by the FBI, and called domestic
terrorists.
This must change. That is why I will champion the Parents Bill of
Rights Act. Introduced last Congress by Congresswoman Julia Letlow of
Louisiana, this legislation will protect the right of parents to know
what their child is being taught in the classroom as well as their
right to be heard. It is time for the education complex to understand
that children belong to their parents, not the state.
Extending education freedom to more students will also be one of my
top priorities, as it has been since I came to Congress, and I am
pleased to see more parents taking their child's education into their
own hands since the pandemic. There has been a surge in the creation of
micro-schools, homeschool co-opts, and other innovative forms of
education. There has also been a surge in enrollment in charter schools
and private schools. This is a good thing. More competition and
disruption in the modern education system means all schools will have
greater incentives to serve their students well. I am hopeful that this
is a topic Republicans and Democrats can work on together, as I know we
all want what is best for students.
I will also be working to protect the integrity of Title IX. We
must maintain a level playing field for women and girls in sports. This
is no game. Many opportunities for girls and women hinge on their
participation in sports. Allowing men to take the place of women on
sports teams erodes decades of accomplishment and deprives women of
these opportunities.
Postsecondary education needs just as much transformation as K-12
education. The Biden administration is turning our student loan system
on its head instead of addressing problems like the rising cost of
college and poor student outcomes. Republicans will not stand by while
the Biden administration attempts to enact its retroactive free college
agenda. As the institution that holds the power of the purse, we have a
responsibility to protect the interests of taxpayers and ensure that
students are receiving a high-quality education that enables them to
repay their loans and be career ready.
Republicans plan to pass commonsense legislation that fixes the
inherent problems in our federal student loan and accountability
systems to protect both borrowers and taxpayers. You will also hear
about the necessity for college cost transparency and innovation here
today have a tremendous opportunity to advance bold postsecondary
education solutions.
Finally, Republicans will also work to improve our nation's
workforce development programs and ensure they are delivering the
skills development opportunities that workers seek and employers
demand. We recognize that a baccalaureate degree is not the appropriate
or necessary path for everyone, and we must support all pathways to
achieving the American Dream.
Once again, welcome to all new and returning members, I look
forward toworking with you. Let us make this a productive Congress.
______

Mr. Scott. Good morning, and thank you Dr. Foxx. When the
Supreme Court decided the Brown v. Board of Education decision
in 1954, it outlawed legal discrimination in education, and
said among other things, that in these days this is doubtful
that any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if
denied the opportunity of an education.
Such an opportunity where the State has undertaken to
provide it is a right which needs to be made available to all
on equal terms. The Court arrived at that opinion in the
context of racial segregation, but in fact their analysis was
clear. Access to a quality education is a right, and politics
should never prevent a student from receiving a high-quality
education.
In recent years Republican politicians have turned their
student's classroom into the epicenter of the culture wars. The
outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, republican politicians sought
to force schools to reopen the classrooms to full-time, in-
person instruction regardless of whether it was safe or not.
Then in 2021, despite schools and institutions clear need
for additional relief funding, the republican lawmakers did
nothing to meaningfully help them reopen safely to help
students recover from the pandemic. In fact, every
congressional republican voted against the American Rescue
Plan, which Democrats passed to provide funding to make it
actually possible to open the schools safely, keep them open
safely, and to make up the lost learning.
Of course, academic scores have been down. Students were
out of school for a year, maybe even more, and the American
Rescue Plan provided the resources to open safely and make sure
that we could make up for lost learning with things like after
school programs, summer programs, counselors, and tutors. Those
cost money, and the American Rescue Plan provided that money.
Now instead of working with Democrats to address the real
issues in schools and institutions, republican lawmakers are
prioritizing cultural wars and investigations, that is in fact
the number of bills introduced across the country to restrict
teaching about certain topics or educational gag orders,
increased in 2022 by 250 percent compared to 2021.
Several republicans led states advanced anti-LGBTQ bills,
like Florida's Don't Say Gay Bill. One CEO said that the LGBT
youth suicide and crisis prevention leads to youth suicide and
crisis prevention organization said that these bills only add
to existing stigma and discrimination, which puts these young
people at greater risk of bullying, depression, and even
suicide.
Republican politicians have also supported and implemented
policies to ban books, censor curriculum and textbooks at every
level of learning, and punish teachers for accurately
recounting our Nation's history. Worse, we have seen the
proliferation of verbal and physical threats at typically
tedious school board meetings.
Florida adopted the so-called Individual Freedom Measure,
which banned educators from teaching certain topics related to
race. In my home State the Governor established an emergency
hotline regarding the teacher teaching critical race theory in
K through 12. That dedicated phone line was shut down since
there were no complaints about CRT being taught in elementary
and secondary schools, and that is maybe because it is only
taught in a few law schools.
Educational gag orders are a distraction and do not address
the public's concerns about the academic success and well-being
of America's students. Many of these attacks have been launched
under the guise of transparency and expanded parent's rights.
While parental engagement is critical for a student's success,
bills introduced have been crafted to give a vocal minority the
power to impose personal beliefs over all students.
Even worse, Republican politicians holding educators
hostage by forcing them to choose between extremist views, or
fully funded classrooms. For example, in K through 12 schools
in South Carolina and Tennessee, Republican lawmakers passed
legislation to withhold badly needed funding from schools
because of their curriculum.
Slashing support for students has not stopped there. The
Republicans Attorney General is suing to prevent over 40
million eligible student loan borrowers from accessing student
loan relief. Congressional Republicans are simultaneously
introducing legislation that would make severe cuts to programs
and help students afford a college degree. congressional
Republicans are also opposing the expansion of registered
apprenticeship programs. Our most successful workforce
development program. We know that 93 percent of apprentices who
complete a registered apprenticeship retain employment with an
average salary of 70 to $7,000.00.
One recent study found that for every dollar a business
invests in the registered apprenticeship program, they earn
$1.44 back. These programs are a win/win for workers and
businesses, and yet we are ignoring the effectiveness of
registered apprenticeships, and advocate diversion of funding
to untested models called Industry Recognized Apprenticeship
Programs or IRAPs.
IRAPs do not have the guaranteed quality and national
recognition that registered apprenticeships have. This
Congress, congressional Democrats plan to reintroduce
legislation to help every student reach his or her full
potential. First, the Rebuild America's Schools Act and
Students and Diversity Act and the Equity Inclusion Enforcement
Act will help modernize healthy school buildings so students
can learn safety, eliminate inequities in education, and
provide families with a legal remedy for students to address
disparities in education.
More options for schools to achievement, NOW Act, the Loan
Act, make sure that all Americans can have more access to
affordable and higher education. The Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act, and the National Apprenticeship Act will fully
fund evidence-based job training and apprenticeship programs to
prepare individuals for our modern economy.
These legislative priorities are rooted in evidence and
research and will take into account the real concerns facing
students, parents, educators and communities. I hope my
colleagues on the committee will stop putting--will put--stop
putting politics over people and put people over politics and
join Democrats in addressing the most pressing issues facing
our Nation's students. With that Madam Chair, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Scott follows:]

Statement of Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott, Ranking Member, Committee
on Education and the Workforce

Good morning. Thank you, Dr. Foxx.
When the Supreme Court decided the Brown v. Board of Education
decision in 1954, it outlawed legal segregation in education, and
said--among other things--that, ``In these days, it is doubtful that
any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if denied the
opportunity of an education. Such an opportunity, where the state has
undertaken to provide it, is a right which must be made available to
all on equal terms.''
The Court arrived at that opinion in the context of racial
segregation. In fact, their analysis was clear: access to a quality
education is a right and politics should never prevent a student from
receiving a high-quality education. In recent years, Republican
politicians have turned our students' classrooms into the epicenter of
their culture wars.
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, Republican politicians
sought to force schools to reopen classrooms for full-time, in-person
instruction, regardless of whether it was safe or not.
Then, in 2021, despite schools' and institutions' clear need for
additional relief funding, Republican lawmakers did nothing to
meaningfully help them reopen safely or help students recover from the
pandemic. In fact, every Congressional Republican voted against the
American Rescue Plan, which Democrats passed to provide funding to make
it actually possible to open the schools safely, keep them open safely,
and make up for lost learning.
Of course, academic scores have been down. Students were out of
school for a year--maybe even more. The American Rescue Plan provided
the resources to open safely and make sure that we could make up for
lost learning with things like afterschool programs, summer programs,
counselors, and tutors. Those cost money, and the American Rescue Plan
provided that money.
Now, instead of working with Democrats to address the real issues
in schools and institutions, Republican lawmakers are prioritizing
culture wars and investigations. In fact, the number of bills
introduced across the country to restrict teaching about certain
topics, or ``educational gag orders,'' increased in 2022 by 250
percent, compared to 2021.
Several Republican-led states have advanced anti-LGBTQ bills, like
Florida's ``Don't Say Gay'' bill. One CEO who leads a youth suicide and
crisis prevention organization, said that these bills ``only add to the
existing stigma and discrimination, which puts these young people at
greater risk for bullying, depression, and even suicide.''
Republican politicians have also supported and implemented policies
to ban books; censor curriculum and textbooks at every level of
learning; and punish teachers for accurately recounting our nation's
history. Worse, we have seen the proliferation of verbal and physical
threats at typically tedious school board meetings.
Florida adopted the so-called ``Individual Freedom'' measure, which
banned educators from teaching certain topics related to race. In my
home state, the governor established an emergency hotline regarding the
teaching of Critical Race Theory in K-12. That dedicated phone line was
shut down since there were no complaints about CRT being taught in
elementary or secondary schools. That is maybe because it is only
taught in a few law schools.
Educational gag orders are a distraction and do not address the
public's concerns about the academic success and wellbeing of America's
students. Many of these attacks have been launched under the guise of
transparency and expanding parents' rights. While parental engagement
is critical for a student's success, the bills introduced have been
crafted to give a vocal minority the power to impose personal beliefs
over all students.
Even worse, Republican politicians are holding educators hostage by
forcing them to choose between extremist views or fully-funded
classrooms.
For example, in K-12 schools in South Carolina and Tennessee,
Republican lawmakers passed legislation to withhold badly needed
funding from schools because of their curriculum. Slashing support for
students has not stopped there.
Republican Attorneys General are suing to prevent over 40 million
eligible student loan borrowers from accessing student loan relief
while Congressional Republicans are simultaneously introducing
legislation that would make severe cuts to programs that help students
afford a college degree.
Congressional Republicans are also opposing the expansion of
Registered Apprenticeship programs-our most successful workforce
development program. We know that 93 percent of apprentices who
complete a Registered Apprenticeship retains employment, with an
average annual salary of $77,000. One recent study found that, for
every dollar a business invests in a Registered Apprenticeship program,
they earn $1.44 back. These programs are a win-win for workers and
businesses, yet we are ignoring the effectiveness Registered
Apprenticeships and they advocate for a diversion funding to untested
models, called Industry Recognized Apprenticeship Programs, or IRAPs.
IRAPs do not have the guaranteed quality and national recognition that
Registered Apprenticeships have.
This Congress, Congressional Democrats plan to reintroduce
legislation to help every student reach his or her full potential.
First, the Rebuild America's Schools Act, the Strength in Diversity
Act, and the Equity and Inclusion Enforcement Act will help modernize
healthy school buildings so students can learn safely, eliminate
inequities in education, and provide families with a legal remedy for
students to address disparities in education.
The Lowering Obstacles to Achievement Now Act, the LOAN Act, will
ensure that all Americans can have more access to affordable higher
education.
The Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act and the National
Apprenticeship Act will fully-fund evidence-based job training and
apprenticeship programs to prepare individuals for our modern economy.
These legislative priorities are rooted in evidence and research
and will take into account the real concerns facing students, parents,
educators, and communities.
I hope my colleagues on the Committee will stop putting politics
over people, put people over politics, and join Democrats in addressing
the most pressing issues facing our nation's students.
______

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Representative Scott. Without
objection, all of the members who wish to insert written
statements into the record may do so by submitting them to the
committee clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5
p.m., 14 days after the day of this hearing, February 22, 2023.
I will now introduce our witnesses. Ms. Virginia Gentles is
the Director of the Education Freedom Center with Independent
Women's Forum. Dr. Monty Sullivan. Dr. Monty Sullivan is the
President of Louisiana Community and Technical College System
located in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Mr. Jared is the Governor of
Colorado and a former colleague who served admirably on this
committee. For our final witness, I yield to Representative
Owens for the introduction.
Mr. Owens. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx. It gives me great
pleasure to introduce to this committee Mr. Scott Pulsipher,
President of Western Governors University, WGU, headquartered
in my district in Salt Lake City, Utah. After more than 20
years in the private sector, Mr. Pulsipher came to WGU in 2016,
and has proven himself to be a game change in postsecondary
education.
WGU is the Nation's first and largest competency-based
university and his leadership and institution has continued to
drive innovation to continue to improve student's outcomes in
Utah and across the country. Thank you, Mr. Pulsipher, for
coming before this Committee. I look forward to hearing from
you today.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much Mr. Owens. We thank
all our witnesses for being here today, and we look forward to
your testimony. Let me remind the witnesses that we have read
your written statements, and that they will appear in full in
the hearing record.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 8D and committee practice, each
of you is asked to limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute
summary of your written statement. The witnesses are aware of
their responsibility to provide accurate information to the
subcommittee, and therefore we will proceed with their
testimony.
Before you begin your testimony, please remember to press
the button on the microphone in front of you so that it will
turn on and the members can hear you. As you begin to speak the
light in front of you will turn green. After 4 minutes, the
light will turn yellow to signal that you have 1 minute
remaining. When the light turns red, your 5 minutes have
expired and we ask that you please wrap up.
As a longstanding committee practice, we will let the
entire panel make their presentations before we move to member
questions. When answering a question, please remember to once
again to turn your microphone on, and then off when finished. I
will first recognize Ms. Gentles.

STATEMENT OF VIRGINIA GENTLES, DIRECTOR, EDUCATION FREEDOM
CENTER,INDEPENDENT WOMEN'S FORUM, WINCHESTER, VIRGINIA

Mrs. Gentles. Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member Scott, and
members of the committee. Thank you for inviting me to appear
today. My name is Virginia Gentles, and I am the mother of two
school-aged children, and the director of the Education Freedom
Center at Independent Women's Forum.
Before I delve into the significant challenges our
students, teachers, and families are facing, I want to
highlight two positive developments, and the first is the
expansion of education freedom. Iowa and Utah passed laws last
month creating K-12 education savings account programs, and
last year Arizona established the gold standard for education
freedom by expanding eligibility for the state's existing ESA
programs to cover all 1.1 million Arizona students.
Second, policymakers are acknowledging the widespread
failure of balanced literacy reading programs and starting to
require phonics-based reading instruction. As legislators who
regularly hear from distraught parents, you are familiar with
the bad news. We are faced with alarming learning loss fueled
by the potent combination of COVID-era school closures and the
prioritization of activism over academic instruction.
Pervasive discipline and mental health issues that are
creating an unsafe environment for students and teachers,
school systems that are determined to view parents as the
enemy; and powerful teachers' unions and education bureaucrats
that reject transparency and accountability, yet relentlessly
demand more funding.
We must acknowledge the pernicious influence of the
teachers' unions. These powerful organizations seek to expand
their partisan political influence, and control working
conditions. They do not aspire to improve education. Union
roadblocks appeared at the outset of the COVID-era school
closures, and they continued into 2021, with leaders colluding
with the CDC to draft restrictive reopening guidance.
Union leaders and union supported school board members
cannot and should not escape accountability for the learning
loss crisis they exacerbated. Fourth and eighth grade math and
reading scores on the 2022 nation's report card significantly
dropped since students were last tested in 2019. Only one-
quarter of eighth grade students met math proficiency
standards.
Chaotic classrooms are driving talented teachers to quit,
likely accelerating learning loss. According to Federal data
schools are plagued with chronic absenteeism, a significant
increase in behavioral issues, and an increase in verbal abuse
and disrespect toward teachers.
School districts' excessively lenient discipline policies
leave teachers without the tools they need to address these
challenges. In theory, mental health support could help
children, but many parents are concerned about the consequences
of funneling more money into school counselors that are
represented by an association that embraces radical ideologies.
Unfortunately, too many forces within the education system
insist on prioritizing the promotion of ideologies over
academic instruction. Polls consistently reveal that most
people do not want children to be bombarded with activist-
drafted materials, and lessons, and books that are pushing
radical gender ideology, and instructing young children that
they can be born in the wrong body,
School policies that secretly socially transition children,
hiding their new names, identities, and bathroom, locker room,
and overnight trip accommodations from parents through Gender
Support Plans are based on the assumption that the only
acceptable response to children who express a desire for a new
name and identity is immediate and unquestioning affirmation.
School staff are pushing highly sensitive girls regardless
of their mental health struggles, down a one-way path to
medical transition, and school staff who do not adhere to this
radical belief system are punished. School districts are citing
non-existent Title IX related requirements as the pretext for
hiding information from parents. This must stop.
Congress can address one Title IX issue by supporting
Congressman Greg Steube's Protection of Women and Girls in
Sports Act, which will end the practice of allowing biological
males to take awards, roster spots, and scholarships from
female athletes.
Parents deserve power over their children's education. The
education bureaucrats and unions hold all the power in states
without education freedom. Supporting the Parent's Bill of
Rights Act introduced by Representative Julia Letlow will
acknowledge parents' fundamental rights and the importance of
curriculum, budget, and student record transparency.
Students must be allowed to escape the residentially
assigned public schools that are not effectively educating
them. The Educational Choice for Children's Act will create a
K-12 Federal scholarship tax credit and give parents the
purchasing power to pay for tuition, tutoring, or technology.
It is time for funding to follow the child to the education
option that best meets his or her needs. Leaders of the public
K-12 education system continue to demand funding increases, but
the Federal Government already provided more than 190 billion
in emergency supplemental education funding, primarily in the
form of elementary and secondary school emergency relief, or
ESSR funds.
The money was largely not needed, or used to facilitate
school reopening, and many districts have not yet spent the
funds. I am the mother of a sixth and a ninth grader, so I have
a front row seat to the failures of our educational system. We
need legislators to hold the K-12 cartel accountable for the
learning loss crisis it created, and pass legislation that
provides families with educational transparency and freedom.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Gentles follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much for being right on
time. We will now hear from Dr. Sullivan.

STATEMENT OF DR. MONTY SULLIVAN, PRESIDENT, LOUISIANA COMMUNITY
AND TECHNICAL COLLEGE SYSTEM

Mr. Sullivan. Good morning. Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member
Scott, and members of the committee. I am Monty Sullivan,
President of the Louisiana Community and Technical College
System, and President of Rebuilding America's Middle Class, a
national coalition of State and individual community college
systems.
On behalf of Louisiana's 12 2-year institutions, and the
more than 150,000 students that we serve annually, as well as
RAMC, thank you for the opportunity to be here today. With each
information cycle and technological advancement, the skills
requirements of the workplace are ever increasing.
We are already far behind, as reflected in our Nation's
near-record 11 million unfilled jobs. Louisiana leads the
Nation in this category with unfilled vacancies. At the same
time, we have people sitting on the sidelines, who want to
work, but have not yet obtained the education and skills needed
to participate in the modern economy.
The United States labor force participation rate was 62.4
percent in January. That is down from 67 percent two decades
ago. We have far too many people on the sidelines not
participating in the economy. The market for talent is
exceptionally tight and seems to be growing tighter by the day.
Central to this policy must be the recognition that almost
every good job in America requires participation beyond high
school, perhaps college, perhaps on the job skills, but beyond
high school. With that perspective, the following are
recommendations to the committee.
First and foremost, expand Pell Grants to cover short-term
workforce programs. The single most important step Congress can
take on behalf of the 60 million Americans with a high school
diploma or less. Let that sink in. It is to authorize the use
of Pell Grants for workforce programs.
Students need the shortest and least expensive pathway to
employment and opportunity for advancement throughout their
lives. In the last 3 years, our community colleges in Louisiana
have served over 15 thousand students who graduated with these
credentials. Students completing these programs have strong job
placement rates above 90 percent and have a demonstrated wage
improvement of well over 20 percent from the prior year.
More broadly in Louisiana, we have a recognized earnings
premium for our students who complete short-term workforce
programs that is greater than the initial earnings of those
students who gain credentials from credit-based programs that
are Pell eligible. Clearly, these short-term credentials are
demonstrating value to employers, yet these shorter-term
programs are reserved for those who have money in their pockets
and will not require Pell Grants to attend college.
Effectively, we are limiting the ability of a broad swath
of Americans to quickly gain the skills needed to obtain a good
job. I congratulate you, Chairwoman Foxx, along with
Representative Stefanik, Banks, Hinson, and Thompson for your
vision, and bringing forward the Promoting Employment and
Lifelong Learning Act which RAMC has endorsed.
I also appreciate the several other efforts in Congress to
expand Pell Grants for short-term programs, and strongly urge
Congress to come to a consensus on this issue.
Point two, updated and improved WIOA. Under the Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act, Louisiana has 15 workforce
development areas, each with its own local board led by a
business representative. Collectively, in program year ending
2022, Louisiana serves 5,655 individuals in ``training
services,'' which places Louisiana above the national average,
yet it pales in comparison to the 180,000 vacancies that we
have in Louisiana.
We simply cannot get to the goal continuing down the path
we are on today. The following are recommendations I would make
to you around WIOA. First and foremost, require more WIOA funds
to be targeted toward workforce training accounts. Improve
coordination with the Higher Education Act. Individuals do not
understand the difference between Federal policy and WIOA, and
Higher Education Act. Streamline those processes.
Maintain the requirement for State and local boards to be
led by businesses. Allow for more flexibility in establishing
enhanced accountability systems with providers and provide
better labor market information. Finally, strengthen the role
of community colleges as we think about the development and the
growth of our workforce system.
Point three, we must establish a no wrong door approach to
education and workforce attainment. While the effort is
intended to lower and eliminate barriers to access education
employment, current policies too often place the highest
barriers in front of those with the greatest need.
Point four, and the final point, developing America's
talent is the responsibility of the education system, but also
business partners. They cannot do it alone. We have great
examples in Louisiana business partnerships. Our friends at
General Dynamics IT are located on the campus of Bossier
Parrish Community College with over 1,000 employees right there
on the college campus.
In the New Orleans market, our Mechatronics apprenticeship
program brings together three LCTCS colleges to meet the needs
of the greater manufacturing sector. In closing, I would like
to thank you again for the opportunity to share some thoughts
with you today. Education is indeed the anecdote to the ills of
this Nation.
We know that our people and our economy will be more
resilient, dynamic, and future ready if we can free ourselves
from historical structures and reconceptualize the systems for
the modern world. Can you image--can you imagine an America
where every single household has one college credential, or
industry-based certification that supports that household? I
can imagine that America. Together we can get there. Thank you
for the opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Sullivan follows:]

Statement of Dr. Monty Sullivan, President, Louisiana Community and
Technical College System

Good morning, Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member Scott, and Members of
the Committee. I am Monty Sullivan, President of the Louisiana
Community and Technical College System (LCTCS) and President of
Rebuilding America's Middle Class (RAMC), a coalition of state and
individual community college systems from across the country that share
the belief that community colleges are one of America's primary
solutions to building a strong, more competitive workforce and
therefore, a strong middle class. On behalf of Louisiana's twelve two-
year colleges and the 150,000 students we serve each year, as well as
RAMC, thank you for the opportunity to be here today to discuss what I
see as a crisis in our nation's education and workforce system.
With each information cycle and technological advancement, the
skill requirements of the workplace are ever increasing. Last week, the
President of Microsoft, Brad Smith, wrote a blogpost noting the advance
in artificial intelligence expected by 2033 would instead be here in
2023. He and others have signaled the profound impact this new
technology will have on jobs and education. This is just one example of
why we need to ensure our nation's system of education and workforce
development can provide the skills that individuals will need to
succeed in our ever-changing economy.
We are already far behind, as reflected in our nation's near-record
11 million unfilled job openings. Louisiana leads the nation in
unfilled jobs, and we are also expecting tens of thousands of new jobs
to materialize from the shift to a new energy economy, and a rapidly
expanding industrial sector in fields like liquefied natural gas (LNG)
and chemical manufacturing. Not to mention health care workforce
shortages, which are impacting the daily care of those in Louisiana and
throughout the country. The market for talent is exceptionally tight
and seems to be growing tighter by the day.
At the same time, we have people sitting on the sidelines who want
to work but have not yet obtained the education and skills needed to
participate in the modern economy. The United States labor force
participation rate was 62.4 percent in January, a rate that has been
dropping for the last several decades from when it was 67 percent. This
translates into millions of more individuals not in today's labor
force.
With relatively low labor force participation rates, we have a
significant pool of untapped talent stranded in this economy. We must
forge a policy environment that broadens opportunity in this nation.
Central to this policy must be the recognition that almost every good
job in America requires preparation beyond a standard high school
diploma. Therefore, every American needs some level of education and
skills beyond high school whether gained at college, on the job, or
even through a free MOOC. In addressing this issue from a policy
perspective, we must align education and workforce policy in a
complementary manner and not as mutually exclusive.
With that perspective, the following are recommendations for this
Committee to consider in order to address at least some aspects of our
nation's education and workforce crisis.
1. Expand Pell Grants to cover short-term / workforce programs: The
single most important step Congress can take in helping address our
nation's skill shortage is to immediately authorize the use of Pell
Grants for workforce programs. Students need the shortest and least
expensive pathways to employment with opportunities for advancement
throughout their lives.
In the last three years, our community colleges in Louisiana have
graduated roughly 15,000 students from short-term workforce programs
using state funds. The results have been astounding. First, students
who complete these programs have very strong job placement rates (above
90 percent) and demonstrate wage improvements of 20 percent in their
first year on the job (Glass, C., Strong Wage Gains from Short-term
Credentials, Old Dominion University, Community College Leadership
Research Report, Fall 2019).
More broadly in Louisiana, we have recognized an earnings premium
for our students who complete short-term workforce programs that is
greater than the initial earnings of students in traditional credit
programs that are Pell Grant eligible. Clearly, these credentials are
demonstrating value to employers.
Those shorter-term programs, with clear value in the market, are
reserved for those who have money in their pocket and do not need to
rely on a Pell Grant for their education. Effectively, we are limiting
the ability for a broad swath of Americans to quickly gain the skills
needed to obtain a good job.
Enacting the Promoting Employment and Lifelong Learning (PELL) Act
would be a profoundly important step toward addressing this current
policy need. I congratulate you, Chairwoman Foxx, along with
Representatives Stefanik, Banks, Hinson, and Thompson, for your vision
in bringing forward this legislation, which RAMC has endorsed. I also
appreciate the several other efforts in Congress to expand Pell Grants
for short-term programs and strongly urge Congress to come to consensus
on legislation that, when passed, will enable a significant increase in
the number of students across the country who will have a new
opportunity in how they improve their skills.
2. Update and Improve WIOA: Under the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act (WIOA), Louisiana has 15 Workforce Development Areas,
each with its own local Workforce Development Board (WDB) that is led
by a representative of business and includes partners such as community
colleges and local non-profits. These Boards collectively oversee 62
American Job Centers and numerous affiliate one-stop centers that
provide entry for individuals seeking workforce and employment
services, as well as related supportive services.
Collectively, in the program year ending last June, 5,655 adults
(including dislocated workers) were served under WIOA in Louisiana, of
whom 3,676 received ``training'' services (as defined under WIOA).
[Note, this proportion of those in ``training'' is higher than the
national average.] Across the two programs for adults and dislocated
workers, roughly three quarters of participants were employed six
months after exiting, and they had average quarterly earnings of $6,697
and $8,459 respectively. A vast majority of all participants left with
a credential.
In 2021, to help address what had often been a disconnect between
our colleges and WDBs, LCTCS led an effort to hold individual meetings
with each WDB along with representatives from K12 education, economic
development, corrections, children and family services, non-profits,
and four-year colleges. We collectively developed a regional workforce
ecosystem that continues under the leadership of our community colleges
and is convened by our regional economic development organizations with
regional employers. This work has helped us to build the human and
programmatic infrastructure needed to meet our workforce needs.
However, despite these types of efforts, we must recognize that we
will not meet the needs of those seeking to obtain skills or the needs
of the business community by relying on the current WIOA system. In
many ways, the program is simply stretched too thin in attempting to
serve so many roles (convener, purveyor of labor market data, provider
of career navigation assistance, and facilitator of supportive
services, to name just a few). As such, the system is often not able to
fully carry out what should be its central function of providing
workforce development skills. In fact, in many places less than a
quarter of WIOA funds are expended for actual workforce development.
In the past, this Committee has worked in a bipartisan fashion to
update these programs, and I hope that you are able to again follow
that path, because it is sorely needed. I believe the next
reauthorization must, at a minimum, include these reforms:
Require more funds to be targeted toward providing much-needed
workforce development through what are identified as ``Individual
Training Accounts'' under WIOA;
Improve coordination with the Higher Education Act such as by
providing incentives for one-stop operators to leverage Pell Grants--
particularly Workforce Pell--so as to facilitate skill development
opportunities to far more students;
Maintain current provisions which require state and local boards to
be led by business;
Remove the current cap under WIOA on pay-for-performance models,
allowing states and local workforce boards more flexibility in
establishing enhanced accountability systems with providers;
Provide better tools for states and localities related to labor
market information so that individuals can be provided the most
accurate and up-to-date information available on what jobs and skills
are needed today--not yesterday; and
Consider changes which would strengthen the role of community
colleges in the overall WIOA workforce development system.
1. Focus on Students, Not Systems: We must establish a ``no wrong
door'' approach to education and workforce that provides a clear path
to education and skills attainment. Whether the journey begins as a
high school honors graduate or as an adult basic education student,
there must be a clear path to an education and the American Dream for
everyone.
While our education and workforce systems are intended to lower or
eliminate barriers to accessing education and employment, current
policies too often place the highest barriers in front of those with
the most need. For example, the processes for gaining workforce
development services should not require so much information and
bureaucracy. Congress should consider an effort, similar to the recent
passage of FAFSA simplification legislation, to make other education
and workforce programs more accessible. When barriers win out, the
impact is not only felt by the individual--we all pay the price when
their abilities are sidelined and their potential contributions to our
economy and our society go unrealized.
4. Leverage and Promote Employer Partnerships: Developing America's
talent is a responsibility that education systems hold jointly with the
business community. Employers need to be part of the solution, but they
cannot solve this problem in isolation. In particular, small and mid-
size businesses must be able to rely on the workforce and education
systems to supply them with qualified workers who are ready to work.
The responsibility of any community college or workforce
preparation program is to prepare students with the right skills needed
to land a job. Knowing what those skills are can only be accomplished
when there is active participation and cooperation with employers.
In Louisiana, we have many examples of innovative and highly
productive partnerships with industry. In the northwestern part of our
state, General Dynamics IT, or GDIT, is working with Bossier Parish
Community College where the company employs about 1,000 employees on
the premises of the college. GDIT is able to expand the pool of
potential employees to include rural populations, which is vitally
important in a time of workforce shortages, and our rural communities
benefit from salaries in amounts almost unattainable previously to the
residents of those small towns.
In the New Orleans area, our Mechatronics apprenticeship program,
developed in conjunction with Greater New Orleans, Inc, or GNO Inc, our
regional economic development partner, brings together three LCTCS
colleges to meet the needs of three manufacturing businesses. Elmer
Chocolate, Laitram, and Zatarain's identify promising employees, and
each college teaches them a distinct set of skills to jointly prepare a
highly sophisticated group of advanced manufacturing workers.
In Louisiana's Fifth Congressional District, partners like Ethridge
Pipeline and Conduit, are working closely with Louisiana Delta
Community College to develop the workforce needed to lay broadband
across our state. The company has donated equipment, taught classes,
identified equipment manufacturers, and brought them to the table. In a
matter of weeks, our colleges have mobilized to create workforce
development programs across the state to meet the workforce demands for
one of our nation's strategic priorities.
Every single day, our colleges are working hand-in-hand with a wide
array of industry partners to meet the most pressing workforce needs of
our state. We have the data that reflect the need. It is our firsthand
experience in the field, talking to business partners and to
individuals who seek a better life, that gives me hope that we will
meet the moment. First, we must have a strong policy platform that
welcomes business partners to the table to help solve this challenge
with us.
In closing, I would like to thank you again for the opportunity to
share some thoughts with you today. We know that our people and our
economies will be more resilient, dynamic, and future-ready if we can
free ourselves from historical structures and reconceptualize higher
education and workforce development for the modern world. I ask you to
imagine each of your districts spread across this great land. Education
is the antidote to nearly every single issue we face as a nation. Can
you imagine an America where every single household has at least one
college degree or high-value industry-based certification supporting
that household? Together, we can build a better America for all our
citizens. Thank you!
______

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. I now recognize
Governor Polis and a former member of this committee as I have
said, for his comments.

STATEMENT OF HON. JARED POLIS, GOVERNOR OF COLORADO

Governor Polis. Good morning. Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking
Member Scott, well it is good to be under the watchful gaze of
Chair Conyers and Chair Goodlatte, I hope you return to your
Committee Room soon, and wish you luck. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on the State of education.
Today our country truly does face an education crisis. A
crisis in quality, equity, access, and affordability. As
leaders, we need to do what we can to strengthen our schools,
create inclusive settings where all students can learn, empower
our educators, parents, and school leaders to prepare every
learner for success.
That starts with strong early childhood education. Colorado
has made incredible progress with free, full day kindergarten
for every child, and now a new free universal preschool, which
launches this fall, which will save families $6,000.00 per
year, and prepare students for success.
While the pandemic brought forward significant challenges,
we saw teachers, students, parents, school districts, higher
ed, and businesses step up in new and innovative ways. We also
saw major Federal investments from COVID relief funds provided
through the Elementary and Secondary Educational Relief, or
ESSR funds, and the Governor's Emergency Educational Relief or
GEER funds, that are already making a difference.
In Colorado we used the lion's share of our ESSR funds to
address learning loss, like starting the Colorado High Impact
Tutoring Program, which offered 43,000 hours of tutoring to
3,800 students in its first semester. We have invested GEER
money to create the Rise Education Fund, to invest in creative,
locally driven solutions, to improve student achievement, and
close achievement gaps in innovative ways, like the creation of
a mobile learning center that brings resources, internet and
learning opportunities directly to students in mountainous Lake
County, Colorado.
We also created the Governor's Bright Spot Award, to
recognize the 21 Colorado schools that improved student
performance two bands or more, on our State accountability
system since the pandemic began. Like Rocky Mountain Elementary
School, and St. Vrain Valley School District that implemented
high-quality hybrid learning, provided a no-cost summer program
that offered evidence-based literacy and math instruction, and
improved greatly results over the last 2 years.
We saw similar innovations across states like Indiana's
Explore, Engage and Experience Grant Program that allows
students to test out potential career pathways, and
Washington's Reimagine Education Project, which integrates
social emotional learning into alternative learning structures.
We are also focused on supporting the mental health needs
of learners, including through critical mental health supports,
like IMatter, an American Rescue Plan funded program that now
offers six free counseling sessions to all students in
Colorado.
We also continue to graduate more high school students with
post-secondary credit, work skills and credentials. 53 percent
of graduating Colorado students took a dual and concurrent
enrollment course, and we want to grow that number. Colorado is
also home to CareerWise, which now supports thousands of youth
apprentices in not just Colorado, but Indiana, New York, DC,
and Michigan.
By blurring the lines between high school and higher
education, we can save students money, help them gain skills,
and set them up to successfully navigate life. As we do that,
we need to make higher education more affordable and
accessible. In Colorado, we have held tuition rates lower than
inflation for the last few years, and we launched the Zero
Textbook Challenge, which encourages Colorado institutions to
expand the use of open educational resources, and eliminate
textbook costs.
I also want to applaud the Biden administration's effort to
increase Pell Grant funding. It is not only about
affordability, but also about ensuring students get a real
return on investment, holding schools accountable, and
protecting students from predatory practices. We need
transparency so students can make informed decisions about
where to spend their hard-earned time and money.
All this work is to ensure that every student can get
skills and knowledge to find a job that supports them and their
family and meets the needs of our business community. In
Colorado we have two open jobs for every unemployed person,
which is why we are working to expanding training opportunities
in new and innovative ways.
For instance, we are now providing free community and
technical college for students pursuing careers in healthcare,
with the hope of expanding this to construction, firefighting,
law enforcement, nursing, and early childhood education. 1,000
students were trained and entered the workforce within the
first 3 months of this program.
We are also in the process of expanding registered
apprenticeship opportunities, and we created a first of its
kind opportunity in the health center that integrates
AmeriCorps and registered apprenticeships. I encourage Congress
to reauthorize WIOA, so the states can continue directing key
WIOA investments toward each state's unique, in demand
workforce needs, including flexibility for key wraparound
services like transportation and childcare, so people can get
to work.
Through all this work, states are leading the charge on
innovative ways to support students and workers of all ages. We
need to be bold and continue pursuing new and innovative ways
to prepare all Americans for success. Let us turn this crisis
into action. Many states see this as an opportunity to move
forward and innovate, and I am hopeful that Congress can use
this momentum to improve quality, equity, access, and
affordability across education. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Governor Polis follows:]

Statement of Hon. Jared Polis, Governor of Colorado

Good morning, Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member Scott, and members of
the Education & Workforce Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify on the State of Education.
I have spent much of my career in education, from launching and
running charter schools and serving on the Colorado State Board of
Education, to serving in Congress, including on this Committee, where I
helped to reauthorize the broken No Child Left Behind Act and Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act, among others.
Today our country faces an education crisis. A crisis in quality,
equity, in access, and affordability. As leaders, we must do what we
can to strengthen our public schools, create inclusive settings where
all students can learn, and empower our educators and school leaders to
give students the best education possible to prepare every learner for
success, and power our economy.
Early Childhood
That starts with a strong early childhood system. Colorado has made
incredible progress with free, full-day kindergarten and our new free
universal preschool program, which launches this fall, and will save
families at least $6,000 per year.
K12
We must also work to make historic investments in our public
schools. While the pandemic brought forward significant challenges, we
saw teachers, students, parents, school districts, higher education,
and business step up in new and innovative ways.
We also saw unprecedented federal investments from COVID relief
funds provided through the Governor's Emergency Education Relief (GEER)
Fund and the Elementary and Secondary Education Relief (ESSER) Fund.
These funds allowed Democratic and Republican Governors alike to get
students back into classrooms as quickly and safely as possible.
In Colorado, we used the lion's share of our ESSER funds to address
learning loss, like starting the Colorado High-Impact Tutoring program,
which offered 43,000 hours of tutoring to 3,800 students in its first
semester and is expanding this school year with the use of additional
ESSER funds.
We have used GEER money to create the RISE education fund to invest
in creative solutions to improve student learning, close equity gaps,
and increase efficiency across the state, like the creation of a Mobile
Learning Center housed in a repurposed school bus that brings
resources, internet, and learning opportunities directly to students in
mountainous Lake County, CO.
We also created the Governor's Bright Spot Award to recognize 21
schools that jumped two or more performance bands on our state
accountability system since the pandemic began, like Rocky Mountain
Elementary School in the St. Vrain Valley that implemented high-quality
hybrid learning, and provided no-cost summer classes that offered
evidence-based literacy and math instruction.
Last week I visited Chatfield Elementary School in Grand Junction,
which improved three performance bands by focusing on professional
development, aligning classroom work to academic standards, and
providing additional support for struggling students.
We saw similar innovations across states, like Indiana's Explore,
Engage, and Experience Grant that allows students to test out potential
career pathways, and Washington's Reimagine Education Project, which
integrates social emotional learning into alternative learning
structures.
Now states are focused on improving student achievement,
particularly around math, while creating safe and productive learning
environments for every student, including major expansions to critical
mental health support, like IMatter, an American Rescue Plan Act-funded
program that offers six free counseling sessions to all students in
Colorado.
We also continue to graduate more high school students with
postsecondary credit, work skills, and credentials.
53% of Colorado students took a dual and concurrent enrollment
course, and continued investments will help this number grow. Colorado
is also home to CareerWise, which now supports thousands of youth
apprentices in not just Colorado, but Indiana, New York, DC, and
Michigan.
By blurring the lines between high school and higher education, we
can save students money, help them gain skills, and set them up to
better navigate postsecondary education.
Higher Education
As we do that, we must find ways to make higher education more
accessible and affordable. The number of students pursuing
postsecondary education is declining, and it is largely due to high
costs. Bureau of Labor and Statistics data show that ``between 2006 and
2016, the Consumer Price Index for tuition and fees increased 63%,
compared to 21% for other goods and services''
That is why we have proposed a new scholarship to support any
graduate in the class of 2024 who is pursuing postsecondary education,
and launched the Zero Textbook Challenge, which encourages Colorado
institutions to expand the use of open educational resources.
I also want to applaud the Biden Administration's efforts to pause
student loan payments during the pandemic, provide widespread debt
relief, and continue to increase Pell Grant funding.
It is not only about affordability, it is about ensuring students
get a real return on investment, holding schools accountable, and
protecting students from predatory practices.
We need full transparency so that students can make informed
decisions about where to spend their hard-earned time and money.
Workforce
All of this work is to ensure that every student can get skills and
knowledge to find a job that supports them and their family and meets
the needs of our businesses.
In Colorado, we have two open jobs for every unemployed person,
which is why we are working to expand training opportunities in new and
innovative ways.
We are providing free community and technical college for students
pursuing careers in health care, with the hope of expanding to
construction, firefighting, law enforcement, nursing, and early
childhood education. 1,000 students were trained and entered the
workforce within the first 3 months of this program.
Similarly, Texas has set a goal for 60% of Texans ages 25-64 to
earn industry-recognized credentials through their Credentials of
Purpose and Value program.
We are also in the process of expanding registered apprenticeship
opportunities, and have created a first-of-its-kind opportunity in the
public health sector that fully integrates AmeriCorps and a Registered
Apprenticeship.
I call on Congress to reauthorize WIOA so that states like Colorado
can continue directing key WIOA investments towards its unique in-
demand workforce needs, including key wraparound services.
Conclusion
Through all of this work, states are leading the charge on
innovative ways to support students and workers of all ages.
The COVID pandemic exposed many of the cracks within our systems,
showing us that we cannot rely on the old way of doing things. We have
to be bold and continue pursuing new and innovative ways to prepare all
Americans for success.
Let us turn this crisis into action.
Many states have seen this as an opportunity to move forward, and I
am hopeful Congress can use this momentum to increase equity, quality,
access, and affordability across education.
Thank you.
______

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. Finally, we will hear
from Mr. Pulsipher.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT PULSIPHER, PRESIDENT, WESTERN GOVERNORS
UNIVERSITY

Mr. Pulsipher. Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member Scott, and
members of the committee, I am grateful for your convening this
hearing and for the opportunity to offer perspective on the
State of higher education. WGU is a private, non-profit
institution founded in 1997 by a bipartisan group of 19
Governors, who saw the opportunity to leverage technology and
competency-based education to improve access, quality, and
outcomes in higher education.
Our mission is to change lives for the better by creating
pathways to opportunity. Today we served more than 200,000
students and graduate 45 to 50,000 during an academic year.
Two-thirds of who belong to one or more historically
underserved populations. The challenges plaguing our higher
education system are many and complex, to which our best
response will be guided by the simple principle creating value
for students.
This became abundantly clear when attending my first WGU
commencement as graduates shared the journeys they took, and
the hurdles they overcame to achieve their degrees. Many were
in their 30's and often accompanied by both parents and
children, reflecting upon this in the nearly 50 commencements
since.
It is clear that for many, education is far more meaningful
than a coming-of-age experience, or some external validation.
It is a gateway to a better life for themselves and their
families. That is the promise we all should expect of higher
education.
This is not to diminish the role of research universities,
nor imply that the purpose of higher education should be
reduced to job training, nor is it to force tradeoff between
advancing citizenry or career enablement, as both are
fundamental for the well-being of well-functioning individuals
and society.
I would argue that the challenges today center primarily
around the growing failure to live up to education's promise as
a great equalizer. Indeed, data show our most vulnerable
students are disproportionately likely to leave college with
considerable debt and no degree, or at least one that took far
more than 4 years to earn.
Post-college earnings for low-income students are generally
lower than those of their wealthier peers. Over the last 50
years, while completion for those from the top income quartile
has increased from 40 to 62 percent, for their peers from the
bottom income quartile it has barely risen. From the bottom
income quartile it has barely risen from 6 to 13 percent.
We are leaving too much talent on the table and paying
dearly for it, both in skyrocketing costs, and in persisting
workforce gaps. Policymakers have worked to mitigate the risks
that students experience from a poor return on investment.
Instead of triaging a flawed system with well intentioned, but
short-sighted solutions, we need to address the root problem.
Higher education has been engineered beyond its primary
objective, enabling economic and social mobility for its
students.
Institutions contend with competing priorities, established
budget mechanisms and conflicting incentives. It can favor
selectivity, constraint enrollment, drive up costs, and
propagate outdated models, layer in regulatory prescription and
cultural nostalgia, and change becomes challenging to the point
of impossible.
WGU was founded by design to better serve those poorly
served, underserved, or not served at all by conventional
options, with a focus on access and outcomes. 26 years later
WGU has graduated more than 300,000 individuals who are
employed at rates at or above national averages, with income
gains one-third higher, who report higher levels of engagement
in their jobs and in overall well-being.
Many aspects of WGU are unique, but our success in serving
students may not be. Congress can promote greater clarity,
purpose, and expectations in higher education, whereas much of
current policy is left at highly regulated as to process, and
unaccountable as to student outcomes. Safeguards are certainly
needed, but safeguards that regulate inputs mostly reinforce
convention and constraint innovation that holds the promise of
enabling the very outcomes that safeguards intend to secure.
Congress can help flip this paradigm with an emphasis
toward enabling innovation with accountability, particularly in
access. Enabling the future workforce starts with dramatically
expanding enrollment, and never before have we had such
powerful tools as technology, the internet, and new models of
learning, including competency-based education.
Relevancy--ensuring credentials and earned and skills keep
pace with the future work, and new credentials and pathways can
be developed appropriately sized and timed to an individual's
career development and workforce needs.
Costs and value--improving affordability by incentivizing
lower costs and better choices, rather than how to pay for ever
increasing costs, and holding institutions and students for
credential attainment and value. Ultimately, outcomes are
paramount, as access without attainment is an empty promise,
especially when underwritten by the taxpayer, and when students
hold the debt.
Quality is not a matter of mode, method, or model, but
completion and value for students. It is much a moral hazard to
fund access without completion, as it is to achieve high
completion rates by precluding access. With the proper
incentives in place Congress can help reinvest a system that is
accessible, affordable, completable, and relevant to
opportunities and workforce needs.
Most importantly, we can dispel the disheartening claim
repeated by far too many that college is not for me. Education
is and must be for everyone, both for the sake of the
individual and our whole society. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify, and I now yield to the committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pulsipher follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Again, thank you all very much for your
very enlightening comments. Under Committee Rule 9(a) we will
now question witnesses under the 5-minute rule. I will wait to
ask my questions, and therefore recognize Mr. Wilson from South
Carolina for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and best wishes on
your service as Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson. We are just so happy to have you. Thank you to
our witnesses for being here today. It is especially good to
see an alumnus of college, Governor Polis, although he is going
to be in a way violating union work rules with a big smile he
has that indicates he is happy to be here, but he cannot wait
to get home, and so best wishes on your service.
Mrs. Gentles, you have cited what is going right in
American education. You call Arizona the gold standard for
education and freedom as the passage of the Universal School
Choice Bill last year. Can you explain how the law works, and
how you consider it the gold standard?
Mrs. Gentles. Yes. Arizona has had a program called
Empowerment Scholarship Accounts in place for over 10 years,
and these provide State created savings accounts that can be
used for eligible education purposes for K-12. These can be
tuition, but also tutoring, therapies, textbooks, and if the
funds are left over they can be even rolled over and used for
college.
The program was expanded for universal eligibility, setting
a model for other education savings accounts in the country.
There are over 10 states with these programs now, and we think
that this is the future because it offers control, freedom, and
flexibility for parents.
Mr. Wilson. Well, it is really a great model for the rest
of the country. Congratulations. Dr. Sullivan, you discussed
how the rapid developments of technology and increasing skills
demands in the modern workforce. I am really grateful in my
home State of South Carolina. We have been promoting
technology. It has resulted in my hometown of Lexington, South
Carolina, the largest Michelin tire company corporation
investment in the world.
Additionally, it has led to our State now being the leading
manufacturer exporter of tires. Then with success in our State,
with Governor Carroll Campbell of BMW, we are now the leading
with Volvo and Mercedes plants now, we are the leading export
of cars, but it is due to the technology and the technical
schools that we have that made this possible.
With the development of the workforce development system,
it has to evolve. How can the workforce system better embrace
technological innovations to increase efficiency and improve
the services available to job seekers?
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Wilson, and congratulations to
South Carolina on the incredible, great work that you have
done. We have been on the other end of some of those
competitions that you have won, and we are very proud to see
the progress going on in South Carolina, and great work by your
community and technical college system there to make sure that
the State of South Carolina has the workforce talent that they
need in order to be able to support those businesses once they
arrive.
It is important to note that I mentioned 60 million adults
in this economy with a high school diploma or less. Each year
in the State of Louisiana we graduate about 40,000 kids from
high school a year, yet we have 1.1 million working age adults
who have a high school diploma or less. Oftentimes, they are
the same parents to the young people that we were just
describing.
From our perspective, we must build in continuous
opportunities for on ramp and for individuals to get into
education, short-term training to get the education that they
need to be able to take on that first job, but then also a
great relationship with the employers, like the ones that you
mentioned, to help advance the education of that individual so
they understand the technology.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much. Hey, we enjoy the
competition with you, but it is not fair when you bring people
to Mardi Gras season, it has an unfair advantage. Mr.
Pulsipher, you were going through the Western Governor's
University's responsible borrowing initiative. Can you go
through even further, how does this benefit students?
Mr. Pulsipher. Yes. Thank you for that question
Representative Wilson. The responsible party initiative is
simply based upon the principle that if you give information--
if you give better information to individuals, they make better
choices. What we do is we actually expose to our individuals
what the total cost of attending and completing their degree
will be at WGU and make recommendations to them as to how much
they should borrow.
What we have actually found is that, you know, if only two-
thirds of the students actually follow that recommendation, and
another 5 to 10 percent end up actually choosing no Federal aid
whatsoever. What that has allowed WGU graduates to achieve is
that we have reduced the borrowing by 30 percent in terms of
debt per graduate. It has declined by 30 percent since the
Responsible Borrowing Initiative, and we have actually also
reduced the total number of students who are attending WGU, and
their actual use of financial aid to do so.
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank each of you for coming, and again,
Governor, we are happy to have you here. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Wilson. Now I recognize Ms.
Wilson for the purpose of questioning the witnesses.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx and Ranking Member
Scott, for convening today's hearing. Last night during his
State of the Union address President Biden said let us give
public school teachers a raise. They deserve a raise. Everyone
in the chamber gave a standing ovation. Everyone on both sides.
I could not agree more.
Later today, I am introducing a bill with Mr. Bowman, and
with the vast majority of the Democrats on this committee to do
just that, the American Teacher Act. The American Teacher Act
sets a $60,000.00 minimum teacher's salary nationwide and
provides a cost of living adjustment for teachers making above
$60,000.00.
Low teacher pay is one of the many factors contributing to
teacher shortages across the Nation. Chairwoman Foxx got it
right, our education system is in fact in crisis. We have
thousands of unstaffed classrooms, partly because of low
teacher wages. As a former Miami-Dade County teacher,
principal, and school board member, promoting the vitality of
our Nation's education system is my top priority.
I see the struggle to recover from COVID-19 pandemic in my
community every day, from elementary school classrooms to
college lecture halls, that is why Democrats put a plan forward
to help our schools during the 117th Congress. In Miami-Dade
County public schools, even with Federal support, officials are
still grappling with teacher shortages amidst a growing migrant
population in the region.
A recent report from Broward County schools revealed a
disturbing increase in behavioral incidents connected to COVID
related trauma and stress. Despite these challenges, my
Republican colleagues have decided to weaponize their newfound
majority to politicize American education.
Proposed Republican reforms, including the Parents Bill of
Rights, are nothing more than political posturing. These
proposals are nothing more than an appeal to the most radical
sectors of our Nation. They fail to address the needs of
students and staff across the education spectrum, leaving them
ill-equipped and under-prepared for a post pandemic economy.
The democratic members of this committee are here to
continue the work we started in the 117th Congress, with one
goal in mind--strengthen our education system. Remember, this
is only the beginning. Democrats will stay the course. We will
fight this right-wing extremist agenda. Our amazing students,
teachers, college professors, school personnel and parents
deserve nothing less.
With that, I have a few questions. Welcome back Governor
Polis. I sat next to you on this committee. You said in your
testimony that we are in a crisis of equity and access to
higher education, and I agree. A large component of that is
cost. The cost of a higher education degree has skyrocketed,
and students have become saddled with debt.
I am pleased that the Biden administration has taken
significant efforts to address this crisis, including one-time
debt relief, changes to the income driven repayment program,
and changes to public service loan forgiveness programs.
Unfortunately, my colleagues have slammed these efforts as a
back door scheme from the Democrats. I believe these are
necessary to fix a broken long system.
Why are these administrative actions necessary for
borrowers, and what can Congress do to build on the
administration's work to address some of the biggest issues
with the loan system?
Governor Polis. Thank you, Representative Wilson. The cost
of a college education has rendered it less accessible now,
rather than more accessible for many Americans. It has
increased at a higher rate than inflation for much of the last
several decades. We are grateful for Federal programs that are
able to help students meet the costs and break down those
barriers.
Those include Pell Grants, and I am very supportive of the
Biden administration's efforts to increase Pell Grants, as well
as efforts to support innovation and excellence. This work of
making sure that we align investment to outcomes, and making
sure that students receive value for the education they get is
also important.
It is important to look at the cost, and at the same time
to look at the benefit, and make sure that any investments that
the Federal Government is making, as well as we're doing this
in Colorado with our State investments, make sure that the
benefits exceed the costs of the investment that we are making
and helping the students achieve success.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. I now recognize Mr.
Walberg from Michigan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thanks to the
panel for being here, including our colleague who is still our
colleague, just on a different committee. One of the biggest
drivers of the cost of higher education is the fact that
graduate students have no limit on borrowing.
Studies show many master's degrees do not have an equal
return on investment. In fact, one study found approximately 40
percent provided a negative return on investment. Mr.
Pulsipher, you mentioned in your testimony that your
institution has focused on delivering a valuable education to
its students, by focusing on degrees and certifications that
lead to in demand careers. That is interesting--while keeping
costs low for students. That is interesting as well.
Can you elaborate a little bit more on how you create these
programs, specifically, while keeping the costs low?
Mr. Pulsipher. Yes. Thank you for that question
Representative Walberg. We start with the fundamental principle
that education has to be a path to opportunity. We start from
that opportunity and work backward if you will. We directly
identify those skills and requirements that are needed in the
workforce, particularly the future workforce.
That can come from partnerships with a company called Light
Cast. You can do a great library and catalogue of all the
skills that are needed. Once we identify kind of macro demand
out there, we then start working directly with employers and
associations that represent that topical, or kind of that field
of study and domain of expertise, such that we are gaining that
input directly into the design and development of our
curriculum so that we know that fundamentally that when our
students complete those programs, that they're actually ready,
and possess the skills and competencies that are needed to be
successful in the workforce.
This is why 98 percent of our employers are hiring WGU
graduates again, and they rate them as highly skilled, or
highly prepared for the workforce, as do the students and
graduates themselves. As it relates to making it affordable, we
have something that addresses both the tuition and the cost of
completing a program, but also can accelerate the time to
complete it.
We simply want first and foremost, to keep our tuition
costs at under $4,000.00 for a bachelor's degree per a 6-month
term, not for the competency based approach, it actually allows
individuals to go at a pace that is right for them, such that
in 6 months students can complete as many courses as they are
able. We do not track seat time in the course.
What we track is competence to that, such that on average
our bachelor's degrees--our graduates of bachelor's degrees are
completing in two and a half years at a cost of less than
$20,000.00 total.
Mr. Walberg. Oh, that is a savings. If it produces the
quality, and you have indicated that it has, as a result of
what the employers are saying. I appreciate that. Let me move
on to another track. Parental involvement in the education of
their children, and I see that as good. With all due respect, I
do not see that as anything other than how it ought to be. It
is paramount to a student's success.
However, in recent years we have seen a push by teachers'
unions, and school districts, sadly, to exclude parents from
the education of their children. This is why I recently
introduced the Protect Kids Act with Senator Tim Scott. Ms.
Gentles, you noted in your written testimony the harmful
impacts of ideological indoctrination in our schools,
especially on young children.
Do you believe this is driving a wedge between parents and
their own children?
Mrs. Gentles. Well absolutely, and it is designed to. The
idea of telling children that their parents----
Mr. Walberg. It is designed to?
Mrs. Gentles. Yes. When we are talking about gender
ideology specifically, there is an intention there to tell
children things that are biologically false, that a child could
be born in the wrong body, or a child might be born a boy, a
girl, both, or neither. Then instruct the child that if their
parent questions them on this, that they bring that information
home, that their parent is a bigot, and that their parent is
hateful.
If the child chooses to choose one of the 70 plus gender
identities that are taught in school, that--and if the parent
questions that, then the parent must want them dead. There is a
lot that is always pushed out there about suicide, or the
parent will kick them out. The child will be homeless.
There is absolutely a wedge that is being driven. Then when
we talk about gender support plans, that is intentionally
hiding information, so it creates a secret between the school
and the child that they are keeping from the parent. That is a
very clear wedge.
Mr. Walberg. Yes, where a disagreement, or not to keep
secrets causes great concerns. Would you say that it would be
important then if the schools do this intentionally, keeping
those secrets they should lose their Federal funding?
Mrs. Gentles. Actions have to be taken. It has to be sent
in a very clear message to districts that--and to schools, that
this is not acceptable. We see State legislation that is
addressing this, and I understand that you and Senator Scott
have introduced legislation as well. Those messages have to be
sent very clearly, that gender support plans, keeping secrets
from parents, pushing children down a path to medical
transition must stop. There must be a consequence.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you so much. Ms. Bonamici, I now
recognize you for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Chair Foxx and Ranking Member
Scott. I want to start by expressing my strong opposition to
the notion that the solution to the so-called crisis in
American education is to funnel taxpayer dollars to
unaccountable private schools, and for-profit charter schools.
Voucher programs of all types, whether they are traditional
vouchers, education savings accounts, or tax credit
scholarships, undermine the effectiveness of public education.
Research has shown repeatedly that vouchers do not improve
student achievement, and when policymakers make a conscious
decision to give coupons to certain students to attend private
schools, their message to the millions of students still
attending public schools is you do not matter, it is not
important to use to equip your school to serve you, and all
students well.
A real crisis in American education is that many of my
colleagues in Congress and in State legislatures, are applying
a device of strategy rooted in discrimination toward an
exclusion of LGBTQ students, and students with disabilities,
trying to censor and silence content that does not fit their
political ideology and agenda, defunding public schools, and
failing to address gun violence.
I spent more than 15 years as an active parent volunteer in
public schools, and an advocate for public education. I was in
many schools, many classrooms, and many conversations. We can
all agree that parent and family engagement is an instrumental
part of creating a safe, inclusive, and supportive public
school environment for all students.
I welcome the opportunity to work with my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle to uplift best practices, evidence
based practices in family engagement, rather than pit parents
against their kid's educators and schools.
Governor Polis, it is great to see you. Welcome back. I am
grateful for your leadership in closing the opportunity gap for
students in Colorado and in helping students recover lost
learning time from the pandemic. You understand that developing
parent and family engagement strategies is a requirement under
ESEA for schools receiving Federal funding.
I have a two-part question, and this is my first question.
Why is it important for educators to authentically and
meaningfully engage with parents and families, and how are
Colorado's school districts implementing parent and family
engagement strategies that reach culturally, linguistically and
socio-economically diverse parents and families, and that
support the health and well-being of LGBTQ students?
Governor Polis. Thank you, Representative Bonamici.
Involving parents is absolutely critical to success. When you
look at best practices at the site level, principal, school
leaders, at the classroom level teachers, one of the big
markers for success is how well parents are included in that
process. I have seen school leaders do inventory of skills of
parents and find ways that parents can supplement and provide
additional learning opportunities for kids.
At the classroom level, making sure that parents are
partners, and know what their students are assigned for
homework. A lot of new technologies have enabled more
involvement with parents on a regular basis, which is
absolutely wonderful toward achieving success.
We do it through conventional structures, like PTAs and
PTOs, but also at the classroom level in new and innovative
ways. When you look at the bright spot schools that achieved
two bands of achievement during the pandemic, which is a very
challenging time, every school had their own localized
strategy. One common theme across many of them were successful
strategies to involve parents, and sometimes even the community
at large in the education.
We appreciate the Federal investment, and helping to forge
parent, student teacher partnerships with all learners,
including learners from diverse backgrounds, which in a State
like Colorado and many states across the country, often means
you need to look at different languages. When you have parents
that speak Spanish, or Vietnamese, or any other language, and
you can't always just rely on the student as that translator.
It is often too much to put on the shoulders of a third or
fourth grader, and the student itself might not be fully
proficient in both languages. Making sure the schools have
access to not just the second most language. In our State we
are providing the access in Spanish is relatively easy. We have
elementary schools in Aurora, Colorado that have 28 languages
that parents speak at that school, and making sure it is
successfully----
Ms. Bonamici. I do not want to cut you off, but I just want
to ask you about--you said you visited Chat. Is it Chatfield
Elementary School?
Governor Polis. Yes.
Ms. Bonamici. You could tell when you enter a school, you
know, there is a joy of learning, and you know, the students
thriving. Can you tell us a little bit about the visit, and
elaborate on how COVID relief funds helped make improvements
possible, and helped your State focus on professional
development for Chatfield.
Governor Polis. Chatfield Elementary is a school in a lower
income area of Grand Junction, Colorado, Clifton area. It was
in turnaround status, which is our lowest performance status 3
years ago. They were able to improve to above average status
over 3 years.
What did they do? Really of course, as always, the
leadership and the team of educators play a key role. They
better aligned their classroom practices to the standards. They
engaged in extensive professional development. The ESSR funds
were used by the school to provide literacy coaches and math
coaches, and they were able to improve, over the last 3 years,
to be above average. Three bands of performance over the last 3
years, which is quite remarkable.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much. I see I am over time. I
yield back. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Foxx. You are forgiven. Mr. Allen from Georgia,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Yes. Obviously, I thank you Chairwoman Foxx, and
thank you to our witnesses. COVID shined a bright light on
education in this country, and certainly a very bright light on
the parents and their choices of what the best educational
environment would be like for their children.
In the 12th District of Georgia, we are a proud home of the
Heritage Academy, an independent school that offers crisis
centered education, and then we have the Dublin city schools, a
rural public school district that has implemented charter
systems. Dublin City schools offers the choice between two
themed elementary schools for specific learning paths, a
science technology engineering arts and math, or STEAM school,
and a leadership in environmental awareness in public service,
or LEAP school.
In fact, I was there when the young people recited Steven
Covey's seven habits for success. It was impressive. I cannot
recite those. We have clearly seen the advantages to school
choice in our district. Ms. Gentles, can you explain some of
the barriers that we face as far as school choice that we have
here in our district in Georgia?
Ms. Gentles. Well, there has been a great expansion of
school choice over the last three decades. 45 states have
charter school laws. Many states have open enrollment. Magnet
school programs, which provide public school choice, and then
of course, over 30 states have 65 or so private school choice
programs. There is a wide array of options out there.
There are numerous studies showing that there are great
benefits, specifically to the private school choice program, 26
out of 29 studies have shown that those programs benefit the
public school students around them, so we definitely want to
overcome any barriers that are there because these are
beneficial programs.
Barriers in place seem to be myths. There are a lot of
myths around school choice. I think it is important for people
to recognize that what is said is often just a talking point,
and not true. What needs to happen is that people, especially
policymakers, need to talk to the families--often low income
families, who are benefiting from school choice programs, and
whose lives have been changed, and recognize that those myths
need to be set aside, and those barriers need to be overcome,
and those policies need to be implemented.
Mr. Allen. Heritage Academy is an example of a low income
school where the kids are really rock stars, and doing great.
Dr. Sullivan, you mentioned the importance of partnering with
employers to prepare students with the right skills. In our
district Tech Strong specialized vehicles, or better known as
E-Z-GO, has partnered with the Richmond County School system to
implement the reaching potential through manufacturing an RPM
program to offer on the job training and employment
opportunities, really to take kids from low-income
neighborhoods, and just show them that you know, the American
dream is for everybody.
I come from a business background in construction, and I
believe that some skills are best learned through real world
experiences, and I am proud that the 12th District of Georgia
is not waiting until after high school graduation to give these
kids the tools and the ambition they need to succeed.
Can you discuss how these types of partnerships with
employers have created work-based learning opportunities for
students and how Congress can ensure that work based learning
opportunities are available to job seekers around the country?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes sir. Thank you, Mr. Allen. I would just
point out that I think we all can agree that working and
earning a living sooner, rather than later is a good thing.
Ensuring that people are in a training program, an education
program that also allows them to be able to work and make a
living, perhaps it is a registered apprenticeship, perhaps it
is an earn while you learn model.
Regardless, starting with the business partner, and
beginning with the end in mind. The end in mind being the
skillset that the individual needs in order to be able to go to
work in that environment. It doesn't stop there. That is the
beginning. As we look at the student population, our average
age student is 27--27. A full decade has passed for many of
these students by the time they get to that employment
circumstance.
I would just urge that Congress continue down the path of
ensuring that it is about the value proposition. Many of the
students that show up at our colleges, they only have six,
eight, 10 weeks to get in, get the training they need, get out
and make a living. But we also have to ensure that they are
able to come back. They are able to continue that growth along
the career path that is going to help them to sustain their
families.
Mr. Allen. Thank you very much, and Madam Chair, I yield
back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Allen. Mr. Takano, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Madam Chair. I have to say I want to
address my disappointment that extremists are being given a
platform to push problematic narratives, and misinformation
about hypothetical issues in order to spread confusion and
distraction. It is distressing because the very, very young
people that need our protection because they are the ones that
are targeted with bullying and harassment.
As they grow older, even death, they are specifically trans
minority individuals are specifically the targets of violence.
Violent murder. It is now more than ever, it is critical for us
to rise up to support, not scrutinize trans and queer students.
We must be supportive of their parents as well.
All students deserve to feel safe, comfortable, and
supported in their school so they can focus on their education.
Supportive educators, whether they belong to a teachers' union
or not, and there are supportive educators who are members of
unions and supportive educators who are not, but they are
essential. They are an essential resource for young people,
especially transgender youth and queer youth who may feel
isolated and unsafe.
With that, I just want to return back to the substance of
why we are here. Governor Polis, welcome back. I want to focus
on just the tremendous resource that were provided by both
Republicans and Democrats. The CARES Act was a Republican led
act. The ARPA was democratic, to meet the needs of states and
school districts to safely reopen.
You mentioned some of the things that you have done with
those resources, but I want to drill down and to the things
that, you know, the pandemic. Unfortunately, the school
closures were a result of a very real response to over a
million of our fellow Americans dying. That is a fact.
Whether schools should have been opened up earlier, that is
a matter of debate, but we need to focus on how we help young
people now adjust to coming back to schools. Can you tell me
what kind of resources have gone into mental health services,
and high schools, and kids that were teenagers kept in their
homes.
Any teenager, regardless of you know, gender identity, or
LGBTQ status or whatever, that is a tough time to sort of be
couped up at home, but tell us about the readjustment that is
going on in Colorado schools?
Governor Polis. First of all, I think I speak for really
all Governors just saying we are grateful for the flexibility,
as well as superintendents that we had. I think we were able to
meet local needs in each of the areas across our State very
effectively, and we appreciate that the aid of both CARES and
ARPA was allowed to be used to meet the local need, rather than
a particular program or investment.
In many areas very simply, extended learning time, which
means free summer academies for learners that are struggling,
after school tutoring programs are supported widely with ESSR.
Through the GEER piece, which we deeply appreciate, we are able
to design a program that broke down barriers that existed
between school districts and community colleges, and other
educational entities to support aligned work toward improving
student achievement.
We were also out of the American Rescue Act funds, able to
fund the IMatter Program, which is providing mental health
support. Every Colorado student has access to six free
counseling sessions. One noteworthy aspect is the universality
of it. They can be virtual, and they are in many places, areas
where otherwise students might not be able to access a mental
healthcare provider, or someone to talk to.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. Thank you, Governor. Mr. Pulsipher,
I have been interested in--well, as a former credential creep,
I have seen professions, professional sort of certifications. I
see the academic work you've got to do just to sort of expand.
Physician assistant programs for example, I had one in my
community college that you could get a physician's assistant
certificate, or certification in 2 years.
Often people coming out of the military, they came to the
community college just for that reason. Then the accrediting
body, the independent accrediting body, said you had to make it
a master's program. I am wondering if there is a way for us to
reverse that trend because I am interested in people being able
to get high-paying credentials, but what do we really need to
do to educate that person?
Governor Polis. We would welcome you to take a look at
Federal involvement around expanding the scope of practice so
people can practice with the training they have. We have been
very thoughtful about applying a skill's based hiring model to
the State, as well as expanding the scope of practice for nurse
assistants and others, so they can practice fully up to their
level of training, and do not require additional college just
for the sake of college.
We would welcome increased Federal interest in that, and we
look forward to visiting with you off line about that.
Mr. Takano. Okay. I meant that for--thank you, Governor
Polis. I meant that for Mr. Pulsipher, but my time is running
out, and I wish--I will talk to you both.
Chairwoman Foxx. I will allow Mr. Pulsipher to answer the
question since there was a misunderstanding.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you, Representative Takano, thank you,
Chairwoman as well. I think we would have to agree with you on
that point, which is that the better we can do to design
learning outcomes that directly map to the skills that are
needed in the workforce, and make sure that in fact individuals
who are traversing those programs, are assessed against their
proficiency against that.
That we want to make sure there is more traversable, more
accessible, and that individuals can get into the workforce
sooner rather than later. There is certainly, even the
bachelor's degree notion itself, this idea that you have to
have 120 credits of learning before you are actually ready for
the opportunities, like that itself is actually a pretty heavy
lift, and we have seen that creeping go up in teacher
preparation programs where it is very difficult to even deliver
teacher prep in a 4-year program.
That is being done by states, and you know, and different
bodies in nursing and healthcare, and places like that. That is
troubling as you consider the costs and the readiness of the
graduates that we are trying to get through those programs.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. I now recognize
Congressman Banks from this great State of Indiana.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Foxx. I thank him for his patience.
Mr. Banks. Thank you. Governor, I used to live in Colorado.
I always respected you, long before you were elected to office.
You were not afraid to go against the grain and stand out and
talk about education reform, charter schools, school choice,
and that is something I have always admired about you.
I was the first Member of Congress during the pandemic to
introduce a bill to keep schools open during the pandemic, and
I watched closely what was going on in Colorado at the time.
You were outspoken as well about keeping our kids in school
where they belong.
You took a lot of criticism for it. In fact, back in a
press conference in July 2020, you were quoted saying, ``I
believe we cannot interrupt education. We cannot sacrifice our
future, and our children's future just because of the
pandemic.'' You took a lot of heat and criticism for saying
that. The teachers' unions howled about it.
The Colorado Education Association expressed their great
disappointment in you for saying that, and they were outraged
at your decision to keep schools open. Obviously, we learned a
lot of lessons during the pandemic, but when it comes to
keeping our kids in school do you feel vindicated by that
decision, looking backward? Some of the lessons that you
learned from going against the grain, going against the
teachers' union, and the criticism of some in the political
class, to keep our kids in the classroom?
Governor Polis. Well, thank you, and again congratulations
on Indian's Explore, Engage and Experience Grant funded through
the American Rescue Act funds. It was a difficult situation in
that there were multiple constituencies. You had parents, some
of whom wanted to send their kids back to school, some of them
who were not yet ready to do that and wanted to continue
online.
You had teachers ready to return to the classroom, eager to
return to the classroom. You had other teachers, some of them
with pre-existing health conditions that were not. We tried to
work with our school districts as best we could to return in
person instruction. What does that mean?
We had a program where we offered, for instance, free masks
to every teacher and every student who wanted them, as a way to
encourage students and classes to return. The majority of our
school districts were back all of the 2020 school year. Like in
a lot of states there were some of the larger municipal
districts that took a few more months to fully return to in
person instruction.
We wanted to be partners with parents, with teachers, with
school leaders, and what do you need to be able to get back to
the classroom so that we can continue to move forward.
Mr. Banks. You wrote a letter to Education Secretary
Cardona last April denouncing changes proposed by the Biden
administration of Federal rules to make it harder for charter
schools to get startup grants. You followed that up with an op
ed in the Washington Post titled, ``The Education Department's
fix for Charter Schools is Misguided.''
You made the case for charter schools by saying they are
some of the most innovative, accessible, and successful schools
in Colorado, and across the country, and that we should support
charter schools, and that the Biden administration's effort is
undermining the success of charter schools.
You know Governor, I could not agree with you more on that.
Do you stand by what you wrote in that letter, and the article
in the Washington Post?
Governor Polis. Charter schools mean different things in
different states because the different states have different
authorization laws. The lens that I really tried to frame this
crisis, quality, access, equity, and affordability. Done right,
public charter schools can contribute to quality, to access, to
equity, and affordability.
While I did not think that the change in the rules were
necessary, I was pleased the Department of Education did
incorporate many of the comments, and critics like myself
included, to make the changes more workable to help support new
charter schools.
Mr. Banks. What else should the Biden administration do to
support charter schools?
Governor Polis. You know I would encourage the
administration to really lean into innovation in all its forms,
as the Obama administration did, and the Trump administration
did. That means that whether it is an innovative district
program, a charter school, or a hybrid type program, we should
support excellence and innovation. Now that also means, of
course, accountability and quality.
It does not mean we should be throwing money at programs
that do not work, but that key role that the Federal Government
can do is to help to be a catalyst before the schools open and
get their funding, and that is really what the Charter School
Innovation Grants are meant to do. Like any public school, they
are self-sustaining over time.
Before they come online they often need help, and I think
that is a very fruitful area to look at investment around how
we can encourage districts and charter schools to innovate.
Mr. Banks. Governor, I have three daughters. You have a
daughter. Do you think it is unfair that biological boys are
allowed to compete against biological girls in sports?
Governor Polis. Well, my daughter is 8 years old. She plays
in Little League baseball in Boulder, Colorado, and it is a co-
ed league. It is probably about 10 percent girls, about 90
percent boys. She is every bit as competitive as them, and you
know, some of the girls want to be on the same team. We have
about half the girls on our team, even though they are about 10
percent across the league.
If I was not Governor, or in Congress, I would probably be
the coach.
Mr. Banks. Pretty soon your 8-year-old will be 15-16, and I
wonder how you will feel at that point. With that, Madam Chair,
I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much Mr. Banks. I now
recognize Dr. Adams from North Carolina for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Madam Chair, and congratulations on
your appointment. You know, as a retired educator of 40 years,
as a proud mom of a public-school principal, I just want to
echo the sentiments of my colleague, Ms. Wilson, and President
Biden last night. Clearly, we have got to do better by our
teachers.
Governor Polis, thank you for being here. Welcome back. In
2019 you announced a road map to build on college affordability
efforts in Colorado. As an avid supporter of programs like the
Sea Campus Program, and many of the emergency grant programs
spurned by Federal COVID relief dollars, I was excited to see
that one of the strategic goals within this road map is to
increase college completion.
As we both know, many students struggle with barriers to
completion, such as lack of access to childcare services, or
even struggling to access funding to cover tuition, or last-
minute emergencies. Governor, would you talk a little bit about
promising efforts institutions in Colorado have used to enhance
wraparound support services that help students thrive, both
academically and non-academically?
Governor Polis. Using American Rescue dollars, we recently,
last year, made it free to get a community college degree in
healthcare related fields. We all know the urgent needs of the
healthcare workforce. That includes EMT, phlebotomists, nurse
assistant, a number of others. When I went to Community College
of Aurora to announce that program, one young man shared his
experience with me.
He was training to become an EMT. Since we made it free,
and by the way it is a real free, meaning not only no tuition,
no textbooks, no fees, it is completely free. He said with the
money that I saved because this program is free, I was able to
fix my car to get to college. That is what we mean when we say
wraparound services.
It is about how do you get there. If you have a 3-year-old
kid, how does your kid have childcare so that you can attend
the program to better yourself and your earning livelihood? We
have to look at this expansively when we look at barriers. Yes,
cost is one of them, but it could be something as simple as
time of day, because you have to have a full-time job during
the day. You need an evening program.
You might need childcare. You might need transportation.
You might need assistance with food. We have a hunger free
campus's initiative because it is hard enough to learn on a
full stomach, how hard is it to learn on an empty stomach?
Those are some of the ideas that we have been able to use
American Rescue Act funds to pursue.
Ms. Adams. Great. Thank you very much. Madam Chair, I am
going to yield back the remainder of my time.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. You get a gold star.
Mr. Owens, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. Thank you very much. First of all, I
wanted to congratulate all of you. This has been well overdue.
This conversation. This is an area that we have had problems
for decades, and we are now seeing the results of that. I was
aware back in 2017, to see reports coming out of the Department
of Education, that 75 percent of the black boys in the State of
California could not pass standard reading and writing tests.
Now unfortunately, as terrible as that news is, it kind of
went over the head of most people. They were not surprised.
They just kind of figured that is the way it is. Well, now we
are seeing across the country the power of the unions that led
this demise of education and hopes in California was going
across our country.
I think it is timely that we are doing this. I think now,
this country, we are waking up. We do what we do best. We are
going to win, get our kids back, and give them the chance to
really believe in the American dream. I want to thank everyone
here for your background, for your expertise, and for educating
us and the American people. We are going to get this taken care
of.
Mr. Pulsipher, the costs of obtaining post-secondary
credentials has nearly tripled the rate of inflation over the
last two decades, forcing students to borrow for degrees
without any guarantee that it will see a financial return for
the time and money invested in the program.
In your testimony you mentioned institutions like students
and taxpayers, need to have skin in the game when it comes to
student loans, such as requiring them to reimburse students and
taxpayers for the share of the financial loss associated with
non-repayment. How would this such requirement change
incentives for colleges and universities when it comes to
degree programs they offer, and the price that they charge
students?
How would this improve the value proposition to post-
education, post-secondary education?
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you for that question, Representative
Owens. Fundamentally, I think if we believe that higher
education is intended to be a path to opportunity, and enable
the economic and mobility of the students it serves, there are
probably two parts to that question. First and foremost, are
institutions held accountable to providing and developing
programs that actually map to workforce opportunities?
That also, by the way, includes liberal education, whether
it is in humanities, or languages, et cetera. It is like you
still have to design those in a way that you are also intending
to increase the readiness of the graduates in those programs
for the work.
If the other part of that equation is what is the
investment we are actually making, asking the students to make
in that program. When you have institutions, or you are
expecting institutions, requiring institutions to have greater
skin in the game, they are going to--is going to force greater
accountability to designing and develop programs that are
relevant to the future work, and to also keep their costs in
check.
Right now, there is no check against the cost of delivering
education, such that you have seen as you pointed out, that the
cost of attending a completed degree has risen to more than
twice the rate of inflation for many decades now, since 1980.
If the average cost of requiring a bachelor's degree is nearing
$100,000.00 of the outcomes, the value, like how many jobs are
worth it to make that kind of investment?
We can certainly find ways by which we hold institutions to
greater accountability for both the cost of completing the
credential, and that those credentials are relevant to the
opportunity.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. Dr. Sullivan, I agree with the
workforce system must do a better job to get Americans off the
sidelines, equipping them with the skills needed to succeed in
today's economy. For more than two decades Utah has integrated
their workforce development system with other safety net
programs to provide unemployed workers a streamlined way to
access the support they need to secure jobs.
Can you discuss how strong regional, and statewide
coordination between workforce development and human services
providers can improve outcomes for the individuals they serve,
what are the updates on WIOA that are needed to lead more
states to pursue innovative approaches to workforce planning
and service delivery?
Mr. Sullivan. Sorry. Thank you for the question. I think
the integration between services that are provided, oftentimes
we provide the services to individuals that are not necessarily
under WIOA. They may fall under a separate portion of State
government, a separate policy act, but the coordination has to
be there. Not just simply the agencies working together, but
also data.
While we continue to provide the privacy that is necessary,
but also ensure that we are able to provide the benefits, the
wraparound services that you heard the Governor talk about a
few minutes ago. I think what we should focus on is to look
back to see what students are doing as a result of some of the
lack of coordination that is going on.
Today we may hear that enrollment is down in 2-year
colleges. The fact of the matter is enrollment is down in
credit enrolled programs. The traditional programs. Students
are showing up at our doorstep in long lines because they want
to be a part of a short-term workforce opportunity that
provides that value proposition that you just heard from
President Pulsipher.
The value proposition that gets them into the workforce in
a shortened period of time. We cannot sustain individuals for 4
years while they go through degree programs. They simply need
the education and skills to get into the workforce, and then
education becomes a little bit different than what we have seen
in the past. It becomes iterative--work and go to school, and
continue to grow that job path, perhaps through the
Baccalaureate degree, or even graduate degrees, but you must
start somewhere.
I think the most important part is to ensure that we get
people into the economy.
Mr. Owens. Thank you once again. I appreciate this
conversation. It is well overdue. Thank you so much.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Jayapal, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Madam Chair. I wanted to spend my
time just talking a little bit about Federal student aid, which
is designed to help underserved students, and also the role of
for-profit colleges. I feel that sadly for-profit colleges have
been more interested in using these funds to pay their pockets.
I have met personally with students, including from the Art
Institute of Seattle, whose for-profit colleges abruptly closed
before they could graduate. All of their tragic stories end in
the same way. High student debt, low-quality education, and
taxpayers ultimately footing the bill.
In contrast, owners of for-profit colleges emerge
unscathed, and proceed with business as usual. Of the nearly
1,100 colleges that closed between 2010 and 2020, an
overwhelming 86 percent of them were for-profits. When one of
these students tries to continue their education, they find
that 83 percent of their credits are ineligible to transfer
because of the school's poor accreditation and reputation.
I really think this undermines all of the good work that
many of you are doing on this panel to provide a quality
education. Let me ask you, and we can start with you Mr.
Pulsipher, is it a good use of taxpayer funds to invest in
these schools when you, yourself, are trying to make sure that
people really have faith in the educational system?
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you for that question, Representative
Jayapal. The reality is that access without completion, to your
point, and also completion without value, both of those are,
and can be a moral hazard. We have certainly seen that occur in
many sectors of higher education.
I think that emphasizes the point as even Governor Polis
said, we need innovation that expands access. We also need
innovation that drives and aligns the value of those credential
pathways to the opportunity. We also need that accountability
that is necessary, such that we know that the Federal dollars,
or even State level dollars, that they are actually going to
institutions that can delivery real equity and access, and
equity attainment because equity and access without attainment
quite frankly can be a scam.
Ms. Jayapal. Your answer would be no, it is not a good use
of taxpayer dollars to invest in those programs.
Mr. Pulsipher. The only thing I would caution is that it is
not necessarily exclusive to for profit institutions.
Ms. Jayapal. Understood.
Mr. Pulsipher. You have to look at all institutions and
programs initially.
Ms. Jayapal. Yes. I agree with you. I am just focusing on
for-profit because it has been such a huge, you know, it has
been such a huge abuse in my view. Governor Polis, did you want
to add anything to that?
Governor Polis. Yes. I think looking at accountability and
ROI, one step more than accountability across all modalities,
online and in person, all types of formation, which could be
public, non-profit, for-profit, you are stewards of taxpayer
money. You want to make sure that Congress wants to make sure
that you are making good investments that benefit people,
rather than to leave them in a worse place than they were. That
is across all modalities and forms of higher education.
Ms. Jayapal. Well, the administration has taken this very
seriously, and they have established a rule called the Borrower
Defense Rule, which streamlines student debt cancellation for
students who are defrauded by these schools, like those from
the Art Institute in my district.
Governor Polis, what are the consequences for students who
are defrauded by their school, or misled about their career
prospects?
Governor Polis. First of all, I think that is an excellent
step. These are students who, through no fault of their own,
because in your own investigating college that looks
accredited, you know, you cannot know all the details of
whether they are going to go out of business, and you did
accept Federal money to do that, so there's some assumption
there the Federal Government did some diligence.
I think canceling the debt on degrees that turned out not
to be worth anything, like ITT or colleges that went out of
business, is a fair and very reasonable thing to do. A better
thing to do would be diligence on the front end, to make sure
that students do not have to waste the time and money alongside
the Federal investment.
Many of them put their own money, and of course, they all
put their own time to make sure that the programs that are
supported are high quality across all modalities, across all
types of entities that offer them.
Ms. Jayapal. Yes. I completely agree with you, which is why
I am focusing on these for-profit colleges, and the work
upfront. The Federal Government has a responsibility to prevent
abuses of taxpayer dollars, which is why I have a bill called
Students Not Profits Act. Last Congress, the Build Back Better
Act proposed stopping for profits from receiving its Pell Grant
investments.
Governor Polis, how does limiting for profit access to
Federal student aid prevent students from being abused?
Governor Polis. Well, I think you are, of course, correct
in identifying that a higher percentage of the problems stem
from for profits. I would also say that we would have the same
problem with a poorly run public institution, or a poorly run
non-profit institution.
As the data shows a correlation, that is clear, but I think
making sure that all providers of education are accountable
across, whether it is online or in person, whether it's for-
profit, non-profit, or public, can help make sure that not only
is Congress better stewards of taxpayer money, but also that
students get better educational outcomes that improve the
quality of their lives.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Governor, and thanks to the panel.
Do I get a gold star, too, Madam Chair? I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. I now recognize Mr. Good for 5 minutes.
Mr. Good. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Just to followup on
what was just the question line that was just had, and my
friends on the other side just despise the term profit
generally, when it applies to a business, let alone education.
I have an issue with these colleges with billion, multi-billion
dollar endowments who are allowing college costs to soar
exponentially for non-academic additions of staff and
otherwise, I would call that for profit by the way.
That said, I am going to direct a couple of questions to
Mrs. Gentles. Thank you for being with us today. In your
testimony, you said it is related to what we were talking
about, costs. Over the last 20 years, K to 12 administrative
staff and public schools have increased by 88 percent, while
student enrollment only increased by 8 percent.
I doubt you would try to justify, but can you begin to
think of how that might be justified, and what the impact has
been from this--besides the exorbitant increase in costs, by
increasing administrative staff 88 percent?
Mrs. Gentles. Right. I mentioned that in my written
testimony, and I also mentioned that inflation adjusted public
school funding has risen by 152 percent. Teacher's salaries
have only increased by 8 percent since 1970, so we have been
hearing a lot about teacher's salaries. There seems to be an
obvious fix, and that is to redirect K-12 funding to fund
classroom activities and teachers, rather than administrative
bloat.
It is laid out very clearly that the districts have grown
in size, and they have hired more and more adults, and that
does not serve the needs of students, and it certainly does not
benefit teachers.
Mr. Good. No question about it. I have seen that across my
district, across my home State of Virginia, and across the
country where even where student population is decreasing, and
we are not directing resources appropriately to the classroom
where it makes an academic difference. Instead, we are
directing resources to non-academic positions, administrative
bloat, or worse.
Changing gears a little bit, but appallingly, and
inexcusably again, in Virginia, in Fairfax County, not far from
here, multiple schools are being investigated for unlawful
discrimination because of a failure to notify students about
their national merit scholar recognition even after some
college application deadlines has passed.
It is reported that a school official in Fairfax County
actually told a parent that they wanted to inform the students
in a low-key way about their recognition, their achievement, in
order not to hurt the feelings of those who did not achieve the
same level of academic achievement.
This district, also by the way, has spent $450,000.00 on
equity consultants for administrators, perhaps part of that 88
percent increase in costs for non-teaching staff. Can you
imagine any justification for that? Why we would not
appropriately want to recognize students who were performing
excellently so they can earn scholarships accordingly for that
achievement?
Mrs. Gentles. Well, there seems to be a movement afoot to
take away the idea of merit to no longer push children to
achieve, or to even differentiate children by skill levels, or
challenge them with different levels of courses that they can
choose from, and so this is all part of that initiative.
Another number to throw out for Fairfax County is that they
had 170 million dollars left in their ESSR funding as of last
fall that they had not spent. We have been hearing wondering
examples of uses of ESSR funds that districts in the State of
Colorado have invested in, and yet in Virginia, there was two
billion dollars overall that the districts had not yet spent
last fall of this ESSR funding.
Clearly, it was not used to reopen schools because Virginia
was, I think, like the sixth worst in the Nation, and my
children were kept out of schools because of that in Arlington
County, and suffered as a result. It was isolating. It caused
harm, emotionally, academically, mentally, and we are seeing
all kinds of problems in Arlington County where I live with
behavior, with drugs, and other issues.
Why were these ESSR funds spent? Why is there this focus on
keeping children down, rather than opening schools and
educating them?
Mr. Good. Well said. History will judge us harshly for how
we sacrificed children on the altar of poor political
decisions, harmful political decisions over the last 2 years.
We were told that we needed 25 billion dollars to safely open
schools. We gave the schools 200 billion. I use the term we
loosely, because I voted against all of that.
We gave the schools 200 billion when children were at no
risk of getting seriously ill from the virus. It is nice to
look around this room and not see the masks that we know never
worked, never prevented transmission of a virus. What we did to
the children, it has already been mentioned today. The lost
learning that they will never recover from, and there is no
plan to recover from that because we put teachers' unions ahead
of students throughout this whole process.
We continue to do it today. I have some questions for you
about teachers' unions, but thanks for your testimony, and
thanks for being here today, and I yield back, Madam
Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Mrs. McBath, I recognize you.
Oh. Okay. I am sorry. Ms. Hayes. You are on the list, I am
sorry. Yes. Ms. Hayes, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx and Ranking Member
Scott, for having this hearing. Thank you to all the witnesses
that are here today. There are so many important things to
consider in this committee. I can talk about the fact that any
good teacher knows and encourages parental involvement, because
they know that is key to student success.
I can talk about the fact that teachers support all
students, regardless of orientation or identity. I could
educate the people in this room about the fact that members of
teachers' unions are in fact teachers. I could talk a little
bit about the fact that education funding is not--it is
appropriated, but it is not spent on the first day of the
school year because many academic programs have to play
themselves out over the year.
Today, I will focus on my questions on the labor shortage
that was exacerbated by the COVID pandemic. I have to remind
everyone once again that we cannot consider any conversation
surrounding the crisis in education without the backdrop of a
global pandemic in which over 1 million people died.
About the fact that the children who are in our schools,
many of them lost family members, and that has impacted them.
These were unprecedented times, and we relied on the sciences,
and conducted ourselves accordingly as we got information. Back
to the labor shortage.
With teachers, healthcare workers, and childcare providers
opting for early retirement, our country was faced to force the
uncomfortable reality that we have long neglected to prioritize
our workforce development. With the U.S. economy seeing record
breaking job creation under the leadership of President Biden,
employers still have millions of job openings to fill.
In Connecticut, childcare workers dropped 28 percent from
2019 to 2020, and according to the National Center for
Education Statistics, more than half of the country's public
schools reported being understaffed at the start of the 2022-
2023 school year. 69 percent of public schools reported that
the primary challenge staffing classrooms was they had too few
teacher candidates applying for open positions.
In my State of Connecticut, we had over 1,000 openings
weeks before the school year began. In the 117th Congress, we
passed the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act of 2022,
that would have been a historic 78-billion-dollar investment in
training one million workers annually until 2028. The
legislation included my bill, the Youth Bill for the Future
Act, which invests 1 billion into youth build programs over 6
years and improves support for vulnerable people.
Mr. Sullivan, I thank you for your conversations about
workforce development--and I believe this is a bipartisan issue
that this committee should be able to find common ground on.
Governor Polis, you mentioned that Colorado offers free
community and technical colleges for students pursuing careers
in healthcare and is hoping to expand this to early childhood
education.
Can you describe some of the difficulties with recruiting
and retaining early childhood educators, and do you see youth
employment as a significant contributor to the workforce
shortage?
Governor Polis. Thank you. We are launching this fall free
universal preschool for every 4-year-old in our State. It was a
voter passed initiative that we put on the ballot and
championed, and in our State it got 67.7 percent of the vote,
which means it passed in red counties, in blue counties, rural
and urban, people of our State overwhelmingly said kids ought
to be able to go to preschool.
Now that is funded. Along with that, we need more early
childhood educators, and again, it is quality. It is not about
a place to park your child, of course the immediate workforce
benefit does help them. It is about preparing a child for the
skills they need to succeed in school and beyond. We are
looking to expand our Care For It Program funded from American
Rescue Act, which currently funds free community college
degrees in the healthcare fields to include free community
college degree for early childhood educators, also for para
professionals that play such a critical role of support in our
schools.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. I love that. As an educator I know
that college is not for everyone, so we have to make sure that
we have equal opportunities for a career in technical training
and workforce development for today's economy. Do you believe
that Colorado would benefit from increased funding in programs
like Youth Build, or these workforce development type
initiatives?
Governor Polis. Absolutely. To get to your second piece,
incorporating workforce training for high school students
especially that are not going on to college is an incredible
pathway to success for them, and very important for the
economy. That can be done for instance, by expanding
flexibility under WIOA, for in school training programs.
We have entire high schools like Colorado early college
high school, where every student graduates with an associate's
degree. We have other high schools where many students graduate
with certificates in certain skills to be ready to enter the
workforce after they graduate if they are not going on to
higher education.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. You made me lose my gold star. I
yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. We will try to figure out some way to
recognize others. Ms. McClain, you are recognized for 5
minutes. The members of the committee can tell you about the
report cards they got last time, and what a difference they
made. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I will try and
adhere to the gold star standard. I just want to caution
everyone on the term of the word free. We seem to throw that
word free out as if there is no one that pays the bill. I might
remind you someone is paying the bill, and free is a very
slippery slope because if it was free that would indicate that
no one pays the bill. Somebody is paying the bill.
With that said, thank you all for being here today. Mr.
Pulsipher, and I hope I am saying that right, I want to start
with you. Is it your testimony you mentioned in December 2022,
that the Government Accountability Office issued a report
showing that roughly half of student aid offer letters
calculated students out of pocket costs by factoring in loans.
This means that students and families could be misled into
believing that certain forms of student aid do not have to be
paid back. Last Congress I introduced the College Cost
Transparency Act, and Student Protection Act, which I will be
reintroducing this Congress.
I think transparency and honesty, and knowing what you are
getting into is critical for the student, as well as the
parent, as well as the colleges. My question is this. Do you
believe colleges should be required to inform students of
financing options that include personal resources, Federal
student loans, or work study and private plus loans?
In addition to ensuring financial aid offers are
transparent, that one other--that is question No. 1. Then I
would like to hear your thoughts on what other ways can
Congress really simplify the college shopping process?
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you for that question, Representative
McClain. What we have certainly learned from our own
responsible borrowing initiative is that the more you give
complete understanding, or the more you give complete
transparency to the full cost of attending or completing your
program, that individuals make better choices about how they
fund that program.
Mrs. McClain. Agreed.
Mr. Pulsipher. That includes, by the way, the total cost of
financing that through Federal aid and Federal loans, and so
they need to understand that if in fact the total cost of what
you are intending that it is inclusive of not just tuition,
books and fees, but that also includes room and board, and
other student life fees, or anything else like that.
I think what you would find if you inspected the increased
cost of attendance over time, that tuition, net tuition
remained relatively flat, but all these other costs started
going up substantially, and the students have to pay for that.
Mrs. McClain. Do you see a downside in being transparent
with all those costs?
Mr. Pulsipher. A downside to the institutions maybe,
because in fact you are going to put at risk some of the
revenue dollars that they are currently achieving, meaning that
there is no downside ultimately for the student. Like if you
keep the focus on the student.
Mrs. McClain. Right. Which is why the institution is there
to educate the student, correct?
Mr. Pulsipher. I think it is absolutely true. You heard
that in my testimony. If everything we could do, we would
actually put the student at the center of higher education.
Mrs. McClain. Amen to that.
Mr. Pulsipher. For them, that we are trying to deliver the
value.
Mrs. McClain. I do not mean to be rude, but in the interest
of time, do you know any other ways, or suggestions that
Congress can simplify the college shopping?
Mr. Pulsipher. Yes. There is certainly one presumption you
can have, even if students do not take out Federal aid, that
virtually all of them apply for FAFSA, or they fill out the
FAFSA, such that in that process itself there are means and
mechanisms by which you could introduce the students an
understanding of what is actually the cost and the return on
that investment you were going to make by choosing that program
at that institution, and what alternative recommendations might
there be that actually have a higher value.
Each of us experiences, in an online shopping world,
recommendations, yes.
Mrs. McClain. Yes. Thank you for that. I think it is
interesting that you talked about return on investment, because
that almost sounds like you are getting value for your dollar,
and you are kind of getting into that profit margin, which is
scary.
My second is in your testimony you noticed that colleges
over charge post-graduate students more than the actual costs
of that degree because there is no cap on borrowing. Would you
agree colleges should be more transparent, and make it clear to
potential post-grad students that they will be overcharged for
these degrees? What limits, if any, should Congress place on
borrowing at the graduate level?
Mr. Pulsipher. Again, if we start with the assumption that
the students are being asked to make an investment in their
education so they can change their life for the better, the
more information they have about the total cost of completing
that, and the return that they are going to get for that
investment, they are going to make better choices today.
Institutions are not held accountable because of the unlimited
amount that can be borrowed in grad plus loans.
We certainly have seen through the studies, including that
which is advanced by the Wall Street Journal, that many of
those programs do not actually fundamentally deliver any
economic return, and yet the costs are exorbitantly high.
Mrs. McClain. Hence the return on investment.
Mr. Pulsipher. That is right. For the student.
Mrs. McClain. With that, I yield back. Thank you, sir.
Thank you all.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. McClain. Ms. Leger
Fernandez, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much, Chairwoman Foxx and
Ranking Member Scott. Governor Polis, we did not serve
together, but we are neighbors. You are our Vecinos up there in
Colorado, and we share many things between Colorado and New
Mexico. I will say our green chili is better than your green
chili. I know you are going to agree on that.
The issue of the early childhood education by a vote of 70
to 30, New Mexico has not targeted to put more resources into
our earliest--you know, the babies right? That is where we need
to invest, because we know that has such an amazing return.
Yes, it is an investment. The return though, is about allowing
a child to realize their full potential, and that is what
education is supposed to be about.
Education is what we use to make sure we have a democracy.
Education is what we use to make sure that our economy thrives,
and so I really do believe that we need to pay teachers what
they deserve, because as we increase pay in New Mexico, we saw
that a teacher gap dropped. It makes sense, right? In a tight
labor market, you need to pay teachers what they have earned
and deserve.
I wanted to talk to you a little bit about college
affordability. I am going to be reintroducing former
Congressman Levin's America's College Promise Act. Under the
bill the Federal Government would partner with states at a 75/
25 percent share to provide tuition free community college to
all students, for whatever they want to study, whether it be a
nurse, whether they want to get some of their degrees and
training that they need to be welders, to know how to be an
electrician, the wide range of things, right?
We showed last year we made college free in New Mexico.
What happened? Enrollment went up, but that is what happens
when you provide the means and opportunity. Can you share how
you think Colorado's and New Mexico's effort to address college
affordability could be enhanced with that Federal State
partnership that I described in the American's College Promise?
Governor Polis. Yes. There is no question that reducing the
cost of higher education promotes equity, improves access, and
affordability, which were many of the barriers. When we,
through the Care Forward Program, with the American Rescue Act
funds, made training in many of the healthcare related fields,
phlebotomy, nurse assistant, EMT free, it increased
participation in these programs by about a third.
We now have 1,000 people in our workforce today filling key
roles in healthcare because they were able to access the
tuition for free. To tell you in the first part of your
comment, and I/we admire New Mexico's investment in early
childhood education, we are following along in Colorado as
well.
Not having childcare for your kid can also be a barrier to
education, so when you look at how to make sure that a young
mom can be able to go to school, to be able to get the skills
she needs to earn a living, if she has a 2-year old, or a 4-
year old at home, it is important that we have a real life
solution that meets their needs as well.
When you look at all of these barriers that can occur,
break them down, and at the same time making sure that both the
State and Federal Governments, as well as the individuals
getting the educational learner, are getting the return on
investment for their time and money, meaning increased earning
potential, meaning the ability to find a job, meaning the
abilities to support themselves and their family.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Governor Polis. We have had
a lot of conversation today about apprenticeships. We have seen
that Democrats have been incredibly supportive of
apprenticeships. I think that was one of the first bills that
we reported to the floor of the House.
I remember it was one of the first bills that I got to
stand up and say, you know, pass, I am in favor of this. It
passed out of the House. According to the Department of Labor,
93 percent of apprentices complete their program, and then earn
on average $77,000.00 a year.
We heard earlier the Ranking Member talk about the $1.44
return that those who participate in these. You have registered
for an apprenticeship program in your State. Tell us how that
works, and how that could be a model as we move forward on
apprenticeships. I tell you, I am really--this is important for
me because we are a State in transition.
Governor Polis. Yes. We embrace all of the above.
Registered apprenticeships, apprenticeships are earned while
you learn models, including through career wise model, working
with high schoolers. There are many people that a barrier to
getting the skills they need is they cannot leave their day
job.
They have to work to support themselves, so how can we
incorporate getting the educational skills they need to earn a
better living into the time they spend at work.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Governor Polis, and I yield
back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. Ms. Miller, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Chairwoman Fox. Governor Polis,
emails reveal that teachers in Colorado schools were discussing
a left-wing political ideology called gender identity with
elementary school students. Governor Polis, do you think it is
appropriate for an adult teacher to talk to an 8-year old girl
about changing her gender?
Governor Polis. I have not seen those emails. Please share
them with the school district. You are also welcome to share
them with us. These are not part of our State standards or
curriculum around health, or around social studies.
Mrs. Miller. Well, I appreciate that you were saying that
you care about involving parents and protecting the children,
but Governor we are talking about five, six and 7 year old
children, and we would like to know do you think it is
appropriate for adults to be talking to them about sexual
orientation and gender transitioning behind their parents back?
We do know this happened in Larimer County Laurel
Elementary School. We have emails.
Governor Polis. What is important is that the teachers, the
principals, meet the needs of all learners, all students, no
matter who they are, no matter how they identify.
They need to learn math, reading and writing, and we need
to involve the parents in making sure the kids are able to get
the education they need no matter what their faith is, no
matter what their gender is, or no matter any of the other
great aspects of diversity that make our country a stronger
place.
Mrs. Miller. You think it is appropriate? You have not
answered the question yet. I want to know is it appropriate for
adults to talk to an 8-year-old about sex and gender without
parents' knowledge?
Governor Polis. Well, again, I do not know the answer that
you are referring to, but obviously I have a third grader, and
a fifth grader, and their classmates know that they have two
dads, and it has never been a problem. Obviously, if parents
want to have discussions with other kids about what they think
or do not think about having two dads, they are welcome to.
Mrs. Miller. Well, this is a parent sir, this is adult
teachers having these discussions with very young children,
five, six, 7-year-old children behind their parents' back. We
want to know if you think it is appropriate.
Governor Polis. Well, I do not know the answer you are
referring to. I am sure you will be able to provide us with the
information, but I can assure you that it is not part of our
State standards. It is certainly not part of our age-
appropriate health standards, nor is it a part of our social
studies standards to have that as part of the curriculum at
that age.
Mrs. Miller. Can you see why parents are upset that adult
teachers are talking to their 8-year-old children about sexual
orientation and transitioning?
Governor Polis. Well, again, I do not know the answer that
you are referring to, but schools need to serve all learners,
and that means kids with two dads, kids with two moms, kids who
were raised by their grandparents, kids who identify in
different ways. No matter how they identify, or what background
they come from, the schools are there to teach them reading,
writing and math, and make sure that they can get the basics,
so they can succeed in life.
Mrs. Miller. Yes. We want to protect our children, and
these are very young children that adults have been having
discussions with behind parents' backs about sexual
orientation, and gender transitioning, and we just want to know
is it appropriate or not appropriate?
Governor Polis. Again, if there is a particular incident
that occurred in my State that you can share that with me, and
we will be happy to share that with the school district,
because I am not aware of the incident you are referring to.
Again, it is not part of the standards to do that.
Again, schools have to deal with every variety of diversity
that society has, and keep the focus on learning.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, sir. Since day one, the Biden
administration has been pushing puberty blockers, and surgical
castration on young children, while cutting parents out. In
conjunction with teachers' unions, Biden is forcing woke
political ideology in a school curriculum, while ignoring the
core subjects of reading, writing and arithmetic.
Just yesterday, sadly, reports showed that 23 schools in
Baltimore have zero students proficient in math. Zero. This is
all fine to the Biden administration, as long as their children
learn about woke politics, and something called gender
identity. Parents are outraged, and this indoctrination of our
young children must stop. We want our children to be educated
and smart. Thank you and I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Miller. Mrs. McBath, you
are recognized now.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you so much Chairwoman, and I just have
to say I just really take offense to the continued use of
wokeism referring to the democratic party. Mr. Pulsipher, thank
you so much for being here today. It is good to see you.
Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx, and Ranking Member Scott. Thank
you to our guests that are here today, who join us to discuss
this very critically important issues, and their impact on
students and families across the country.
As I have said to this committee before, this coming week
is an incredibly difficult week for me and many, many others,
as so many are from the communities, families, and classrooms
that have been torn apart by the crisis of rampant gun violence
in our country.
Next week I continue to mourn, as we mark the fifth
anniversary of the senseless murder of 17 students and their
teachers at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland,
Florida. Next week I will also continue to mourn and
commemorate what should have been my own son's 28th birthday on
February 16.
For me and those who remain behind, the pain of having to
bury a child, or losing a loved one never, ever truly goes
away. You carry it with you always deep in your soul, but you
just learn to manage it.
It is a pain that I would never wish on anyone here, but
that possibility is a reality that students and their parents
are facing every single day, as they go to school in the
morning, or drop their kids off at the bus stop, before heading
off to work.
From recurring lockdown drills to purchasing bulletproof
backpacks for children still learning to read and write,
students, teachers, and parents today are asked to endure the
mental hardships and lasting trauma that they never had to face
before school shootings began occurring at the terrifying
frequency that our Nation sees today.
It is a preventable crisis that we cannot afford to ignore
any longer, and it is critical that more steps be taken to
address the epidemic of gun violence and school shootings that
continue to plague our country. I applaud the important steps
that we took to make schools safer through the bipartisan Safer
Communities Act, but we can, and we must do more.
Every day that we refuse to enact the policies necessary to
curb this epidemic, we allow more and more families to be torn
apart and permanently scarred. We tell more and more students
and parents and teachers, that their leaders and elected
officials are comfortable letting them bear the emotional
burden of losing a loved one or being maimed and killed in a
moment's notice.
That is the reality that I, and so many families live every
single day, and it is one that we must not allow to become the
new normal for students, teachers, and families today.
My question is for Governor Polis. Governor Polis, can you
briefly talk about why school climate and atmosphere, I mean is
such an important factor in our children's educational
outcomes, and what the elements of an effective school climate
program look like?
Governor Polis. We appreciate the bipartisan bill last year
around improving gun safety, including funding for schools to
implement common sense measures. We have added additional State
resources around hardening, including single exit points and
additional barriers, but that is too late in the process to
have a discussion, as you have indicated.
There are a lot of forms of school violence. Obviously, the
most extreme form we have seen is guns. We have also seen
knives, fistfights, and many other things. What you need is to
make sure you have a positive school culture that supports all
learners where everybody feels valued. A part of that is making
sure kids have access to the mental health resources they need
to get help when they need it.
They know who to talk to through the IMATTERS Program
funded through Opera funds kids in Colorado can get six free
counseling sessions privately when they need to. The
information is posted up in the schools about how to do that
and many school districts have invested in additional
counseling to better support kids that have behavioral health
needs to make sure before they lash out or take it out on
others or themselves are able to get the help that the need.
Mrs. McBath. In response to your answer, what can we, as
members of this body, do to prevent this culture, this really
violent culture from furthering and just wreaking havoc on our
schools?
Governor Polis. I think really focusing on positive school
culture and school environment, having site leaders, parents,
educators involved, making sure that kids feel supported in
schools, that their needs are met. They know who to go to if
they see something and that the right intervention can occur
promptly.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. I now recognize Mr.
Moran for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moran. Mrs. Gentles, thank you for being here today. I
am going to direct my questions to you for just a few moments.
You mentioned earlier the Parents' Bill of Rights that likely
is going to come through this Committee this year. I want to
read a statement to you and see if you would agree with this
statement.
``The parental right to guide one's child intellectually
and religiously is a most substantial part of the liberty and
freedom of the parent.'' Would you agree with that?
Mrs. Gentles. I would agree with that.
Mr. Moran. This statement, as you likely know, was made in
a 1925 U.S. Supreme Court case by the name of Pierce v. The
Society of Sisters. There was a unanimous decision by the
Supreme Court in 1925 to strike down the 1922 Oregon law that
attempted to compel elementary school children to attend public
schools to the exclusion of other choices.
In doing so, the Court, when it struck down this law said
that it ``Unreasonably interferes with the liberty of parents
and guardians to direct the upbringing and education of
children under their control.'' Would you agree also with that
determination and finding?
Mrs. Gentles. I would agree with that. I believe they also
said that children were not mere creatures of the State and I
certainly agree with that.
Mr. Moran. That is right. Like you, I agree with these
statements and agree with that precedent unanimously held by
the Supreme Court almost a hundred years ago as a father of
four school-aged children. You mentioned that you have two
children. I have double that amount, but I have been in both
Gifted and Talented meetings and also Art meetings.
I proudly serve my community by helping with an education
foundation and hoping to start one for our public school system
and I proudly send my kids to a public school system, the same
one that I graduated from. I recognize that parents need
choices, and every child is different and every decision for
every child must be made by those parents in their education.
I wonder if you could comment about what you believe the
role of this Committee should be and what we could do to
preserve the parents' rights to guide the education of their
children in this Nation.
Mrs. Gentles. I think redirecting the K-12 education system
to prioritize academic instruction is a big role. That is what
parents want. They want schools to focus on academic
instruction. They want Math and Reading to be at the center of
what the child is presented at the school. They want academics,
not activism and so there are numerous steps that you can take
to do that. I think holding school districts accountable for
what they did during the COVID era, with closures that harmed
children and how they spent the emergency funding, is it going
to address learning loss. That is going to meet the needs of
parents.
Then reinforcing Federal--existing Federal laws, PPRA, for
making sure that parents know what their rights are under
existing Federal law will be an important message that you can
send from this Committee.
Mr. Moran. Likewise, I would pose a similar question with
respect to your advice to local school districts as they seek
to partner with parents to be at the center of educational
decisions for their local school districts. What advice would
you give to be good partners with the parents at the local
level?
Mrs. Gentles. Well, the Federal Government did give them
advice and said that parents needed to be consulted as part of
the Federal funding and districts weren't even able to comply
with that in many areas. There just needs to be a reckoning
with what is become of the relationship between school
districts and parents. The parents going to the school board
meetings and speaking up that was very courageous in a time
when things had become quite adversarial. It has not resulted
in a change in that relationship. The school districts need to
recognize that parental involvement is key to student success.
If that district wants to achieve what it is set out to do,
which is educate children, it has to involve the parents in a
non-confrontational in inclusive way.
Mr. Moran. Switching gears one moment for a final question.
You are not a medical doctor, but in your testimony, you
highlighted that the education establishment's embrace of so-
called gender affirming care is at odds with steps being taken
in other countries to reduce or eliminate such interventions.
Why are these practices so harmful and why is American medicine
so out of step with other countries' approaches in this regard.
Mrs. Gentles. Well, fortunately the State of Florida and
specifically their Board of Medicine has taken a look at the
evidence. They have done a systematic review of evidence and
concluded that what is called gender affirming care is actually
not helpful and, in fact, harmful to the often emotional
vulnerable youth who are drawn into this system.
European nations are ahead of us in this process. Sweden's
done a systematic review. The United Kingdom has as well, and
the UK shut down their pediatric gender clinic as a result of
the review, recognizing that it is harmful.
Mr. Moran. Thank you for your answer today and thank you
for your efforts on behalf of our children. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Moran. Mr. Bowman, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. Mrs. Gentles,
you mentioned the State of Florida in some of your remarks just
then. Do you support the State of Florida's decision to remove
AP African American History from its curriculum?
Mrs. Gentles. That is not something that I have looked into
and I do not think, from a Federal perspective, that Congress
needs to get involved in what a State should or should not
teach. I am not sure if that is the role--that is not the role
of the Federal Government.
Mr. Bowman. I am asking you your opinion. Do you support
the teaching of African American History?
Mrs. Gentles. Absolutely, I support the teaching of African
American History. Fourth grade Social Studies in Virginia has a
real emphasis for that.
Mr. Bowman. You, also--I am sorry. I am reclaiming my time.
Do you support the teaching of Latino History?
Mrs. Gentles. For sure, yes.
Mr. Bowman. You support the teaching of all history,
multicultural history in every American school, you support
that.
Mrs. Gentles. Right. We need to have a robust and full
history standards and lessons and curriculum so that all topics
are addressed.
Mr. Bowman. Do you support the teaching of Queer and Gender
Studies in public schools?
Mrs. Gentles. I am not sure what you mean when you say
Queer and Gender Studies. That does not sound like something
that would be in elementary level, for example, appropriate
topic.
Mr. Bowman. What about middle school and high school?
Mrs. Gentles. Yes, I am not sure what you are saying when
you are saying Queer and Gender Studies.
Mr. Bowman. I am a former educator. I worked in education
for 20 years. I was a middle school principal for ten and a
half years and I had students who identified as gay or lesbian
or queer, and it was very important for them to feel safe and
comfortable and seen and heard and recognized in our school
curriculum and that helped them to have higher levels of self-
esteem, self-worth, and it helped them to thrive academically,
in my school. I am just wondering what your thoughts are about
that. Do you support the teaching and supporting of Queer and
Gender Studies in schools?
Mrs. Gentles. I honestly am not familiar with a curriculum
or a class that would be an appropriate class, Queer and
Gender.
Mr. Bowman. What about authors and books? There are many
books who are authored by authors who identify as Queer. Many
of these books in Florida have been taken off of bookshelves,
along with many other books. Do you support the removal of
classroom libraries in Florida or in public schools across the
country?
Mrs. Gentles. Well, I am pretty contrary by nature, so when
books like To Kill a Mocking Bird and other books were being
brought up as controversial and I went out and ordered them to
make sure that my daughters were not kept from reading them in
their public schools. When you are talking about schools that
specifically direct children to sex acts, sex Apps, or lay
out----
Mr. Bowman. How many schools--resuming my time. I am sorry.
How many schools have been identified as teaching this so-
called or providing this so-called woken indoctrination agenda,
how many schools?
Mrs. Gentles. There are examples----
Mr. Bowman. Have you identified a number of schools that
are so-called implementing a woke indoctrination agenda; is
there a number?
Mrs. Gentles. No. That might be something that the
Committee could----
Mr. Bowman. There is no number.
Mrs. Gentles [continuing]. Submit a report on, but there is
anecdotal evidence.
Mr. Bowman. In your testimony you continued to make general
statements about schools this, parents' that, teachers this,
but you cannot tell me a number right now of schools that are
implementing this sort of curriculum. Let me just reclaim my
time.
In your testimony, you drew a contrast between balanced
literacy and phonics. Can you talk to me about that contrast?
Mrs. Gentles. Yes. Thank you for that question. Balance
literacy refers to what is often called ``queuing,'' which is a
debunked approach to teaching reading that is taught students
to guess.
Mr. Bowman. What is ``queuing''?
Mrs. Gentles. It teaches children to memorize words to
guess the sentence based on the context. They look at pictures
and they guess and skip over words that they are not familiar
with. The contrast of that is phonics instructions, which helps
children spell out and break down the building blocks----
Mr. Bowman. Okay. Let me just reclaim my time. As I
mentioned, I taught in public schools for 20 years. I was an
elementary school teacher. Phonics is a major component of
balanced literacy. Balanced literacy includes the teaching of
reading, writing, listening, and speaking and it also includes
the teaching of phonics instruction. That is why it is called
balanced. It is not separate from phonics instruction. Phonics
instruction is supposed to be part of balanced literacy. It is
important for you to know that. It is important for everyone on
this panel to know that.
I just have a few more questions, while I do not have much
time left, but I would like to go to Governor Polis. Can you
talk a little bit about how to build a positive school culture?
Governor Polis. In 10 seconds? Wow. Well, it really
includes partnership with parents, first and foremost. We have
heard this from both sides of the aisle. It needs to be
implemented. In fact, great site leadership is so important and
then bringing educators along with that vision for the school,
including aligning curriculum to standards.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you and I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Governor, you get a gold star.
Mr. Williams, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Madame Chairman. Governor, as the
executive of a significant State, I really admire you for your
investment here and your patience in dealing with all of these
things. My wife is a native of Colorado from Fort Carson. There
only briefly before her father was deployed to Vietnam. Just a
little biographical comment is that my wife and I both
homeschooled our children, though we are the product of
excellent public education and have had significant further
education, that was the best choice for us.
Sir, I commend you. You have been a consistent champion for
school choice, and I very much applaud everything that you have
done for the children of Colorado to ensure that a child's zip
code is not the determinate factor of their quality of
education.
I am personally saddened that school choice has become more
partisan in recent years, although it looks like it is making a
comeback. I am excited about that, but it really should not be
a partisan issue. School choice is about giving every child a
chance to succeed in life no matter their circumstances.
I did read your testimony in case you think all is lost or
we do not pay attention. You say we cannot rely on the old ways
of doing things. I just invite your comment, sir. Can you
explain briefly for this Committee why you support school
choice, and can you offer advice on how we, as Republican and
Democrat, can come together on this issue. You have done this
successfully, and I would like to learn.
Governor Polis. I will give you an example of the way in
Colorado Democrats and Republicans came together on school
choice. We are home to over 400,000 Military families like the
family your wife was born into. Many people get stationed to
Colorado, including people with young kids at a different time
of year than the traditional open enrollment season and so many
of them were effectively excluded from the open enrollment
process, had to enroll in their neighborhood school and many
enrollments in their neighborhood school. That is a fine
choice.
However, what we did through the State legislature, and I
was able to sign the bill to do it, is we created a special
open enrollment period, a different timeline for Military
families that are assigned to Colorado so that they can have
their school of choice for their child, the space permitting,
of course.
We have open enrollment within school districts and across
school districts in Colorado. We also try to learn from schools
that have a lot of demand and therefore need to have lotteries.
We are saying what are they doing well, how do we expand or
replicate that? Some of them are district schools, some of them
are charter schools. It is not about the model of the school.
It is about the quality, and it is about the educational
outcomes.
Finally, I would point out that what is good for one kid is
not necessarily good for another. I have two kids. Many on this
Committee have different kids and you know that many kids have
different learning styles. Some might want a hands-on outdoor
experiential add model. Some might want a more rigorous college
prep model. Some might benefit from additional vocational or
hands-on ways of learning. While every possible model is not
necessarily available to every kid, we want to make sure that
more kids across our State can access the education that works
for them.
Mr. Williams. If I may, just to followup, the model that
has been talked about from a governance standpoint, governing
standpoint, and because you obviously have a very large
responsibility in the education in your State, I have seen that
the resources should follow the child, instead of the
institution in funding a child's education as a focus rather
than a system.
A lot of things you mentioned really talk about enrollment
in the public schools with some flexibility for charter. I
think back to our own experience of extending that to parochial
schools to homeschooling, which was the right choice for our
family. Do you have any thoughts or suggestions along those
lines?
Governor Polis. We do have many school districts and
charter schools that partner with and support homeschooling
families. I think what is missing from some of these models
like the Arizona model that has been touted on this panel, is
the quality and accountability. How do we know it is working if
we do not know there is student achievement? How do we make
sure that if there are taxpayer resources being used, that
there is quality? There needs to be some way of doing that,
some structure for doing that, some accountability for doing
that, some transparency into that, because these are public
funds.
Certainly, we want to make sure that we can innovate with
homeschools, with other kinds of schools to make sure that as
long as they are willing to have the transparency that
accompanies public funds there's a way to incorporate the
innovation they bring.
Mr. Williams. Respectfully, just for the last 10 seconds,
we homeschooled in four different jurisdictions, Washington
State, briefly in Florida, New York State, and New York City,
which, of course, is its own. Our son is a senior at Georgia
Tech in Aerospace Engineering, so homeschooling did work in our
case. Thank you for your comments, sir.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. Mrvan, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx. I would like to
thank the panel for being here today. Governor Polis, I am from
Indiana, northwest Indiana, and my daughter is a sophomore and
she went through the Explore, Engage, Experience Grant and came
home and said she wants to be a lawyer so she could afford what
she likes. I bring that up because that experience that you
mentioned is something that makes them think about what they
want to do when they grow up and I appreciate you mentioning
that from being from the State of Indiana.
Very quickly, realizing the key to successful economic
development is an educated workforce, very often in the most
vulnerable populations becomes challenges and hurdles, such as
childcare, such as transportation, such as dependent care, and
housing. They are significant barriers or challenges to
employment.
However, these services provided by Workforce Innovation
and Opportunity Act, the WIOA, as we know it, allow the workers
to receive job training and create paths of their choosing
toward economic stability. My question to you is what impacts
do these services have on training programs completion and
employer retention.
Governor Polis. Yes. The flexibility within WIOA to be able
to support these wraparound services is critical. To be clear,
it is not transportation for the sake of transportation. It is
not childcare for the sake of childcare. It is directly related
to the ability to become part of the workforce.
We traditionally focused the money on the skills piece and
obviously that is a relevant piece, the need of the skills. If
you have the skills, but your reality is you are the caregiver
for a child during the day hours where you want to be working
or you do not have a car and there is not a bus route to get to
work, how can we be flexible enough with WIOA where we can make
sure that person is able to work and support themselves and
address the barriers that they have in their own life.
Mr. Mrvan. I was a former Township Trustee, to get to the
point, we managed the most vulnerable populations. In order to
give them a lift up, we were able to provide transportation
through a bus service. We were able to provide childcare, so I
commend you.
One of my questions that I think is a key component is how
in education did you utilize the American Rescue Plan dollars
to most maximize what was going on in education?
Governor Polis. Lots of different ways. The ESSER and the
GEER funds are two of those. I would say across the State,
making sure that we could reduce and address the learning loss
a lot of this was decentralized in districts and schools were
able to innovate as they should. Many of them included extended
learning days, additional hours of support. We are looking at
directing additional State dollars to afterschool Math support
as an example for kids who are struggling in Math.
Free summer clinics--many school districts in the past
either had to charge for or had very limited ability to offer
free slots for academic tutoring in the summer. Many districts
leaned into that last summer and are planning the same for this
summer to help make sure that students are caught up for
success. Supporting innovative programs through GEAR that broke
down barriers between community colleges, school districts, and
workforce. An example, in the San Louis Valley a number of
school districts worked with out-of-State college in the area
to provide transferable and aligned dual and concurrent
enrollment credit in many of the rural districts that surround
the college.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you. Dr. Sullivan, you talked about
workforce development and engagement in community college, and
short-term college programs that allow entrance into the
workforce. Can you just share with me some success stories of
industry in those colleges and those programs working together
in order to have the outcomes of people getting into the
workforce quickly?
Dr. Sullivan. Sure. Great example, first of all, commend
the State of Indiana for the Ivy Tech. Great work that is going
on there. One of the Nation's best community and technical
college systems, so I know you have a great deal to be proud
of.
Mr. Mrvan. I will share that with them. Thank you.
Dr. Sullivan. Thank you. Just as a broad statement, I know
many of you are aware of the broadband initiatives that are
going on around this country trying to establish broadband for
the people of this country. Someone has to lay that broadband.
Someone has to lay the fiber. We are in the midst of what has
been now about a 10-week process of developing curriculum of
working with folks within the industry to identify the skills
needed and to help those individuals to become certified.
Companies like right there--Louisiana Delta Community College
in the northeast part of the State who is working with Ethridge
Pipeline and Conduit.
These folks are coming onto the campus, bringing equipment,
bringing expertise to teach individuals. We are forecasting
about 2,000 graduates by the end of this current year within
the broadband space to help ensure that we have the people
necessary. That we are not asking folks from Indiana to come to
Louisiana to install fiber, but instead, that we are able to do
that work ourselves.
Mr. Mrvan. Thank you, Dr. Sullivan. I was proud to vote for
the infrastructure bill that allowed for that fiber to be laid,
which created jobs to open the gates for education. I thank you
very much for all your participation today. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Mrvan. Ms. Houchin, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you, Madame Chairwoman. I am really glad
to talk about this subject matter today. I am glad that our
first Full Committee hearing is focused on such an important
issue or such important issues. Dr. Foxx said in her opening
remarks, this could not be more rewarding work than looking out
for the interest of students.
Mrs. Gentles, my first question is for you. I really
appreciated your written testimony. I took particular interest
in your discussion of literacy. My son is dyslexic. May of our
colleagues have children with dyslexia or other reading
disabilities, so I have worked on this issue very closely in
the State of Indiana as a legislator.
You note the problematic use of balance literacy. I
appreciate your mention of the book by Emily Hanford told a
story how teaching kids to read went so wrong and I have
experienced that first-hand, both as a mom and a legislator. We
are making progress toward a more phonics-based instruction. I
am really glad of that, but I do know first-hand how hard it is
to turn the bureaucratic barge.
In the State of Indiana, we fought the Department of
Education to implement a screening for students with dyslexia
and implementing reading specialists in the schools who have an
understanding of the issue and how to teach kids to read.
We have seen maybe a failure of what I would call the
education industrial complex in this space. Reading scores are
not just keeping pace. They are declining and they have since
we changed our methodology. What more can we be doing at the
Federal level to encourage this transition to phonics-based
instruction and bridge the gap, particularly in the higher
education space.
Mrs. Gentles. Right. You mentioned reading scores going
down. Eighth grade Math scores got a lot of attention from me,
but it should be noted that a third of fourth graders are below
basic in Reading and 30 percent of eighth graders are below
basic. Below basic is appalling and so keeping attention to
where those scores are dropping, but then shining a light on
where they went up. Where are the success stories? Colorado is
one of them when it comes to Reading and ensuring that this
transition over to a more appropriate approach is happening in
Mississippi is a great success story.
I think here at the Committee you can shine the light,
bring the leaders and the people who have implemented reading
instruction and approaches to setting curriculum standards at
the State level and implementing them at the district level
here so that people can know those models and follow them.
Ms. Houchin. That is great. I would like to know, when we
are talking about learning losses, as a parent of a child with
an IEP, COVID, learning losses, all students were impacted, but
no more than studies with disabilities on IEPs. We did not have
specialized training to teach our children. I am not trained in
the methodologies that help students with dyslexia, so that is
something that will continue to have to strive to overcome.
I do, Madame Chair, I would like to highlight that the
students that have dyslexia and the Dyslexia Institute of
Indiana reached out to me regarding strong support for a
phonics-based approach and I would like to submit a brief
statement to the record by the Dyslexia Institute of Indiana
that they provided to my office.
Chairwoman Foxx. Without objection.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you.
[The information of Ms. Houchin follows:]

Statement for the Record by the Dyslexia Institute of Indiana

``The Dyslexia Institute of Indiana is a strong proponent for using
a structured literacy approach for reading that aligns with the Science
of Reading. In the 34 years of our existence, we have had success
teaching students to read and spell using the Orton-Gillingham approach
to phonics and phonics based skills. This multisensory approach uses
direct and explicit instruction to help students retain reading skills,
which in turn brings them closer to automaticity and fluency. This
approach is appropriate for all students who are learning to read and
not just dyslexic students.''--Dyslexia Institute of Indiana
______

Ms. Houchin. A couple of things. I want to switch to Mr.
Sullivan. I did have the opportunity to visit with Ivy Tech
yesterday. Certainly, we are very proud of their presence in
southern Indiana in my district. One of the things we talk
about is the record number of job openings and the lower
workforce participation rate and what we can do to increase
that.
Ivy Tech is working on increasing and drilling down on what
high-skilled certifications are necessary so that high-value,
industry-based certification. What is the single greatest
barrier, in your opinion, to those types of credentials?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, thank you for the question. First of
all, I would say to you they are high-cost programs, which is
one of the key areas. They are also programs that are difficult
to identify faculty for because they are typically the more
skilled individuals and so there are a number of challenges,
but I want to be really clear of what you just said.
Information is powerful. If you have the ability to point out a
sector that is a growth sector in Louisiana, as an example, the
cyber security space is a growth area, as I am sure it is in
many states around the union.
As we begin to develop those programs, as we deliver those
programs to ensure we have the workforce there, I will simply
point out that our students are voting with their feet. Time is
the enemy.
One other point that I cannot help but point out here. This
nation has millions of adults who do not have a high school
diploma. As we sit today and talk about K-12 education, how in
the world can parents be informed about their K-12 education of
their child when they do not have an education themselves? In
the WIOA Act, adult basic education has been second fiddle for
far too long.
We are not serving the needs of adult students through WIOA
through adult basic education at the level that we need to. It
is about skills. Yes, the high school diploma and equivalency
is important, but we must find a way to put skills in front of
these individuals so that they have the ability to get into the
economy and to produce for their families.
Ms. Houchin. I could not agree more. Thank you so much. I
yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Stevens.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Madame Chair. It is evident we have
three great community college systems represented here today.
LCTCC, we are very proud of your background, Dr. Sullivan. Ivy
Tech, which I have gotten to know from my time in workforce
development. Oakland Community College in Michigan, it is
community college week in Washington, DC, and folks are talking
about the skills gap.
Now, in the 116th Congress, we introduced the College
Affordability Act as a democratic majority, which included the
expanded programs. I was just outside talking to our community
college friends from Michigan about this. Dr. Sullivan, I was
wondering if you could extrapolate on this opportunity of
expanding PELL for some of the short-term work programs to get
people into skills and employment opportunities?
Dr. Sullivan. First of all, thank you for the question.
This is an area where it is clear that we have bipartisan
support. When you think about the number of individuals
stranded in this economy, 60 million individuals who do not
have the skills needed in order to be able to get that first
job, we have a point-in-time opportunity to change the
trajectory of millions of Americans and ensure that they get
back into the economy.
When you think about being down 5 percentage points
workforce participation, think of the millions of people that
are impacted. Think of the millions of young people that are
impacted. I would say to you this, the best teaching for young
people is to watch their parents. Let us give those parents an
opportunity to be educated and skilled at a level that allows
them to provide for their children and their family. That is
the greatest education a young person can see.
Ms. Stevens. Well, this is a great action item for us in
the 118th Congress and a way to come together. As we talk about
the American Education in Crisis, we know that our waivers for
free and reduced lunch that were expanded during the pandemic
have expired and we have 10 million students at risk of going
hungry.
My father was a public-school teacher and often brought
culinary into his classroom to meet those needs. We know that
96 percent of school systems in this country are now saying
that they are experiencing debt. Obviously, Mrs. Gentles, I
note in your testimony you had a brief section talking about
the worsening school climate and I was just wondering if you
could validate that not having the moneys for schools to
provide free and reduced lunch is contributing to that
worsening school climate?
Mrs. Gentles. I am not sure what you are talking about. I
apologize as far as not having----
Ms. Stevens. You are not sure what I am talking about
regarding providing free and reduced lunch, and the fact that
we do not have waivers, and schools are incurring debt as a
result? It has been in the news a lot.
Mrs. Gentles. The fact that schools are going into debt
because they do not have their free and reduced-price lunch
funding. No, I am sorry. I am not familiar with that.
Ms. Stevens. Well, we would be happy to exchange with you
on that. Certainly, I know in your brief section in your
testimony dedicated to the worsening school climate one would
oblige that not having the moneys to provide lunches.
Which Mr. Polis, our great Governor of Colorado, you have
implemented some tremendous programs for the pandemic relief
and for providing free and reduced lunch and I was wondering if
you could share with us specifically some of the results that
you are seeing in Colorado.
Governor Polis. Yes. Of course, we, like most states, took
advantage of the extended free lunch during the pandemic. We
now have chosen, starting next fall, to move forward with free
lunch for everybody and free breakfast as well. What that means
is, of course, it is optional. Some parents want to pack lunch.
That is fine. Removes any stigma associated with school lunch
and frankly reduces a lot of paperwork and overhead associated
with who pays what and who does what. It makes it a lot easier,
freeing up school resources to be used on teacher pay and
classroom instruction.
First and foremost, making schools have the--kids have the
nutrition they need to succeed if they do not get those healthy
meals at home, reducing overhead and bureaucratic waste, and
saving families money on lunches.
Ms. Stevens. You have a ballot measure cooking to alleviate
the burden of filling out school meal applications and to
assure that no child falls through the cracks. This is
something that we hear a lot, the stigma, the shame. Could you
speak about that ballot measure?
Governor Polis. With the free lunches? Yes. There are no
longer any forms associated with it, which had always been an
issue, especially for non-English-speaking families, for
families that value their privacy. You know all these sorts of
nosy government questions just to get the lunch. You no longer
have to answer those. It would be either lunch provided to
everybody. If you want to take advantage of it, you can. There
is no check card you need. There is no stigma associated with
it and it will save every family who wants to participate in
that the cost of school lunch.
Ms. Stevens. Feed our kids, educate America. Thank you,
Madame Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. Grothman, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Mr. Pulsipher, western Governors deliver an
education through competency-based education model. I would
like you to elaborate that a little bit and see what we can do
to amend the Higher Ed Act to accommodate that or your opinion
of the benefits of it.
Mr. Pulsipher. Sure. You know over a century ago we kind
established and codified a credit hour into our system of
higher education and something that started really as a way for
faculty to accrue hours and get paid became somehow a measure
of learning.
Well, competency-based takes a very different approach,
which is it tries to keep the standard for learning, meaning
the proficiency against a particular learning outcome like that
is actually what determines that you have developed the
competency that is necessary to complete the course.
When you design around that model, it allows a couple
things that I will just highlight. First and foremost, it
allows you to more directly align the learning outcomes with
the work and that which they need to be readied for. Second, it
actually allows you personalized learning, such that an
individual can leverage that which they may already be quite
skilled in and can move quite quickly through that, and they
can dedicate more time and attention to the things that they
need to focus on, and may have less preparedness in. At the end
of the day, what you can determine with a competent-based
approach is that every individual has been assessed and
validated proficient against those learning outcomes.
The last thing I would say on this, Representative
Grothman, is that competency-based education is not new. If you
talk about any licensure area, in medicine, in law, in the
practice of nursing, even in accountancy, all these individuals
have to meet proficiency standards. Well, the same can apply in
higher education as a practice.
Mr. Grothman. It would seem to make common sense that you
would focus more on people--on what people know and how long
they have been sitting at a desk; does it seem that way?
Mr. Pulsipher. Yes. It certainly seems--I often like to say
that virtually every one of us who may have gone to a
conventional model already personally experienced competence-
based education. You can think of that course where you
realized that I did not need to sit through all the lectures,
but I had to wait until the end of the term to take the final.
What competency-based education allows is that individual,
when they actually are ready, and can take their assessments
and pass those assessments, they are done with that course, and
they can progress. We have seen that, one, increase the
personalization. Two, it also reduces the time that students
need to acquire their degree.
Mr. Grothman. Save some costs too, right?
Mr. Pulsipher. A lot of cost when a bachelor's candidate
can finish their degree program in two and a half years versus
four, you are significantly reducing the cost to attain the
credential they need.
Mr. Grothman. We will switch over here to Virginia Gentles.
There are some numbers before me here that even I am shocked at
and I do not think I could be shocked. It says here among
English teachers there are 97 Democrats for every 3 Republicans
and among health teachers 99 Democrats for every Republican. I
think it is accurate to say in this country we are divided
about 50/50, right, every Presidential election, maybe 51/49 or
something. Overall, 87 Democrats for every 13 Republicans.
I am not a big one on all this diversity stuff, but I do
think, say when you are picking out novels for kids to read and
novels a lot of times have a message in them, you would expect
about 50/50 as far as English teachers, History teachers, what
have you, but it is not that way at all. I think that is one of
the major reasons why there is such a lack of support for
education today among some people. Could you comment on that a
little bit as to how this happens and what we can do to turn it
around and can we ever be considered to getting a holistic
education if we have so many teachers on one side of the
ideological spectrum to even have a good school.
Mrs. Gentles. Well, I am a product of public education, K
through 12, growing up in Florida and I am happy to say I have
absolutely no idea what the partisan affiliation of any single
teacher that I had growing up. I think one solution would be to
create an emphasis in the classroom on academics rather than on
activism and ensure that teachers are reminded that it is not
appropriate to bring in their partisan approach to the
classroom.
Another approach would be to make the teaching profession
welcoming to people of all different political persuasions.
Mr. Grothman. I do not mean to cut you off. To me, the
problem is even if you say you are being non-ideological every
novel has a message in it, right? If you are a hardcore
Democrat, you want to give the kids a different message than
more of a traditional person. What can we do to get back to 50/
50? When I went to college, by the way, I remember--you can
tell how old I am. I would say half the teachers in the school
had Join McGovern buttons on, so I know what was going on
there.
Yes, can you think of any way we can get back to say in
English literature about a 50/50 split here.
Mrs. Gentles. Again, I think that the teaching profession
needs to be welcoming to people of all different perspectives.
When you have the environment right now that encourages
teachers to keep secrets from parents there are people of maybe
a more conservative persuasion that are not comfortable with
that and they are not going to want to stay in the teaching
profession or join the profession. Perhaps if the profession is
more inclusive of a wide range of values and includes more
conservative values there either might be more of a balance.
Chairwoman Foxx. The gentleman's time has expired. Ms.
Manning, you are recognized.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Madame Chair. I want to associate
myself with the earlier remarks of my colleague, Mr. Takano. It
is concerning that extremists are being given a platform in the
Congress of the United States to spread misinformation and
disinformation by citing antidotal incidence or by citing their
own articles of evidence to back up their misinformation about
what is going on, in general, in our schools.
This is a serious body that has important work to do for
the American people and America's children. We have real issues
to deal with and that is what my constituents sent me here to
address. I do appreciate the focus and discussion today about
the critically important issue of apprenticeship programs and
technical training programs in community colleges. These types
of educational opportunities are particularly critical to my
district where we are now seeing the growth of good-paying jobs
in advanced manufacturing that require education beyond high
school.
Governor Polis, the Public Workforce Development Systems
can only be successful if employees see value in engaging with
these systems. Given your experience working with employers in
your State, do you think the Workforce Systems are providing
value to employers and are their key areas that need to be
strengthened?
Governor Polis. Applaud the work of Careerwise now helping
to link the employer side in Colorado and several other states.
We, as a State, see value in this and I believe in putting our
money where our mouth is, meaning we, ourselves, as a State we
have now partnered with apprenticeship in several of our State
agencies to be able to make sure that we can benefit from the
work of individuals who are getting an education while they do
it.
We see the benefit. So many private sector employers across
our State increasing numbers--I am happy to submit the list of
participating employers to the Committee--are seeing the
benefit because when I talk to CEOs, chief H.R. officers in
many of the major employers in our State the No. 1 issue they
bring up is always how do we attract and retain the talent we
need to succeed? They see apprenticeships and these kinds of
models as a key strategy of achieving their own goals of making
sure they can track and retain the people they need to continue
their success.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. Are there ways you think employers
could do more to support workers, especially those with
barriers to employment in lifelong learning?
Governor Polis. I think now is an excellent time to have
that conversation because more than ever employers are really
looking and thinking out of the box about how they can meet
their workforce needs. In Colorado, we have two jobs that are
open for every unemployed person, and I know there are many
jurisdictions across the country, that have a similar dilemma.
Now is the time to really convene, as we have in Colorado, many
of the key employers. That means at the county level, it means
at the State level, at the regional level, and really talk
about how we could improve the pipeline of talent to further
their success.
We are looking at aligning our workforce dollars, some of
which are ARPA dollars, with meeting the needs of the growing
private sector in our State.
Ms. Manning. I met with one of the leaders of one of our
great community colleges just yesterday and talked to her about
what we can do to get more older students, students with
families back into the system. She talked about needs,
including childcare, transportation, nutritional benefits, and
mental health issues.
Unfortunately, some across the aisle feel that these
investments should be cut. You noted in your testimony that
wraparound services are a part of Colorado's investments in the
workforce. Do you feel that these services have increased
retention and increased the number of people who can come into
these workforce development programs?
Governor Polis. Without a doubt, making sure that people
can get to workforce training programs helps improve
participation for those for whom transportation was a barrier
that they could not overcome on their own. We are also
partnering with our community colleges and colleges to provide
additional onsite childcare opportunities.
By the way, that benefits their workforce as well as the
students. Both for attracting and retaining the support staff
they need as an institution as well as for the students, the
availability of lower-cost onsite daycare is critical.
Ms. Manning. That is great to hear. I am going to stick
with you, and I am going to ask you one more question and that
is about one of the real crises in our schools and that is
youth mental health. You noted in your testimony that Colorado
is expanding mental health support for students and offering
free therapy sessions with mental health professionals.
As your administration has begun implementing these
programs, have you seen an impact on student populations?
Governor Polis. Yes. The demand has been huge. Getting the
word out, particularly, for students who otherwise have
barriers to access. That can be geographic, it can be a rural
area, it can be a cultural or familial barrier where they do
not know where to go or who to ask for help and really making
it easy and convenient has absolutely help lead to improved
learning outcomes as well as helped make sure that we have a
safer State.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. I am not sure if I am going to get
a gold star, but I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. I told you we are working on some kind of
recognition to you. Mr. Bean, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bean. Thank you very much, Dr. Foxx. Good afternoon to
you and good afternoon to the Education and Workforce
Committee. It is good to see everybody. Dr. Foxx, I am going to
give you a gold star because you have shined the spotlight on a
crisis. It is in education.
I come from the free State of Florida where I have served
10 years on the frontlines of legislating ways to improve
education, empower parents, and really focus on results. Some
of the legislation has been talked about in the Committee, and
I am going to talk about it back to let you know the real story
of what we have done in the State of Florida.
Now, do not trust me. Go look at our state's report card,
or you can look at parents who have voted with their feet to
come to the State of Florida with the reason being they wanted
their kids back in school. That is what they wanted. In the
free State of Florida, what we discovered is education and kids
do better when there is live instruction. They do better when
schools are open. They do better when parents are involved and
empowered. They do better, as Governor Polis said, when there
is choice, because all kids are, in fact, different. They also
do better when there is more time focused on the things that
matter.
A couple of the legislation bills that were talked about is
the so-called Don't Say Gay bill, which has nothing to do with
anything about gay or anything the other opponents want to say
about it. What it does say, and I wish I could name the bill.
In fact, let us do it right now. There is a new name for that
bill and it is called Let Kids be Kids bill because there is no
reason whatsoever that we should be teaching sex or any of
the--we should not be teaching sex to kindergarteners, first,
second, third graders. That is what that bill says. Let us
teach age-appropriate things.
Hey, let us teach things--subjects that matter, Reading,
Writing, Arithmetic. The so-called CRT, we have said no in the
State of Florida, no to CRT. There is no value. There is no
value to teach kids to hate each other based on race. There is
no value in teaching kids to feel guilty just because they are
of a certain race or persuasion. Let us teach them--here is a
novel idea. Let us teach them Reading or Math or Science.
My first question--and I have got questions for every
single one of you. That is, Mrs. Gentles, what can we do--and
this is new to me on a Federal level because this is--the
action is at the states, but what can we do on a Federal level
to help states, like the free State of Florida, better their
education system?
Mrs. Gentles. Well, we certainly need to celebrate states
like Florida, who were success stories when it came to the NAEP
scores and success stories for keeping schools open and
ensuring that academics are at the center.
A big thing that the Committee can do is support school
choice legislation that does happen at the Federal level for
states who are very different than Florida and do not have an
array of options. Ensuring that charter school programs receive
sufficient funding, taking a look at that education tax credit
program that would provide options for students in states that
do not have robust choice programs. That is definitely
something that can be done at the Federal level.
Then again, reminding parents of their rights under PPRA,
under FERPA, ensuring that states and districts are not lying
to parents about what Title IX does and does not do. That
should be something that the Committee could do.
Mr. Bean. Mrs. Gentles, thank you so much. That is the
right answer, the answer that I was hoping for to continue to
push states. I am running out of time. I have got a question
for everybody. Let us make it a multiple-choice, toss-up
question for everybody and that is it. I am thinking about a
bill, our last meeting, our roundtable was Dr. Foxx did a focus
on the disaster we call the Student Loan Program. How can we
fix it? My thought is, what if we did a bill that said a
college has to cosign for the loan so colleges are involved
whether that loan is made. Is that a good idea, a bad idea, or
an idea worth exploring, Mr. Pulsipher?
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you for that question. I think that
there certainly are ways by which if you increase institutional
accountability or risk sharing in the cost of attaining a
degree that would increase the incentive to control the cost of
attaining a degree.
Mr. Bean. Good idea. Thank you. Governor Polis, good idea,
worth exploring? Hurry.
Governor Polis. Hello, from the free State of Colorado.
Aligning incentives to outcomes, there is a lot in Mr.
Pulsipher's testimony about that and I generally agree with the
directions that he indicated in his testimony.
Mr. Bean. Good idea. Thank you so much.
Dr. Sullivan.
Dr. Sullivan. Not a big student loan participants in terms
of our students because our price point is relatively low. I
would say to you we already have Title IV provisions that
require institutions to be partners in the form of Return to
Title IV. I would suggest to you it is probably not a bad idea.
Mr. Bean. Thank you. Yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. Ms. Wild, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Madame Chairwoman. I am not sure I am
going to get a gold star here, but I am going to try. I was
encouraged when I read the testimonies of the witnesses getting
ready for this hearing because I found a number of points of
agreement with each of you. In fact, much of this hearing has
addressed points of agreement, but there are a few areas that I
really need to hone in on.
I want to make a couple of observations at the outset. Here
I am as almost the last witness or the last person to question,
so I have heard a lot in the course of this hearing and my
observations, first of all, to my colleague and to anybody who
believes otherwise, CRT, otherwise known as Critical Race
Theory, is not taught in the K to 12 schools, ever. This is a
talking point that has been used by the opposition party to try
to inflame parents and people and it is simple not done. We
need to stop talking about it.
No. 2, there is a reference in at least one testimony to
cruel COVID-era closures of schools. I would like to point out
that the COVID-era closure of schools started under President
Trump, and I am not suggesting that it was inappropriate, but
this seems to be something that is consistently blamed on the
Biden Administration and Democrats and it is very important to
note that the schools were closed in roughly March 2020 when
President Trump was still President.
Third, I have heard a lot of comments about teachers and
teacher unions. I have read a lot about in the testimony almost
suggesting that they are the root of all problems in our
schools. It was refreshing when we were going through COVID and
so many of these kids were learning at home online. It was so
refreshing to hear parents say now I really appreciate my kids'
teachers because they understood just what a challenge it is to
teach. Those are my observations.
Onto the points of agreement, Dr. Sullivan, I agree with
your testimony that PELL needs to be expanded to include
workforce programs. Mr. Pulsipher, I agree that Higher Ed must
meet the needs of the workforce and that Higher Ed must create
value for the students and Higher Ed must be accessible,
transferable, and equitable. I just want you to know all the
things I agree with you on.
Mrs. Gentles, I agree with you that far too many forces
within the education system insist on prioritizing the
promotion of ideologies over academic instruction. I agree with
you that we need oversight and accountability of emergency
Federal funding to schools, and I think the Biden
Administration is actually doing that oversight and
accountability of those funds. I agree with you that far too
many classrooms are chaotic and sorely in need of programs that
support mental health and discipline.
We do disagree, however, on where these ideologies that you
spoke of are coming from. I will start by talking about the
effort to ban books in public school districts across our
country. We have heard from Pan America that 138 school
districts across 32 states banned books from the Summer of 2021
to the Summer of 2022. These bans affected 4 million students
nationwide.
Forty-one percent of the banned books over this time period
featured LGBT themes or characters, 40 percent featured
characters of color, 21 percent dealt with issues of race and
racism. Do you believe that all those books in those categories
should be banned? That is just a yes or no question.
Mrs. Gentles. No, I am not a supporter of book bans.
Ms. Wild. Okay. Good, then you probably would agree with me
then that this nationwide movement to prohibit students from
reading certain books is an attempt at ideological
indoctrination in our public education system, which was
exactly what your testimony did not want to see?
Mrs. Gentles. I would want to point out that the books that
are being brought up and questioned, not banned, but questioned
are generally of very sexually explicit in nature, regardless
of the other themes, and the focus or the main characters in
those books, the sexual explicit nature of the books,
particularly, when you are talking about graphic novels that
are aimed at younger, emerging readers, those are the primary
concern.
Ms. Wild. I think we could probably agree that sexually
explicit materials should not be given to young elementary
school students. Can we agree that it is important with older
students to teach the skill of critical thinking?
Mrs. Gentles. We absolutely agree that critical thinking is
important.
Ms. Wild. Okay. Meaning the ability to look at a situation,
weigh the evidence, look at the trustworthiness of a source,
particularly now with rampant social media that spreads all
kinds of things, and arrive at a person's own conclusions based
on the evidence. You like that idea?
Mrs. Gentles. Absolutely.
Ms. Wild. Okay. This is best done by exposing people, and I
am not talking about four and 5-year-old, this is best done by
exposing people to exposing people to different ideas, teaching
them about the sources, and letting them evaluate the evidence.
True?
Mrs. Gentles. Yes.
Ms. Wild. Okay. In general, would you----
Chairwoman Foxx. Your time has expired.
Ms. Wild. Yes. I told you I was not going to get a gold
star. Thank you. I yield.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. I am going to give Mr. Kiley a
gold star for being here and being so patient today, because he
has sat through this entire hearing waiting to be--oh, Ms.
Hayes too. Okay.
Mr. Kiley. Happy to share the gold star.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. You are recognized.
Mr. Kiley. Governor Polis, thanks very much for being here
today. I believe you are the founder of a charter school
yourself, is that right?
Governor Polis. That is correct, two.
Mr. Kiley. Two charter schools and you have been a strong
supporter of charters in Colorado. As you know, after President
Biden took office the Administration almost immediately set out
to target charter schools with proposed rules that, as you put
it, would ``gut the Federal charter schools' program.'' You
wrote a letter to Secretary Cardona, in which you said you
strongly oppose the Department of Education's proposed new
rules.
Now, I have to say, when you were asked about this earlier
you seemed to hedge a little bit by saying that while different
states have different authorizing laws, there was no hedging in
this letter. You celebrated the national impact of charter
schools. You wrote ``Around the country public charter schools
are making a difference in students' lives. During the 2020/
2021 school year, nearly 240,000 new students enrolled in
charter schools across the country.''
You also wrote in this letter ``It is confounding and
deeply disturbing that the Department of Education would even
want to consider making the opening of high-quality charter
schools considerably more difficult than ever before. Our
students need more public school options and high-quality
charter schools play a critical role in providing that
access.''
I do not want to put you in a tough spot. I am coming at
this from someone who is very interested in bipartisan
education. I am a former high school teacher myself, very
interested in working on a bipartisan basis to expand
educational opportunity, to expand high-quality public school
options, to close achievement gaps, and I have now found some
partners on the other side of the aisle. I hope to have the
chance to collaborate with you as well.
I have to say it has been few and far between with many in
your party, it is like running into a brick wall. The only
interest they have in charters is how to harass them, how to
target them, how to get rid of them. In my State, California,
the Governor and super majority have been condemned time and
time again by Civil Rights groups for their relentless attacks
on charter schools.
You are the chosen witness here of the minority at today's
hearing. I just wanted to get your help in understanding why do
you think so many elected officials in your party are hospital
to charter schools?
Governor Polis. Well, I do not think that--I do not see
charter schools as a partisan issue. In our State, about 15.2
percent of kids who go to public schools go to attend a public
charter school. I founded a charter school for new immigrants
and English language learners and one for kids who were
experiencing insecurity in housing.
Again, I was pleased with the final rule. Again, while I
did not think the rule was necessary from the Department of
Education, it did incorporate many of the changes that I
suggested, that others suggested involving charter schools.
This is around a funding stream that specifically supports new
charter schools and it is very important. I helped write some
of the legislation when I was here around that piece of the
Every Student Succeeds Act and it is really important to
support innovation. I think it is a high return investment. It
is a small dollar amount, high return.
It is also important to note that every idea is going to
work out and that is Okay, just as every charter school does
not work out, every new district initiative does not work out,
but if you are not trying to do something different, then you
are doing things the same way.
Mr. Kiley. I am sorry. My time is limited, so I just want
to get back to the question.
Governor Polis. Sure.
Mr. Kiley. It has become a partisan issue as this
Administration almost immediately went after charter schools.
As you well know, the opposition of charter schools largely
comes from the other side of the dais. We have heard some
comments today. I want to get your thoughts on this. Why has it
become a partisan issue? I agree with you, it should not be.
Governor Polis. Well, again, President Obama was very
supportive of high-quality charter schools. I have every reason
to believe the Biden Administration is also supportive of high-
quality charter schools that improve equity and access. I think
what they are pointing out, and again, I do not always agree
with everything that they have said, they are more concerned
about the equity and access piece. I think it is complicated
how charter schools affect equity and access. It depends on the
particular charter school, depends on the attendance, depends
on the recruitment.
Yes, some states and some school districts have better or
worse authorizing laws than others. We are proud of our
authorizing laws in Colorado, and we hope to improve them even
more.
Mr. Kiley. Do you have any other theories as to why it is
that in some states we have overwhelming opposition to charters
from one side of the aisle?
Governor Polis. Well, there are certainly states that have
worse charter authorizing laws. Frankly, they have had some
negative experiences with charters that we have not seen in
Colorado. In Colorado, we have seen them as a very
constructive, innovative part of public education, and there is
enormous demand for differentiated programs. By the way,
districts have learned from practices in charter schools and
districts have improved and offered new programming in district
schools as well.
Mr. Kiley. Well, thank you. I appreciate your commitment to
doing the right thing for students, and I would encourage you
to have conversations with some who are less willing to take
that same approach.
Chairwoman Foxx. All right. Thank you very much. Ms. Omar,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Omar. Thank you, Chairwoman. I wanted to enter this
article into the record from the Florida Phoenix. I know the
gentleman is no longer here, but he was----
Chairwoman Foxx. Without objection.
Ms. Omar. Thank you.
[The information of Ms. Omar follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Omar. He was speaking to how wonderful Florida was
doing in regard to education, and I just wanted this record to
be entered into the record, just 17 percent of eighth graders
were proficient in Math in Florida, and 6 percent were
considered advanced in the subject in 2022.
I think it is really important for us to be able to share
actual facts in Committees. When it came to Reading, 70 percent
of eighth graders that were tested were not proficient in
Reading according to these results.
Now, Governor Polis, from the free State of Colorado, I
greet you as someone who represents the free State of
Minnesota. I wanted to talk to you a little bit as both a
parent, someone who sat on this Committee, and someone who now
is a Governor. As a mom of four children who are in the fifth
grade to juniors in high school and one sophomore in college,
is there anything that is prohibiting parents from being
involved in their children that you are aware of outside of
time constraints that you and I might have?
Governor Polis. I think that language can sometimes be a
barrier and many of our school districts are taking great
proactive approaches to----
Ms. Omar. Do you know of any laws that say a parent cannot
show up to PTA meetings----
Governor Polis. No.
Ms. Omar [continuing]. Or to school board meetings?
Governor Polis. To the contrary, we are really focused on
how we can get parents more involved.
Ms. Omar. Yes. I participated in PTA meetings. I also was a
guardian for two of my nieces. I went to almost all the school
board hearings when my kids were younger before I got elected
to Congress. I am sure you were involved or would love to be as
involved. You probably would try to go on all the field trips,
talk to all the teachers. My dad was actually notorious for
showing up to my school, sitting in the back of the classrooms
when I was in high school to the point that it drove me and my
classmates insane.
I am not aware of, as you have just said, any decisions
that are being made by lawmakers here in Congress, by local
lawmakers that is saying we do not want parents' input. We do
not want parents' involvement. We do not want parents'
engagement in our schools. I just hope that we put this
argument that is not based on the actual facts that are taking
place in our communities to be put to rest.
I also wanted to congratulate you on some of the work that
you are doing about addressing mental health issues in your
State. Some of the ways in which you are using the bipartisan
Safer Communities Act that we passed. Our State is also doing
some incredible work in regard to higher education. I know that
you talk about the importance of holding institutions
accountable for deceitful practices. Your former colleague,
Attorney General Pete Ellison, shut down a company that was
fraudulently promising student loan forgiveness to Minnesotans,
who often these types of practices target veterans. They target
immigrants. They target the most vulnerable.
On the 4-years that I have sat on this Committee, we have
done a lot of work on accountable for these types of practices
and I am proud of what we have been able to accomplish, and I
am pleased to see that the Administration is working on gainful
employment regulations. From your perspective, why is the
Federal Government accountable important in higher education?
Governor Polis. It is important, of course, from the
Federal perspective and Congress's perspective because these
are taxpayer dollars that you are custodians of. It is
important from the customer's perspective, the individual who's
benefiting, so that they have the knowledge and the data to
back it up that the time and effort that they are putting in to
better their lives will actually produce better earning
outcomes and a better life for them and that they do not fall
subject to a scam or somebody's attempt to take their money.
Ms. Omar. Well, thank you. Again, I will say this is the
Education Committee. We should be factual and talk about the
truth. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Mr. DeSaulnier, you are recognized for 5
minutes and I am going to avoid responding to that right now?
Mr. DeSaulnier. To the 5-minutes? No, forget it. Well,
thank you, Madame Chair. Thank you, Ranking Member. Thank you
for this hearing. Thank you to the panelists and Governor, it
is delightful to see you. You are triggering fond memories of a
field trip that we took to the Bay area when you were on the
Committee. I do not know if the Chair remembers our
conversation when we were waiting for a ride on a street corner
in San Francisco, but we'll leave that for another venue.
Governor Polis, I want to talk about just following up on
the questions about outcomes as a former employer, some of the
comments about making sure that we are getting people trained
for the workforce and transparency in data collection. We have
some support for the transparency, Higher Education Act, so
that we make sure that the data is collected, and we have that
to prove the outcomes. I wonder if you have any comments on
that.
Governor Polis. I think the next iteration and in
generation and outcomes, of course, traditional measurements,
job placement, loan repayment rates are very helpful and
constructive. I think the next generation will be looking at
return on investment in ROI and seeing how you can maximize the
ROI from both time and dollars in terms of increased earning
potential from the beneficiary.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Okay. I want to ask you some questions on a
different subject matter that you have touched on specifically
about ESSER funding and ARP, and the requirements to 5 percent
and the 1 percent that we hold back. We know in states like
California, where I am from, we did a lot of work. I led a
bicameral and bipartisan taskforce on intersession and summer
learning loss, and nutritional loss around the State. We have
worked with, on a bipartisan level to make sure that we
extended the school year in California, and other states have
like Colorado, and we gave also provided more year-round
afterschool programs.
It was a big issue for Governor Schwarzenegger and now in
California, that we have free and reduced lunches with high
nutritional standards, year-round, that the State pays for,
largely. I wonder if you could talk about--we were prepared, in
a way, not for the level of the pandemic, but we already knew
about what we would lose when the kids were not in the
classroom. There are other options within the system that we
are working on that increase performance, particularly for
disadvantaged communities.
You have demonstrated leadership in your State on this
issue. It does not have to be all about the COVID experience.
We have learned lessons and the model has changed, so the
social model, two income households, kids out of school with
more time alone. Maybe you could address your experience in
Colorado with positive outcomes.
Governor Polis. First, it is very important to highlight
that these types of innovations that California has undertaken,
that Colorado has, and many states have would not have been
possible without the American Rescue Act, without ESSER. That
is what really empowered states to be able to say let us
increase learning time, which is a very data-driven
intervention. That is probably the single biggest utilization
of funds, different ways of increasing learning time. It could
be after school, summer programs, longer school year, these all
take resources and take investment.
The revenue, of course, from our school districts was
static to some even, of course, down during the midst of the
pandemic. Really, these types of proven data-driven
interventions that we know will improve student achievement
would not have been possible without congressional action that
we are very grateful there.
Now, that is the biggest bulk of it. On top of that,
deployment of resources to address mental health challenges of
students to make sure they are ready to learn. We talked about
the nutritional element as well, housing security, a number of
other social determinants of successful educational outcomes,
but the single biggest is just the very traditional time on
task, data driven, it works. Spending quality time learning
Math, learning Reading helps the students get there.
Mr. DeSaulnier. I appreciate that. We were able to get a
bill that I was the author of out of the House, Mental Health
Matters Act. The Chairman and I have had discussions about this
when she was the Ranking Member. I look forward to engaging my
colleagues on the other side on what we do about developing a
workforce around mental health, particularly, for young people.
Yes, I just really appreciate the comments. Madame Chair, I
always look forward to positive reinforcement for you, so I am
going to yield back with 40 seconds left.
Chairwoman Foxx. Another gold star. Hurrah. I am going to
recognize the Ranking Member of the Committee now for 5
minutes. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madame Chair. Governor, it is good to
see you back. I remember when you were a member of this
Committee you had kind things to say about Early Childhood
education. You mentioned that the childcare aspects of it would
benefit the parents. Could you say a word about the long-term
benefits to the student?
Governor Polis. Yes. Several long-term longitudinal studies
that have taken place over decades and saw the tremendous
benefit of Early Childhood education often to the tune of 7 to
$12 for every dollar invested in quality Early Childhood
education. Where do those benefits come from? Better high
school graduation rates, lower youth adjudication rates, less
interactions with law enforcement, safer, higher earning
potential, so a number of benefits have been shown from not
just preschool and kindergarten, but quality birth to four as
well to make sure that all kids have the advantage that some
kids have of parents reading to them, of word spoken, of books
discussed, and that is important to bring to more children to
address this achievement gap before it occurs. It is harder to
address in third grade and fifth grade than it is to prevent it
from occurring in the first place.
Mr. Scott. Along those lines, I remember one thing you said
that you were on a study committee when you were in the State
senate and concluded we are talking about high school
achievement and the best way to improve high school achievement
was to put all your money into Early Childhood education and
wait 10 years.
Governor Polis. You have an excellent memory, Mr. Ranking
Member, so yes, the preface to the report. Of course, it is no
excuse not to reform our high schools now and we want to
improve them, but they will look much better and perform much
better if every child gets a strong Early Childhood education.
Mr. Scott. Can you say a word about the importance of
assessments and accountability in K through 12?
Governor Polis. Yes, assessment and accountability are
critical and that is one of the major deficiencies in some of
these so-called choice models in states like Arizona where we
will not even know, as a State, as country, what works, what
leads to increased student achievement and what does not. It is
important in Higher Ed. It is important in K-12.
If we are all about, and a number of members on both sides
of the aisle have said, let us make sure kids learn Math,
Reading, Writing. That is what we should focus on. We need to
make sure we know whether they are achieving at grade level in
those areas. Therefore, while no one enjoys assessment, it is
really important to make sure that we are accountable for all
students and that we can address persistent achievement gaps
that occur along racial lines, along income lines, along
geographic lines, and that we can have strategies to address
those.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Mr. Sullivan, you mentioned the
short-term PELL legislation that's pending now. You did not
mention last year the House passed a short-term PELL bill that
was a specific amendment to the Competes bill. The short-term
PELL had overwhelming Democratic support. The Competes bill
passed with overwhelming Democratic support, but it did not
survive. You have heard from this side there is strong support.
You have also heard there are some problems with the for-
profit and what we do not want to happen is we have short-term
PELLs, and you set up some little storefront operations that
deal out worthless credentials and take all the PELL money. My
question is how would you differentiate the good programs from
the bad programs?
Dr. Sullivan. Great question. Thank you for your leadership
around Workforce PELL and with this group, this body in the
past. I want to take a step back for 1 second and I would
really like for you to think about, within the context of
Workforce PELL we are opening up opportunities for people to be
able to be educated in a shorter period of time. I know I have
said that a couple of times, but it is so very important.
Mr. Scott. We agree on that. Our community colleges
programs, 6 to 16 weeks, tremendous programs. The question is
if you open it up to everybody, you are going to be wasting a
lot of money unless you have a screen that only appropriate
vendors can get access to it and how do you separate the good
from the bad?
Mr. Sullivan. It is a matter of employment. It is a matter
of earnings. It is about job demand. It is about ensuring that
people get value from the experience. I would urge that we
continue down the path on the accountability front. This issue
is too be for America's public institutions only to solve, with
60 million adults with a high school diploma or less.
Mr. Scott. We are trying to write legislation. Let me ask
the other witnesses if they would have a quick statement about
how we can legislate that would divide the good from the bad.
Mr. Pulsipher. I would echo the fact that you should look
at value and cost rather than modality or method or delivery
mode. We certainly do not believe that online, for example, is
a great delimiter of quality. The number of individuals today
who actually utilize the online mode, especially with public
and private nonprofit institutions, like WGU, it is ultimately
about whether that program is delivered at a cost relative to
the value of that program in the marketplace.
Mr. Scott. Can you legislate along those lines? We have got
to write legislative language that separates the good from the
bad, do you have examples of what we can use?
Mr. Pulsipher. Yes, I certainly that you can utilize
things, key results around how do students complete those
programs, what is the attainment rate of jobs and opportunities
of completeness of those programs and what was that value
relative to the cost of actually completing the program. I
think that increasing transparency and accountability at an
institutional level is certainly possible.
Chairwoman Foxx. I think the Chairman's question is very
important. I am going to let it go on, but do not take too long
please.
Governor Polis. I will be brief. I applaud WTU for the
absence of Federal criteria, really thoughtfully coming up with
their own criteria and that could help form part of a template
for what the Federal Government looks at to maximize return on
investment from investments that are made.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Madame Chair, I think you have heard
from the answer that the for-profit/non-profit is not the split
because there are some good for-profits and some bad non-
profits. We have got to figure out how to make sure that the
money is being spent well, and I think we are in agreement on
that. It is an important possibility that we can get done.
Chairwoman Foxx. Yes, sir. That is why I wanted to let the
questions go on.
Mr. Scott. I thought so.
Chairwoman Foxx. Mr. Courtney, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Madame Chairwoman. Thank you to
all the witnesses. I have been really kind of in and out here
today and appreciate your patience and endurance here today.
One area where American education that I believe is not in
crisis, in fact, it is highly valued is anything particularly
in the moment we're in, in terms of our economy, is career and
technical education funding. The omnibus that we just passed
actually boosted the CTE account by $100 million above last
year. I come from a district, and the Governor remembers
because we used to sit next to each other on this Committee a
number of years ago, and my friend from Connecticut knows this.
We have a shipyard that builds submarines, and the demand
signal is off the chart in terms of the Columbia Class Program
and the Virginia Class Program.
The good news is that it is gone from about 7,000 to about
13,000 workers. They have got to get up probably another 5,000.
There are 1600 job openings, mostly in the metal trades,
welding, electrician, sheet metal, you name it. The career and
technical education programs that are there are completely
packed with waiting lists. Secretary Cardona from Connecticut,
who was a graduate from a tech school, came up and visited.
Again, is a passionate believer that we have got to move this
curriculum to comprehensive high school and that is actually
what some of that new money that was in the Omnibus is going to
be aimed at is in terms of trying to push that out.
There is a problem, and the President talked about this
last night, which is, so if you have a master welder teaching
kids how to just do almost intro welding, the good news is, is
that when these kids graduate, even at high school age, they
are probably starting at about $50,000 a year, and in no time
they are actually going to be making more money than the master
welder who is teaching in the program there.
Trying to find a way to get the right skillset in the
welding booths to teach what is a critical occupation right now
for the country in terms of these programs is going to require
having to come up with a way to pay for the quality that you
need. I do not know if you are running into this, Governor
Polis, in Colorado, but in the CTE area almost all of them are
teaching skills that you could go out right now in this his
economy and make far more than you could as a teacher.
Governor Polis. Yes, I agree with the focus on increased
resources and investment in career and technical. There are
also opportunities, as you discussed, WIOA for allowable use of
funds while students are still in school, as well as looking at
additional partnership with the private sector like we have
through Careerwise where students are able to replace for earn
while you learn models while they are working. In effect, a
kind of apprenticeship model that can complement the
traditional career and technical education model.
Mr. Courtney. Again, Mr. Sullivan, I know this is in your
space. I do not know if you had any comment, again, about
trying to get the people in the classrooms.
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you for the question and thank you for
the focus on CTE. In particular, I mentioned earlier one of the
more difficult parts of creating the capacity is identifying
that faculty member. One of the things that we have done is
worked with our industry partners. As someone begins to look at
retirement, 6 months, 9 months prior to retirement from one of
our business partners, being able to slide that individual over
into the classroom and allowing them to teach and to be able to
give back has been a really successful strategy for us. For
that group they are not as concerned about the pay. They are
concerned about giving back and so that has been a great
strategy. What I know for certain is we do not have enough
retirees to meet that capacity issue.
Mr. Courtney. I was just going to chime in with that point
because they are tapping into that same pool and a lot of them
are just super passionate about mentoring and really teaching
people that manufacturing is not a dirty sort of dismal job.
The fact of the matter is, is that is a really unreliable pool.
I mean we have to figure out a way, again, to get the people
who have the talent. I mean welding an admiral who was down
there once described a nuclear welder is about as skilled as a
brain surgeon. I mean there is no margin for error when you are
building a vessel that does not support human life.
Again, I think it is just something we need to think about
in terms of this question about 11 million job openings in the
economy, highly concentrated in manufacturing, and how do we
get people connected with the right teachers to make sure they
can help the country and succeed for themselves. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Courtney. I will now
recognize myself for 5 minutes. I have got three questions to
ask, so I will ask you all to keep that in mind.
Mr. Pulsipher, you brought out from both sides of the aisle
the interest in ROI. It is clear that there is bipartisan
support for that. Could you briefly describe how this metric
could be applied in the broader, post-secondary context, risk
sharing, performance bonuses offer, in demand, high quality
credentials, just a few more points on what you brought up
before.
Governor Polis. The ones you touched upon, risk sharing is
an excellent example--oh, sorry, Mr. Pulsipher.
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you, Chairwoman. I do think the more
we can bring a spotlight to value the better. That is for sure.
I would share with you some of the things that we have held
ourselves accountable to. To increase value, you have to
increase completion rates, so you have to look how well are
students, who are beginning the program, completing the
program. You then have to look at whether or not having
completed that program, are they actually obtaining employment
in the field of study, and are they achieving the economic
return on that, and what does that look like for the students
through that program.
Third, you absolutely have to be able to look at the cost
of completing that program. There is no doubt that in many
programs today that the wage for--you know completeness of that
program has not increased at the same rate the cost to achieve
it has.
I certainly believe that we can increase reporting and
accountability at institution level for such metrics. We
certainly can also involve the creditors in looking at
institutions to present their plans to improve those outcomes.
When we do so, we can give that information to students so they
are making better choices about their future.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. I appreciate that. Mrs.
Gentles, I want to go back to Mr. Bowman asking you a question
about balance literacy and phonic-based reading instruction.
There was a followup with Ms. Houchin. Mr. Bowman did not give
you a chance to respond, but I know from my reading there is
significant research showing what does and does not work when
teaching kids to read. Could you respond to Mr. Bowman's
argument that balanced literacy is an effective approach to
reading instruction?
Mrs. Gentles. Right, well, reading influences every aspect
of life and we know that students are learning to read up until
third grade and then from there they are reading to learn.
Unfortunately, for too long there has been this balanced
literacy approach that has taught children to read the wrong
way and the queuing that we were briefly discussing is an
important component of that, which essentially tells children
to memorize some words, guess based on pictures and clues and
context and then skip words that they are not familiar with.
This guessing learning of reading is a huge reason that we have
such abysmal literacy rates and fortunately, there is an effort
to address this.
What we heard as well today, is that children with dyslexia
and other learning disability are the ones who are extremely
harmed by this. Children with disabilities suffered in the
COVID closures and they have suffered through these awful
literacy programs that have been debunked and their needs to be
prioritized going forward.
Chairwoman Foxx. I am very pleased that we have Ms. Houchin
on the Committee because I know she is going to bring some
great wisdom to this issue, along with some others.
Mr. Sullivan, I would like for you to--I have lost my
questions. Goodness, gracious here. You have recommended
addressing the problem of people not using WIOA, companies not
using WIOA, you addressed the problem. You recommended
improving coordination with the Higher Ed Act. Could you talk a
little bit more about that and how we could have better
coordination between the two systems and that would lead to
more workers gaining in-demand skills.
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you for the question. Let me begin by
just pointing out that we have two primary funds in this Nation
that fund talent, the PELL grant and WIOA. I have a question
for you. Why would we keep them separate? We are trying to
accomplish one workforce in this Nation and yet we are using
funds from two different instruments that have lots of
different prescriptive rules around them that make it
exceptionally difficult to accomplish the goal that we have set
out. At a minimum, a level of coordination that focuses the
United States dollar on solving the issue at hand.
Chairwoman Foxx. I am going to take a little point of
personal privilege here to say I think everybody who is going
into any kind of education program is looking to come out with
a career. I have been preaching for a long time that whether
you bet a baccalaureate degree, whether you get a diploma,
whether you get a certificate, you are in career education and
I dislike very much separating one kind of education from
another kind of education.
I have talked about that a lot because, again, I was
getting an English degree. I wanted a job. If you are going
into learning to weld, you want a job. I think it is really
terrible that we are separating people that way and so I really
appreciate you bringing that up and giving me the opportunity
to respond to that. I do think it is something we have to
really focus on, and I think talking more about short-term PELL
and how we can help people gain skills that will lead them to a
career, whether it involves a baccalaureate degree or Master's
degree, or Doctorate, or whatever that is, but we desperately
want people to get skills to be able to improve their lives in
the long term.
I want to thank all of you for being here today. I think we
have had an excellent hearing. Governor Polis, I appreciate you
very, very much for coming back. You and I always--I have
always felt you had great common sense and you proved it again
today and I appreciate it. I am very pleased that we have had
this as our first hearing, and we have a lot of work to do for
the American people. Thank you all for coming and sharing your
wisdom with us and I thank everybody in the audience. The
meeting is adjourned.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon at 1:48 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
