- COMPETENCIES OVER DEGREES: TRANSITIONING TO A SKILLS-BASED ECONOMY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COMPETENCIES OVER DEGREES:
TRANSITIONING TO A SKILLS-BASED
ECONOMY

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE
WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JUNE 22, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-16

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-757 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on June 22, 2023....................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Foxx, Hon. Virginia, Chairwoman, Committee on Education and
the Workforce..............................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Scott, Robert C. ``Bobby'', Ranking Member, Committee on
Education and the Workforce................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8

WITNESSES

Kimbrough, Dr. Karin, Chief Economist, LinkedIn Corporation..    10
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Smith, Dr. Mark, Director, HR Thought Leadership, Society of
Human Resource Management, SHRM............................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    20
Debroy, Dr. Papia, Senior Vice President of Insights for
Opportunity@Work...........................................    26
Prepared statement of....................................    28
Healey, Mr. Dan, Head of People for Customer Success, Global
HR Management Team, SAP America, Inc.......................    37
Prepared statement of....................................    39

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Chairwoman Foxx:
Letter from Associated Builders and Contractors dated
June 26, 2023..........................................    88
2023 LinkedIn Economic Graph Report......................    92

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Response to questions submitted for the record by:
Mr. Dan Healey...........................................   132
Dr. Mark Smith...........................................   138
Dr. Papia Debroy.........................................   142
Dr. Karin Kimbrough......................................   147

COMPETENCIES OVER DEGREES:
TRANSITIONING TO A SKILLS-BASED
ECONOMY

----------

Thursday, June 22, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Education and The Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The committee met pursuant to notice, at 10:18 a.m. House
Rayburn Office Building, Room 2175, Hon. Virginia Foxx,
[Chairwoman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Foxx, Thompson, Walberg, Grothman,
Stefanik, Allen, Banks, Owens, Good, Miller, Kiley, Bean,
Burlison, Moran, Chavez-DeRemer, Williams, Scott, Courtney,
Wilson, Bonamici, Takano, Adams, DeSaulnier, Norcross, McBath,
Hayes, Stevens, Manning, and Bowman.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Mindy Barry,
General Counsel; Hans Bjontegard, Legislative Assistant; Cate
Dillon, Director of Operations; Isabel Foster, Press Assistant;
Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant; Sheila Havenner, Director
of Information Technology; Meghan Heckelman, Intern; Claire
Houchin, Intern; Amy Raaf Jones, Director of Education and
Human Services Policy; Marek Laco, Professional Staff Member;
Hannah Matesic, Deputy Staff Director; Audra McGeorge,
Communications Director; Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Kent
Talbert, Investigative Counsel; Brad Thomas, Senior Education
Policy Advisor; Ilana Brunner, Minority General Counsel; Scott
Estrada, Minority Professional Staff; Gerardo Gutierrez,
Minority Intern; Kristion Jackson, Minority Intern; Malak
Kalasho, Minority Intern; Stephanie Lalle, Minority
Communications Director; Angela Lopez-Albarran, Minority
Intern; Raiyana Malone, Minority Press Secretary; Kevin
McDermott, Minority Director of Labor Policy; Kota Mizutani,
Minority Deputy Communications Director; Veronique Pluviose,
Minority Staff Director; Jessica Schieder, Minority Economic
Policy Advisor; Dhrtvan Sherman, Minority Staff Assistant;
Banyon Vassar, Minority IT Administrator.
Chairwoman Foxx. The Committee on Education and the
Workforce will come to order. I know that a quorum is present
with a lot of friendly conversation going on. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to call a recess at any
time. Thank you everyone for joining us today for hearing
entitled Competencies Over Degrees: Transitioning to a Skills-
Based Economy.
I thank the witnesses for traveling from as far as
California to testify on such an important issue. Our economy
is rapidly changing, and there is an urgent need to match the
competencies of our future workforce within demand jobs.
Advancements in technology, industries and the global markets
are reshaping the opportunities available in America's economy.
Many employers are feeling the effects of America's
economic growing pains as they struggle to access the skilled
workforce needed to match the times. There is a growing
recognition that the old ways of identifying talent are not
working for today's economy.
To address this issue job creators across the country are
shifting to skills-based hiring to broaden the talent pipeline
and fill in demand, good paying jobs. It is time we reassess
the definition of success in our society. Despite nearly two-
thirds of Americans aged 25 and older not possessing a
bachelor's degree, we have perpetuated the notion that such
degrees are the only pathway to the middle class.
It is essential that we acknowledge the immense potential
within individuals that transcends any demographic boundaries.
We need to speak honestly about the educational paths we offer,
and give priority to skills acquisition whether through work
experience, military service, community college, certificate
programs or online learning.
At its core skills-based hiring is based on the simple
premise all learning should count. If a worker has the skills
and competencies to do the job it should not matter how or
where they obtain those skills. They should have the
opportunity to compete for the job, by allowing all learning to
be considered on a level playing field we can unlock the
potential of the millions of Americans who gain skills through
alternate routes.
After all, supporting the multiple educational pathways
that Americans are choosing will make a difference only if
employers are willing to look beyond the bachelor's degree, and
recognize talent wherever it exists. The good news is skills-
based hiring is gaining momentum as a solution to our workforce
challenges. Increasing numbers of employers are removing degree
requirements and instead focusing on specific skills and
competencies needed for the job.
This approach not only widens the talent pipeline but has
also proven to be more effective in hiring and retaining a high
performing workforce. President Trump led the way in reforming
Federal hiring through executive action, emphasizing skills
over degrees. Several states, including Colorado, Maryland,
Utah, Pennsylvania, Alaska, North Carolina and New Jersey,
South Dakota, Ohio, and Virginia have also eliminated degree
requirements for most State government jobs.
Employers are taking charge by creating their own pathways
to identify and recruit skilled workers, including internships,
apprenticeships, boot camps and on-the-job learning
opportunities. These initiatives equip candidates with the
exact skills required to excel in their roles.
However, for our workforce system to align with the demands
of a skills-based economy it needs significant updates. One
challenge faced by employers is navigating the landscape of
skills-based credentials. The increasing number of programs and
opportunities emerging, consistent and transparent information
about credentials and the competencies they indicate is vital.
Information on credentials should be funded and accessed
easily through the workforce system. In turn, employers would
have a greater ability to gauge the skills a worker possesses
and determine his or her ability to succeed on the job. The
workforce system could also play a crucial role by providing
support, and reworking job descriptions around the
competencies, and utilizing competency-based assessments to
verify the skills of job seekers.
In order to help more employers, particularly small
businesses, build their own pathways for workers to develop
critical skills, the system must place a greater emphasis on
employer led initiatives. Additionally, we must acknowledge
that directly addressing the skills of prospective workers can
be more difficult for employers from the legal and regulatory
perspective, than simply relying on a bachelor's degree as a
proxy for ability, despite the fact that degree requirements
automatically exclude the vast majority of Americans.
Greater clarity and technical assistance on the lawful use
of assessments would help more job creators make the shift to
skills-based hiring. In conclusion, our economy is undergoing
significant changes, and it is imperative that we adapt. I look
forward to facilitating that shift in a bipartisan effort with
my colleagues, by reauthorizing the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act, WIOA. With key reforms to WIOA we can begin
the bridge the skills gap in our Nation's workforce.
Let us seize the opportunities presented by a skill-based
economy where individual potential and competency are
celebrated above all. With that, I look forward to the
discussion today, and yield to the Ranking Member for his
opening remarks.
[The Statement of Chairwoman Foxx follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Scott. Thank you, Dr. Foxx. Thanks to the leadership of
President Biden and congressional Democrats, our economy is
thriving. In the span of 29 months, President Biden has created
more jobs than any previous President has created in a single
48-month term.
The past 2 years respectively, were the first and second
largest job growth years in American history. That all happened
while the President was improving the deficit situation that he
inherited. As a result, we are not meeting today to discuss how
to revive our economy, we are discussing strategies to continue
to build the economy from the ground up and the middle out,
address long-standing challenges in the labor market, and help
find workers meaningful careers. For example, employers are
continuing to look for skilled workers to fill the record
number of new jobs. Over the years, far too many employers have
fallen into the habit of requiring college degrees for jobs
that do not necessarily require them.
This approach dismisses qualified job applicants who are
skilled, and able to work, but are not even eligible because
they do not hold a college degree. Both employers and our
economy are losing out on the roughly two-thirds of talented,
working-age Americans who do not hold a 4-year degree.
Moreover, requiring a college education contributes to
economic disparities for people who are disproportionately
facing barriers to completing higher education. Employees are
increasingly evaluating job applicants based on experience and
skills assessments, rather than formal credentials or degrees.
Major companies across industries, from Google to IBM in
the tech sector to Costco and Publix in the retail sector, have
been adopting skills-based hiring. Similarly, the Federal and
State governments, and you mentioned many states, are looking
to this approach for an increasing number of job applicants.
For the past 2 years, 10 states, with both Democratic and
Republican Governors, have passed policies to implement skills-
based hiring for new public service jobs.
Notably, the previous administration also issued an
executive order that instructed the Federal Government to
implement skills-based hiring, and the current administration
released new guidelines on skills-based hiring within the
Federal Government. These initiatives demonstrate that skills-
based hiring has the potential to provide workers with another
established pathway to find good-paying jobs.
I am encouraged by the bipartisan enthusiasm for skill-
based hiring. I appreciate the Chairwoman's interest in
exploring how programs in the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunities Act, or WIOA, can do a better job of ensuring
equitable employment opportunities for those with barriers to
employment.
When the House passed the legislation to reauthorize WIOA
with bipartisan support last Congress, we included provisions
that support those from historically disadvantaged backgrounds,
such as the increasing use of wraparound services and codifying
comprehensive services for justice-involved individuals.
I am also hopeful that this committee can discuss how the
government can facilitate skills-based hiring practices,
without driving a wedge between the value of a college degree
and skills and experience. College degrees remain the surest
pathway to economic mobility. This does not mean that everyone
should be forced to go to college, nor does it mean that
everyone should be restricted to receiving skills training.
Both higher education and skills training should be
accessible to every American. In other words, Democrats agree
that skills-based hiring has the potential to make our economy
more efficient, more equitable, and more productive. We must do
our due diligence to ensure that new hiring practices close
income gaps and expand pathways to employment.
To do that, we need a robust body of evidence that
considers the employment outcomes of these individuals. Simply
put, we must ensure that skills-based hiring is not just
equitable in concept, but equitable in practice. To that end, I
hope we can pass a bipartisan and fully funded reauthorization
of WIOA that relies on evidence-based practices, and better
engages employers in our workforce development system.
We should also pass two initiatives that remove financial
barriers to upskilling. One, the National Apprenticeship Act of
2023, that is because registered apprenticeship programs rely
on skill-based hiring, and are alternative ways to economic
prosperity, and Workforce Pell, which would enable students to
use Pell grants to access short-term programs proven to lead to
good careers.
Today, I look forward to discussing how these steps would
unlock the full potential of our economy, rebuild the middle
class, provide employers with the skilled workers they are
looking for, and create more options for workers to find
meaningful careers. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I thank the
witnesses for being with us this morning, and I yield back.
[The Statement of Ranking Member Scott follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Scott. Pursuant to
Committee Rule 8(c), all members who wish to insert written
statements into the record may do so by submitting them to the
Committee Clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5
p.m., 14 days after the date of this hearing, which is July 6,
2023.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days to allow such statements and other extraneous material
referred during the hearing to be submitted for the official
hearing record. I now turn to the introduction of our
distinguished witnesses.
Our first witness is Dr. Karin Kimbrough, who is the Chief
Economist for LinkedIn located in Sunnyvale, California. Our
second witness is Dr. Mark Smith, who is Director of H.R.
Thought Leadership for the Society of Human Resource
Management, SHRM.
Our third witness is Dr. Papia Debroy, who is Senior Vice
President of Insights for Opportunity at Work. Our final
witness is Dr. Dan Healey, who is Head of People for Customer
Success for SAP, which is located in Newton Square,
Pennsylvania.
You certainly have some interesting titles today. We thank
our witnesses for being here today and look forward to your
testimony. I will remind the witnesses we have read your
written statements, and they will appear in full in the hearing
record. Pursuant to Committee Rule 8(d) and Committee practice,
I ask that you limit your oral presentations to a 5-minute
summary of your written statements.
I also remind the witnesses to be aware of the
responsibility to provide accurate information to the
Committee. I now recognize Dr. Kimbrough for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. KARIN KIMBROUGH, CHIEF ECONOMIST, LINKEDIN
CORPORATION, SUNNYVALE, CALIFORNIA

Ms. Kimbrough. All right. Thank you. Chairwoman Foxx,
Ranking Member Scott, and members of the Committee thank you
for inviting me to testify today. My name is Dr. Karin
Kimbrough, and I serve as the Chief Economist at LinkedIn. My
team has been researching how we as a nation can do better to
match talent to jobs, to enhance outcomes for individuals and
employers alike.
I appreciate the opportunity to share LinkedIn's insights
on a skills-first approach to hiring talent. In the U.S. today,
there are 10.1 million unfilled jobs on LinkedIn alone. The
number of open jobs has doubled in the past 3 years. At the
same time there are nearly 70 million workers that are not
being considered because they lack a college degree.
These include Americans like Sierra, who had worked to
acquire new skills over the past few years and is now seeking a
better paying job as an IT manager, however she finds she is
consistently shut out, not because of lack of skills, but a
lack of a degree in a system that too often overlooks other
means of recognizing talent.
Sierra, and our more than 200 million U.S. members interact
with millions of employers seeking new and exciting job
opportunities, and this gives us at LinkedIn a real time view
of our economy, and how companies find and hire talent. It also
shows us that our current system of hiring is simply not
working. It leaves far too many people behind.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics indicates that there are
nearly 1.6 unfilled position for every unemployed person in the
U.S., highlighting a large imbalance between labor demand and
supply. When employers hire based on degrees, they miss out on
half the workforce.
In particular, this locks out roughly three-quarters of
rural Americans, Hispanic Americans and Black Americans who do
not currently hold a 4-year degree. Our nation and our economy
cannot afford such a system to continue. This trend has major
implications for growth in equality and inflation. It is also
unlikely to change dramatically in the foreseeable future given
early retirements and an aging workforce.
We recently released a comprehensive report which
highlights how a skills first approach to hiring can address
this gap by vastly expanding the pool of qualified talent, and
Democratizing access to jobs. Our research found that in the
U.S. the impact of shifting to a skills first approach
increases the number of qualified, eligible workers by nearly
20 times.
With a skills first approach in jobs where women are
particularly unrepresented, such as technology or construction,
the proportion of women in the U.S. talent pool would increase
26 percent more than it would for men. We also found that
younger workers are in the best position to benefit.
In the U.S. the talent pool increases more than 18 times
for Millennials and more than 21 times for Gen Z workers. This
approach incidentally also serves employers, who can be more
adaptive in meeting their changing labor needs which will only
accelerate with the continued advances of technology.
We are already seeing evidence of this skills first
approach taking hold at many levels. Most significantly, our
data indicate that roughly one in five job postings on LinkedIn
no longer require a degree. Today, almost half of hirers on
LinkedIn use skills data to filter candidates for jobs.
In the last year, LinkedIn members have added 380 million
skills to their profiles. Let me be clear, we recognize the
value of a college degree. It is a meaningful signal of
competency and skills; however, we need to create multiple
pathways to signal relevant talent and skills. We believe that
there are several ways that Congress can help advance a skills
first approach.
As part of the reauthorization of WIOA we recommend a few
things. First, encourage employers, states and local
governments who receive WIOA funds to use skills first hiring.
Allow funds to support employers seeking to implement skills-
based hiring. Leverage the required skill assessments to enable
credentials reflecting current skills and allow support of
research evaluation and dissemination of skills first hiring
efforts.
In addition, we support Pell Grants being used for short-
term programs, and we urge you to consider other
recommendations included in our report. Thank you for the
opportunity to share our insights, our thoughts, and our
recommendations. LinkedIn looks forward to working with this
Committee as you pursue policies which promote a skills first
agenda for Sierra and the 70 million Americans.
[The Statement of Ms. Kimbrough follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much, Dr. Kimbrough. Dr.
Smith, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. MARK SMITH, DIRECTOR OF H.R.
THOUGHT LEADERSHIP, SHRM, ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA

Mr. Smith. Good morning. Madam Chair Foxx, Ranking Member
Scott, and honorable members of the Committee. I am Mark Smith,
Director of H.R. Thought Leadership at SHRM, and I am happy to
testify for you today about skills-based hiring.
On behalf of the 325,000 members of SHRM, thank you for
this opportunity to be a witness on this important issue.
Particularly, on the use of skills assessments. Skills-based
hiring is about ensuring people have a chance to showcase their
actual qualifications for the job. Unbiased, and validated
skills assessment measure the critical knowledge and skills
needed for a job.
Simply put, they open the doors to opportunity. SHRM
research has found that more than half of employers use pre-
employment assessments, and 78 percent of those say it improves
the quality of hires. These assessments connect employers to
applicants who have been historically underrepresented,
including those who did not attend top tier schools, people who
served in the military, or were incarcerated.
Workers with disabilities, youth who did not attend
college, and older workers. The use of skills assessment
requires careful management, and SHRM has identified best
practices to consider when utilizing these assessments,
including conducting a self-assessment to determine whether
current employment practices disadvantage certain groups,
creating objective, job-related qualification standards, and
implementing practices that diversify the pool of candidates.
While there are several strategies for determining the job
relatedness of a selection procedure, I will highlight two that
are most relevant for skills testing. First, determining
validity through content related evidence involves
demonstrating that the test content matches what employees need
to do on the job.
This involves a careful analysis to understand what's
required to perform the job, followed by creating or adopting a
test that reliably measures these skills. Second, a criterion
related validation consists of administering the test to a
group of people, usually job incumbents, and then evaluating
them on the job. To the extent that people who score higher on
the test perform better on the job, the test demonstrates its
validity.
There are several tools and approaches available to make
the validation process easier. For example, the Federal
Government has created a foundation with the Department of
Labor supporting Ona system, which saves time and effort for
organizations by providing valuable skill information for
nearly 1,000 occupations.
There are also existing tests available to employers for
screening applicants on a variety of skills and skill levels,
but employers must consider that these tests require some form
of local validation. Some employers turn to credentialing
organizations for verifying the skills of applicants by hiring
individuals who already have the relevant credentials.
Despite the benefits of skills assessments, many employers
are not taking advantage of them. Some believe that skills
tests are not worth the required effort, while others find the
process too complex. Still others fear lawsuits or penalties
from the EEOC or other agencies.
As this Committee pursues the reauthorization of the
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, there are several
ways in which this law may be used to elevate skills-based
hiring. This includes expanding the range of business services
made available to employers through local one stop career
centers, to include assistance with implementing a skills-based
hiring system using unbiased and validated skills assessments.
WIOA should also be amended to expand the transparency of
credentials and ensure that participants enrolling in an
eligible program have a clear understanding that such a
credential validates their job relevance. In addition to
changes to WIOA, SHRM supports the Advancing Skills-Based
Hiring Act introduced by Representative Stefanik last Congress.
This would provide employers with confirmation from the
EEOC when their use of a specific assessment meets the burden
of being job related. Enacting this legislation will give
employers the assurance they need to implement a skills-based
hiring system. Thank you.
[The Statement of Dr. Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Dr. Smith. I now recognize Dr.
Debroy for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. PAPIA DEBROY, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT
OF INSIGHTS, OPPORTUNITY@WORK

Ms. Debroy. Good morning, everyone. Chairwoman Foxx,
Ranking Member Scott, and members of the committee. Thank you
for the invitation to be with all of you today. It is an honor
to speak with you all. My name is Papia Debroy, and I am a
researcher with the nonprofit social enterprise Opportunity at
Work.
I am going to begin my remarks today actually by anchoring
us in our labor force. There are about 140 million of us who
are showing up to work every day, active. Of that 140 million,
about 60 million of us have a bachelor's degree, or a higher
level of educational attainment.
These workers have traversed a pathway through higher
education that is critical to our economy. In addition to these
60 million workers though, are another 70 million; they have a
high school diploma, do not have a bachelor's degree, but are
skilled. They are skilled through alternative roots, that
acronym is STARs.
Who are these workers that we call STARS? Well, they are
our cousins, they are our neighbors, our siblings, our parents.
They have gained skills through military service, through
community college programs. Most of the time they have gained
skills by showing up to work every day getting better at their
jobs and gaining skills on the job.
We know the world is different for STARs than workers with
a bachelor's degree. When a STAR entered the workforce in 1989
at the age of 25, they were earning less than a worker with a
bachelor's degree. That has historically been the case. If you
track the STAR for the next 30 years of their career is what
you see is that 30 years into their career, a STAR is still not
earning what the bachelor's degree worker was earning on day
one of work.
That inequality is new to this generation. STARs make up a
significant portion of our workforce in every region of this
country. In Virginia, STARs are 48 percent of the workforce. In
North Carolina, they comprise 54 percent of the workforce. In
both states, they contribute to the economy in jobs ranging
from sales representatives to software developers, to
registered nurses.
When a job requires a degree, employers automatically
screen out almost 80 percent of Hispanic workers, more than 70
percent of Black workers, 75 percent of rural workers, and
nearly 70 percent of veterans. While bachelor's degree programs
have been, and always will be, a critical pathway to higher
wages in this country, tens of millions of STARs are also
gaining valuable skills for higher wage jobs , and they should
not be locked out of opportunity.
Especially because if you study the skills of STARs, what
you will see is that millions of them are positioned for higher
wages today. 30 million STARs have skills to make a transition
to a higher wage job if they were given access and opportunity
to do so today.
They are positioned for jobs we call gateway and
destination jobs. Unfortunately, these are precisely the jobs
they have been locked out of. They have lost access to almost 7
and a half million gateway and destination job opportunities in
the past two decades.
These jobs include jobs like secretaries, H.R. assistants,
computer support specialists, medical diagnostic technicians.
These degree barriers are compounded by other barriers,
misperceptions, biases, weaker professional networks. They
amount to something we call the paper ceiling, and more than
half of our workforce faces it.
What might we do to actually tear the paper ceiling? First,
as an employer, the public sector plays a critical role.
Federal, State, and local government actors are some of the
largest employers in every State in this country, yet the
government is requiring degrees for its roles more often than
the private sector, and State and local governments require
degrees more often than Federal positions.
I do want to note how quickly the public sector has acted
upon realizing this error. 14 states as of this week have
removed degree requirements for State roles in the past 12
months. Second, we need a 21st century Federal workforce data
infrastructure. All labor market participants need trustworthy,
granular, timely and accurate data on occupations, vacancies
and employment wages and skill needs.
We need that data longitudinally and across geographies.
Third, we must strengthen WIOA. WIOA is the primary funding
source offering STARs access to skills training and support
service programs. Through it we must elevate community
colleges, and the key players they are in local economies.
The majority of STARs have some college credit, and nearly
one of every five STARs has an associate's degree. Finally,
employers must be incentivized to shift to skills-based hiring.
Policy makers can actually support employers as they experiment
with new ways to do this. For example, employers are deploying
apprenticeships and other work-based learning programs in many
new roles in the US labor market. It is time to tear the paper
ceiling for STARs. Thank you for your time today.
[The Statement of Ms. Debroy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Dr. Debroy. Now, I recognize
Mr. Healey for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. DAN HEALEY, HEAD OF PEOPLE FOR
CUSTOMER SUCCESS, SAP, NEWTON SQUARE, PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Healey. Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member Scott, and
honorable members of this Committee, my name is Dan Healey, and
I am the head of H.R. for Head of People for Customer Success
Organization at SAP. Thank you for the opportunity to
participate in this hearing and provide a perspective of a
major technology employer and human capital management provider
on skills-based hiring, an issue of critical importance to our
Nation.
As the world's largest enterprise cloud software company,
SAP and our 107,000 global employees, and 25,000 colleagues
here in the United States help over 450,000 companies of all
sizes, and all industries run at their best. This footprint
enables SAP to touch almost all corners of our U.S. economy.
Technology is changing rapidly, with over 10 million open
jobs and business needs evolving, companies have had to rethink
their approach to hiring, developing, and retaining talent to
focus on skills. This approach means urgent business needs,
while expanding the opportunity for more workers to enter into
in demand career pathways.
SAP has invested heavily and transformed our recruiting
process, our approach to employee upskilling and career
pathways, and also invested in digital skills in communities
nationwide. Skills-based hiring is not just a trend. It is a
business imperative. It allows us to tap into expanded pools of
quality candidates, reduce time to hire, create opportunities
for individuals who are often overlooked.
At SAP we have shifted away from looking at those
traditional signals such as degrees and universities attended,
and instead we looked at each candidate, and looked at how we
can find ways to distill what that person can accomplish. We
recognize that individuals can develop the skills needed to
work in technology through many education pathways, including
community colleges, career technical schools, software boot
camps, technical certification programs, high school technical
programs, on the job apprenticeships, internships, and our own
U.S. military.
Once workers join SAP, we continue to use a skills-based
approach to advance our talent. For example, in our labs, our
software labs in the United States we run rotational
development programs that uses blind screening processes to
assess talent for relevant skills. As a result, we have hired a
more diverse class that we have ever had, with over 50 percent
females, and the largest number of underrepresented minority
developers from boot camps and career backgrounds that were
often overlooked.
At SAP, we commit toward our employers ongoing success, and
part of that recipe for this is again skills-based development.
For example, our salespeople and software developers receive
skills assessments annually, and personalized coaching,
regardless of their background. We can correlate skill
development to on-the-job performance and company achievement.
At SAP we believe in building skills not only for our
employees, but for communities nationwide. In 2021, we launched
Learning as ASAP.com, a free platform to build relevant skills.
Last year, we had more than a million people actively engage
with SAP's learning content, which offers some of the world's
deepest and most robust IT education.
In 2022, we further committed to upskill 2 million people
by 2025 through our digital initiative. Here we focused on
reaching out to communities previously excluded from some of
these programs, specifically women, underrepresented
minorities, veterans, unemployed and under employed, along with
students.
We have programs for students, including K through 12 STEM
education, university career development and adult learners,
and especially our NS2 serves program, which supports our
Nation's veterans, which is a skills-based hiring program that
has led to a 98 percent placement rate among our veteran
graduates.
SAP is not alone in taking these actions to build skills in
workers. For example, through the Business Roundtable Corporate
Initiative, CEOs are collaborating to implement skills-based
hiring and advancement practices, develop and scale
apprenticeship programs, and advance other initiatives, focused
on workforce development such as second chance hiring.
To compete at home and globally we need a public workforce
development system that is flexible, and capable of preparing
workers with skills for in demand and growing careers, urging
the Nation's jobs and skills mismatch will require a major
national commitment to lifelong learning, and a robust suite of
services to deliver state-of-the-art continual skills.
Thank you for this opportunity to share SAP's own workforce
perspective. It is an area ripe for bipartisan action, with
measurable opportunities to grow the economy and expand our
talent pipeline. I know I speak for many across the business
community in saying I hope this Committee and Congress will act
on these opportunities.
We are committed to partnering with you to meet employers'
workforce needs and deliver opportunity for Americans to
strengthen our global competitiveness.
[The Statement of Mr. Healy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Healey. Under Committee
Rule 9, we will now question witnesses under the 5-minute rule.
The Ranking Member and I will go first on asking questions, and
then we are going to disappear, but we are not disappearing, we
are going over to the floor because they do not schedule the
floor around our Committee unfortunately, so we both have to go
to the floor to handle a bill, so I want the witnesses to
understand we are not just leaving Willy Nilly.
Thank you very much. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Healey, you made a very strong business case for skills
base hiring. Despite all the clear upsides you mentioned, it
appears most employers are still relying on credential criteria
like bachelor's degrees and previous job titles.
What do you think prevents employers from making the shift
to skills-based hiring, and what is the most important thing we
can do as policymakers to break down these barriers?
Mr. Healey. Chairwoman Foxx, thank you for your question.
Because skills-based hiring requires different processes and
different thinking, there is a change management issue I
believe at heart. Organizations have long struggled with skills
management due to outdated skills frameworks, and the
difficulty to objectively assess skills and validate those
skills.
Skills-based hiring requires more time. It requires more
planning. Often the way headcount is deployed based on budget
process, it is a land grab, and you fill open headcount
quickly, which puts lots of pressure on talent attraction
organizations, and on H.R. to onboard.
We have seen some great examples in my home State of
Pennsylvania. For example, we have removed the 4-year degree
requirement. I believe that policymakers can support by
creating multiple pathways for improving transparency in data
systems, and creating flexibility for workers, and ensuring
data privacy also to acquire new skills.
We also see the Pell grants to pursue new skills in
creating industry opportunities as well.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. Dr. Kimbrough, in
your testimony you discussed how certain skills overlap across
occupations and industries. In the case of a worker seeking a
degree change, or a worker displaced by economic destruction,
how can better identification of their existing skills and
awareness of occupations with similar skills accelerate their
advancement in the workforce?
Ms. Kimbrough. Thank you, Dr. Foxx. We think it is really
time to rethink how we hire and grow talent. At Linkedin, we
see talent everywhere, but we do not see access to opportunity
everywhere. When we think about a skills first approach, what
we see, and I say this as an economist looking at our data, it
benefits workers, it benefits businesses, employers, it
benefits the economy.
Some of the main conclusions which I referenced earlier
were the 20 percent increase in the potential talent pool in
the U.S. just by taking this approach alone. What I did not
mention as well, was the fact that Democratizing access to
opportunity benefits, in particular people without a college
degree, but also women, and frankly, all generations.
We see that it provides an increased resilience for workers
who are navigating uncertainty and economic shocks when they
are relying on their skills, as opposed to trying to find a
similar job title. We also see that the data, our own data,
actually suggests that when workers add skills, and the more
skills that they do add the quicker they find a role, and the
fewer jobs they need to apply to. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. Dr. Smith, I am
concerned that small and midsized employers may look at all the
requirements for creating a valid skill's based assessment. I
think it is too complex to pursue. Can you briefly walk us
through how an employer can ``transfer'' the validity of an off
the shelf assessment development by a third-party, and do you
think additional clarity and technical assistance from the EEOC
on transporting validity would be valuable to employers seeking
to switch to a skills-based approach to hiring?
Mr. Smith. Thank you for the question, Dr. Foxx. I am happy
to talk about validity transportability. The basic premise
there is if you have a job in one organization where you have
validated a test, in order to transport that validity to a
different location, you have to demonstrate that the job in the
new location is functionally the same job.
There are a couple of different ways to do that. One of the
ways is through a job analysis questionnaire, where you can
match the duties and the requirements of the job that has
validity evidence to this new job. There is not a lot of good,
specific guidance, and I think that is what we in the hiring
community would need, good, specific evidence on what it takes
to demonstrate proper validity for transportability.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. I yield back the
balance of my time and recognize the Ranking Member for the
purpose of questioning the witnesses.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Dr. Smith, just following up on that,
I think that your question and the answers reflect the idea
that some tests may not be effective in evaluating potential
applicants, and also may show bias without showing any
relationship to the ability to do the job.
Who would actually validate? How do you validate the test,
and how do you avoid inadvertent bias?
Mr. Smith. Thanks for the question, Representative Scott.
As long as the test is job relevant, that equals valid, and so
you need to go through the process to show job relevance, and.
Mr. Scott. Well, you could show job relevance with a
discriminatory impact.
Mr. Smith. Right. First of all, the tests need to be
standard and used in a standard way, so everybody is treated
the same, the test is scored the same way. Some of the times
even when you go through that the test does show differential
outcomes for different groups.
That does not necessarily mean that the test is biased, as
long as the test is job relevant, and everybody is treated the
same way, then the desperate impact that may occur.
Mr. Scott. Okay. There have been tests in the past that
have shown job relevance valid, but better workers do better on
the test, and poor workers do worse, with a notorious racial
bias. Dr. Debroy, can you speak about how you deal with the
racial bias in some of these standardized tests?
Ms. Debroy. Thank you for the question, Mr. Scott. When we
approach hiring with pedigree-based screening mechanisms, we
automatically screen out a huge portion of workers in the
United States. Almost 80 percent of Hispanic workers are
screened out, 75 percent of Black workers are screened out. We
also screen out veterans. We screen out rural workers in
disproportionate volumes.
When we approach the skills-based hiring method, there are
a lot of different mechanisms that employers have available to
them to actually think about how to assess the skill of a
candidate. The first recommendation that we make is actually to
consider the skills that the worker is gaining on the job in
their past job, because that is how actually most of us make
transitions in the US labor force.
We make transitions to jobs that require very similar
skill. The deployment of methods then to actually evaluate the
skills of the candidate will vary a lot across different
occupations in the US labor market. Picking the right skills
assessment to actually ensure that you are not being biased, is
a critically important point.
Mr. Scott. You acknowledge that some tests may be good in
terms of general validation, but have a significant racial
bias?
Ms. Debroy. Yes, that is correct. There is a lot of
variation in the types of assessments that employers use, and
some of them are not neutral. That is correct.
Mr. Scott. OK. Thank you. Dr. Kimbrough, on LinkedIn, a lot
of people look at the resume. Can you say a word about how a
resume would look much better if it had a registered
apprenticeship. Registered apprenticeships have national
recognition and high standards. and how would that help
somebody's resume?
Ms. Kimbrough. Thank you, Ranking Member Scott. When people
are able to on Linkedin members essentially upload their
resume, and we call it their profile, data they choose to share
publicly. They can put not only prior experience, what they
have done, where they have worked, which would include
apprenticeships, but also skills that they have gained in the
process of doing any particular job.
The benefit to answer your question of having an
apprenticeship would allow a member on Linkedin, or any worker
or job seeker to have more exposure to skills, to have more
opportunity to showcase and demonstrate their skills on their
profile, and therefore be perhaps a stronger match for a wider
range of roles
Mr. Scott. Let me get in another question. Do you also have
skills certificates that you can get at a community college?
How would a short-term Pell help you get those certificates on
your resume?
Ms. Kimbrough. Thank you for that question. I should say we
are supportive of short-term Pell programs in general, and you
have asked the question how would they help someone secure a
role? To the extent that any member can enhance their education
and skills by attending a community college, that is clearly
another one of those powerful channels for accessing
opportunity for enhancing someone's human potential.
We would be very supportive of that. The more skills that a
member has, as I have said before, the more opportunities they
have to be recognized by recruiters and hirers and actually
secure a job faster. I will say that we find that people who
are sub-baccalaureate actually benefit disproportionately more
by adding the skills to their profile.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Foxx. I now recognize Mr. Thompson for 5
minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to all of
our witnesses for being here today. As co-chair of the
congressional Career and Technical Education Caucus, this
hearing is timely given the challenges employers currently face
in finding skilled workers in nearly every industry and every
sector across the country.
CTE schools often educate students with these skills in
mind at a low cost, and quite frankly, in a short period of
time. I am glad we are finally recognizing as a society the
value of careers and education outside of traditional 4-year
universities. As I travel throughout my district, I am
incredibly pleased to see many career and technical education
schools that now have waiting lists because of increased
interest and demand.
These investments in our future will help the next
generation climb the ladder of opportunity. I always like to
say it is not so important where you start in life, it is where
you end up, and having been able to reach that next rung in the
ladder of opportunity is what we work hard to provide. Mr.
Healey, as you noted in your testimony, in a company as large
as SAP, you implement a wide variety of hiring practices to
recruit and retain a talented workforce.
While I am sure there are some jobs that your company may
require a bachelor's or an advanced degree, you noted how many
do not. Even though a perspective employee may not have all the
necessary skills for the job on day one, that does not mean
that the employer cannot fill in the gaps. Mr. Healey, how do
you think we can place a greater emphasis on employer driven
upscaling, such as apprenticeships, or other work based
learned?
Mr. Healey. Congressman, thank you for your question.
Employers will provide and serve an important role in helping
newly onboard candidates develop ongoing learning and skills to
succeed in their job, and to also be prepared for jobs that do
not quite exist or have not been budgeted yet in a company.
Companies like SAP, place a great emphasis on learning, on
skills development, along with rotation programs, internship
programs, but collectively we believe in on-the-job learning,
which is every talent has an opportunity to learn about 70
percent of what they need to be successful, and for career
growth on the job.
Another 20 percent is in mentoring and coaching, and
ongoing support. Finally, the 10 percent part is in the actual
hardcore skills learning, so it's a combination, but it is
certainly fostered on the job.
Mr. Thompson. Similarly, your testimony touched on the idea
that skills-based hiring means that companies should consider a
job applicant's current skills, in addition to a candidate's
ability to acquire new skills for the future. What are some of
the ways employers can gauge an individual's potential to build
relevant skills?
Mr. Healey. Thank you for the question. I think that as was
referenced earlier, certainly standardized and objective
measures to assess a candidate's skills, the applicability of
those skills for roles within for example, SAP, will allow more
employers like SAP, and this is something that we're trying to
do consistently to make more informed and better decisions, but
it does come down to that standardization and objective
measurement of the skills, the skills that are in demand for
roles.
That removes again the focus away from the degree, and
perhaps the institution where they studied to the actual
skills.
Mr. Thompson. Very good. Along those lines, graduates from
CTE schools are often well equipped with the technical skills
and knowledge that employers are looking for. I have been proud
to see so many partnerships between the private sector and
these schools in recent years. In many instances, local
employers are coming to CTE schools with a set of skills or
knowledge that they need to fill vacant positions, and these
schools have been able to collaborate with them on a curriculum
that meets these needs.
Do you think that there are ways companies like SAP can
partner more closely with CTE schools so they are involved in
the student's education, and can ensure that their skills meet
the needs of today? Quite frankly, tomorrow's workforce?
Mr. Healey. Congressman, yes. I do agree, and I believe
that there is a massive opportunity for companies like SAP to
partner with institutions like this. Just as an example, now
this is our university alliance program, but we are extending
that approach. For 25 years SAP has worked with universities
and community colleges around this country where we engaged
between 125,000 and 150,000 students to learn very specific SAP
skills that can apply to not only our customers. We have
197,000 customers in the United States, but also our partner
community, and certainly SAP alone.
These programs incorporated into course work, CTE programs,
et cetera, provide very relevant, timely skills which will
stand out by the way on a Linkedin profile, which will stand
out when we are running skills-based searches on Linkedin to
identify candidates.
I think that there is more of an opportunity to move that
focus and engagement from the university level to other schools
as well.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Healey. My time has expired.
Thank you.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I now recognize for 5 minutes Mr.
Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for being here today. As was said earlier, the topic
of this hearing could not be more timely. The labor market
continues to outperform all the predictions of economic experts
on both the right and the left. On June 2d, when the latest
Bureau of Labor Statistics report came out the economy again,
defied all the predictions, and created 339,000 new jobs.
At the same time, as Dr. Kimbrough said, the number of job
openings increased. Trying to sort of solve this problem for
both employers, but also for perspective workers is all about
trying to change the metrics in terms of how a person connects
to a job opportunity.
In Southern New England, we are seeing this phenomenon on
steroids. Right now, with the Electric Boat Shipyard, who is
doing again, a huge increase of work for the Navy in terms of
submarine production. Last year, they hired just under 4,000
people in Rhode Island and Connecticut, and that hiring target
for this year is 5,750.
When you are dealing with an issue of that magnitude,
skills-based hiring just by sheer volume, is driving change in
terms of how people are approaching. The good news is that WIOA
pre-apprenticeship training programs really have just shown at
this moment, in terms of setting up accelerated programs for
welding, electricians, metal trades in general, that over a
period of 8 to 10 weeks, you can actually get in the door of
the shipyard, and then go from there on a daisy chain on a full
apprenticeship training, and then even to advanced degrees
because there is a lot of work for engineers, both in cyber and
design work that is happening right now.
The biggest issue that we are hearing from our workforce
board in terms of how we can fix this, and again, a lot of the
reforms that you have discussed here today I think would be a
really good help for rewriting WIOA, but trying to get people,
particularly from communities that really have not
traditionally sort of been part of this sector to sort of take
the leap in terms of moving forward, is dealing with just basic
issues of how do you afford to take care of your kids, you
know, get transportation, pay the rent during that time period.
There is a limit to how much the stipends under WIOA can
really afford to you know, to make it feasible for people to
move that. Obviously Pell grants, short-term Pell grants would
help the cause, but you know last year's WIOA actually
addressed this issue by just sort of recognizing these
realities, in terms of trying to help people really transform
their lives.
Again, Dr. Kimbrough, maybe you could comment in terms of
just how that can really help solve this skills gap problem.
Ms. Kimbrough. Yes, thank you so much Congressman.
Absolutely. We have seen it in our own data, which spans over
200 million members in the U.S., the impact of the shocks to
the labor market, both from the pandemic and then the recovery,
which was on its own since became a positive shock.
As a result, we see that it is really important for workers
to have all their needs met in order to be able to explore
careers, because careers are not prescribed anymore. They are
very opaque. It is not a lateral where you know you go one
step, next step. You acquire skills, and then you look around
to see where could this skill possibly be applied. Where can I
maximize my income?
Absolutely. It is important and imperative that we find
ways to expand all the pathways for people to access skills,
and then to be able to demonstrate them, have them validated,
so they can have career progression and receive really better
wages.
Mr. Courtney. Again, that is why we have to really focus on
sort of just basic, you know, realities for people in terms of
trying to make that change. It is not that easy, as much as we
know it works. Another example of earn while you learn is
apprenticeships, which goes back to the 1930's, the Fitzgerald
Act.
Congressman Fitzgerald had my congressional seat at the
time when President Roosevelt signed that into law. We know it
works, but unfortunately, it has been too narrow a segment of
the population that has been served by it. The reauthorization
that got through the house last year would extend the scope to
other sectors like healthcare that have not traditionally been
apprenticeship.
Again, Dr. Debroy, in a few seconds, maybe you could just
sort of talk about how that model, which again allows people to
deal with how you pay the bills can really change people's
lives.
Ms. Debroy. Absolutely. Apprenticeships as you say, they
are a time-tested way for actually offering employers a very
reliable pipeline to scale talent, and while they have
traditionally been concentrated in the trades, we did some work
last year that actually showed that in the last 10 years,
apprenticeships have expanded to 100 new roles in our labor
market , and employers have actually been implementing informal
apprenticeships in an additional 200 roles. They are absolutely
a method that employers should be thinking about considering in
more scale in the coming years. Thank you for the question.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I will now recognize for 5 minutes
Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the Chairman, and I thank my friend
from Connecticut too for highlighting that because it is
expanding because it works, and we need to keep doing that.
Thanks for the panel for being here. Dr. Kimbrough, you have
seen I am sure as I have, over and over again the shortage of
skilled workers with employers just crying out for needed
workforce.
Could you explain more fully finding--Linkedin's finding
that shifting to a skills first approach can increase the
number of qualified eligible workers by nearly 20 times, and I
am sure you have illustrations from the small business
community on that.
Ms. Kimbrough. Thank you. Thank you so much, Congressman
Walberg. Let me just say that we do indeed hear from many, many
employers who are looking for talent across our range of
industries from healthcare to construction, even manufacturing
and retail, so it really is happening at this moment.
Our findings that we could potentially expand the talent
pool of qualified, eligible workers by up to 20 times in the
U.S. is calibrated on the idea that if you look at just the
skills that people have, and you do not try to first filter for
a degree, you start off already with a much broader pool of
people. If I started with a constraint of just a degree, I am
already restricting myself to only 37 percent of working
Americans, and then I need to find the skills that I want.
If I do away with that constraint, I am starting with a
much larger pool, and that is how we get in very quick terms,
how we get to a 20 times number. It ranges from industry to
industry. Some industries do not see as much of that expansion,
but all industries do see some expansion of talent pool when we
use a skills first approach.
On the small business point, absolutely, we see we have
about 80 percent of our employers are small businesses on our
platform, so they are definitely adopters of this approach.
Mr. Walberg. Yes. Well, that is my approach to fishing. I
look for the largest schools and go for that. Dr. Kimbrough,
you discussed also how Linkedin found that matching job seeker
skills to job postings, specifically led to higher success
rates and required fewer applications.
The workforce system under WIOA is tasked with getting
employed and underemployed workers into job opportunities. Can
you explain Linkedin's approach to matching skills with
opportunities, and are there ways the workforce system could
better utilize skills information to achieve that mission?
Ms. Kimbrough. Yes. At Linkedin we have a platform that
essentially enables job seekers to come and find employment.
They can look privately, or they can signal that they are open
to work, and we have employers who are seeking talent. What we
find in our data is that as I said before, there is an
increasing need to find talent and a lot of industries are
still struggling.
I will add that we are starting to see job seekers come
back with a little bit more interest in the past couple of
months, so maybe the labor market is rebalancing. What we see
in our data is better matching. When we use a skills first
approach you get a more precise match, a better match, and what
that means I will put my economist hat on, is that we just have
a more efficient market.
It is more dynamic, it is more efficient because people are
moving around and navigating their career choices according to
the skills they have, and not because they need to find a job
with a similar job title. It is kind of a win, win, and I do
believe last, as I said before, that it does provide a lot more
access opportunity for many more underserved groups, rural
Americans, veterans, women. Thank you.
Mr. Walberg. Yes. That is what we want to see, everybody
participating yes.
Ms. Kimbrough. Absolutely.
Mr. Walberg. Dr. Smith, you indicated that 79 percent of
H.R. professionals find scores on pre-employment skills
assessments just as important, or more important than
traditional criteria like degrees or years of experience. How
can directly assessing the skills of candidates through
assessments lead to more effective hiring, and then relying on
a bachelor's degree or a proxy for ability?
Mr. Smith. Thank you for the question, Representative
Walberg. I think it is time that we stop making the assumption
that the only place to get key skills and abilities are through
colleges and getting college degrees.
Mr. Walberg. Parents, are you listening. Go on.
Mr. Smith. There are skills assessments to more directly
assess these things, and I think that organizations should use
them more, and worry more about the skills, and less about
where they came from.
Mr. Walberg. Yes. Well, I appreciate that, and I think it
is going to be proven. I yield back, thank you.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize for 5
minutes, Dr. Adams.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for joining us this morning. In North Carolina,
Governor Cooper, recently issued an executive order emphasizing
the importance of skills-based hiring. In turn, this would
encourage more North Carolinians to apply for government jobs,
and to help recruit additional skilled workers without having
attained a 4-year degree.
In your testimony, Dr. Debroy, you identified 13 State
governments that have removed degree requirements for their job
classifications. As you correctly pointed out, these actions
send a message to other employers in the State that, if a
worker has the skills to perform a job, they should have access
to it, and the potential career advancement that it offers.
Would you elaborate just a bit more, on how State governments
are currently benefiting from the adoption of skills-based
hiring practices?
Ms. Debroy. Thank you so much for the question. You are
exactly right. In the last year, as of this week, 14 states
have removed unnecessary degree requirements for hard to fill
roles. 10 Governors followed Maryland's lead last summer in
passing executive orders, and 4 states have passed legislation
focused on skills-based hiring.
This is a bipartisan movement, and it speaks to the
critical need, as you say, to rethink our standard hiring
practices in a labor market that is not allowing many workers
to reach their full potential. These actions are really low-
cost ways to actually open hiring processes to more applicants
and improve economic mobility in regions for qualified workers.
In the example of Maryland where we worked closely with the
Governor, they were motivated to address the needs of the
workers, and what they actually were able to do by shifting
their hiring practices in this State alone, was enable access
to 1.3 million additional workers.
Ms. Adams. Let me ask you because I have got a few more
questions. Were there any barriers that you could mention that
you have seen?
Ms. Debroy. Barriers to removing degree requirements?
Ms. Adams. Yes.
Ms. Debroy. Yes. Good question. In the context of the
public sector, I think one of the things that has actually been
proven now by these 14 states is that when the decision is
made, action can follow quite quickly, and I think that is
actually a really important signal for all of us to be latching
onto at this moment.
Ms. Adams. Dr. Kimbrough, you mentioned briefly in your
testimony that nondegree holders lose a vital path for upward
mobility, when employers use degrees as a proxy for skills. Can
you talk a little bit about how skill-based learning impacts
the ability of workers without degrees to earn promotions, and
do you think that this practice, whatever it may be, would
minimize any possible biases when promoting workers?
Ms. Kimbrough. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
We believe that talent is equally distributed. Opportunity is
not, and skills are everywhere. Everyone possesses a variety of
skills, a constellation of skills that will allow them to
perform tasks and hold jobs.
To the extent that workers are able to embrace learning,
and we see this in our own platform with more and more people
choosing to invest in themselves through online learning
courses, or from taking classes at community college, and
adding those skills to their profile, we think about almost
like skills are a currency or a building block for your career,
and the ability to acquire the skills is what will allow people
to enrich and empower themselves, so I absolutely think that
this is how people can progress in their career, by having
greater experiences, and a bigger breadth of experiences, and
fundamentally expanding the avenues.
Ms. Adams. Yes, yes ma'am. Well, thank you. In the LinkedIn
report it is mentioned that traditional skills, such as years
of experience are flawed predictors of somebody's ability. Can
you discuss briefly how to prepare workers who are already in
the workforce for skills-based hiring?
Ms. Kimbrough. I am so sorry. Could you repeat just the
last part of the question?
Ms. Adams. Okay. For workers who are already in the
workforce, how should they be prepared for skills-based hiring?
Ms. Kimbrough. For workers--very briefly, for workers who
are already in the workforce preparing for skill based hiring
really means being able to acquire skills, showcase your
skills, demonstrate them in a way that can be valid, and
remember that all skills matter. So many skills are changing
over time. It is imperative for people to kind of continuously
learn.
Ms. Adams. Well, thank you very much as a 40-year college
professor at a 4-year institution, I certainly appreciate all
that you've offered today. Thank you very much, and I yield
back.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I recognize for 5 minutes Mr.
Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Yes, first of all Ms. Kimbrough, you said
something during your testimony that bothered me a little bit.
You advocated more use of Pell grants. My concern with Pell
grants is always there is a significant marriage penalty
associated with them, and a significant work requirement,
because they are based on a percent of poverty.
I can think of three examples, since I have had this job of
people giving the examples of people who didn't get married
because they have a ``free college course''. It is not entirely
free, but it helped you along those lines. Could you comment on
that? That is my big problem with Pell grants. How do you
respond to people who would say they expect the person who is
grabbing the Pell grant when they have a full-time job, or
grabbing the Pell grant when they are married, in both of those
cases they do not get it because they are not in poverty, and
therefore the programs discourage work and discourage marriage.
Ms. Kimbrough. Thank you for that question, Congressman. At
Linkedin we support broadening the pathways for people to have
access to opportunity, so to the extent that a Pell grant is
yet another option, in a variety of options. We do not support,
or we have not taken a position on any particular piece of
legislation. We are just very supportive of the opportunity to
work with this Committee to find numerous solutions for all
Americans.
Mr. Grothman. No. You understand what I am saying though?
Right? A Pell grant is based on percent of poverty, so if you
are saying going to school in addition to working full-time,
you cannot get the Pell grant. If you marry somebody who has a
full-time job, you cannot get the Pell grant. There are people
who do not have jobs, or do not get married because they are
eligible for these sort of programs. Does that bother you?
Ms. Kimbrough. Apologies. I have not investigated this
issue very deeply. It is a little outside of my domain as a
macro economist, but I would say it would seem prudent to have
as many options as possible, so that we do not let people who
can fall outside and garner solutions.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Well, next question for Mr. Healey. I
think doing court cases, which are now 50 years old, makes it
difficult to give people some tests that maybe you can take,
maybe even in lieu of a college degree. How do you think we can
deal with it because on the one hand you want to be able to
hire people based on skills, or ability to do something.
On the other hand, we have court cases kind of saying that
you cannot give certain tests. Can you explain to me how we can
kind of square that circle?
Mr. Healey. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. I
would like to illustrate an example, an investment that SAP has
made. I hope it directly answers your question. Years ago, SAP
created our NS2 Serves program. It is a program designed to
support our veterans.
There are 19 million American who are veterans, and to
address a growing need, now this is very specific around the
skills piece that I want to touch on. SAP launched NS2, and it
is a subsidiary of our company. The program is in high demand,
and we essentially offer free training in supporting veterans
in their transition to civilian life.
It has an eight-to-12-week intensive program, and students
at all technical levels, and I think this is I hope, addressing
to your question at all technical levels, yet worldclass
software training and education and learning.
Mr. Grothman. No. You are not answering my question, so I
have got to maybe clarify it more. If you were going to give
somebody a job, and you are not going to say you have to go to
college, you have to find another way to measure this applicant
versus another applicant. There was a time in this country
where you could do that by giving them a test, okay?
Court decisions struck down the idea of just giving
somebody a test. On the other hand, I think we have all sorts
of people who could do a job without going to college, you
know, but they cannot get that job. How does a company identify
that person? The obvious way to do it is to give them a test.
Mr. Owens. Brief question, you can answer.
Mr. Healey. Very shortly. I would say it is again back to
the skills assessment piece. What are the required skills for a
role independent of their credentials, and what are the skills
which we can assess our candidates and we can match those
skills.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. Thank you so much. I would like to
recognize for 5 minutes Ms. McBath.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you. Thank you so much, Chairwoman Foxx,
Ranking Member Scott, and to our witnesses for making this
hearing possible today. A college degree or credential is still
the surest path to economic security, but it is clear that
relying so heavily just on a higher education system that
remains pay to play is not what is best for our students, or
for our country.
For too long, it has been emphasized that the only way to
be successful is to possibly take out a loan and go to a 4-year
institution. While we have some amazing universities in our
country, and in my State of Georgia, and they truly do kind of
remain the surest path for Americans to create a good life for
themselves and for their families, there are other options out
there that we need to be doing more to promote as well.
Every student in high school should have the chance to be
encouraged to learn more about the trades and other
opportunities to get ahead like registered apprenticeships. I
am highly in favor of those. While I firmly believe that every
student should be able to go to college if they want to, the
fact of the matter is that some families are just not able to
afford to send their children to college because of the cost ,
a direct result of decreased public investment in higher
education, and I can say that having had millions of dollars
taken out of our public school institutions and universities in
Georgia.
There are over 122,000 adults in my district alone, Georgia
7th, that qualify for some form of student debt forgiveness
under the President's plan, and I believe that this number
would not be nearly as high if we did more in Congress, my
colleagues and I, to lower the cost of college, while also
making sure that students are made aware of, and able to
consistently follow other opportunities that are out there in
order for them to become successful.
Programs offered by IBEW Local 613 at the Atlanta JATC
Electrical Training Center, in my district, provide students
with the opportunity to do a lot of on-the-job training,
learning and getting paid a good wage at the same time. First
year inside wiremen and construction electrician apprentices,
get paid about $14.00 or $15.00 an hour, and they can expect to
earn over $34.00 an hour after graduating from this program.
We should be doing more to expand these opportunities by
reauthorizing the National Apprenticeship Act, and taking real
steps to ensure that every American knows that these are viable
paths of success for them.
Dr. Debroy, I have two questions for you today. Most
registered apprenticeship programs utilize a skills-based
assessment when onboarding an apprentice with some competency-
based training as a means of education. In your testimony,
which I have read, you mentioned that nearly 40 percent of the
workers entering new registered apprenticeship programs are
going into high wage jobs that historically require a
bachelor's degree, and that is an incredible statistic.
Would you agree that registered apprenticeships are
considered a skills-based hiring approach?
Ms. Debroy. Thank you so much for the question. Yes.
Absolutely apprenticeships are a critical lever available to
employers to bring--a skills-based approach to their hiring.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you. How can employers utilize
registered apprenticeship programs when adopting skills-based
hiring practices? If you really expound upon that because I am
a huge proponent of what we are talking about today. I have a
district in Georgia that is a lot of first--and second-
generation immigrants.
A large number of my constituents were born outside of the
United States, so this is really important for my constituents,
so that they too are able to really be able to be economically
successful.
Ms. Debroy. Absolutely. Apprenticeships are really a time-
tested way of offering employers a reliable pipeline of talent
that is skilled. To your point, we have seen in the data since
2010 that registered apprenticeships have expanded in terms of
what types of jobs they are preparing workers for. We have seen
them expand to 100 new roles in the US labor market, and
further, we see that they are actually implementing informal
apprenticeships as well to an additional 200 roles on top of
that.
I think what is also important to understand in the data is
that by opening up these new roles to apprenticeship
opportunities, they are actually attracting a much more diverse
workforce as well. We are seeing increased opportunities for
workers of color, as well as women, into a number of these
positions that have historically not been available to workers
who have not gone to college.
These positions include jobs in healthcare, in tech, in
advanced manufacturing and other sectors as well.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you so much. I appreciate it, and I
yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize for 5
minutes, Mr. Allen.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for being
with us today. This is some good information that we need to
pass on to the entire country. I had the privilege to grow up
on a small farm and as most young Georgians did prior to 1970,
I learned many skills growing up on that farm like operating
equipment, masonry, concrete welding, and carpentry.
I did that starting at a very young age. I was able to pay
my way through college by working as a welder in a large
fabricating plant, and of course I attended a very fine
architecture and engineering college. My folks first ownership
opportunity in the construction industry was with a second
generation general contractor, founded by my mentor for many,
many years who had a sixth grade education, and was one of the
most successful. He was an icon in the community, a very
successful business person.
He, like most young people that grew up in the great
depression. He had to go to work and help support his family.
Dr. Smith, as employers in Georgia, and across the country are
struggling to find workers, it is time to acknowledge that a
college degree is not always a good measure for what a worker
can bring to the table.
In fact, I will add this, the majority of my--in the
construction business, my subcontractors grew up through the
trades, and they became entrepreneurs and formed their own
businesses, and they employed hundreds of people. They were
able to learn quickly their passion.
We need to support employers who want to find qualified job
candidates through skills-based hiring. In fact, nearly two-
thirds of Americans aged 25 and older do not possess a
bachelor's degree, yet society has perpetrated this idea that a
college degree is the only pathway to the middle class, and a
good paying job.
Can you explain how to use the preemployment skills
assessments can help employers remove degree barriers and give
all workers a fair chance to compete, and the respect they
deserve?
Mr. Smith. Thank you for the question, Representative
Allen. I think for every job there are a set of skills that
somebody needs, and they can get those skills from multiple
different places. You can get them from colleges. You can get
them from vocational schools.
There are some schools you can get from watching videos on
YouTube. As long as they have the right skills for the job, and
they can pass a reasonable assessment of them, I think that
makes them a good candidate, and they should at least be
considered for the job regardless of educational background.
Mr. Allen. In your testimony you said 78 percent of H.R.
professionals believe the quality of their hires has improved
due to use of preemployment skills assessments. However, you
also mentioned that many employers are not taking advantage of
them, one reason being a fear of lawsuits or penalties from the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Would you like to expand on that should EEOC provide more
technical assistance to employers to help them shift to skills-
based hiring through the use of assessments?
Mr. Smith. Yes. We would like the EEOC to provide some
assistance on the front end, so organizations are vetted,
getting the thumbs up from the EEOC if they have done the
validation of their tests properly.
Mr. Allen. Employers would be interested in receiving this
help?
Mr. Smith. Yes. The employers that we have talked to, they
would be interested in receiving this help, and I think it
would help many organizations get over the fear of using the
preemployment assessment.
Mr. Allen. Mr. Healey, last Congress I joined my
colleagues, Elise Stefanik, Michelle Steel, Julia Letlow in
introducing the Validate Prior Learning to Accelerate
Employment Act. The initial legislation is to accelerate job
seekers. Do you agree that this would be a good update to the
law?
Mr. Healey. Congressman, I do agree. I think any
opportunity again where we can focus subjectively on skills and
remove barriers creates standards around that so that companies
can match demand with existing talent that's out there. We
know, and my fellow experts here have confirmed that there is
an inordinate number of amazing talents out there that are
seeking opportunities, so I do agree.
Mr. Allen. Thank you. I am out of time, but I do have
additional questions about WIOA and some of the things they
need to be doing to assess skills, and I will submit those in
writing. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize for 5
minutes, Ms. Hayes.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. We actually agree on this topic that
there is more than one way to be successful. I think Democrats
have been saying that all along. We think that we need to have
multiple pathways for opportunity, and that there are multiple
avenues for success. I would be the first to say that. I was a
high school teacher for 15 years, actually National Teacher of
the Year, and I know that college is not for everyone, so there
is no dividing line here.
Democrats support the idea of apprenticeships, of workforce
training opportunities, and we have been completely on board
with this issue from the very beginning, but I welcome this
conversation today. It is very important to encourage students
to pursue whatever pathway will present the most amount of
success for them, whether it be higher education or workforce
opportunities , and expose them to those opportunities, and the
realities of the job market.
The trades and skilled labor offer career assistance
directly out of high school, as well as the opportunity to
learn as you go through apprenticeship programs, which would be
lifesavers for many of the students that once sat in front of
me.
In Connecticut, 4,400 advanced manufacturing companies
employ more than 161,000 workers. My district is home to one-
fifth of that workforce, so I am definitely supportive of these
initiatives. More and more out of State companies are also
moving to Connecticut because of the existing workforce in the
aerospace and defense industries, and the potential to grow.
This spring, two manufacturers in the housing sector
announced new facilities in Connecticut, citing the talent pool
available in the State. Additionally, this year Connecticut
introduced the state's manufacturing strategic plan, with the
vision of increasing manufacturing employment to 235,000 by
2033. Last Congress, the House passed the Workforce Innovation
and Opportunity Act, which would have reauthorized Federal
programs to support workforce development efforts and
transition to skills-based hiring.
Unfortunately, the Senate did not take up our legislation,
but we will continue to work on this, and I think we all
agree.--I also think that these programs have to be accompanied
with both funding and transparency to make sure that we are
doing them correctly.
Dr. Debroy, through Opportunity at Work, we have helped
businesses implement skills-based hiring in their employment
processes. You have acknowledged that removing formal education
requirements is a first step to facilitating hiring through
skills obtained through alternate routes. In your experience,
what is the most common obstacle employers face when trying to
adopt skills-based learning, and what can the Federal
Government do to remove those barriers?
Ms. Debroy. Thank you so much for your question, and for
your remarks. There are a number of ways that we could think
about actually supporting businesses to do this work because it
is a different method from what many of them are accustomed to.
I actually want to start by talking about our small and medium-
sized businesses.
They employ 60 percent of STARs today. In fact, 43 percent
of STARs are actually employed by a business with fewer than
100 employees. For many of them, shifting these methods is
actually quite difficult. Through WIOA, we actually have an
opportunity to increase services to businesses that could
support them in making these shifts within their own
organizations.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. Dr. Kimbrough, you mentioned the
utilization of a LinkedIn skills assessment. Could you
elaborate further on what skills are being assessed through
those evaluations, and how they may be used for different
occupations?
Ms. Kimbrough. Yes. Thank you for the question,
Congresswoman Hayes. We have at Linkedin the ability for
members to put up to 50 skills on their profile, and they can
then be--we encourage them to take skill assessments of some of
the top skills that they rank on their profile.
If they choose, they can post the results of that skill
assessment. Now the benefit of the skill assessment is that we
are actually in an economy where frankly skills are changing. I
can look back 5 years and see what the skills were required for
certain occupations and see what they require now based on job
postings, or based on what people who are in that job actually
say that they can do, and it is changing.
Digital skills are evolving. As a result, what we see is
that it is critical to kind of continually acquire these skills
because we do not know what the future roles will be.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. One of the things I used to say to
my students is, tell me what you are good at, and we will
figure out the job that is best for you, so I welcome this
conversation, and I encourage anything that we can do to make
sure that my kids have jobs of the future. I yield back, thank
you.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I now recognize for 5 minutes, Mr.
Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Smith, in July
2020, President Trump issued an executive order overhauling the
Federal Government's hiring practices to prioritize skills over
college degrees. From a private sector perspective, can you
describe what was meaningful about that executive order, maybe
even talk about some of the lessons learned?
Mr. Smith. Thank you for the question, Representative
Banks. I do not know that I can speak to the specific results
of the change in the legislation from President Trump. We have
seen a shift over time from less organizations demanding
college degrees. I do not know that I have a good answer for
the----
Mr. Banks. It would appear from your perspective did it
appear to make a difference? If it was July 2020, I suppose
there was not that much time that it was in effect, although it
appears that the Biden administration has kept the executive
order in place from my perspective. I do not know if the rest
of you would agree with that, but it appears that that was a
pivotal point, and a change that--one thing that this
administration kept into effect from the last is that anybody
else?
Ms. Kimbrough. If I may, I would just add ancillary point
that we are indeed seeing an increasing number of roles on our
platform that do not require a college degree, and it was
roughly 8 percent of roles did not require a college degree
before the pandemic, and now it is about 20 percent, so it is
increasing.
Mr. Banks. Anybody else?
Mr. Healey. I would offer an insight as a technology
employer. Skills-based hiring, and of course removing those
requirements that you mentioned, I think ultimately it just
allows insurers more talents to apply for perspective roles and
enter the workforce. That is very important. This means that we
of course can grow talents, employees, colleagues when they
join SAP.
We also look at it not simply for identifying talents that
we would not necessarily look for, but also career growth
opportunities, because the talent and the skills are universal.
The question is what are the skills that are necessary to bring
someone into an organization like SAP, No. 1.
Then No. 2, what are the skills that are necessary to take
future jobs that may not exist? It is skills about, you know,
transferable skills I would say, and also this learning mindset
and curiosity, which in and of itself is an important skillset.
Mr. Banks. I mean the reason I ask is because often times
the private sector follows public sector, in decisions like
these, and this appears to be a very significant change from
the last administration. This administration has kept in effect
that the private sector is following. I think that is what you
are describing, what you are agreeing with.
Dr. Kimbrough, does Linkedin have a public sector division
within the company that talks about hiring practices, and?
Ms. Kimbrough. Thank you. Congressman Banks, I know that we
have employees at Linkedin that are focused on the public
sector, but I would have to get back to you to give you an
accurate answer.
Mr. Banks. I did not expect that you might be able to
answer this question, but any idea does the administration have
any dialog at all? This administration, former administrations
with Linked in on practices and strategies where you have an
avenue to give them feedback?
Ms. Kimbrough. I think I would have to followup with you on
that, or have our team followup with you on that.
Mr. Banks. Yes. That is fair. That is all I have. Very
important conversation, we appreciate all of you being here
today. I yield back.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize for 5
minutes, Ms. Manning. Norcross. Mr. Wilson. Okay. Mr. Norcross,
all right.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman. I have to agree with my
colleagues, this is probably one of the most cooperative
conversations we have had in here, and I am really glad to see
it because I think we all can understand that the idea of
having a job, a career is extremely important to people for
literally their life.
One of the narratives that you have talked about today, and
quite frankly we hear is in order to make it in America you
have to go to a 4-year school. That is great. Certainly, I
would want to make sure my doctor, medical doctor has gone
there, but the idea of getting ready for employment, and only
going to college leaves out, what you talked about, so many
people.
I myself, went to the other 4-year school. I did an
apprenticeship. I speak from a little bit of history here, and
the reason being is that, quite frankly, parents are the first
line of trying to encourage their kids to pursue a career or a
job. What I have heard so often is the idea of a child who is
not pursuing college, they go to a vocational school because
they could not do it. They are not quite as smart.
That narrative is out there, and quite frankly, parents
have to give their children permission to pursue an area of
their career that they want to go, always striving to do
better. The idea of doing better is only through college, I
think is something that I am continuing to hear here.
That permission to pursue a career that works for the
individual that he can take care of his family is extremely
important, and this is why skills. You have hit the nail on the
head. This is where I want to ask a couple of questions. You
brought up transferable. We used to call it portability, but
skill is just a word. What particular skills we are talking
about, and whether it is a registered apprenticeship, and
registered equals an assessment that there are standards.
If you have an unregistered program, that is great. The
difference between those two is when you are trying to
describe, you get your first job and it is an apprenticeship
program, but if it follows another standard, what does that
mean to your next employer if they do not know what it is?
This is the question I want to pursue is, whether it is an
apprenticeship or skills, how do we set those standards? Dr.
Kimbrough, if you could touch base on that, and how do you fit
that into your assessments?
Ms. Kimbrough. Yes. Thank you so much for the question,
Congressman Norcross. What I would say is we have right now at
Linkedin roughly 40,000 skills, a sort of a taxonomy of skills.
We can see over time how skills are changing as I mentioned
before, which is quite interesting.
We also think about skills in different categories, so
there are soft skills that to use your word portability, or
transferability, that go with you through your whole life as
you develop them and refine them, so think of communication
management, leadership, these are all skills that are highly
sought after in job descriptions.
Then there are of course, business skills and Microsoft
Word or PowerPoint kind of skill, and then there are the
digital skills, which are evolving relatively quickly depending
on the coding, or if you are an online marketing expert. We see
different buckets of skills.
To answer your question, I would say all of these different
buckets are evolving at different paces, but all of them are
extremely important to seeing anyone survive--or, I should say
survive, succeed, excuse me, in their career.
Mr. Norcross. Yes, and I guess that is one of the
challenges is once we describe what the skillset is A, did you
really do it? People like to embellish, and that is always
going to be an issue, especially you are an employer. You are
assuming, rightfully or wrong, that what you are telling us is
truthful.
How do we go through that because if you graduate from a
registered program, there is a certificate.
Ms. Kimbrough. Yes. I understand your question now. Well,
there are a couple of ways on Linkedin that people can sort of,
I would say verify or validate their skills. One is through
endorsements, which has long been a feature on the platform,
which allows someone who is like your first connection, who
truly knows you, to say I worked with this person. I observed
them for 7 years performing this skill.
Generally, because your reputation is on the line you are
going to be truthful about the accuracy and the proficiency.
The other way is there are skill assessments on Linkedin. Those
do exist, and people can take them. There is a range of skill
assessments, not for all 40,000 skills, but there is a range of
them.
Mr. Norcross. No, but the idea of heading this way, the
other side of the coin is the employer when they are looking
for it. We have been trained that it is your college, it is
better than a skillset. The term bias is not where I am going,
but an inclination that you want to hire somebody who has a 4-
year degree versus somebody who has outstanding skills.
How do we address that? I mean you talked about it in a
couple different ways, but how do we get employers to say, it
is what job you can do well, not necessarily what piece of
paper you carry with you.
Mr. Healey. Thank you for the question, Congressman
Norcross. I think it is a very important one, and I will
illustrate one example that we have used in our labs out in
California. We have labs in Pennsylvania, and in the Midwest as
well. We implemented a blind screening process focused
specifically on the skills.
The skill, the knowledge skill requirements of the role,
but also the skills of the candidates. In parallel with a
rotation----
Mr. Norcross. I am sorry, I would love to followup with you
offline here, my time is ending, so thank you for indulging me.
Mr. Healey. Okay. Sure.
Mr. Owens. I appreciate that. I recognize for 5 minutes Mr.
Burlison.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Debroy, I want
to kind of go in a different direction. I think it is clear
that employers, and it is good to see that employers are re-
thinking the way they hire people, and that they are re-
thinking the value of college degrees.
My question is, is there any research done to evaluate the
impacts, the economic impact on individuals when states pass
occupational licensing laws that require a college degree? For
example in Missouri, we had to fight for years to get African
hair braiding separated from the cosmetology license.
Ironically, students were being forced to pay a lot of money
and go to school for 18 months or more to get a degree that did
not even teach them how to braid hair, and yet the State was
requiring that.
There are numerous examples across the country. I will stop
ranting and just kind of ask that question. What is the impact
of all these occupational licensing laws that require some
education that may not be important?
Ms. Debroy. Thank you so much for the question. On the
occupational licensing landscape, that is outside the domain of
my expertise. I will say though that there are a range of
different credentials in the United States. There are more than
a million of them, in fact. The impact that they have in
signaling to employers that a worker has skills varies so much.
I think one of the important pieces of the conversation
that is getting picked up right now is, how do we actually
measure skill as opposed to a credential? A lot of the
conversation today, I would say, is focused on how do we think
about the skills of an individual, and matching the skills of
an individual to the skills required of the job? Thank you.
Mr. Burlison. Right. Yes. Thank you for answering that. As
the policy of the United States, at the Federal Government and
the State level is to subsidize universities, which I think has
created the dynamic that we have today where we have too few
people in the trades, and skills based, and we have a lot of
people with philosophy degrees, myself included, right?
We got to this point because we funded it. We subsidized
the universities, and then we do it directly, and then we fund
the scholarships, and we fund the grants and the loans and
everything like that, right? Then we create laws that say if
you want to be an interior designer and pick the color of the
paint on the wall, you better go to college.
Well, at the end of the day it causes economic harm to
consumers because now I have got to pay just for somebody to
help me pick color pallets, I have got to pay for their college
degree. I think thinks are moving in an interesting direction.
Coming from the IT sector there was a lot of value that
companies like Cerner Oracle that I worked for, that they saw
in paying for on demand training.
Online training, things like pleural site became available,
tools like Linkedin Learning was an option as an employee, and
it opens up employees to a vast opportunity to not only learn
how to do their job but learn how to do the job they want to
transition to. With that in mind, I want to ask a question of
Dr. Kimbrough. Should we really rethink where we are sending
money? Should we rethink that perhaps maybe we could grant tax
incentives for individuals that want to pay for online learning
tools that may not be at a university level?
Ms. Kimbrough. Yes. Thank you, Congressman Burlison. I
would say first off what we see in our own data is that more
and more workers are embracing the idea of investing in
themselves and learning, whether it is in an online format, or
they are looking for opportunities, consume information,
education themselves and skill themselves in any form they can.
I would actually say that I think it is beyond the scope of
my expertise to say what Congress should determine it should
fund, but we definitely would support the idea of broadening
the pathways, the plurality of pathways for access, and not
creating barriers.
As an economist, I would tell you it is incredibly
inefficient to have barriers, you know, unnecessary barriers.
Mr. Burlison. Right. For example, are education savings
accounts, are they eligible to spend money on some of these,
you know, trainings?
Ms. Kimbrough. I do not know that. I would have to get back
to you.
Mr. Burlison. Okay. Thank you. My time has expired. Thank
you.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize myself for
5 minutes. I am sorry. I would like to recognize for 5 minutes
Ms. Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am grateful for
this discussion, thank you for your testimony, everyone. I hope
this hearing will shed some light on how we can incorporate
quality, opportunity, and transparency for workers and
employers into workforce development.
Listening to my former colleague, my colleague on the other
side of the aisle who just spoke, reminds me of the importance
of really cracking down on these for-profit institutions that
promise skills and then do not deliver. I frequently talk about
the importance of having a path for everyone, and as a member
of this committee, as a member of my community, as a
policymaker, I understand that not everyone is on the same
path.
I do want to emphasize that the committee's focus on
credentials and competencies and skills should not come at the
expense of discussions about college affordability. That needs
to be part of the conversation as well. Colleagues on both
sides of the aisle with college degrees can attest to the value
of their education, and our Nation's students and workers
thrive when they actually have a real choice between getting an
affordable, debt free 4-year degree, or entering a workforce
training program.
This should be a choice, not a decision made because
college is not affordable. Dr. Kimbrough, our economy is
evolving rapidly. New jobs are becoming available daily for
workers in existing in emerging industries, and we are in a
pretty exciting time, and an opportunity rich moment for job
seekers and employers.
I am interested in learning more about how this changing
job market will affect skills-based hiring. Do you anticipate
that the credentials available to workers today will change as
job opportunities change? If so, how?
How can Federal policies such as the Workforce Innovation
and Opportunity Act be updated? We need to improve credential
transparency, provide some sort of baseline quality metric for
credentials, transferability for example, of credentials is
important to keep up with the pace of technology. Collecting
data about the utility of micro credentials.
Ms. Kimbrough. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the question.
To the first part of your question, I would say as we look over
time, we just see how quickly roles are changing. There are
roles now on our platform that did not exist a decade ago. The
skills that are required for these roles are also kind of
sprouting up anew.
It really is a moment of incredible change, which makes
skills all the more important to kind of match people. There
are employers who are creating roles where they are not quite
even sure of what the skills are that they require because
things are changing so rapidly. I see some nodding heads from
my fellow panelists.
I would say we absolutely need to focus on the idea that
skills are evolving over time, and we need to provide people
changes to update and grow those skills in a continuous
fashion. We see in our own platform that we have some 40,000
skills, and people at any given time are updating those skills
in real time.
To answer your other question about you now, more from a
policy perspective, I would say at Linkedin we support WIOA,
and feel that promoting a skills first approach should be a
central tenet of any reauthorization of WIOA, and I do think
that including awareness, including encouragement of public and
private sector employers to use skills first approaches would
be vastly appreciated.
Ms. Bonamici. I appreciate that. Thank you. A few years
ago, a very large tech company in this country did a survey of
the skills that they are looking for in employees. The
technical skills were actually at the bottom of the list, and
at the top of the list were things like communication,
collaboration, empathy, the ability to work on a team.
I just want to emphasize that those soft skills are really
critical as well. We cannot lose sight of that. The bipartisan
National Apprenticeship Act is a blueprint for how employers
can use skills-based assessments to determine the readiness of
apprentices for jobs for which they are hired, and last year, I
helped secure funding for a registered apprenticeship and a
pre-apprenticeship program in northwest Oregon called United We
Heal Training Trust.
It provides workers with personal and professional
development opportunities, allows employees to recruit and
retain skilled talent, but also improves the quality of
training for workers. Dr. Debroy, how can registered
apprenticeship and pre-apprenticeship programs like United We
Heal leverage skills-based hiring practices in recruiting and
hiring workers, particularly workers from underserved
communities?
Ms. Debroy. Thank you so much for the question.
Apprenticeships are a really important way that employees can
actually implement skills-based hiring practices. I think what
is really interesting to look at in the data is what this lever
has been able to accomplish for a lot of employers who are
deploying it.
What we see is much more diverse pipelines of candidates
entering these apprenticeship programs than we have
traditionally found in those occupations. It is actually
bearing out what we thought could happen with apprenticeships
to actually diversify a lot of occupations that have not
traditionally seen workers who are women, workers who are
people of color, at the same rates as other workers. Thank you.
Ms. Bonamici. I appreciate that. My time has expired. I
yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Owens. Thank you, Ms. Bonamici, thank you so much. I
would like to recognize myself for 5 minutes. First of all, I
would like to disagree with the Ranking Member. This is a very
exciting moment, really that we have such bipartisanship on
this. The fact that we are now talking to innovators in terms
of how to really disrupt this whole process of getting our
workforce going, very timely.
I think the fact that the American way is all about not
having caps, and we have talked about the glass ceiling cap, we
have seen the boardroom. Paper cap, it is the first time I have
heard this one, but it is now time decades later finally get to
it and I appreciate that in a big way. I want to thank you guys
again.
Mr. Healey, I believe the skills-based hiring will disrupt
traditional higher education, allowing new learning providers
to compete as alternative pathways for the same types of jobs.
How do you think higher education should adapt to a more
competitive landscape, and greater focus on job relevant
skills?
Mr. Healey. Thank you for the question, Congressman Owens.
Higher Ed, colleges and universities all need to evolve their
curriculum. All need to evolve their approach and incorporate
practical-based training into the academic coursework. It is
not just academic course work, but it is going to be practical
based skills training as well.
You know I referenced earlier our university alliance
program as one such example where we partner with partner
institutions, and literally hand our technology training and
incorporate that into classes. Consumers who are going to
colleges and universities, and junior colleges, are expecting
that the product continue to evolve.
I think that in concert obviously with public private, this
will ensure that more university-based hires are going to be
prepared with practical skills. This would just be a few
thoughts.
Mr. Owens. Okay. Thank you. Dr. Kimbrough, I thought of
something that you said earlier, I think kind of highlights
what we're talking about, skills are everywhere and they all
matter, and that is such a powerful statement, and I am glad
literally we are finally acknowledging that across the board.
To you, Dr. Kimbrough, I am encouraged by what you shared
with us about the rise of skill-based learning and hiring. Last
December, Utah moved to drop the bachelor degree requirements
from 98 percent of the State government jobs. From your
testimony it indicates that roughly four in five job postings
still require degrees.
What would it take for more companies to look beyond the
college degree as the only way for workers to gain in demand
skills, and what motivated Linkedin interest toward shifting
toward a skill-based approach?
Ms. Kimbrough. Thank you so much for that question. You are
absolutely correct. There are right now about one in five jobs
on our platform at Linkedin that do not require a college
degree, but it is an encouraging trend. There was a point just
before the pandemic when it was less than 10 percent of the
jobs required--did not require a college degree.
We have seen an encouraging trend, a positive momentum. We
also see now currently that about 45 percent of hirers on our
platform are using skills as a way to source and identify
potential candidates for roles. This is also up significantly
from the prior year.
We see this very positive momentum of adoption, but I think
it is going to take time. It is a major collective mind shift
that we have to undergo, and a behavioral change that we have
to go through in order to actually see this take root fully and
broadly across our economy, but I am absolutely convinced that
it is something that will benefit workers and businesses, and
the broader economy.
If I may quickly answer your last question, what made
Linkedin do this? Well, Linkedin has a vision of creating
economic opportunity for every member of the global workforce,
and the emphasis being on every means that we want to be a
platform for every member regardless of skill.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I am running out of time. I guess I
will just say this. We definitely have seen a paradigm shift,
and I think it is exciting for us on this side wanting to be
innovative legislators to talk to innovators to how to make
sure this paradigm shift fits in a way that we can bring so
many more millions of Americans into building a dream, so thank
you so much for that. I am going to recognize for 5 minutes
Mrs. Stevens, thank you.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to
witnesses for this hearing on the Competencies Over Degrees:
Transitioning to a Skills-Based Economy. We are all about
skills in Michigan, and I certainly hear from businesses, small
businesses, on the regular who are trying to hire a diverse,
inclusive and skilled workforce about a dog fight for talent.
We are in a race, given the incredible job growth that the
Biden administration has overseen, and as we continue to
achieve these record setting recovery milestones, it is vital
that we ensure such growth is equitable, and includes a path to
economic prosperity for as many hardworking Americans as
possible.
This certainly can be achieved by passing Ranking Member
Bobby Scott's National Apprenticeship Act of 2023, a bipartisan
bill that invests more than 3.85 billion over 5 years to
increase access to registered apprenticeships, youth
apprenticeships, and pre-apprenticeships.
We are excited about apprenticeships, and the registered
apprenticeship program is the best tool in our toolbox for
skills development. It will get students away from this debt
culture, earn as you learn, it is very exciting stuff.
Now, this word came up about taxonomy, okay, and I have a
confession because I worked with apprenticeship programs, but I
also worked for Obama's National Network for Manufacturing
Innovation, and we did this great thing in this lab I was in
overseeing, workforce development to do the taxonomy for
digital manufacturing jobs.
I got Healey here, Mr. Healey with SAP, all this incredible
innovation going on, and software and this and that. I do not
know how long you have been with the company sir, but you have
probably seen them through a lot, the company has.
I mean how were you, when the digital revolution hit, how
was SAP taking your existing workforce, getting them access to
skills, and then how were you communicating these new jobs on
these platforms that exist, and then with the community
colleges and the schools, and all this and that so we could
make sure we have these workers in IoT.
Mr. Healey. Thank you, Congresswoman Stevens. It is an
incredible pertinent point. SAP is going through one of the
largest skills transformations in our 50-year existence.
Ms. Stevens. Now you have got AI.
Mr. Healey. Now I have got AI, so you are absolutely right.
To make the journey from on prime software to cloud, the
disruption that cloud has had on customers, the expectations
for consumers. When you talk about generative AI as well, so we
are embarking on a workforce transmission plan not only across
107,000 colleagues, but within the United States, and it is
back to skills.
Ms. Stevens. You have got to look at these apprenticeships
too. I mean look, this is a topic I have engaged on for a long
time, and no one is here to finger point. I mean we have got to
succeed because we have got the trained workforce of the future
today. It is continual learning.
Now we have got Dr. Debroy here, and I want to bring you
into this because can you talk about this relationship between
the registered apprenticeship program and skills-based hiring?
Ms. Debroy. Absolutely. Registered apprenticeships are a
critical lever available to employers to actually deploy
skills-based hiring and hire workers based on skill. I want to
go back to a point you made earlier because I think one of the
moments that is in front of us is actually an opportunity to
actually rethink how we collect data about our workforce in
this country.
We actually need a 21st century Federal workforce data
infrastructure to meet the needs of how fast skills are
changing in the US labor market.
Ms. Stevens. I mean you are right, though. I mean we do,
and it needs to evolve, and it has got to be alive, and
inputted into, and it is not just that you get your skill and
you are done. That is the beauty of these apprenticeships, and
that is the beauty of, we have got digital, but we have got
analogue too.
We are not ever going to get rid of the hard skills. The
painter is still going to paint. The road paver is still going
to pave. I do not care what kind of robot you have, what kind
of AI you have, come to Michigan and see my building trades in
action. It is real. All right, thank you. I am over time. I
yield back.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize for 5
minutes Mr. DeSaulnier.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Congresswoman for your passion and background on this. She is
being understated today. Dr. Debroy, first of all, I want to
acknowledge your resume. You went to the two best public
universities in the country, the world, Go Bears, Go Blue.
I represent a part of the San Francisco Bay area that has
tech in the East Bay but is also heavily industrialized. We
have had real challenges in the industrial sector with five
refineries, chemical plants, manufacturing, although that is
trying to rebound. In California, I led a task force in the
legislature, bipartisan, because we had eliminated a lot of our
career tech infrastructure.
It was interesting going around the State and seeing how
regionally we had gone away from that. We had heavily bought on
the Bay Area that knowledge-based economy. Everybody was going
to get a bachelor's degree, and the world had changed.
We have made really good progress on a bipartisan level in
California, building back partnerships, career tech, and now
with community college districts. The State California Building
and Construction Trades has changed dramatically. 80 percent of
their members are minority and women. I was recently with them
in a very disadvantaged community, you will remember this,
Richmond, where we have got apprenticeship programs where kids
from poverty are getting really good jobs in the industrial
sector right out of college.
125, $150,000.00 a year, they are deliberately looking for
kids in need opportunities. I spent a lot of time with the
Labor Institute at Berkeley and Michigan to talk to your folks.
This is a real partnership, but employers are the ones who are
pushing the hardest because they need the skilled workforce,
and they need it generationally at a time when the demographics
are a challenge.
The needs on energy transition, and since there are not a
lot of deep-water ports on the west coast, it means Puget
Sound, Long Beach and LA and San Francisco. Trying to do that
is very important for the global and the national economy.
It is sort of a missing part of our discussion here on how
do we rebuild these skills knowing that we are going to have
energy transition for two or three generations of the
workforce, and we are going to have retrain those folks. We had
to train them in the first place, but we have to retrain them
as well.
You want to train those IBW and boilermakers, but you have
got to get ready for they're going to be doing different work
over this transition. Can you just speak about that and your
experience?
Ms. Debroy. Absolutely. I will actually reference economic
history in responding to your question because we are at a
moment of transformation, and if we were to look to the past to
kind of understand what might be coming in the future, I think
we are sitting at a moment where there will be a proliferation
of jobs in the next decade, two decades, that we do not yet
know much about.
These are going to be new world occupations that we will
have to figure out how to train a workforce for. I think what
is exciting in looking at the data is that there are 70 million
workers who are skilled through alternative roots who are
building skills in their jobs today who could, you know,
transfer a lot of those skills into the newer jobs that are
coming online.
I think how we now start to think about training programs
to support them to make those transitions effectively and
efficiently, is a really important question for communities. To
your point, what is really interesting to study across the
United States is regionally how many of these communities are
performing for workers varies.
How we actually help communities recognize and understand
where are their pockets in their workforce who are prepared to
make these transitions immediately if they were given access to
them, is a really important question. Another really important
question is how do we take the workforce we currently have and
upskill them in the specific skills they need for these new
jobs that are entering our regions.
Mr. DeSaulnier. That is really important, and Dr.
Kimbrough, if we have any time, so succinctly, and a very big
question. The cultural problem, and I love this hearing, there
is a place for bachelor's degrees, master's degrees, doctorate
degrees, but as people who work for a living have told me, both
union and nonunion, it is about RESPECT. How do you get kids to
choose the right career, have their choices, and have that
competency?
The cultural problem is a big thing. We want to value
higher education, but it is not for everybody, and people who
work with their hands deserve the same infrastructure and
respect. Can you speak to that briefly?
Ms. Debroy. Sure. I think it is actually why it is really
important to understand the biases that we bring to our
language. A lot of our language about the American workforce is
deficit based. We think it is important to bring a different
narrative to workers who are gaining skills through many
different pathways. It is why we have termed workers who have
not gone to 4-year degree programs, STARs. They are workers who
are skilled, but through alternative roots.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A lot of good
conversation, but I really appreciate this today.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize for 5
minutes Mr. Good.
Mr. Good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
witnesses for being here. Dr. Kimbrough, in your testimony you
eluded to how COVID-19 changed the workforce landscape. Can you
elaborate a little bit on that?
Ms. Kimbrough. Yes, thank you so much, Congressman Good.
COVID-19 changed the workforce landscape in a number of ways.
There were some short-term impacts and long-term impacts, but
really briefly, the short-term impacts were obviously a very
quick rise in unemployment that over time, you know, came back
down.
We saw many more Americans actually back at work, and we
are now back at pre-pandemic levels. The long-term impacts were
about where we work and how we work, and why we work, and we
saw----
Mr. Good. Just to clarify, I am sorry, you said we are back
at pre-pandemic levels.
Ms. Kimbrough. In our data, and actually also in BLS data,
we see that labor force participation rates amongst Americans,
prime aged Americans, aged 25 to 54, is back at about pre-
pandemic levels. We also see in our own data the rates at which
people are being hired is about at pre-pandemic levels.
Mr. Good. Do you see--what impacts do you still see though
with the other health emergency finally, declared over. What
challenges do you see, or impacts do you see on the economy
that are beyond just the labor participation, which reports I
have seen is that we have the lowest participation rate. We
have got two or three million less Americans working than were
working before the pandemic.
Perhaps you could address that, but then also, what other
impacts do you continue to see with the emergency declaration
over?
Ms. Kimbrough. Yes, thank you. The labor force
participation rate that I was referring to limits it to just
the age of what we call prime age working Americans, so age 25
to 54, but there is a broader measure that includes people who
are older than 54, young than 25, and that is probably what you
have looked at, and so since we are both correct.
You asked the question about----
Mr. Good. Are there additional impacts?
Ms. Kimbrough. Yes. Yes. Absolutely. Other additional
impacts that we are seeing is just that the pace of change is
accelerating since COVID. People have transitioned to lots of
online work. There are online marketing specialists, that is a
role that has sort of always been around but is now one of our
top roles. It is on the platform.
We saw a lot more trucking roles for example because there
is so much more online shopping happening that people need
these warehouses and storage centers, and have the goods
delivered to their home. There are a lot of roles that are
changing as a result of COVID. It is changing the job market in
small and large ways.
Mr. Good. Are you seeing an unwillingness to go back to in
person work after folks have gotten used to working remotely?
Ms. Kimbrough. I would say that people really have enjoyed
the flexibility they get from remote and flexible work options,
but----
Mr. Good. Including if I may Federal employees who 80
percent are working 1 day a week by the way in person.
Ms. Kimbrough. We actually have quite, I would say, quite
extensive data on remote and hybrid, and what we see is that
employers are encouraging people to come back to the office.
More and more job postings are for hybrid or full-time onsite,
few are for remote.
The remote opportunities are declining, but applicants are
still overwhelmingly preferring to apply for remote roles.
Mr. Good. Can you share any thoughts you have on what the
impact of vaccine mandate--I was talking to a group of high
school students yesterday who showed up at the capitol steps to
meet with me, talked to them about how we fired--I use the term
we loosely.
We fired their parents because they did not get a vaccine.
Can you talk about what you have seen the impact of vaccine
mandate had on businesses?
Ms. Kimbrough. I do not have a lot of data on that in our
dataset. We did actually try to look at that back a few years
ago, and we just did not have a lot of data. We were attempting
to try to understand the degree to which, for example, job
postings or employers were requiring mandates, but we did not
have enough information.
Mr. Good. How about the impact on the relaxed work
requirements, verification requirements, the expanded subsidies
available if you will to able bodied workers. How has the
current welfare situation, the Federal subsistence situation,
or even for that matter State supported statistics impacted
employment today?
Ms. Kimbrough. What the economic data, and this is again,
this is not Linkedin data now. This would just be the economic
data that I look at as an economist, seems to suggest is that
there was a point at which Americans largely had a lot of
excess savings, and that allowed them to consume more, shop
more, it put pressure on the supply chains that were at the
same time being constrained.
I think most economists would say that excess savings is
slowly being wound down.
Mr. Good. Yes. If I may, you have got the 20 percent loss
in retirement accounts, the depleted savings because of folks
not working, combined with the massive 40 year high inflation,
and then interest rates which are quickly crushing American's
ability to buy homes, grocery prices, utility prices, gas
prices, housing prices, crushing American people all related to
the policies of this administration, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize for 5
minutes Ms. Wilson.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you so much. Thank you for having this
hearing today. I would like to try something new, so I am going
to ask all of the witnesses if you will--I want to put this in
the record, but I am going to ask you if you will answer me in
writing to these questions, but it will be on the record.
What are your own organizations? What leaders and
innovators and credentialing and work-based learning doing to
address the gap that exists in soft skills acquisition, such as
team building, communication, collaboration, which are also in
high demand by employers. That is No. 1.
How can we begin, even before college, to foster
collaboration between formal curriculum tracks and competencies
credentialing in organizations like yours? My own experience
with my 5,000 role model boys has shown that we cannot wait
until students reach higher education.
How would you propose collaborating with leaders in higher
education, particularly at large, urban, public minority
servicing institutions, and HBCUs so that they can benefit from
your proposed models?
Dr. Debroy, you highlighted that the current emphasis on
formal education strips historically disadvantaged communities
from job opportunities, 80 percent of Hispanic workers, 70
percent of Blacks, and 75 percent of the rural workforce, as
well as 70 percent of veterans. Would you share with us
additional ways in which skills-based hiring could further
improve the job prospects of historically disadvantaged groups?
Ms. Debroy. Absolutely. There is quite a bit of racial
segregation in our labor force today. In fact, if you look at
the Black STAR population, workers who are black, have a high
school diploma, do not have a 4-year college degree. What you
will see is that they are actually concentrated in a really
small subset of jobs.
In fact, there are 25 jobs that account for 50 percent of
Black STARs in this country. What I think skills-based hiring
allows employers to do is actually think about how workers in a
number of occupations that are lower or middle wage, are
actually building skills that are transferable to higher wage
occupations.
Our study of 130 million transitions in the US labor market
in the last 10 years actually suggests all of us make these
transitions with our skills. Workers with a college degree,
workers without a college degree. What we see though is that
Black workers and Hispanic workers are not given access to
skills-based transitions the same way as white workers.
When they do get access to those jobs, they earn less than
their white counterparts. We also see that for women when they
do achieve that transition, they are also earning less. Skills-
based hiring is a really critical and important lever for
employers to actually surface and find a lot of talent they
seek today.
I think it is imperative on us to actually think about this
method to diversify our workforce across the labor market.
Thank you for the question.
Ms. Wilson. Mr. Healey, in your testimony you touted how
the implementation of a blind screening resulted in the hiring
of a more diverse class of developers, and your experience can
help reduce potential biases across other industries. What
other insights did you gain from the implementation of blind
screening?
Mr. Healey. Thank you for your question, Congresswoman
Wilson. I do agree that blind screening as a process is a way
to identify hidden talent, emerging talent, and is very
effective. We ran such a process in our labs, SAP labs in
California and used blind screening as a way, not only to
identify talents that are often overlooked, but also as a way
to rotate talent within our organization as well.
Which became a part of our development program. This was
very effective. We found that in our incoming class by unit
using blind screening process, 50 percent of our talents were
female, and the largest number of unrepresented minority talent
as well into technology jobs that are traditionally overlooked.
We are an advocate for that, and not only that--for
identifying talent, but also for rotating the growing talent
within our organization.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you. I yield back. On record the
question, thank you.
Mr. Owens. Okay. Thank you. I would like to recognize for 5
minutes Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today. I welcome the opportunity this
hearing presents to discuss competencies and skills-based
hiring, as a concept. We have seen how governments and
businesses alike are looking at innovative ways to promote
skills-based hiring at both the Federal and local level.
Often, businesses and employers look at a bachelor's degree
as a guarantor of a certain level of literacy and numeracy. I
have heard the word proxy, that a bachelor's degree is a proxy
for a certain level of a set of competencies, but the reality
is that not every profession or every occupation requires a
bachelor's degree, and we have to find other ways.
We have to look at ways to get past the idea of a
bachelor's degree being a proxy in all cases. Now to be clear,
I am not interested in bashing 4-year degrees. We still know
that one of the surest ways to achieve economic mobility is by
achieving a high-quality bachelor's degree. Not all bachelor's
degrees are equal.
Often, too often here in this committee room, in the name
of trying to appear as if one is a populist, or somehow closer
with the ordinary person, or whatever that might mean, people
end up bashing higher education.
That should not be our message either. I was a former high
school teacher, and I would still recommend to students that
they have a 4-year degree in their mind, but you do not have to
achieve it all at once. It can be achieved in stackable
credentials.
I was a community college trustee as I said at Riverside
Community College, and one of the programs that I supported
being implemented, or being established, was the physician
assistants program at the community college level. We were the
only community college west of the Mississippi River to
actually have a physician assistant's program.
During the 90's and most of the aughts, in fact all the way
through the aughts, you could get a physician's assistants
degree, or a certificate, or license with a 2-year community
college program. There are some initial requirements to get
into the program, which mainly was about 5 years of experience
in a medical career prior to being a program, you know, maybe a
corpsman or maybe a medic, or maybe an EMT.
You could satisfy it in a number of different ways. The
interest in the program was substantial. It drew a number of
students to the community college, and you could earn very,
very good wage or not even a wage, a good salary after
completing this program.
To my surprise when I came to Congress in 2013, I learned
that the independent accrediting body phased out the community
college program and said that you have to get a master's
degree. This adds substantial more time, and both getting your
bachelor's degree and your master's degree. It left me furious
as a community college trustee.
From what I knew, our students were scoring just as well on
the board scores, kind of an indication of competency. I would
like for anyone to, I only have about a minute left to respond
to the story I just presented to you which comes from my own
experience. Does anyone have anything to add quickly before my
time runs out?
Ms. Debroy. I will add a note on the important of community
colleges as a pathway for the majority of our workforce because
community colleges have proven to be engines of economic
mobility for workers who are skilled through alternative roots.
The majority of STARs actually have some college credit, and
almost one of five STARs has an associate's degree.
This is actually a really critical pathway that we continue
to invest in in this country, and ensure that workers are able
to translate the learnings they get in community college to
earnings in the labor market.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, you know it is unfair
because you are not unfair, but unfair that I asked that
question to my panel because looking at their backgrounds they
really didn't have a background to sort of answer my question.
I would love it if the committee could look into this issue of
credential creep, but also how is it that we see these programs
eliminated?
People could have achieved in 2 years, is it really
necessary to get a master's degree in order to be a physician's
assistant? I mean could that be done? I know people getting
training in the military as corpsmen and as medics. I wonder
how much more education do they need to come out and be like a
physician's assistant, or a nursing, or you know, an advanced
practice nurse.
Mr. Owens. I would love to. I love it that we are having
these kinds of conversations about innovation, and what really
does count, and what impacts as soon as possible now in our
society.
Mr. Takano. Well, I would love it if we could work together
to get a panel, no disrespect to this panel, but a panel that
could engage this about you know, about these independent
accrediting bodies. I do not want to muck that up, but I still
think there is something wrong when you go from a 2-year
community college program to a master's program. What is up
with that?
Mr. Owens. Well, we will have Dr. Foxx look into this for
sure. Thank you so much. Appreciate that. Thank you. I would
like to yield 5 minutes to Ms. Chavez-DeRemer.
Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for
holding this important meeting. There have been a lot of
exchanges today, and our workforce consistently prioritizes
skills over degrees.
No other country can compete with us. Apprenticeships play
a huge role in maintaining that economic edge. Oregon has
created the right environment for maintaining an incredible
apprenticeship system, one which other states frankly should
copy.
If you go to the Oregon Apprenticeship and Training
Divisions website you will find easily accessible program
equipping Oregonians to become bricklayers, educators, fire
fighters, aircraft mechanics, iron workers, and so many more
jobs that without, our State couldn't function, quite frankly.
Dr. Debroy, in your written testimony you discussed the
need to have updated and accessible data bases, so that
apprenticeship programs are meeting the labor's market needs.
Can you tell me what are the barriers preventing these kinds of
data bases?
Ms. Debroy. Thank you so much for the question, and it is
such an important one. I want to grab my notes on this. There
is the need that we have right now as a community in workforce
to actually better understand the workers. Workers, their
trajectories, their occupations, their skills, their employment
opportunities.
I think one of the most critical things we note in the
Federal data infrastructure right now is there is a lag in when
we get access to that data, and how accurate it is in State and
regional contexts. I think investing in the opportunity to
actually better understand the American workforce is going to
better serve all actors within the workforce ecosystem.
Mrs. Chaves-DeRemer. You are saying the data input is what
is the barrier to--is it the lag of information is what is the
barrier? That is the only barrier for the----
Ms. Debroy. It is a significant barrier to that.
Mrs. Chaves-DeRemer. Okay. What are the targeted solutions
we on the Committee should focus on?
Ms. Debroy. Yes. It is a great question. I think
investments in data infrastructure are actually really
critical, and I think through WIOA, we have an opportunity to
also start to think about better investments in serving
business services as well, to actually better serve small-and
medium-sized businesses, as well as large enterprise and
regions.
Mrs. Chaves-DeRemer. Thank you. Now for the programs
themselves. In terms of how we prepare workers. In Oregon,
workers overwhelmingly prefer registered apprenticeships
because those programs have clear, and uniform standards
centered around what is best for the worker.
Can you speak to why workers have such a strong preference
for registered apprenticeship programs over industry recognized
programs?
Ms. Debroy. Good question. I do not know as much about the
variation of apprenticeships. What I will say from the data is
that we have seen a proliferation of registered apprenticeships
into new occupations in the US labor market. You named a number
of occupations. We have also seen registered apprenticeships in
healthcare, in technology, and in advanced manufacturing that
didn't exist 10 years ago. That is a really promising trend for
the American workforce.
I think beyond that though, what we do see is a lot of
innovation in employers actually deploying informal
apprenticeship models to an additional 200 roles in the US
labor market. That is also really important, because that is
the kind of first step in figuring out how can we build those
pathways for workers to actually enter a lot of newer
occupations that they have not historically had access to.
Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you. I would add that it is
important to remember that nobody, I hope, wants to get rid of
industry recognized programs, but I think we have to call it
like it is. If you want the Federal Government to financially
support your apprenticeship program, you have got to meet the
standards, which make registered apprenticeships so appealing
to the workers.
Really one last question that I have for you, Dr. Debroy.
Aside from the things you have already mentioned, what are the
best ways Congress can make apprenticeships more successful for
workers, and please feel free to take really what's left of 56
seconds to answer the question.
Ms. Debroy. I do think it starts with a better data
infrastructure for the American workforce. Then beyond that, I
do think that there is--apprenticeships still account for a
really small portion of how workers get access to jobs. We need
to scale that in a significant way.
There are ways that we can actually incentivize employers
to move toward skills-based hiring practices, and
apprenticeships are just one method, right. There are other
methods like helping them see that internships are a pathway
into work, that contract to hire opportunities are also another
way to bring workers who have not historically had access to a
number of opportunities into their jobs as well. Thank you.
Mrs. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you, Dr. Debroy. Mr. Chair, I
yield back.
Mr. Owens. I would like to recognize Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I represent North
Carolina's 6th congressional District, a place where we have a
history of great manufacturing. Many of those jobs went
overseas in the late 1990's, resulting in huge and devastating
job loss.
Thanks to very hard work, and thanks to huge investments in
the American worker, in American businesses by the last
Congress and the Biden administration, we are now enjoying the
growth of advanced manufacturing once again in our district.
Many of our businesses are now having trouble finding
qualified workers to fill the open jobs. Simply put, we need
more skilled workers. Dr. Debroy, registered apprenticeship is
viewed as one of the best tools in the toolbox for skilling up
workers, and we know that 93 percent of people who complete a
registered apprenticeship program are employed upon completion,
earning an average wage starting above $77,000.00 annually.
Is registered apprenticeship a model that can be used for a
skills-based hiring approach, and if so, can you tell us how?
Ms. Debroy. Yes. Absolutely, apprenticeships are a critical
lever available to employers. One thing I will note though is
that 70 percent of apprenticeships offer entry into jobs that
make up just 8 percent of the labor force today. There is
something now about thinking about this moment, and expanding
the number of pathways that apprenticeships can offer
opportunities into.
Ms. Manning. Wonderful. You mentioned in your testimony
that the adoption of skills-based hiring can expand employers
pool of applicants, improve candidate assessments, which in
turn can lead to increased quality of new hires, as well as
improvements in productivity, employee engagement and
retention.
Can you talk a little bit more about--I know you talked in
your testimony, but if you can elaborate a little bit more on
what skills-based hiring can do for employers, and perhaps talk
about hurdles that employers may face in using a skills-based
hiring approach.
Ms. Debroy. Thank you so much for the question. You are
absolutely right. The return on investment in skills-based
hiring certainly shows up in the hiring process, but it extends
beyond that for employers. With larger and more diverse pools
of applicants, and more effective candidate assessments,
employers can actually expect to see an increase in the quality
of new hires with skills-based hiring.
They can expect to see improvements in productivity and
employee engagement as well as retention. That is what early
data is actually showing about the value of skills-based hiring
for employers.
Ms. Manning. You noted in your opening statement that
workers skilled through alternative roots, your STARs Program,
are willing and able to take many of the quality high paying
jobs, that remain unfilled across many industries. What steps
can Congress take to incentivize employers to adopt these
practices?
Ms. Debroy. I think that there are number of steps that the
Federal Government can make. I think the first one is actually
a really critical one, which is that the public sector is one
of the largest employers in all regions of the country.
Deploying these methods themselves as an employer is the first
critical step.
I think beyond that the moment in front of us to actually
make investments in WIOA and amplify them as a really critical
investment that we can make to actually ensure that STARs are
getting access to training and services they need to be placed
into a lot of the higher wage occupations that are available in
their region's labor market.
Ms. Manning. I asked, but I do not know if you answered.
Are there hurdles that employers face in using the skills-based
hiring approach? Are there skills that are not easily tested
that can actually affect whether an employee can succeed in a
particular job?
Ms. Debroy. Sorry, I missed that one.
Ms. Manning. That is Okay.
Ms. Debroy. It is a really important question because
skills-based hiring is actually a quite different method to be
deploying to surface talent than what employers have
historically used, which is more of a pedigree-based approach.
In deploying this method there are genuine shifts that need to
occur within an organization.
It actually starts with a mindset shift. What we see is
that the majority of managers in this country have a bachelor's
degree. Managers with a degree are less likely to consider a
worker without a degree for a similar job, and they are also
less likely to make investments in workers without a degree
within their own workforce.
Combatting that is the first step right, is how can we in
some respects help employers understand that STARs are a vast,
overlooked, skilled and diverse part of our labor market, who
should be valued for the many skills they are bringing to the
job.
Ms. Manning. Great. Thank you so much. My time has expired,
and I yield back.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize for 5
minutes Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just beg for your
patience for a few minutes. I would like to describe my
district to you, and then maybe ask for your advice, and what
we can do. We are blessed in New York's 22d District with an
abundance of resources.
We have three excellent private colleges. In fact, many of
the--three of the best in the country, Syracuse University,
Colgate University and Hamilton College. We also have excellent
community colleges, and I mean truly excellent. Mohawk Valley
Community College, as well as the Onondaga County Community
College.
We are also blessed with a historic opportunity of Micron
Technology in making a historically large investment in
manufacturing in this Nation, and quite fortunately in our
district as well. That sets up a competition for available
workers that are in our district.
I hear this from other manufacturers, and companies that
are already there that there is this dynamic of competition,
and there is also this dynamic of mismatch of skills, many of
which you have addressed today in your questions, in your
testimony. You know, when I hear about apprenticeships, skills-
based training, certificate-based training, I would say all the
above are relevant to what we are doing.
I see a lot of different models, for example. Onondaga
Community College is moving toward a certificate-based learning
program specifically to meet the most immediate needs in
healthcare, technology, manufacturing, and other areas where we
happen to be growing. It is actually very exciting.
Even the trade unions actually are doing an excellent job
of developing workers for construction. You see we have all of
the blessings and all of the challenges; we simply do not have
enough workers. Could any of you address anything related to
partnerships among all these different organizations, whether
it is private or public?
How we can get new workers into the workforce. We are truly
handicapped that we cannot afford to leave anybody behind in my
district, quite literally, we need everyone to work. I also
know from my own experience doing jobs training for homeless
men, that there is a significant gap to get on that first
ladder of the workforce.
I really do open it up in a sincere way. Is there any
advice or counsel you would have to help make me effective
marshalling these resources to help people get on the workforce
ladder because we need them? Please. Thanks for being brave and
going first.
Mr. Smith. I think I could. Thanks for the question and
opening it up to everybody. At SHRM we started an H.R.
apprentice program, and so we talked a fair bit about
apprenticeship programs here, but they are typically more on
the blue-collar side of thing, and at SHRM we decided it would
be a good idea to open that up past blue collar and into what
has traditionally been more of a white collar job of human
resources.
The really good thing about the apprenticeship programs is
the on-the-job learning, but also you are getting paid while
you do this, and I think there is more opportunities for this
type of training beyond traditional blue collar.
Mr. Williams. May I ask what prerequisites you are looking
for, for people to get on that kind of program?
Mr. Smith. Mainly, it is the interest in it.
Mr. Williams. Is it high school education? Is it any
college? Is it you know?
Mr. Smith. I do not remember offhand. It is certainly not
the bachelor's degree.
Mr. Williams. Okay.
Mr. Smith. I don't remember if----
Mr. Williams. Can I open it up to anybody else?
Ms. Debroy. I agree you have described a very robust
workforce ecosystem. If I were to name from our research what
we've learned is one of the most critical parts of ensuring
that connection happens between and across a workforce
ecosystem, it is getting the demand signal right.
It is ensuring that workers know what jobs are in demand,
what skills are required of those jobs, and they need that data
in a timely way. To get that right for us now in this next
phase, we actually need to update our data infrastructure for
this century.
Mr. Williams. A lot of times I come across, and I know I am
out of time. I come across manufacturers that are offering
amazing packages for people, education, all kinds of things,
and they find no takers. Any last thoughts in our remaining
seconds? Thank you. Thanks for your time. I yield back, sir.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize for the
last 5 minutes Mr. Bowman.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
to the witnesses for being here. This is an incredibly awesome
and exciting conversation. I am so happy that we are having it.
I want to start by giving a huge shoutout to Chairwoman
Virginia Foxx, she was just sitting there, but I wanted to
acknowledge her publicly, and the Republican party for putting
this hearing together.
If someone can get Chairwoman Foxx back in here, I want her
to hear me say this is great, and I want to give her a huge
shoutout. I am thinking about so many things, right? Obviously,
I support higher education, but it is not a pathway for
everyone.
For so long, for decades, so many young people who have
graduated from high school have been left out of higher-earning
jobs and careers because they did not have access to higher
education, so this is the exact conversation we need to have. A
conversation about multiple pathways to work, dignity, self-
determination, self respect in a thriving economy that works
for everyone and helps humanity.
To me this is about equity. That is what we are talking
about. We are talking about equity. I have got a couple of
questions. One, what should high schools be doing? I also think
that kids should be graduating high school ready to enter the
workforce. What should high schools be doing, and then try to
answer quickly because I have got one more question. I am going
to start with Dr. Debroy, and then we will go to Healey, and
then boom, boom, boom, quickly, and I have got one more
question. Please. What should high schools be doing?
Ms. Debroy. I think there is a basic set of skills that all
students coming out of high school should be getting that
employers recognize and understand are valuable skills for all
jobs in the labor market.
Mr. Bowman. Awesome.
Mr. Healey. I mean I would concur. I would say that high
schools need to understand the requirements, and the technical
requirements for many roles, particularly for employers within
their district, and teach those skillsets.
Mr. Bowman. Awesome.
Ms. Kimbrough. Expose them to the range of great jobs that
are out there, not just college pathway jobs, but all the other
trades jobs that are out there.
Mr. Bowman. Yep.
Mr. Smith. I think they should also focus beyond the
technical skills on what we would refer to as behavioral
competencies. Teamwork and communication, these are sometimes
called soft skills, but these skills that are very common
across all sorts of jobs that are often, I think,
underdeveloped in high school.
Mr. Bowman. Yes. In many ways our K to 12 system is like
the same that it is been for like 100 years, and that needs to
evolve in many ways, and that is why I ask about high schools,
but my background is education. I know what needs to happen at
the K to 12 level as well.
I think this is a moonshot moment for our humanity and
economy, and we need to rethink, reimagine, redesign, and
restructure the economy in a way that aligns to everything
we're talking about here today. I think part of that is going
to require us investing in getting employers, educators, higher
ed, and everyone who cares about humanity and the economy in a
room to consistently like work together to reimagine and
redevelop the economy in a way that deals with the issue of
equity.
We measure the strength of our economy right now through
GDP. We talk about how powerful and great we are, but we have
not even scratched the surface of our capacity because we
continue to leave tens of millions of people behind because of
persistent inequality within our economic system.
You are all nodding, so I guess you agree with that. Can
you just comment on that Healey quickly, and then down the line
please.
Mr. Healey. SAP believes unequivocally that people
sustainability. You have just been touching on people
sustainability is a business imperative, and we support human
potential to create more sustainable futures. We define, by the
way, we have a definition of people sustainability, and it
means treating people across organizations, supply chains, and
communities ethically and fairly.
We can do that through obviously the identification of
skills, and matching skills to open needs, open roles.
Mr. Bowman. Yep. Thank you.
Ms. Debroy. I concur that this is a moonshot moment, and
there are 70 million workers, 30 million of which who have
skills to move into significantly higher wage work today if
they were given access and opportunity to do so. It is time
that we leverage them and give them that opportunity.
Mr. Bowman. That is right.
Mr. Smith. At SHRM, we strongly support skilled hiring no
matter where the skills come from. If it comes from education
great, if they get good business relevance skills from other
places also great.
Mr. Bowman. Awesome.
Ms. Kimbrough. There is a meaningful number of Americans
who are only marginally attached to the economy. There is at
least five million Americans out there who want a job and are
not even looking. There is a huge amount of untapped talent
still beyond the STARS.
Mr. Bowman. There are multiple intelligences. Skills are
always evolving. This is about life-long learning and
upskilling consistently. This is very exciting. Thank you all
so much, and I am sorry Virginia Foxx did not come back. Sorry,
Chair Foxx, another shoutout to you. I yield back.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Bowman. I appreciate
it. If you do not mind just standing around for a minute as I
close out. Mr. Bowman, just hold tight. I would like to
recognize for her closing statement Ms. Hayes.
Mrs. Hayes. I just want to thank the witnesses for your
time here today. This is a very important hearing, and as you
hear, there is bipartisan support for this initiative, because
it really is just that basic. We have to prepare our workforce
for the future of, you know, the next generation of jobs.
There are so many young people, people changing careers,
people who have life experiences that can be transferred into
the workplace. College is not for everyone, for a variety of
different reasons, whether it be the costs, the location,
transportation, childcare, there are lots of different
barriers, but it does not mean that people cannot still find
success.
I think that it is very important that we look to ways that
we can get more people into the workforce, not less. The Biden
administration has talked a lot about made in America, bringing
jobs back home, getting people back to work, and this is one of
those initiatives, and ways that we can do that.
I would just finally like to close by saying we have to, I
guess, I echo the comments of Ranking Member Scott when he
emphasized that it is past time that this committee passes a
fully funded reauthorization of WIOA that relies on evidence-
based practices, and better engages employers in our workforce
development system.
I think we are all asking for the same thing. We just have
to work really hard to make sure that we are reaching the
people who are never touched by these programs, digging deep
into the most vulnerable and marginalized communities. Making
sure that employers are working cooperatively with the
recommendations, the system if they are going to access any
type of Federal funding.
The way we get to that I think can be achieved through
hearings just like this, so again, I thank you for your time
and your participation, and with that I yield back.
Mr. Owens. Thank you so much. I guess a couple things. I,
too, wish Dr. Foxx was here, but I wanted to share this
moment's enthusiasm and excitement about where we are at this
point. Dr. Debroy, you mentioned--I was going to say an
inflection point. You said it best, moonshot moment. Very good.
All right.
Another reason for you to stay around, thanks so much. I
appreciate it. Now that is exactly, when you think about where
we are today, we have industries, we have legislation, we have
American parents, all focused on one thing, not only preparing
our kids, but listening to them, and giving them options to go
out and do what we have to do.
This, I think, you can tell by national security, you
cannot say something more important than first of all,
educating our children, and giving them a change to go out and
build the American dream, and that's where we are right now. It
was something Thomas Jefferson said, ignorant and free can
never be.
Our freedom comes from the ability to dream big, go out
there and pursue what we want to do in life, feel like this
means something, and then giving back. I am going to say the
biggest asset we have as a committee--we are at a point now
where we truly do need to hear from innovators.
We want to be innovative in terms of how we legislate, and
that is why we had the questions we had today. We want to think
outside of the box. How can we get all these millions of young
people, and old, to be in a position where they can pursue what
they really believe is important, and really fall in love again
with the opportunities that we think we have in this country.
My big ask would be please let us know what it is that we
can do try to give you a runway, so we can go out and actually
build something, and legislate something that gives you the
freedom to make that happen. I want to thank you again. This
has been a remarkable hearing, and again we all share the same
concepts, we just want to make sure at the end it is a good
negotiation.
Thank you for that. I would again like to thank the
witnesses for taking the time to testify before the Committee
today. Without objection, there being no further business, the
Committee stands adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon at 1:06 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
