- PROVEN RESULTS: HIGHLIGHTING THE BENEFITS OF CHARTER SCHOOLS FOR STUDENTS AND FAMILIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROVEN RESULTS: HIGHLIGHTING THE
BENEFITS OF CHARTER SCHOOLS
FOR STUDENTS AND FAMILIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EARLY CHILDHOOD,
ELEMENTARY, SECONDARY EDUCATION

of the

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE
WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, MARCH 6, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-40
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

57-461 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania           Virginia, Ranking Member
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia                 Northern Mariana Islands
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          MARK TAKANO, California
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   MARK DeSAULNIER, California
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MARY MILLER, Illinois                PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
MICHELLE STEEL, California           SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RON ESTES, Kansas                    LUCY McBATH, Georgia
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
KEVIN KILEY, California              ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
AARON BEAN, Florida                  HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EARLY CHILDHOOD, ELEMENTARY, AND
SECONDARY EDUCATION

AARON BEAN, Florida, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon,
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                    Ranking Member
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               RAUL GRIJALVA, Arizona
MARY MILLER, Illinois                GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
MICHELLE STEEL, California             Northern Mariana Islands
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           FREDERICA WILSON, Florida
VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina        MARK DeSAULNIER, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on March 6, 2024....................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Bean, Hon. Aaron, Chairman, Subcommittee on Early Childhood,
Elementary, and Secondary Education........................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2
Bonamici, Hon. Suzanne, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Early
Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary Education.............     3
Prepared statement of....................................     4

WITNESSES

Raymond, Dr. Macke, Founder and Director, Center for Research
on Education Outcomes, Stanford University.................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Heilig, Dr. Julian Vasquez, Founding Board Member, Network
for Public Education.......................................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Pondiscio, Robert, Senior Fellow, American Enterprise
Institute..................................................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Campbell, Kenneth, CEO, New Schools for Baton Rouge..........    26
Prepared statement of....................................    28

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Chairman Bean:
CREDO Policy Brief entitled ``A Closer Look: Examining
the Impact and Effectiveness of Online Charter
Schools''..............................................   173
Ranking Member Bonamici:
Letter dated March 3, 2024, from The Network for Public
Education..............................................    36
Report dated November 15, 2018, from the National Council
on Disability entitled ``Choice & Vouchers--
Implications for Students with Disabilities''..........    43
Foxx, Hon. Virginia, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina:
Statement dated March 19, 2024, from the National
Association of Charter School Authorizers (NACSA)......   178
Statement dated March 6, 2024, from the National Parents
Union (NPU)............................................   180

PROVEN RESULTS: HIGHLIGHTING THE
BENEFITS OF CHARTER SCHOOLS
FOR STUDENTS AND FAMILIES

----------

Wednesday, March 6, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Elementary,
and Secondary Education,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15, a.m.,
2175 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Aaron Bean (Chairman
of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Bean, Owens, McClain, Miller,
Kiley, Williams, Foxx, Bonamici, Hayes, Bowman, Wilson,
DeSaulnier, Norcross, and Scott.
Also present: Letlow
Staff present: Nick Barley, Deputy Communications Director;
Mindy Barry, General Counsel; Isabel Foster, Press Assistant;
Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant; Amy Raaf Jones, Director of
Education and Human Services Policy; Georgie Littlefair, Clerk;
RJ Martin, Professional Staff Member; Hannah Matesic, Deputy
Staff Director; Audra McGeorge, Communications Director; Eli
Mitchell, Legislative Assistant; Rebecca Powell, Staff
Assistant; Brad Thomas, Deputy Director of Education and Human
Services Policy; Maura Williams, Director of Operations; Nekea
Brown, Minority Director of Operations; Rashage Green, Minority
Director of Education Policy & Counsel; Christian Haines,
Minority General Counsel; Stephanie Lalle, Minority
Communications Director; Raiyana Malone, Minority Press
Secretary; Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director; Olivia
Sawyer, Minority Intern; Clinton Spencer, IV, Minority Staff
Assistant; Maile Sit, Minority Intern.
Chairman Bean. Ladies and gentlemen, a very good morning to
each of you. Welcome to your nation's capital, the House of
Representatives, and the Subcommittee on Early Childhood,
Elementary, and Secondary Education will come to order.
A quorum is present. Without objection, the Chair is
authorized to call a recess at any time. It is a special time
of year in our Nation's capital, and no, not because cherry
blossom season is almost upon us, for children across the
country trapped in failing school districts, this is the season
of opportunity. Each year, in the spring, thousands of parents,
families, and eager young students gather around their
computers to wait and pray for a name to appear. The room is
still. Parents sit quietly with bated breath. They know the
next few minutes could have a profound impact on the course of
their children's lives.
A name appears and happiness erupts. A lucky winner has
been picked, but with the good fortune comes the opportunity
for a student to escape an abysmal traditional public school
and enroll in a school that meets his or her individual needs.
This is the story of our Nation's charter school lotteries.
The joy in a parent's heart is when their child is accepted
is one of the foremost reasons that I support charter schools.
I also recognize there is a flipside to the story, charter
schools have limited seats in the lottery system, while fair,
does not pan out for every family. For the smiles, there are
tears. This is a sad reality, but it is not an argument against
the schools.
On the contrary, it is an argument for expanding charter
school access so that every child can receive a high-quality
education no matter his or her zip code. Expand they have,
charter schools are relatively new in terms of the American
education system, with the first charter issued in Minnesota in
1992.
They have since ridden the school choice way to over 8,000
communities serving nearly 4 million students across 45 states.
Furthermore, charter school growth is accelerating. Enrollment
doubled in the most recent decade, and 74 percent of parents
would consider sending their child to a charter school if just
given the chance.
Charter schools' success is linked to thousands of success
stories across the Nation. As studies and testimoneys emerge
from the first class of charter schools, they have proven what
we all have expected. Removing the educational bureaucracy is a
boon to student achievement.
Now, charter graduates have the chance to send their own
children to charter schools, and I see it as the Committee's
role, give them the best possible chance to do it. Today, we
will embark on a journey to learn more about where charter
schools are, how they are benefiting students, and to get more
information.
With that, I yield to the Ranking Member for an opening
statement. Ranking Member?
[The prepared statement of Chairman Bean follows:]

Statement of Hon. Aaron Bean, Chairman, Subcommittee on Early
Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary Education

This is a special time of year. No, not because cherry blossom
season is almost upon us. For children across the country trapped in
failing school districts, this is the season of opportunity.
Each year, in the spring, thousands of parents, families, and eager
young students gather around their computers to wait--and to pray--for
a name to appear.
The room is still. Parents sit silently with bated breath. They
know the next few minutes could have a profound impact on the course of
their children's lives.
A name appears, and happiness erupts. A lucky winner has been
picked. With the good fortune comes the opportunity for a student to
escape an abysmal traditonal public school and enroll at a school that
meets his or her individual needs.
This is the story of our nation's charter school lotteries. The joy
in a parent's heart when his or her child is accepted is one of the
foremost reasons that I support charter schools.
I also recognize there is a flipside to this story. Charter schools
have limited seats, and the lottery system, while fair, does not pan
out for every family.
For the smiles, there are tears. This is the sad reality, but it is
not an argument against these schools. On the contrary, it is an
argument for expanding charter school access so every child can receive
a high-quality education, no matter his or her zip code.
Expand they have. Charter schools are relatively new in terms of
American education, with the first charter issued in Minnesota in 1992.
They have since ridden the school choice wave to over 8,000
communities, serving nearly four million students across 45 states.
Furthermore, charter school growth is accelerating. Enrollment
doubled in the most recent decade. Seventy-four percent of parents
would consider sending their child to a charter school if given the
chance.
The charter success story is linked to thousands of student success
stories. As studies and testimonials emerge from the first class of
charter schools, they have proven what we all expected--removing the
education bureaucracy is a boon to student achievement.
Now, charter graduates have the chance to send their own children
to charter schools. I see it as the Committee's role to give them the
best possible chance to do so.
______

Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, Chairman Bean. Thank you
to our witnesses for being here today. As recognized by the
founding fathers, numerous Supreme Court Justices and many
State Constitutions, the provisions of a free, high quality,
public education to all children, serves a compelling community
interest.
Mr. Chairman, I see your scenario not as a case for more
charter schools, but as a case for making all public schools
the best they can be. When we invest in education, we are
investing in our future. Members of this Committee should
understand that children, regardless of where they live, or how
involved their parents are, they deserve access to high
quality, public education that allows them to achieve their
full potential.
Now most agree that parents should have a say in their
child's learning environment, and under some circumstances this
may include well-regulated public charter schools. Well-funded,
transparent, and accountable public charter schools in some
instances may be a better fit for some students.
For example, KairosPDX is a charter school in Portland.
They work to dismantle structural racism, close opportunity and
achievement gaps for students of color, through hands on,
culturally competent teaching.
Unfortunately charter schools are not subject to the same
level of oversight and accountability as traditional public
schools, and as a result we often do not know whether charter
schools will provide the students with benefits, and any
meaningful benefits.
Concerningly in many instances, charter school schemes are
another way for my colleagues across the aisle to divert
taxpayer dollars and community resources from already
struggling public schools. Now, we must not ignore the growing
number of charter schools that are operated by for-profit
corporations, located in states that have lax, or even
nonexistent oversight.
According to the Network for Public Education, more than
1,100 charter schools are now run by for-profit entities, and
that is more than 14 percent of charter schools. Prior to the
Education Department's updates to the Charter School Program, a
2016 audit found that charter school programs run by for-profit
entities in California, Florida, Michigan, New York,
Pennsylvania and Texas, all lacked internal guardrails that
posed risks to student learning, and enabled waste, fraud, and
abuse of Federal funds.
I also have serious concerns about the effects of charter
school programs on students' civil rights. Although charter
schools by law are required to honor students' and families'
civil rights protections, such as individual education plans
for students with disabilities. Gray areas surrounding a
school's legal status may leave them ill-equipped to provide
every study with the legally required fair and equitable
education.
Studies show that charter schools are more segregated than
traditional public schools. In addition, students may be
rejected, unnecessarily disciplined, or expelled for reasons
that would not be allowed in a traditional public school, often
with few or no avenues for recourse.
Then there is the issue of the number of charter schools
that close, often abruptly. In fact, about 25 percent of
charter schools close within 5 years, leaving students and
families without support, and sometimes without information.
Often for-profit management, entities are based outside the
bounds of Federal oversight, not really the choice parents are
looking for.
Yes, parents should be able to decide the best way to
educate their children, however this should not come at the
expense of a strong quality public education system that
protects and supports every child. That is why I ask that
Committee members join me in supporting more Magnet schools,
schools that provide choice within the public school system,
and that come with accountability and nondiscrimination.
My home district in Beaverton, Oregon for example, offers
some very popular options, an Arts Magnet, a Science and
Engineering Magnet, an International Magnet. Instead of
proposing an 80 percent cut to the Title I program, my
colleagues should invest in public education and evidence-based
choice programs, so that every family can send their child to a
high quality, accountable, and safe public school.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here, and I yield bank
the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Bonamici
follows:]

Statement of Hon. Suzanne Bonamici, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Early Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary Education

Thank you, Chair Bean. Thank you to our witnesses for being here
today.
As recognized by the Founding Fathers, numerous Supreme Court
justices, and many state constitutions, the provision of free, high-
quality public education to all children serves a compelling community
interest. Mr. Chairman, I see your scenario not as a case for more
charter schools but as a case for making all public schools the best
they can be.
When we invest in education, we are investing in our future.
Members of this committee should understand that children, regardless
of where they live or how involved their parents are, deserve access to
high-quality public education that allows them to achieve their full
potential.
Now, most agree that parents should have a say in their child's
learning environment--and under some circumstances, this may include
well-regulated public charter schools. Well-funded, transparent, and
accountable public charter schools, in some instances, may be a better
fit for some students. For example, KairosPDX is a charter school in
Portland. They work to dismantle structural racism and close
opportunity and achievement gaps for students of color through hands-
on, culturally competent teaching.
Unfortunately, charter schools are not subject to the same level of
oversight and accountability as traditional public schools, and as a
result, we often do not know whether charter schools will provide
students with any meaningful benefits. Concerningly, in many instances
charter school schemes are another way for my colleagues across the
aisle to divert taxpayer dollars and community resources from already
struggling public schools.
Now, we must not ignore the growing number of charter schools that
are operated by for-profit corporations located in states that have lax
or even non-existent oversight. According to the Network for Public
Education, more than 1,100 charter schools are now run by for-profit
entities. That is more than 14 percent of charter schools. Prior to the
Education Department's updates to the Charter Schools Program (CSP), a
2016 audit found that charter school programs run by for-profit
entities in California, Florida, Michigan, New York, Pennsylvania, and
Texas all lacked internal guardrails that posed risks to student
learning and enabled waste, fraud, and abuse of federal funds.
I also have serious concerns about the effects of charter school
programs on students' civil rights. Although charter schools by law are
required to honor students' and families' civil rights protections--
such as Individual Education Plans for students with disabilities--gray
areas surrounding a school's legal status may leave them ill-equipped
to provide every student with a legally required fair and equitable
education.
Studies show that charter schools are more segregated than
traditional public schools. In addition, students may be rejected,
unnecessarily disciplined, or expelled for reasons that would not be
allowed at a traditional public school, often with few or no avenues
for recourse. Then there is the issue of the number of charter schools
that close--often abruptly. In fact, about 25% of charter schools close
within 5 years--leaving students and families without support and
sometimes without information.
Often for-profit management entities are based outside the bounds
of federal oversight--not really the ``choice'' parents are looking
for.
Yes, parents should be able to decide the best way to educate their
children; however, this should not come at the expense of a strong,
quality public education system that protects and supports every child.
That is why I ask that committee members join me in supporting more
magnet schools--schools that provide choice within the public school
system and that come with accountability and nondiscrimination. My home
school district in Beaverton Oregon, for example, offers some very
popular options--an art magnet, a science and engineering magnet, and
an international magnet.
Instead of proposing an 80 percent cut to the Title I program, my
colleagues to invest in public education and evidence-based choice
programs so every family can send their child to a high-quality,
accountable, and safe public school.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
______

Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Ranking Member.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 8-C, or Sub-C, all Committee members
who wish to insert written statements into the record may do so
by submitting them to the Committee Clerk electronically. You
have to use Microsoft Word format to do it by 5 p.m. after 14
days from today's hearing, which is March 20, 2024.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days after the date of this hearing to allow such
statements, and other extraneous material referenced during the
hearing to be submitted for the official hearing record. I note
for the record the Subcommittee that some of our colleagues who
are not permanent members of this Committee may be waving on
for the purpose of today's hearing.
Now, I know you are wondering how does our Committee staff
find foremost experts in the field, but once again, they have
done so. They have traveled across the Nation, and we have got
some premier experts on charter schools. Once again, it is my
pleasure to introduce today's all-star panel.
Our first witness is Dr. Macke Raymond, who is the Founder
and Director of the Center for Research for Education Outcomes
at Stanford University, located in Stanford, California. Dr.
Raymond has served as Director of the Center since its
inception and has steered the group to national prominence as a
rigorous and independent source for policy and program
analysis.
She leads the Center in investigating the effectiveness of
public charter schools and has spearheaded several landmark
studies on charters.
Our next witness will be introduced by our Ranking Member,
Ms. Bonamici. Ranking Member?
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Julian Vasquez
Heilig is a Founding Board Member of the Network for Public
Education and an academic whose research focuses on K12
education practices that impact equity and innovation. He
previously served on the Executive Committee, and as Education
Chair for both Kentucky and California NAACP.
Dr. Vasquez Heilig received his Ph.D. in Educational
Administration and Policy Analysis, and a Master's Degree in
Sociology from Stanford University--kind of west coast heavy
here so far. He has also earned a Master's Degree in Higher
Education and a Bachelor's Degree in History and Psychology
from the University of Michigan. Go Wolverines. Welcome Dr.
Vasquez Heilig.
Chairman Bean. All right. Let us go to the east coast where
our third witness is standing by waiting to be introduced. Mr.
Robert Pondiscio who is a Senior Fellow at the American
Enterprise Institute located in Greenville, New York. Mr.
Pondiscio is a Senior Fellow at the AEI where he focuses on K
through 12 education curriculum, teaching school choice and
charter schooling.
Before joining AEI, Mr. Pondiscio was a Policy Analysist
for Education Reform at the Thomas B. Fordham Institute, and
education policy think tank. He worked previously for the
Corps, this is good, previously for the Core Knowledge
Foundation as an advisor and civics teacher at Democracy Prep
Public Schools, and then became interested in education policy
issues where he started teaching fifth grade at a struggling
South Bronx Public School in 2002.
We will hear from him in just a moment, but our final
witness is Mr. Kenneth Campbell, who is the CEO of New Schools
for Baton Rouge, which is in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Previously, Mr. Campbell served as Executive Director for IDEA
Public Schools of Southern Louisiana.
President of the Black Alliance Educational Option and as
Founding Director of Charter Schools for the Louisiana
Department of Education where in the years following Hurricane
Katrina, he was responsible for rebuilding New Orleans
education infrastructure to high-quality charter schools.
Mr. Campbell served 8 years of active military duty, and 13
and 1/2 years of Reserves before retiring as a Captain in 2005.
Thank you for your service, Mr. Campbell.
We thank all our witnesses. We are eager to hear you. There
is this one little rule that you need to know about, and it's
the 5-minute rule. Everybody has 5 minutes, we do too, and so
pursuant to Committee Rules, I ask each of you to limit your
oral presentation. If you go over or get near, you will hear
this sound, that means to wrap it up.
We appreciate you, but you can submit your written
testimony as long as you want, I have received--I think we have
all received the written testimony. We also remind everybody
that we have a duty to be responsible in the information that
you provide to the Subcommittee. With that, let us get to it.
Dr. Raymond, you are first of all, welcome. We are glad to have
you here, and you are recognized. The floor is yours. Dr.
Raymond, your mic. Mine is clicking off too, but.

STATEMENT OF DR. MACKE RAYMOND, FOUNDER AND DIREC-
TOR,  CENTER FOR RESEARCH ON  EDUCATION OUTCOMES,
STANFORD UNIVERSITY, STANFORD, CALIFORNIA

Ms. Raymond. All right, starting over at zero. Chairman
Bean, Ranking Member Bonamici, and other members of the
Committee, good morning, and thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you today. I am joined by Dr. Won Fy Lee, a lead
analyst with the study that I will discuss today.
For over two decades, CREDO has studied national charter
schools, and have produced three national studies of the
academic progress in charter schools, compared to carefully
selected comparison students in nearby district schools, in
partnership with 29 states and the District of Columbia.
By the time I saw the results of our third analysis in
early 2023, we had waited 10 years to solve a mystery. To tell
you more, I need to frame the results in the context of the two
prior studies. In 2009, our studies showed charter students
learning less than their District peers in both reading and
math, by a statistically significant amount.
Using a comparison standard of 180 days of learning in a
typical District year of 180 days of schooling, charter
students only had a 174 days of learning in math, and 163 days
of learning in--I am sorry, 174 in reading, and 163 in math.
In 2013, the second study showed improvements across the
sector, posting a positive advantage of six extra days in
learning and reading, and breaking even with District students
in math.
As everyone knows, two points make a line, but they do not
make a trend. The latest results from 2023 were keenly
anticipated. Our findings showed charter school students had 16
more days of learning in reading, and 6 additional days of
learning in math than similar peers in local District schools,
and both comparisons were statistically significant.
I will return to this trend later. Good results for charter
school students were even more pronounced for urban students,
for black and Hispanic students, for low-income students, and
students served by charter school networks. For each of these
groups attending charter schools led to more learning in a
year's time compared to peers in adjacent District schools.
Not all the results in the national charter school study
were positive. The learning for rural charter school students
is not strong, and special education students in charter
schools also lagged the learning of their peers in District
schools.
While comparative progress of black and Hispanic charter
school students is positive compared to their District
counterparts, both sets of students learned substantially less
than their white peers on average.
Targeted improvement would benefit all of the groups I have
just mentioned. The study revealed insights about charter
school networks, also called Charter Management Organizations
or CMOs. The average student in a charter school network gained
more than a month of extra learning compared to their District
school counterparts in both reading and math.
More importantly, charter school networks do not sacrifice
learning as they replicate in scale. The final set of results I
want to mention are the so-called gap busting schools.
We look for charter schools that had above average
achievement in their respective states, and of these, we subset
schools that had learning for minority or poverty students that
was at least as strong as the learning of their white or non-
poverty charter school classmates.
We found hundreds of schools who met the criteria. In fact,
over 1,000 schools where Hispanic students exceeded the
progress of their white classmates. Moreover, we found dozens
of charter networks able to produce these impressive results
across their entire networks.
The implications from the national charter school study are
important and timely. Millions of charter school students have
been well served, adding to their education progress, and their
life outcomes. The charter school community also delivered many
examples of successful schools and showed that scaling
successful models is now common.
These examples hold promise for adding more charter
schools, and for fulfilling their charge to be laboratories of
new, and now proven ideas. The long-term trend of these three
studies shows especially what legislators like of this
Committee, are able to do, to devise policy levers to create
good outcomes.
The Charter School Law pairs flexibility and
accountability, and these forces produce incentives for
continuous improvement that are readily apparently in the data
we study. We see thousands of schools getting a little bit
better each year, which explains the upward trend line.
The insight we think is welcome, considering the general
State of schools coming out of the pandemic. I will conclude
with the idea that there are untapped opportunities for
exporting successful models to other schools, and for other
laws to use similar incentives to provide further improvements
in our public school system. Thank you very much.
[The Statement of Ms. Raymond follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Dr. Raymond. Well done.
Next, let us go to Dr. Heilig. Dr. Heiling, thank you for
coming today and welcome, and the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF DR. JULIAN VASQUEZ HEILIG, FOUNDING
BOARD MEMBER, NETWORK FOR PUBLIC EDUCATION, AU-
GUSTA, MICHIGAN

Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Thank you, Chair and members of the
Committee. I am honored to contribute to this critical
discussion on school choice, sharing insights from my multi-
faceted engagement with the charter school sector. As a former
charter school educator, donor, parent, board member and now
researcher.
These experiences combine with my academic inquiry have
provided me with a deep understanding of the nuances and
complexities surrounding charter schools. In the late 1990's,
my research of charter schools began in Michigan, as a State at
the forefront of the charter school movement.
This journey continued through an instructional role as the
Aspire charter school in East Palo Alto, California, and as a
Board member of a charter school in Austin, Texas. Witnessing
my daughter's education within a charter school further
personalized my insights into the sector's impact on students
and families.
As a researcher and tenured scholar, I have published 28
peer reviewed articles, reports and law reviews and other
publications on school choice. The foundational premise of
charter schools was to foster innovation and provide an
alternative that would spur improvements within the traditional
public school system. The body of peer reviewed academic
research, including my own studies, increasingly questions the
efficacy of charter schools in delivering on these promises.
Data from the NCES indicates no significant academic
advantage for charter school students over their public school
counterparts. Furthermore, CREDO's series of ongoing reports
have sometimes noted positive achievement results, and other
times they have found negative results.
Often in the hundredths of a standard deviation. CREDO has
also faced criticism for the methodology from the National
Education Policy Center and the Network for Public Education,
casting doubt on the significance and replicability of their
days of learning framing of their findings.
Beyond the question of academic outcomes, charter schools
have been shown to exacerbate pre-existing challenges within
the public education system. As noted by the 2016 resolution
from the NAACP that came forward when I served as NAACP
Education Chair in California, charter schools on average
exhibit higher rates of teacher turnover, decreased teacher
quality, serve less special needs students and intensified
racial segregation, and have exhibited inequitable disciplinary
practices.
The work of such scholars as Kevin Welner, among others,
have illuminated how charter schools' selective recruitment and
retention practices contribute to a deepening of educational
disparities. My own research corroborates these findings,
highlighting the troubling extent of racial segregation in
charter schools, and challenging the inclusivity and equity of
the choice model.
Here is the flip side. The issue of accountability, or lack
thereof in the charter sector is particularly alarming. The
absence of rigorous oversight in many states has paved the way
for financial mismanagement, conflicts of interest, and a
disturbingly high rate of school closures. A recent study by
NPE found that over 25 percent of charter schools closed within
5 years.
By year ten, the closure rate was 40 percent. Millions of
public funds from the Department of Education have been spent
on charter schools, they either never opened after receiving
those grants or closed within a year. These dynamics not only
disrupt a students' educational paths but have resulted in
documented misallocation of billions of dollars in public
funds.
The governance structure of many charter schools,
especially those managed by for-profit entities, often fail to
align with the broader community interests where they are
located, undermining the principal of public accountability and
education.
Moreover, the unchecked expansion of the charter sector
poses significant risks to the public education system because
it dilutes resources and exacerbates the challenges of
delivering a high-quality education in all sectors.
The problem is accentuated by the expected nationwide
decline of K-12 student populations in public schools,
underscoring the urgency of focusing our efforts on improving
existing infrastructure, rather than expanding the charter
sector indiscriminately.
Given these concerns, my stance on charter schools has
evolved toward a more cautious and critical perspective. While
most have heard the original idea that charter schools would
serve as laboratories for educational innovation, and provide
families with diverse options, it is imperative that we address
the profound existing issues of accountability and financial
management that currently beset the school choice movement.
In consideration of the predominant perspective of
educational research data, it is imperative that we unite in
advocating for strategic reassessment of the charter school
model, with a focus on upholding educational excellence,
reinforcing our value of education as a public good, and
enhancing community's involvement in charter schools.
Only through a concerted effort to confront and resolve
these challenges can we ensure that charter schools will
instead contribute positively, rather than negatively, to our
collective goal of an effective education system for all
students. It is my sincere hope that this testimony serves as a
catalyst for thoughtful and comprehensive reevaluation of the
charter school landscape.
I do not mean to be the skunk at the garden party, but may
it ignite initiatives and policies aligned with our highest
educational aspirations, guaranteeing every child access to a
high quality education that is emblematic of our Nation's
dedication to excellence in education for all children and
families. Thank you for considering these perspectives on this
critical issue.
[The Statement of Mr. Vasquez Heilig follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Dr. Heilig, well done. Thank you very much.
I was following along because you have submitted your written
testimony earlier. Mr. Pondiscio, you are recognized. Welcome
to the Committee, and you got 5 minutes, and your mic needs to.

STATEMENT OF MR. ROBERT PONDISCIO, SENIOR FELLOW,
AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE, GREENVILLE, NEW YORK

Mr. Pondiscio. Thank you, Chairman Bean, Ranking Member
Bonamici and members of the Committee. Thank you for having me.
My name is Robert Pondiscio, I am a Senior Fellow at the
American Enterprise Institute and a former teacher. In 2002, I
became a fifth-grade teacher at the lowest performing public
school in the south Bronx, New York City's lowest performing
school district.
A mere 16 percent of PS277 students could read at grade
level. The first charter schools were just opening up in the
neighborhood. Back then there were virtually no alternatives to
the schools that had failed children for decades. In my role at
AEI, I study and write about education, including charter
schools, but my focus has seldom strayed from the question that
motivated me to become a teacher in the first place.
How can we ensure that disadvantaged children in places
like the south Bronx have every opportunity to succeed in
school and in life? A few years ago, that very question took me
back to the south Bronx where I spent a year at Success Academy
Charter School, literally across the street from where I had
been a student teacher, and a few blocks from my old school.
This charter school was delivering astonishing results for
children. In the years since I had left my classroom, Success
Academy had grown from a single school in nearby Harlem, to 45
schools across New York City, educating 17,000 children. The
lowest performing of those schools had 85 percent of its
students pass the New York State English Language Arts test.
That was the worst one. The Success Academy school with the
lowest pass rate in math had 92 percent of its students at or
above proficiency, the others were even better. Said
differently, if Success Academy were a school district it would
be the highest scoring district in New York State. It gets
better results than the city's gifted and talented programs,
and better results than wealthy suburban districts with
multimillion dollar homes.
More than 90 percent of Success Academy students are
children of color, mostly low-income, black and Hispanic. By
comparison, only 1 in 3 black and Hispanic children in New York
City test at or above grade level in math or reading.
I spent a year embedded at Success Academy Bronx 1, not as
a teacher, but this time as a reporter and researcher, writing
a book about the lessons that Success might teach us that could
be applied to K-12 education at large. After all, a founding
ideal of the charter school movement was to serve as an engine
of innovation and experimentation.
I welcome the opportunity to discuss in detail what I
observed, but in a sentence, what I saw is what is possible
when you allow parents to select a high-functioning school, and
when every adult in a child's life teachers and parents alike,
is pulling in the same direction, just as it has been
demonstrated time and again in America's past.
For years I have applied what I call the Tiffany test to my
work in education. It is named after a real-life student that I
had when I taught fifth grade. You have heard of the expression
``a problem child''? Well, Tiffany was a not your problem
child. She came to school every day in my fifth-grade classroom
in a spotless school uniform.
Never missed a day of school, never missed a homework
assignment. She was hard-working and conscientious. Tiffany was
solidly at grade level in a school where that was rare. I
called her a not your problem child because 1 day I pointed out
to my Assistant Principal that I was not doing very much to
challenge Tiffany, this incredibly diligent, dutiful, perfectly
behaved, entrusting kid who was deeply devoted to her school
and her education.
The Assistant Principal said something I'll never forget.
She said, ``She's not your problem.'' What she meant was, why
are you worried about Tiffany? You have got kids who are far
below grade level in reading and math, you have got behavior
problems, you have got special needs kids. Who cares about
Tiffany? She will be fine.
Reading and doing math at grade level is the starting line
for my child, and for yours, but it is the finish line for
Tiffany, and kids like her in America. No one would tell the
parent or teacher of a well-off student we have got bigger
problems than your kid. She is doing well enough.
Even in the most dysfunctional schools and classrooms in
America, you will find some number of diligent and hard-working
kids whose parents believe in the promise of education, but
whose teachers have bigger problems than the not your problem
child. The Tiffany test is simply this. There are parents and
kids who demonstrate faith in education and upward mobility and
the American dream.
Are we doing all in our power to ensure that faith is
rewarded? Ten years later, what did I see at Success Academy?
Tiffany, in nearly every seat. Tiffany, or someone like her. It
is commonly said in teaching that we should meet the children
where they are. It is equally important, I believe, to have an
education system that meets families where they are.
There is no rational or moral reason for government policy
at any level to prevent the children of motivated, engaged, and
invested Americans of any race, ethnic group, or income level,
from reaping the full rewards of their talents and ambitions.
There is no reason to interfere with parents' earnest
efforts to do what is best for their children. I title my book
How the Other Half Learns, and I chose that title frankly,
because I do not think I am wrong, or over-simplifying to
suggest that if you are wealthy, you have every conceivable
option available to you.
If you are poor, black or brown, you get a lecture. You get
hand wringing over fairness. You are told to be patient. You
are told your most promising student is not your problem.
Public charter schools pass the Tiffany test. Thank you very
much.
[The Statement of Mr. Pondiscio follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Mr. Pondiscio, thank you very much, and
right on time. Our final witness, who has given service to our
country, thank you again, Mr. Kenneth Campbell from Louisiana.
Welcome to the Committee, and you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF MR. KENNETH CAMPBELL, CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER,  NEW  SCHOOLS FOR  BATON  ROUGE,  BATON,
ROUGE, LOUISIANA

Mr. Campbell. Thank you. Good morning. Chairman Bean,
Ranking Member Bonamici, and members of the Committee, thank
you for this opportunity to speak with you. My name is Kenneth
Campbell, and I am the CEO of New Schools for Baton Rouge, a
nonprofit founded in 2012 by civic and community leaders to
transform public education in our city.
Our core belief is that every child deserves a great
school, and our mission is to ensure that every child has
access to an excellent education. I have spent the past 30
years advocating for, and working with educators, parents and
community leaders across the country to develop and implement
thoughtful and impactful charter school policies and
initiatives.
In 2007, I was tapped by the Louisiana Department of
Education to serve as the Founding Director of the State
Charter School Office, and to help lead efforts to rebuild New
Orleans education system following Hurricane Katrina. We did it
by empowering local educators to restart their schools as
charter schools, so that they would have the autonomy to make
the best decisions for students.
Before Katrina, New Orleans was the second lowest
performing school district in Louisiana, with the graduation
rate of less than 60 percent. Recent studies now say that New
Orleans, an all charter district, has one of the highest
academic growth rates of any urban school district in the
country.
As CEO for New Schools for Baton Rouge, my energy and
efforts are focused on utilizing charter schools to drive the
same type of improvement and innovation in Baton Rouge. Our
work with charters is centered around two questions. First, are
charter schools serving students and families well?
Second, are they accelerating learning for our most
vulnerable children? We believe the answer to both of those is
a resounding yes. As with most school districts nationwide,
Baton Rouge schools have struggled to recover from COVID.
However, in the state's most recent performance evaluation
almost 70 percent of our charter schools surpass their 2019
school performance scores, compared to less than 40 percent of
the District's traditional schools.
Almost 80 percent of charter schools in our city improve
their performance year over year. Not surprisingly, this
academic success and innovation are driving greater demand. We
are celebrating 30 years of chartering in Louisiana this year.
We have 87,000 kids in charter schools in Louisiana, and in
Baton Rouge, almost 30 percent of students who attend a public
school, attend a charter school.
That tells us that moms, dads, grandparents, continue to
seek out new and better schools for their kids, and we should
be in the business of trying to help them do that. Charter
schools serve as catalysts for educational innovation. Bell
Chase Academy, just south of New Orleans was the Nation's first
charter school on a military base was founded to meet the
unique needs of military children.
We have two charter schools in our city that partner with
large healthcare centers and hospitals to collaborate on
academic resources and opportunities in STEM education. GEO
Next Generation High School is committed to ensuring that every
student graduates from high school, having also earned an
associate's degree.
Unfortunately, as has been mentioned here a couple times a
day, not every charter school is successful. In fact,
accountability is a cornerstone of the charter school model.
Unlike traditional public schools, when charter schools are not
performing up to standards, they can be closed.
While the decision to close any school is regrettable, we
must be committed to evaluating performance, and when
necessary, making the difficult decision to redirect resources
to schools that better serve students, and our communities'
needs.
Earlier I spoke about the growth of charter schools in
Louisiana and across the country. While local leaders deserve
all of the credit for the hard work of planning and launching
schools, I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the key
role that the charter school program has played in the growth
and expansion of charter schools over the past 25 years.
We are deeply appreciative that Congress continues to
allocate resources to the charter school program, and we hope
that charter schools continue to enjoy strong, bipartisan
support.
I also want to acknowledge Congresswoman Letlow, and
Senator Cassidy, both from the great State of Louisiana, for
partnering with colleagues, and their respective chambers, to
introduce legislation to help charter schools solve two of the
biggest hurdles, access to facilities and resources to help
educators and community leaders strengthen their charter
applications.
Charter schools provide viable options for families and
students who want more from their public schools. They empower
families with the ability to choose the school that best fits
their child's needs. They engage communities with a sense of
ownership and pride.
There is no question that our public education system is
struggling, and I believe charter schools can be important
collaborators with school districts to develop programs and
services that improve all public schools for all students.
Again, thank you for this opportunity to speak, and thank you
for recognizing the vital role that charter schools play in the
education of our students.
[The Statement of Mr. Campbell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Mr. Campbell, thank you so much. Leave it to
the military man to finish early and give us time back. Thank
you so much. Under Committee Rule 9, we will now question
witnesses under the 5-minute rule. I will begin the
questioning. Put the clock on Bean as we embark. You all did a
great job by the way. Thank you all for coming forward.
Mr. Pondiscio, you have got a unique perspective because
you were a teacher in a public school, and now you have been
involved in a charter school. Is it possible for you to tell us
what is the difference? What is the secret? What is the secret
sauce in charter schools and the difference?
Mr. Pondiscio. I was a teacher at a public school and at a
charter school. I taught high school civics for a time at
Democracy Prep public charter schools in Harlem, New York. The
difference is, and let me be clear, I do not think there is any
particular magic that happens when you put the name Charter on
a school building.
What it is, is a permission structure, right? Chartering
allows you to innovate, allows you to do something new and
different that you could not do in the public school system.
Some charters take full advance of that, some do not. Let us be
honest. The best charters embrace this, and innovate around
curriculum and instruction, which is my particular interest.
Some of the very best charters think thoughtfully about the
job of the teacher, and making--how do you make that job, as I
like to say, doable by mere mortals? As a former public school
teacher, I can tell you that it is--I like to say it is the
easiest job in the world to do badly, the hardest job in the
world to do well.
One of the things that I have studied over the years,
particularly in charters, particularly like the one that I
reference in my testimony is innovative ideas around making the
job doable by the teachers we have, not the teachers we wish we
had.
Chairman Bean. Were you coached differently? Is the
administration at one or the other?
Mr. Pondiscio. Oh, no question. Well, back to my experience
as a charter school teacher, I got more observations in
coaching on a single day than frankly, I got in 5 years at
PS277 where I had two observations in 5 years. I do not mean
two a year, two observations period, in 5 years.
In my first day teaching high school civics at Democracy
Prep, my principal was in my classroom giving me feedback. If I
may----
Chairman Bean. I believe we will, I have got to move on,
but hopefully we will explore that because I know you have had
that insight right there. Dr. Raymond, we have heard we all
want what is best for kids. We all want a system that thrives.
We want an accountable system. We want to be measuring
everybody's report card. All of our report cards should be the
same because we can measure.
There has been some criticism on charters today that we do
not measure them appropriately and what not. How do you respond
to that criticism? Is that fair?
Ms. Raymond. I think that all schools should face the same
outcomes performance criteria, and I think if we do that you
will find, as Mr. Pondiscio said, some charter schools do not
do very well, but the vast majority of them do. Those sets of
criteria should apply regardless, and they ought to be tied to
our learning standards that we think kids need to know in order
to be successful in life.
Chairman Bean. Is the CREDO measuring stick, and that is
the measuring stick of how we based on educational outcomes. Is
that fair? Does that need to be reformed? Is it accurate?
Ms. Raymond. Well, if we thought it was unfair we would
change it. No. The idea that we have is that we have precisely
matched on all things that we can measure, a student in a
charter school, with students who look exactly like them,
including their starting score, so, their educational
endowments, in local District schools.
It is a peer reviewed methodology. We have had four
published critiques, evaluations, of our methodology, and not
only do we hold up well as a regular matching methodology, but
our results actually approximate what you would get with so-
called experimental designs. I am confident it is useful.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much.
Mr. Campbell.
Mr. Campbell. Yes, sir?
Chairman Bean. You have got a distinguished career as a
military veteran, but also as a business leader. You could do a
lot of things, probably go elsewhere and make a lot of money,
but you have made a decision to engage in bolstering charter
schools and educational choice. Why are you doing that?
Mr. Campbell. Very simple. I mean just the hundreds and
hundreds of families, parents that I have talked to. I have
been in living rooms where I have heard them talk about the
challenges of getting a great education. I have heard them
share their hopes, their wishes, their dreams, their
aspirations for their kids that they felt like were being
unmet.
Anything that I can do to help them do that, I think that
is the most important work, and work that I will always look
back upon fondly. If I could help parents be able to do that,
that is what I am going to do.
Chairman Bean. Was my opening statement accurate when I
said there is a lottery, there are lines to get in, families
literally live on that computer trying to get in. They know
that sometimes it is the only way they can get out. They can
elevate their family. Is that accurate?
Mr. Campbell. It is in some cases. That is absolutely
accurate in some cases. Others, you know, the reality is that
you know, if we do this well, our schools will be better, and
also traditional public schools will be better.
My hope again, is that we have great charter schools. They
push our district in ways that they might not always want to be
pushed, but that they get better also.
That we have a variety of offerings that parents,
especially those parents who have a limited means can be able
to access those schools.
Chairman Bean. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Campbell. I now
yield the floor to Ranking Member Bonamici for 5 minutes, you
are recognized.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
to the witnesses. I would like to start by reiterating that
research on charter schools is mixed at best when it comes to
determining their effectiveness at providing high quality
academic instruction for students.
Additionally, research has shown that charter schools are
less likely than traditional public schools to enroll and
support students with disabilities, more likely to be
segregated by race, socioeconomic status, class, and student
language proficiency. I think, Dr. Raymond, you made a great
case for a longer school year.
Mr. Pondiscio, you certainly made a case for more
professional development, a differentiation, a great case for
smaller class sizes, and more engaged administration, but I see
our role as policymakers to care about all students, not just
with those students with the parents who say okay, well we want
to find a right fit for our students because you still have to
look at everybody and give everybody a great education.
When I was in the Oregon legislature, I was on a charter
review Commission, where we looked at it was 10 years after our
charter law passed, and we were grappling with issues back
then, maybe 12--15 years ago. A lot of questions still have not
been answered today. How are charter schools determining which
students enroll? Who serves on boards? To whom are they
accountable?
What happens when charter schools close? Where do their
students go? We had a lot of questions about the proliferation
of online charter schools, which tend to have an abysmal
record. Dr. Vasquez Heilig, you mentioned the lack of
accountability and rigorous oversight of charter schools in
many states, and also the high percentage of schools that
closed.
What do students and families do when their charter school
closes its doors? What recourse is there? What options do they
have? If a charter school closes in the middle of an academic
year, how does that affect the local public schools?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes. I have to work in an example about
the University of Michigan. I can want to go to the University
of Michigan, but the University of Michigan also wants to have
me too.
I think that is one of the issues that we have with charter
schools is we talk about lotteries and these types of things,
but the charter schools get to decide who is eligible for that
lottery in a lot of cases, right.
If those students leave, then they are able to backfill
those students, and they can decide how they want to backfill
students when students leave, et cetera. When charter schools
close, we know that public schools are going to welcome them
back. Because public schools are a part of education as a
public good, and so they are going to bring any student that
comes to their door, they are going to allow them in.
We have to understand the school choice does not mean that
parents can willy nilly choose a student they want in the
school that they want to go to, they also have to be chosen by
that school. It is the same premise for vouchers too. Whether
it is charters or vouchers, school choice means that the
schools have a role in that choice.
If a charter school is closed, and we know that quite a few
charter schools do close. I gave those numbers in my opening
statement, that disrupts their education. That disrupts their
families, and so those students are welcomed back with open
arms to their public schools.
They do also have a lot of other opportunities for choice.
Many districts have in-district charters. Those are community
engaged charters. There are Magnet schools, there are community
schools, there is a lot of community driven choice.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. I want to get another question in.
Like many other states, Oregon's witnessed of proliferation of
online charter schools as I mentioned. In 2015, a CREDO report
about online charter schools found such poor performance that
Education Week actually quoted Dr. Raymond as saying it was
literally as though the student did not go to school for the
entire year.
Despite this enrollment, we know that they have long been
some of the worst performing schools in the charter sector.
There was a rise, of course, during the COVID 19 pandemic. In a
2022, a GAO report found that virtual charter schools had
significantly lower proficiency rates on State tests compared
with other school types.
What are the long-term outcomes for students who attend
these schools, and what if anything, can we do to hold online
charter schools accountable for poor performance?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Right. I think that the CREDO has been
very consistent in finding that the online charters perform
especially poorly, especially in math, that they have been
performing very poorly. When I was in California as Education
Chair, this was something that California was tackling.
This is one of the biggest challenges in the charter
sector. I think it is in the best interest of the charter
sector to support accountability, because then their numbers
would look better than hundredths of standard deviation of
improvement. I think it is in their best interest for the good
apples to call out the bad apples.
Ms. Bonamici. I appreciate that----
Ms. Raymond. Can I clarify for the record?
Ms. Bonamici. Go ahead, Dr. Raymond.
Ms. Raymond. The numbers that you have quoted are accurate,
but of just a few weeks ago our team in part led by Dr. Lee,
behind me, published a policy brief about online charter
schools. I would be happy to enter that into the record during
the follow-on period.
What we found is that in most online charter schools, while
the average performance is bad, and that is certainly the case,
there are in every school a substantial proportion of students
who do well. The problem that I see now in this additional
insight is that online schools are not for every student. They
do not have the necessarily clearing and matching.
Ms. Bonamici. I have to reclaim my time. They are also
significant equity issues for students who do not have a parent
or someone at home with them. Mr. Chairman, as I yield back, I
want to enter into the record a letter by the National Network
for Public Education about charter schools and enter into the
record as well, a report by the National Council on Disability
entitled ``Choice and Vouchers--Implications for Students with
Disabilities.''
Chairman Bean. Without objection, so ordered. Thank you
very much Ranking Member.
[The information of Ms. Bonamici follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. We will now yield to the State of Michigan,
where Representative Lisa McClain is recognized for her 5
minutes. Representative McClain, you are recognized.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you. Before I get started, Ms. Raymond,
did you want to finish your thought?
Ms. Raymond. I was done. Thank you.
Mrs. McClain. Okay. Thank you. Then I will start just with
a general question to Mr. Heilig because we have talked a lot
about charter schools and what happens if they close, and we
are all concerned about that, right? Goodness gracious, what
happens if the close in the middle of a school year, right?
We want to make sure that we are protecting the children.
What happens when a public school fails?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Well, that is a good question. How do
you define failing, Congresswoman?
Mrs. McClain. Same way we define failure for charter
schools. What happens--it is real simple. One, do you have a
determination whether a public school is failing? Yes or no?
Yes, you do?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Well, I was asked to do that at work
for Rod Page when I worked in Houston. Did you want me to say
more on that, or just leave it?
Mrs. McClain. I am just asking. Do we have a measurement
for when a public school fails? Yes we do, no we do not.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Bureaucrats do create arbitrary
measures for a failing school. Yes.
Mrs. McClain. Yes, we have that measure for when public
schools fail?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes. Bureaucrats do create that now.
Yes.
Ms. McClain. Okay. I appreciate that. What happens to a
public school when it fails?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Well, we should make investments in----
Ms. McClain. I am not asking what should, I am asking when
a public school fails what happens?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Well, I could tell you what happens in
Texas. In Houston, they have gone and taken away the schools
from the community. That is what is happening in Houston. I
think that we need to make investments in the things that we
know matter.
Ms. McClain. I understand. When a public school fails, this
is what I am trying to wrap my head around.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Sure.
Ms. McClain. We have two separate sets of rules for the
same children, which is kind of interesting to me.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Okay.
Ms. McClain. If a charter school fails, we have all these
rules and regulations and it closes, right? If a public school
fails with less rules, less regulations, we just want more
money to fix the problem. If money is the answer for public
schools, why would we not give money to the answer for charter
schools? With that, I am going to switch my questioning now to
Mr. Pondiscio.
The National School of Choice Awareness Foundation
January's survey found that 72 percent of parents considered
not--but considered different schools for their children. A 35
percent increase since 2022, right? What do you see is driving
such a significant increase in school of choice? 35 percent.
Mr. Pondiscio. Yes. I think the short answer may be COVID.
For years I have pointed out that what happens inside of the
American school classroom is a bit of a black box. We do not
really know. COVID ripped the lid off of that black box, as it
were, so suddenly your child's school was coming onto your
laptop, onto your kitchen table every day all across America.
In many, and hopefully most instances, the parents were
edified by what they saw. In some number of cases,
unfortunately, parents were aghast at what they saw. When
parents are unhappy with their school, they tend to want
something else. If they are in a public school that is not
doing well, then they are going to seek choice.
Congresswoman, if I also may just answer your previous
question about what happens when a public school fails, well in
2002, I went to work at the lowest performing public school in
New York City's lowest performing district. It is now 2024,
that school is now the lowest performing school in New York
City's lowest performing district.
Mrs. McClain. Well, we just have measurements, I thought we
just talked about we had measurements for those public schools
when they close. Why did that one not close?
Mr. Pondiscio. That is a very good question, Congresswoman.
Mrs. McClain. Hmm. Did we have--that is interesting, but we
care about the children, right? Okay. Just checking. In my
district over--we have 3,300 charter school students, right? I
am wondering if you could help--there is a need, there is a
want, maybe not a need, but a want for more charter schools,
right?
There is a waiting list to get in, right, which I would
think would be a good thing. Can you describe the roadblocks
that exist at the local and State level in developing more
options?
Mr. Pondiscio. Sure.
Mrs. McClain. Why can we not have more of these schools
that parents are demanding for their children?
Mr. Pondiscio. I understand that we are talking about this
at the Federal level, but in New York, where I have spent my
entire education career, there has been a charter school cap in
place for nearly a decade. Despite the fact that the City in
particular, New York City, is home to some of the highest
performing, highest demand public charter schools in the
country, there has been no more room at the inn, so to speak.
State lawmakers have blocked the creation of new charters.
Mrs. McClain. Why do you think we are so afraid and so
scared of charter schools?
Mr. Pondiscio. That is a very good question. I do not have
an answer for you.
Mrs. McClain. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Let us go to the great
State of Connecticut, where Representative Hayes is recognized.
You are recognized.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you and thank you to all of our witnesses
for being here today. I just want to make a few corrections to
the record before I get into my remarks. First of all, teaching
virtually is a skillset, so this idea that people turned on
their computers and were aghast by what they saw, many of our
educators had never had the investments made in what it takes
to teach students virtually, which is a different skillset.
For that to be the metric of evaluation for what is
happening in our public schools, it is just wrong and
inaccurate. I am not sure where in the country a teacher would
only be evaluated two times in 5 years. Teacher evaluations are
part of our school systems.
I was evaluated every year, multiple times a year, on
things like student learning objectives, standards-based
observations. Parent and peer feedback, whole school measures
and also student feedback. You cannot advance as a teacher and
maintain your certification without evaluation, so that needs
to be said. There is already a partnership in place between
parents and teachers.
I have to shout out from my own home State of Connecticut,
our PTA Chairman, Joe Accomando, who is here in the gallery
today listening. Listen, I am an educator, and I support school
choice. I support high quality public charter schools. There
are no exceptions, but I also recognize the importance of
specialized learning.
Schools with a focus on a particular strand or a topic
because these schools can engage students in a very different
way and help them to excel in their learning. Charter schools
get to pick and choose if and when they will accept a special
education population. They get to choose to exclude students
based on disciplinary or attendance issues.
Public schools cannot do that. We have to support all
students, no matter what they bring to the table. Even the kids
who have no one else advocating for them. Even to your point
the Tiffanys.
That is our job, to support all students, so why then are
we not talking about making all schools the best that they can
be, instead of picking off and creating subsets where a select
handpicked group of students have access to high quality
specialized learning.
As a parent, I would expect that for my child, and I want
that as a teacher for every child. That should be our response.
I also do not support moving public funds from students who
need it most, to fund for-profit charter networks. The
Department of Education invests millions of dollars in charter
schools, so we must have transparency and oversight of these
funds, and that is not unreasonable.
To my colleague's point, these are questions that for a
decade still have not been answered. Dr. Vasquez Heilig, in
your testimony you mention that charter schools have higher
rates of teacher turnover, and lower teacher quality than
traditional public schools.
Can I ask you why public schools are able to retain quality
teachers at higher rates than most public charter schools?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. That is a great question, and I think
there is a lot of peer reviewed research on this topic. The
charter teachers say it is because there is a lot of
inexperienced teachers in charter schools. One fifth of public
school teachers have less than 3 years' experience.
One third of charter school teachers have that experience.
They also have a challenge with experienced leaders and working
conditions. Right here in D.C., 25 percent of teachers turn
over in public, neighborhood public schools, 40 percent in
charter schools according to a Washington Post piece that I
recently saw.
It is very well established in the research literature on
average because we are talking about the averages here, that
charter schools have less experienced teachers, and they are
less qualified, and they have higher turnover.
Mrs. Hayes. According to the Network of Public Education,
over 15 percent of charter schools around the country are run
by for-profit corporations. Do you think that a mandatory
spending report, or other measures by Congress would help in
providing transparency to where these funds are going?
Mr. Vasques Heilig. We absolutely need more accountability.
There was a comment about money for these planning grants, with
the CSP grant, and I have been a CSP reviewer for the U.S.
Department of Education. We have seen a billion dollars going
to planning grants for schools that either never opened or
closed after a year.
There is excessive malfeasance in terms of the finances in
the charter school sector.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. I do not have much time, so I will
end by thanking you all for your testimony, and just reminding
you that investing in our teachers and in our public schools,
is the way that we reach all students. This idea about picking
out and pulling out the most egregious statistics about failing
schools should be our call to action, not us turning away from
the kids who need it most, or the kids that have no one but us
advocating for them. With that, I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Representative. Let us
go to the great State of Illinois, where Representative Miller
is recognized. Representative Miller.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Chairman Bean, and thank you to all
of our witnesses for being here today.
Mr. Campbell.
Mr. Campbell. Yes, ma'am?
Mrs. Miller. You mentioned in your testimony that 67
percent of Baton Rouge charter schools are surpassing their
pre-pandemic test scores. Congratulations.
Mr. Campbell. Thank you.
Mrs. Miller. Which is roughly double the percentage of
traditional public schools in Baton Rouge achieving the same
success. That number is simply remarkable. What do you think
explains the charter school success in Baton Rouge?
Mr. Campbell. I think several things. One, being able to be
in that smaller environment where you are worried primarily
about the kids in that building gives you a laser like focus on
those kids and their needs and their interests.
We have a school district, and you are kind of worried
about everybody and everything, it is kind of hard to forget
about the one kid, and what does that one kid need? I think
charter schools being mission aligned, and mission focused
really digging in on instruction, and understanding you know,
kind of what the learning loss during COVID entailed, and how
they can get past that.
I think our schools have done a wonderful job. We have
further to go, but by far we want to be far better. We are
really encouraged that those schools are back to that level. We
think they could be even better next year, so that is what we
are focused on.
Mrs. Miller. That is great. Mr. Campbell, I am also deeply
impressed by your dedicated service to our country, having
served 8 years on active duty, and an additional 13 years in
the Reserves. First and foremost, thank you so much for your
commitment and sacrifice to preserve our freedom.
Mr. Campbell. Thank you. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Miller. Your contributions are truly commendable, and
our Nation is indebted to individuals like you. In your
testimony you highlighted the potential of charter schools in
addressing the unique needs of military families. Could you
elaborate on how charter schools can effectively cater to the
specific needs of military families?
Mr. Campbell. Yes, ma'am. First, it is knowing the kids.
The reality is you know, our military families, especially in
the post-911 era, you know, they were facing frequent
deployments, and so our family members were gone all the time.
What does that mean to a kid who is in your school, you know,
if they have a dad gone, or a mom gone for an extended period
of time?
Frequent TDY's, the fact that they are moving every two to
3 years and they are at a different community with different
friends, all those things affect kids and how they learn, and
their ability to be deeply connected to teachers and schools. A
school that recognizes that and those little things, for
example, when you walk into Bell Chase, you know, shortly after
9/11, you would see banners hanging in the entryway with the
names of every parent who was deployed, right?
That kids would walk through that on their way into school
knowing that people cared about their family member, and that
they were praying for them, and hoping for their success. The
fact that these kids have to go on to different school
district, and they need to be on grade level.
All those sorts of things I think made a big difference to
the families, you know, just south of New Orleans, and I am
hoping that other schools can have also that laser like focus
on particular kids who go into their doors.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Campbell, and may God continue
to bless and grant you wisdom as you seek to be impactful in
these children's education, and Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Representative. Let us
go to the great State of Florida where Representative Wilson,
you are recognized, good morning.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, home boy. Thank you, Chairman Bean,
Ranking Member Bonamici, and thank you to our witnesses for
your testimony today. I must State upfront that I find your
claims of charter schools outperforming public schools to be
not only misleading but entirely deceptive and unfounded.
Charter schools have failed to uphold their promises to the
communities they serve.
A number of years ago, I became a public school teacher to
keep the promise that traditional public schools make. My
mission was clear to provide Black and Brown children with
opportunities for life, knowledge, civic engagement, and the
pursuit of the American dream.
Charter schools fall short of this promise. Instead, poorly
monitored charter schools deliver subpar academic results,
snatch money from our public schools, and then wash their hands
clean of any responsibility. On top of that in my home State of
Florida, we see charters exacerbate patterns of resegregation
along racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic lines.
In Florida, Black students consistently perform worse in
charter schools than in their traditional public schools. While
Florida's charters boast more A rated schools, they also lead
the pack in F rated institutions, compared to public schools,
and that is just the reality.
In fact, in 2022, News4Jax report revealed that 10 out of
40 Duval County charter schools received D or F grades from the
State. Does this sound consistently successful to you? Help me
make sense of this. Again, the assertion that charters are best
for minority, low-income communities, is not just misleading
but downright dangerous and destined for failure.
In a WTSP Tampa Bay report, Florida's charter school
statistics paint a grim picture, a staggering 409 charter
schools have shut down since the first opened in Florida in
1996. That is a 40 percent failure rate. As a former teacher,
and former principal, myself, let us recap what we have
learned.
What are charter schools actually good at, if anything? We
have learned that charter schools are good at snatching
Florida's money that should be going to public schools, leaving
them deprived. Then, they peddle substandard education. When
the damage is done, they shut down and leave nothing but chaos
in their wake.
This is what we get with charter schools. We as a nation
have worked very hard, made so many gains, and we simply cannot
continue to regress into an educational landscape where we fail
to keep the promises we have made to our children. The very
first charter school in the Nation was established in my
hometown of Florida, Miami, Florida, by Jeb Bush, who used that
platform to win the Governorship of Florida.
After the school board, which I served on, passed the
charter provision, despite my protest, I worked with Mr. Bush
side by side to make sure that the school was at least halfway
equal to our public schools. It was not, and it soon closed.
Please stop diverting funds from public schools to experiment
with our children. With that, I have a few questions.
Dr. Vasquez Heilig, data is consistently showing that
traditional public schools are increasing in performance over
time. Meanwhile, charters have higher teacher turnover rates.
Would it not make sense to invest in our traditional public
school system, rather than splintering our resources in a
variety of school types?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes. This is particularly important for
the African American community. The NAACP has had five
resolutions on charter schools, and the one in about 2010 made
exactly this point. This is why the NAACP called for a
moratorium on charter schools in 2016, and this is especially
important because in urban areas, one in every five Black
students is now attending a charter school.
Ms. Wilson. I am out of time. Thank you.
Chairman Bean. Thank you, Representative Wilson. Let us go
to Utah where the Chair of the Higher Ed Subcommittee is
recognized. Burgess Owens, Representative Owens, you are
recognized.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Heilig, I would like to ask a quick question. Would you agree
with--I will get to what the question is, what is the priority
of education? The child or the institution?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Well, part of the education system
should be to make the investments in our students, so they can
have successful futures----
Mr. Owens. No, no, no. Just--is it the child? Is that the
priority? Or is the institution? There are two different
focuses I think we are kind of dealing with right now?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Investments in the children.
Mr. Owens. Okay. Okay. The State of California 2017, 75
percent of the black boys in the State of California could not
pass standard reading and writing tests. Here in Baltimore,
three districts--zero proficiency in math. Should the parents
of those children--well, let me also ask this.
Would you agree the parents of these children care about
their kids as much as everybody else, even if they are poor,
black, Hispanic, they still care about those kids that are
failing?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. I am sorry. I do not understand.
Mr. Owens. Would you agree that the parents of those
children care about their kids as much as we do care about our
kids?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Absolutely.
Mr. Owens. Okay. In a situation where there in these
schools should parents have a choice of leaving failing public
schools to go someplace else? Can I just reState this? 75
percent of black boys in the State of California fail to read,
write and think. Should those parents have a choice of leaving
those public--failing public schools, to go someplace where
their kids have a chance to succeed?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. The question you asked has limited the
responses I can provide. The response to the actual question is
we need to make an investment in these children.
Mr. Owen. Well, let me just say this. If we were talking
about your child, I am sure you will say I want to choose
someplace else. I have been hearing this for 40 years that we
need to reinvest in these schools. Guess what happens? Every
three to 4 years, kids are graduating not understanding how to
succeed as we are talking about investing more into failing
schools.
Should public school systems have the same level playing
field, in terms of the outcome, as charter schools?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Well, I think the record should say
that charter schools should have the same accountability.
Public schools have vastly more accountability in State law
than charter schools do.
Mr. Owens. Okay. Why are we having so much failure across
our country? This is not just California, by the way.
Everywhere, and by the way, let me just say this. It is
happening more in black, Hispanic and low-income that this is
going on.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes, yes, yes. That is the elephant in
the room in our country. We know that inequality is--20 billion
dollars more go into districts that are primarily white
compared to districts that are primarily Black and Latino.
Mr. Owens. Well, let me just say this. I know that charter
schools in the same communities as these public schools, so if
you go to a charter school you have a majority of black,
Hispanic and low-income. You go to the same public school,
charter, you are going to have the same geographics.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes, but here is the answer. Here is
the answer to that question. If I go into your local
supermarket, I have $10.00, and I have to split it three ways,
that is completely different than if we invest it in a public
choice decision. The vouchers, charters----
Mr. Owens. Okay. Just let me say this because I do not want
to get into too much of the weeds. I am going to ask you, and I
look at this. The problem is accentuated, this here statement,
by nationwide declining K through 12 student populations at
public schools. That could be because parents realizing it is
not working for their kids.
I think we have to--I understand this, how about we look at
best practices? Have you ever thought about this? You look at
what is going on in Baton Rouge, you look at what is going on
in the Success Academy. If those are working, should we not
replicate that if the focus is our kids?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Well, I think that is a great question.
We have a district in Louisiana that is all charter schools,
and I do not think anybody is arguing that they are a model of
educational success. After Katrina, charter schools were forced
on New Orleans, and nobody is arguing that they are a beacon of
educational success.
Mr. Owens. No. We can also not argue, we have to argue that
there is 75 percent failure rate in California, so those public
schools are failing too. My point is we should have a standard
for all of them because failing our kids, they should not be
part of the equation, right? Would you agree with that?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. I agree we should have a high standard
for all schools, absolutely.
Mr. Owens. Okay. That means public schools also. If the
public schools are failing, let us get rid of them. If charter
schools are failing, let us get rid of them. A bottom line is
our output of our kids being able to sit and have these kinds
of conversations, to have a dream, the ability to move forward,
only happen if they can read, write and think.
For us to talk about putting down the best practices of
college, of situations that are working is we are--I am trying
to understand why that is happening. If it is succeeding, if it
is in Baton Rouge it is succeeding, New York, I would go to the
Success Academy upstairs in the same building is where Success
Academy is.
Downstairs is public. The biggest--the biggest
disappointment of those kids and those same families, one knows
they are going to be succeeding because they are a part of that
lottery ticket, and the other know they are not going to
succeed because they are going downstairs to a public school
system that is going to guarantee their failure.
We need that focus on our outcome, focus on our kids, not
the institution. Thank you guys, actually, for what you are
doing. I appreciate particularly those in these communities
that these kids have not had a chance in the past. Thank you,
guys, so much for that, and I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Representative Owens.
Let us go to the great State of California where the Chair of
the Subcommittee of the Workforce is recognized. Representative
Kiley, you are recognized.
Mr. Kiley. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Campbell, I want to
ask you about the New Orleans experience because it is such an
important case study that in the wake of Hurricane Katrina you
had to rebuild the whole education system. New Orleans went 100
percent charter. Is that correct?
Mr. Campbell. That is correct.
Mr. Kiley. What have the results been in terms of student
achievement?
Mr. Campbell. The results have been nothing short of
remarkable. As we said, it was virtually a wasteland. It was
one of the worst school districts in America prior to Hurricane
Katrina. You look today and you actually see a vibrant school
system.
It actually works very well. Contrary to what a lot of
people said, the folks who started schools after Hurricane
Katrina were education leaders who were already from New
Orleans. It was not like there was some invading force that
came in with all these charter schools.
The reality is we empower local educators who were already
there, already operating schools, with a new way to be able to
do it, that they have embraced and ran with and done phenomenal
things with. Right now, if you look at our State, New Orleans
again was always at the bottom. It is in the top tier in terms
of school district performance, and top 40 percent.
There is no way you would have expected that in New Orleans
when you look at the demographics of New Orleans. We have
veteran educators who love New Orleans, who have lived there
their entire lives, who are running great charter schools.
If you ask a person, they will tell you they will never go
back. That is the reality of what is happening in New Orleans.
Mr. Kiley. New Orleans went from among the worst to among
the best.
Mr. Campbell. Yes.
Mr. Kiley. After going 100 percent charter?
Mr. Campbell. Yes.
Mr. Kiley. We see in some parts of the country charter
schools are under attack. One of the first things that the
Biden administration Education Department did was propose
cutting charter school grants. In California, a number of laws
have been passed, and have been signed into law by the
Governor, making it harder to open and to reauthorize charter
schools.
In Los Angeles, Unified School District, the second largest
district in the entire country, that we are proposing right now
to significantly restrict the ability to operate charter
schools. We have heard today, several just blatantly false
statements about how charter schools work from our friends over
there, as well as one of the democrat witnesses, who just
blatantly mischaracterized the New Orleans experience.
What would your message be to those who are waging this war
on charter schools when they have been shown to produce
remarkable results?
Mr. Campbell. I think the first thing we have to understand
is that this is really about money and control, right? We can
talk about all these other things performance, others, it is
money and control. It is who gets to decide how kids are
educated, where they are educated, and who gets to spend the
money.
The fact is now we have a situation where all of a sudden
it is not all housed in one district. There are other people
who can say this is how we are going to spend our dollars.
These are the results we are trying to achieve. For the first
time, we have empowered poor families to say I do not like what
is happening in this school, so I am going to take my money,
and I am going to move and go somewhere else.
At the end of the day, as long as we are talking about
money and power and control, you are always going to have this
kind of contentiousness but let us not make it something else.
It really is about money and power and control, and who has it
and who does not.
Mr. Kiley. In other words, the attacks on charter schools
are about putting politics over kids.
Mr. Campbell. Absolutely.
Mr. Kiley. Dr. Raymond, I wanted to ask you briefly about
the CREDO study because this is really the gold standard when
it comes to measuring charter school success. I think you have
results specifically from California as well, which is my
State. Can you speak to that a little bit about how charters
are done in California?
Ms. Raymond. I knew I would get a detailed question. Hang
on just a second. Yes, thank you. In our charter school study
of 2023, students in California charter schools were able to
host 11 extra days of learning in reading, and four extra days
of learning in math.
These are 1,300 charter schools across the State, so on
average they are moving students forward faster than students
in traditional public schools that are right down the street.
Mr. Kiley. Is it not interesting that the politicians in
Sacramento see those results and decide these are precisely the
schools that we need to go after, and to target, and make it
more difficult to operate them? Thank you very much for your
work, and thank you as well for your testimony, Mr. Campbell,
and your work--the tremendous work that you are doing to
provide opportunities to students.
The beauty of charters is that not only are they helping to
close achievement gaps in districts that have historically
struggled when it comes to student success, but you know, they
also allow for just different options for different types of
kids, and different types of families. In the area that I
represent, we actually have some truly excellent traditional
public schools, and then we also have some outstanding charter
public schools that some families choose to opt into.
I want to thank the Chair for holding this hearing. I think
it is very important that we continue to support the charter
movement and to support successful charter schools and charter
leaders. I think it is highly unfortunate that that cannot be
as bipartisan as frankly it should be. Thank you, and I yield
back to the Chair.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Chair Kiley. Let us go
to the great State of North Carolina, where the Chair of the
Education and Workforce is standing by. She is now recognized
for questions. Representative Foxx, you are recognized.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Chairman Bean. I want to thank our
witnesses for being here today. Dr. Raymond, coming to you
again, you mentioned that charter school results for students
in urban areas, and for minority students are especially
positive. Could you say something more about that?
I know you have done excellent research and have terrific
numbers about this, so we would love to hear more about that.
Ms. Raymond. I love it when somebody asks me for more
numbers, thank you.
Mrs. Foxx. Will you turn your mic on? I am not sure it is
on.
Ms. Raymond. Yes, ma'am, it is on. Can you hear me now?
Mrs. Foxx. Okay.
Ms. Raymond. Urban students enrolled in charter schools
learn an extra 30 days in a year's time in reading and 28 extra
days of learning in math in a year's time compared to district
students that they're matched with. For black students, those
numbers are 35 extra days of learning in reading, and 29 extra
days of learning in math.
Hispanic students, reading 30 extra days in reading for
Hispanic students, and 19 extra days for Hispanic students in
math. The poverty results are 23 extra days of learning in
reading, and 17 extra days of learning in math. What this means
is over a course of several years, students are making months
and months and months of additional academic progress.
This means they are better prepared to graduate. They are
better prepared for life after high school.
Mrs. Foxx. Which makes it again even more puzzling as to
why policymakers do not want these students to have these
opportunities. It is just maddening. Mr. Pondiscio, in the last
few years we have seen parents in traditional public schools
get silenced, excluded and shamed for simply wanting to be part
of their children's education.
I think that is inexcusable. How can charter schools help
ensure parents have a voice in their child's education?
Mr. Pondiscio. The best schools, charter, public, privates
alike, recognize the power of getting every adult on the same
page so to speak, or pulling in the same direction. I think one
of the potential benefits of charter schools is to encourage
again, innovation, and create a more--a wider variety, an
ecosystem if you like, of different school types.
With respect to my research-based colleagues, I focus on
curriculum, on instruction, on school culture. If you think of
the choices that an affluent American parent has at his or her
disposal, depending on where they live of course, they likely
have access to a classical school, a Montessori school, a
project-based learning school.
They have, without controversy, unfettered access to make
the best choice for his or her child. Imagine if we had a
similar range of options for low-income families, where--and
this should be the magic of chartering. Let us be honest, if
there is a weak link in the charter ecosystem, it is that we
are not encouraging this robust flowering of different school
models and cultures.
If we use the chartering process to create an equal system,
a system that it was just as robust and diverse and had as many
different options as well-off families have, well then you
would more likely match parents and children to schools that
match their interest, their values, et cetera.
That I think is the promise of chartering that is
unfulfilled, but it is fulfillable.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much.
Mr. Campbell.
Mr. Campbell. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Foxx. We have heard a lot of concerns about how having
too much red tape can stifle charter school flexibility and
growth. As someone who has been involved in charter schools for
several years, what kind of regulations could be eliminated
without compromising charter effectiveness?
Mr. Campbell. Yes. Honestly, ma'am, I do not know where to
start, right? There are so many regulations, and I must say
this is not only the case for our charter schools, this is for
traditional public schools also. Like the amount of red tape
that we throw at education is ridiculous.
I will give you a really quick story. In Louisiana, we
passed a bill several years ago that would allow every kid to
get $1,000.00 in free tutoring. A report just came out last
week that only 1 percent of eligible students were taking
advantage of that. The reason was because we made the mandates
for being a tutor so hard, like you had to be a retired
teacher, you had to have so many hours of training, that we
could not find enough teachers to do it.
Across the board, we are always bringing in additional
mandates, cursive writing. You have to learn about this one
little obscure thing. At the end of the day, let us set the
outcomes and let us try to get out of the way. Let us take the
handcuffs off. I mean we certainly want to protect kids. We
want to protect families. Those things are really important.
I would argue our whole system is overly burdened by
regulator red tape, and it certainly affects charters, which
are supposed to be exempt from that.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Chair Fox. Let us go to
the great State of New York, where Representative Bowman is
recognized. Good morning.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
to our witnesses for being here. Before I get into my
questions, Dr. Vasquez Heilig, is there anything you want to
clarify based on questions you may have been asked before I
arrived?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. I would like to clarify. There is a lot
of conversation about why CREDO's results are valid. I am
really surprised that they are spending so much time trying to
convince us that they are valid, which to me tells a story.
Now, one of the things about being at Stanford was I was
subjected to a lot of statistical torture in my graduate
program.
I would like to talk a little bit about CREDO. Our
understanding of that report, and only they really know, is
that less than 40 percent of public school students are
compared to more than 90 percent of charter school students. It
is not really a comparison of charter schools and neighborhood
public schools. It is a very--and she said carefully selected,
and I want to underline selected.
It is really narrow subject groups, rather than actual
samples, so I think that is very important to say. I do not
think that we should cherry pick results about educational
outcomes. They note in their report that they had issues with
sampling, especially for Native American students, and ELL
students, sub-50 percent, and their ability to match in those
areas.
She talked about CMOs, and they decided to omit several
states that have CMOs. Ohio, one of those. 78 percent of the
charters in Ohio are CMOs, and one in every two is for-profit.
I think it is important that I am just really surprised that
they spent a lot of time trying to justify their methodology,
and I think that is because of the last 14 or 15 years that
scholars have had lots of critiques of their methodology.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much. As a former teacher,
principal, and founder of a district run public school across
New York City, I have also seen countless examples of the ways
that charter schools can negatively impact traditional public
schools, and often go against the wishes of local communities.
Dr. Vasquez Heilig, how do charters impact students in
communities at traditional public schools, especially as it
relates to things like funding, available space, and student
enrollment? Can you say more about how, as you stated in your
testimony, charters often fail to align with the broader
community interests?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes. I think this is a very important
point, and I was able to make it briefly to the other
gentleman. What is happening now is we are opening charters. We
are offering opportunities of vouchers, et cetera. We are using
the same educational dollars, and we are funding three separate
systems, which is a very inefficient way of going about public
education.
Now, we have examples from other countries. I will give you
an example of Chile. Chile is a place where they have universal
choice. What we see in those situations is that you have your
great public schools in the nice neighborhoods. You have your
other public schools where most of the lower achieving and low
SES students go, and then you have some private schools where
those voucher students go.
What these systems actually do is they promote
stratification of students. You see less special ed students
being served by charter schools. You see greater segregation.
When we did our study on segregation, we looked at every single
school in NCES.
We did not say here is 40 percent of neighborhood public
schools. Here is 95 percent of charter schools. We looked at
every single school in the NCES dataset and found that charters
are more segregated. I think it is very important that we are
attentive to these critiques, and that where the NAACP was
coming from in 2016. There are significant critiques of charter
schools, and I think charter school supporters could get a lot
more people onboard if they would actually address the
critiques, and they have not.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you and let us try to get this one in
before the time runs out. Can you also discuss in more detail
the harsh discipline practices that exist more often in charter
schools than in traditional public schools, and how these
practices disproportionately impact marginalized students,
including students with disabilities?
I mean, I have seen kids thrown--just thrown out of the
charter schools, the public schools cannot do that.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes, yes.
Mr. Bowman. Get suspended for long periods of time, public
schools cannot do that.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes, yes.
Mr. Bowman. Can you say more about that, please?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes. I think the big picture is that it
really disturbs me that we spin these sort of negative aspects
of charter schools, that we need to have these harsh
discipline, no excuses charter schools. That it is Okay that
charter schools close. That it is okay that we have lower
quality teachers. That spin.
For me, as a former charter school instructor, I think of
Gary. He reminded me a lot of myself, and I do not want to cry
here, but he reminded me a lot of myself. He got into a little
bit of trouble now and then, but one day he got into a little
bit too much trouble, and the charter school kicked him out.
I came back 1 day, and Gary was not there, and it broke my
heart. I just think about all the Gary's out there who charter
schools have decided that they do not want to serve, and they
want to send them back to our neighborhood public schools.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Representative Bowman.
Let us stay with the great State of New York where
Representative Williams is recognized. Welcome, and good
morning.
Mr. Williams. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and thank you.
Thank you to all of our witnesses for being here. I am an
advocate for school choice. I believe that parents, not
bureaucrats, make the best decisions for their parents, I am
sorry--for their kids' success, and particularly for their
education.
In my district, we are very fortunate to have some
excellent public schools, and I commend those administrators
and teachers and school boards that deliver excellence in their
communities. I also have excellent charter schools, and they
are usually located in the most disadvantaged communities in my
district.
They are also very successful. They are wonderfully
diverse. They are skillfully led, and they are in great demand.
In fact, right now there are ten families waiting on a wait
list just to get into kindergarten in their community charter
school. Every year they have more applicants than seats
available.
Dr. Vasquez Heilig, do you believe that charter schools
cherry pick students to inflate positive academic results?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Well, I think that I made a point
earlier before you arrived, Congressperson.
Mr. Williams. It is a real easy question. Do you believe
that charter schools cherry pick students?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. They have the ability to do that. Yes.
Mr. Williams. You believe they do?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. They have the ability to do that if
they so choose.
Mr. Williams. You have on record for having said an option
is that we can ban charter schools altogether in a September
2019 interview. Are you really considering banning all charter
schools?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Well, I think that--I do not think that
we should ban all charter schools. I think all charter schools
should be democratically accountable to the public.
Mr. Williams. Can you provide some context for me to
understand your comment that an option is that we can ban
charter schools altogether?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes.
Mr. Williams. That sounds like banning charter schools,
that is what it sounds like to me.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Again, great question. I do not know
the context of the comment? Do you know where that comment was
made?
Mr. Williams. They are your words. I assume that you meant
them when you said them.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. I do not know the context of the
comments, but----
Mr. Williams. It is always context.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. I do believe that all charters should
be democratically accountable.
Mr. Williams. Okay. Is it not your whole mission really
just to avoid direct competition to local public schools? Is
that really your mission?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Sorry. I am a scholar, so my job is----
Mr. Williams. Well, scholars can have political objectives.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. My job----
Mr. Williams. Please do not interrupt me, sir. Thank you.
Scholars can have political points of view, as we have all
learned. I am educated in engineering, and engineers have
political opinions. This is a very political issue. Is it not
your whole mission simply to avoid direct competition to local
public schools? Is that your mission?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. No.
Mr. Williams. That is not your mission? Mr. Campbell has
pointed out that this is really about money, control and power.
Mr. Campbell, you made some very compelling statements there.
What is a good reason to ban charter schools altogether?
Mr. Campbell. Sir, I could see no good reason to ban
charter schools altogether. They are viable, they are popular
with our families, and they are doing well. There is no reason
to ban charter schools.
Mr. Williams. Well, we have scholars who are saying that
that is a viable option. What animates and motivates that point
of view? I am surprised to have heard it today?
Mr. Cambell. I think sometimes there is a tendency to look
at something that is not perfect, and to try to equate
something else to it, to try and compare and contrast. We have
had conversations today, and I have heard people talk about
stratified schools. Our public school systems are stratified
today, right?
The reason we have charter schools is to help those folks
who are stuck where they are, and so you know again, it is not
as if parents are leaving to go to charter schools because
everything is perfect. They are leaving because of the
challenges that are already there.
Now our public school system needs to be better, and our
working in Baton Rouge, we support great schools regardless,
Magnet, outside under a tree, whatever it is. If it works we
are for it, and the reality is that too many of our schools do
not work, and we need more schools that do.
Mr. Williams. It just seems that getting back to where I
started--that putting power in the hands of parents, and
letting them choose, like in my community where they are on a
wait list for these wonderfully diverse schools that achieve
just remarkable results, not at the exclusion of public
schools. We have excellent public schools as well that dot my
landscape.
Mr. Campbell. Yes.
Mr. Williams. I am proud of both.
Mr. Campbell. Yes.
Mr. Williams. This idea that to avoid direct competition of
local schools, and perhaps even ban charter schools altogether
as a scholarly option is absurd, and I appreciate you all for
testifying here today. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Mr. Williams. Let us go
to the great State of Louisiana, where Representative Letlow is
recognized. Good morning, and you are recognized.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
to all the witnesses for being here, especially my fellow
Louisianan, Mr. Ken Campbell, from New Schools for Baton Rouge,
for coming to testify in front of the Subcommittee.
Mr. Campbell. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Letlow. I have previously visited Mr. Campbell's
charter school operations and was so impressed by the
educational innovation occurring at your schools, and how they
are meeting the student's needs, and catering to their learning
styles. It is no secret that I am a strong supporter of charter
schools.
The charter school's program at the U.S. Department of
Education, and in fact, last September, the Louisiana
Department of Education was awarded 55.5 million in Federal CSP
grants to support Louisiana's charter school movement. Over 5
years LDOE will support the addition of over 5,000 seats at 25
new, expanding or replicating the charter schools primarily
located in failing school districts, including in rural areas,
just like mine.
I am thrilled this grant will benefit our State, and
ultimate our students. As I visited with the charter advocates,
it has been increasingly clear how tedious and long the
administrative process is for starting our new charters. To
address these concerns, last November I introduced H.R. 6418,
the Empowered Charter Schools Educators to Lead Act.
The bipartisan bill, which authorizes states who receive
grants through the CSP, to use a portion of their funding to
support the application process and development of new charter
schools. These planning awards will help support experienced
educators with at least 5 years of school-based experience to
the charter school application process, and increase technical
assistance opportunities for them, including locating and
accessing a facility for their new school.
It is my hope the Committee can consider my bill, so it can
ensure high-quality perspective charter school applicants have
the tools and assistance they need to successfully complete the
process. My question is to you, Mr. Campbell. Can you share
your experience with this Committee, including any red tape
that you have encountered when opening new schools for Baton
Rouge?
Then second, how could access to a planning grant and
increased technical assistance, ease the way for additional
charter schools to open in Louisiana and eventually across the
country?
Mr. Campbell. Yes, ma'am. Thank you and so pleased to, you
know, kind of have you here, and good to see you today. For
your piece of legislation, I think it is incredibly helpful.
Starting a charter school is hard, as it should be, right? I
was the authorizer for the State of Louisiana.
I am going to tell you right now to get over our bar to be
able to start a school is incredibly hard. The reason it is
hard is because serving kids is hard. Like this is not an easy
endeavor. The hurdles that you have to overcome in order to be
able to start a school are significant.
With the CSP grant, we are able to solve part of the
challenge. We are able to get the money between the time their
applications are approved, and the time their school opens,
hire teachers by curriculum, furniture, all those sorts of
things, and that is a wonderful use of the program.
The reality, however, is that I think stronger schools are
made in the planning process. If we are able to get some money
to educators sooner, to help strengthen their applications and
their planning, it will be remarkable. For example, if you
decided that you wanted to start a school for girls in STEM
education, you might want to go visit two or three of those
schools and take some people with you from around the country
to see them, which ones are succeeding. Why are they
successful? What is working really well?
These funds would allow you to be able to do stuff like
that. The budget, the finance piece, you know, there has been a
lot of talk about charters struggling with finance, and I think
that is a real thing. Being able to get real support of people
to help you put together a budget that is conservative,
realistic, that allows your school to get started to be
successful, would be tremendously helpful.
That is not a skill that everybody has. Things we can do to
help strengthen planning, to help strengthen the applications I
think will lead to stronger schools, and it is one piece that
has been missing, and I am really encouraged about the
possibility of being able to make that happen.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you so much. Thank you for all that you
are doing for Louisiana. You are changing the landscape of our
State, and eventually the country. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Representative Letlow.
Let us go to the Commonwealth of Virginia, where the Ranking
Member of the Education and Workforce is standing by.
Representative Bobby Scott, you are recognized. Good morning.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, and good morning. We have heard a lot
about questions about what happens when a school is failing. I
just want to remind people that we updated the law in the Every
Student Succeeds Act, to require that the lowest performing
schools receive additional supports as a solution of addressing
failing schools.
Dr. Vasquez Heilig, can you say a word about what sense it
makes as a solution to a failing school to let a few students
slip out the back door?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Thank you so much. I would like to
answer your question, and also correct the record on two
places. The Congressman dropped and said I had called for a
ban, but that was related to California's ban on for-profit
schools. I just did a quick Google on that. Yes, I do believe
that we should not be--we should not have for-profit-charter
schools, so I want to make that clarification.
I think the second thing about the New Orleans
conversation, we looked at the ACT, SAT data, the NAEP data,
and Louisiana RSD has been last and nearly last for quite some
time. I do not believe that deserved accolades. If there is new
data that I have not seen since I published that brief, I am
very open to seeing those New Orleans data.
Then finally, I think it is very important that we serve
all students. All students that come to our door. That is what
is great about public schools. Now, I understand the concerns
about failing schools, and the----
Mr. Scott. Well, if you have a failing school, saying
letting a few people slip out the back door, those have figured
out what is going on, leaving everybody else in the failing
school. That does not sound like much of a solution at all.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. No.
Mr. Scott. In fact, everybody, if you have a failing
school, all of them would choose to leave. Then what happens?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes. Not every parent has the option to
take their kid all the way across a city or a neighborhood to a
charter school that does not provide transportation. There are
a lot of limitations to what parents are able to do. It is in
our best interest to have in the neighborhood a strong public
school.
Mr. Scott. The solution would be to improve the school, not
let a few people slip out the back door?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Let me ask you another question. I have limited
time.
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes.
Mr. Scott. You mentioned on school choice that it is not
the student, but the school that is choosing, and said eligible
for lottery. What did you mean by that?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes. I mean I have been to kid's
schools where they outline who is eligible for their lottery.
Now I am not saying that all public schools cream and crop
students, and so in the research literature you have Kevin
Welner's work, there is a variety of ways that students are
creamed and cropped. I will not go deeply into that.
There is well established research on how charter schools
can change their populations, which makes the analyses that
CREDO do very difficult because it biases their selective
sample.
Mr. Scott. Even with all that bias, some charters are
obviously better than others. On average, are charters better
or worse than public schools?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. I do not think that conversation could
be limited to just test scores, because most of the research
that CREDO does, they take very small standard deviations and
hundredths of standard deviation and create these days of
learning. We also need to look at teacher quality, and teacher
turnover, and discipline, and suspension rates.
We cannot just look at----
Mr. Scott. What is the effect of teacher quality, pay,
inexperience, and turnover of teachers in charter schools?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Yes. We have looked at the success of
teachers in terms of teacher quality. When you have a stronger
teacher, it means better student achievement. There has been
folks that have looked at well, is it okay if we have great
teachers come in and they leave very quickly?
There is very little research that establishes that is a
good idea.
Mr. Scott. Well, do charter schools have better pay,
turnover and experience with teachers, or worse than public
schools?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. They have worse turnover, worse teacher
quality, in some cases better pay.
Mr. Scott. Can you say a brief word about the disciplinary
policies? If a kid gets expelled from a charter school, where
do they go?
Mr. Vasquez Heilig. Sure. Well, they are going to have to
go back to their neighborhood public school. Charters in many
states can reject students because of prior disciplinary
issues.
Mr. Scott. Then, Dr. Campbell, the city of Baton Rouge got
significant funding under the American Rescue Plan Act. Do you
know what the public schools did with that money that they were
able to do because of that money to address learning loss?
Mr. Campbell. Sir, first of all, it is Mr. Campbell, do not
confuse me with the good folks down here. Yes. Yes. I think
much of that funding went into real high-quality interventions
for kids. We rapidly expanded, or greatly expanded high dosage
tutoring for students, which I think is very powerful.
We increased the number of math and literacy coaches in our
schools. We were able to use some of that funding to expand
early childhood education. I do think that in the State of
Louisiana, city of Baton Rouge, rescue funds have been used by
things that have made a difference.
Mr. Scott. Well, did it make a difference?
Mr. Campbell. Yes, sir.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Chairman Bean. Ranking Member Scott, thank you very much.
We are nearing the end of our journey, but before we adjourn,
let us yield to the Ranking Member Bonamici for her final
thoughts.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
to our witnesses. It has been an important discussion today.
Every student deserves a high-quality education that will
prepare them for success. As we have heard, not all charter
schools provide students with a quality education.
When we consider all students, nor do they deliver the same
educational outcomes that our traditional public schools could.
Certainly, they are not a panacea for the challenges facing
students today. As we heard, poorly regulated charter schools
often have poor academic outcomes, and leaves students with no
recourse when their rights are violated.
I want to followup on Ranking Member Scott's comments about
the conversation, the questions regarding so-called failing
schools. As we know, under No Child Left Behind, a failing
school was used--a term used to describe schools where the
students have lower test scores.
As those of us who were here in 2015 and worked on the
Every Student Succeeds Act, as Ranking Member Scott clarified,
we asked those questions. What does that mean to have low test
scores? Maybe we need to ask a question, what does that school
need? Why are the students not getting higher test scores?
In fact, we changed that so that no longer are test scores
used as punitive measures to label schools as failing. We put
in the Every Student Succeeds Act that those schools should
probably have more resources, right? Why are the students
failing?
Do they need smaller classes? Is there lead in the water?
Are they hungry? All those questions. Where do we put the
resources to help every student? I wanted to point that out
because the term failing schools is really one where we have to
question. A school is a building. What is happening with the
students inside of it?
I also want to take strong exception to the suggestion that
this is about money. I find that personally offensive as a
Member of Congress, as someone who cares deeply about every
student, to suggest that I might have questions about charter
schools because of money.
We care, not only about the students whose parents say wow,
I need to look at a charter school option for my child. We care
also about the students whose parents are maybe a single parent
household. Maybe they are stressed. Maybe they do not know
about other options. Maybe they do not know how to get
involved.
To say that we only care, and that we want to provide a
good education to those who want to leave the traditional
public schools, I find to be inappropriate, and I just want to
get that on the record that we should be here. We care about
every student and want every student to have a good education.
Calling for unchecked expanded access to charter schools
that lack meaningful accountability, while continuing to
underfund our already overwhelmed traditional public education
system is not in the best interest of students. It is not in
the best interests of parents, and it is certainly not in the
best interest for the future and for our economy.
I know on my side of the aisle, I will continue to fight
for a strong quality public education system that protects and
supports every child, not just those with involved parents who
are looking for an alternative. We do not, as Ranking Member
Scott said, we do not want to just leave everybody else behind.
We would need to say what can we do to give them a great
education, so with that Mr. Chairman, I yield back, and thank
you. I look forward to continuing the conversation.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, Ranking Member
Bonamici. Here are my four takeaways. One, charter schools have
high levels of academic achievement, and as we have heard
during this hearing charter students, on average, learn more
reading and math than their peers in traditional public
schools.
The fact is it is especially important when we know parents
across the country are looking for better academic options. No.
2, charter schools are open to innovation, as Robert pointed
out. Innovation is there, we have heard testimony that charter
school autonomy can enable teachers to pioneer fresh teaching
methods, encourage schools to develop better personnel
practices and equip schools to innovate in curriculum.
All of this can happen because charter schools are not
burdened by the regulations and contracts that restrict
traditional public schools. Three, charter schools can provide
a lifeline, as Mr. Campbell pointed out, to the most
disadvantaged students.
While there are some traditional public schools that
provide a good education, we know that many students sometimes
can be trapped when it is not the best option for them. We
should keep trying to improve public schools, but we are going
to try to improve charter schools too.
We realize that charters can provide a vital lifeline to
students where there are no other good options. Everyone
benefits when families have high-quality educational
opportunities to choose from. Four, I have got three kids. They
all learn differently. Every kid is different.
To give them just one choice I think is not the best way to
go. Everybody learns different, and maybe it is a charter
school, maybe it is the public school, maybe it is a Magnet
school. Maybe home schooling. I do not know, but everybody is
different. We recognize that, and I think that is what we
recognized today.
Finally, to our witnesses, let me tell you what I did. You
saw me, I promised a very innovative, invigorating, robust
discussion. I did set the bar high for you but let me tell you
what you did. You exceeded expectations. Thank you so much for
participating.
This, as Ranking Member Bonamici has said, we will continue
this conversation as we embark on a journey to make American
schools the best they possibly can be. With that, if there is
no further----
Mr. Scott. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Bean. Yes. Ranking Member Scott, you are
recognized.
Mr. Scott. The notice of consent requests that I would like
to enter into the record, a letter from the Network for Public
Education about charter schools and a report by the National
Council on Disability entitled ``Choice and Vouchers--
Implications for Students with Disabilities.''
Chairman Bean. Without objection, so ordered, and thank you
so much. There being no further business to come before the
Committee, we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon at 12:01 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
