- PROTECTING KIDS: COMBATING GRAPHIC, EXPLICIT CONTENT IN SCHOOL LIBRARIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING KIDS: COMBATING GRAPHIC,
EXPLICIT CONTENT IN SCHOOL LIBRARIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EARLY CHILDHOOD, ELEMENTARY, SECONDARY EDUCATION

of the

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, OCTOBER 19, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-26

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-904 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EARLY CHILDHOOD, ELEMENTARY, AND SECONDARY EDUCATION

AARON BEAN, Florida, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon,
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                    Ranking Member
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               RAUL GRIJALVA, Arizona
MARY MILLER, Illinois                GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
MICHELLE STEEL, California             Northern Mariana Islands
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           FREDERICA WILSON, Florida
VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina        MARK DeSAULNIER, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on October 19, 2023.................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Bean, Hon. Aaron, Chairman, Subcommittee on Early Childhood,
Elementary, and Secondary Education........................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Bonamici, Hon. Suzanne, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Early
Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary Education.............     6
Prepared statement of....................................     9

WITNESSES

Smith, Lindsey, Parent, Chapter Chair for Moms for Liberty...    12
Prepared statement of....................................    15
Friedman, Dr. Jonathan, Director of Free Expression and
Education Programs, PEN America............................    17
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Eden, Max, Research Fellow, American Enterprise Institute....    25
Prepared statement of....................................   128
Degenfelder, Megan, State Superintendent of Public
Instruction, Wyoming Department of Education...............    32
Prepared statement of....................................    35

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Ranking Member Bonamici:
Letter dated October 19, 2023, from the American Library
Association (ALA)......................................    40
Letter dated October 17, 2023, from Penguin Random House.    43
Foxx, Hon. Virginia, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina:
Statement dated October 19, 2023, from Nicole Solas......    50

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record by:
Mr. Max Eden.............................................    56
Dr. Jonathan Friedman....................................    59
Mrs. Lindsey Smith.......................................    67

PROTECTING KIDS: COMBATING GRAPHIC,
EXPLICIT CONTENT IN SCHOOL LIBRARIES

----------

Thursday, October 19, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Elementary, and
Secondary Education
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:18, a.m.,
2175 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Aaron Bean [Chairman
of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bean, Owens, Miller, Foxx,
Bonamici, Grijalva, DeSaulnier, and Norcross.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Nick Barley,
Deputy Communications Director; Mindy Barry, General Counsel;
Isabel Foster, Press Assistant; Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff
Assistant; Sheila Havenner, Director of Information Technology,
Paxton Henderson, Intern, Amy Raaf Jones, Director of Education
and Human Services Policy; Andrew Kuzy, Press Assistant;
Georgie Littlefair, Clerk; RJ Martin, Professional Staff
Member; Hannah Matesic, Deputy Staff Director; Eli Mitchell,
Legislative Assistant; Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Brad
Thomas, Senior Education Policy Advisor; Maura Williams,
Director of Operations; Jonah Berthelsen, Minority Legal
Intern; Nekea Brown, Minority Director of Operations; Ilana
Brunner, Minority General Counsel; Rashage Green, Minority
Director of Education Policy & Counsel; Christian Haines,
Minority General Counsel; Stephanie Lalle, Minority
Communications Director; Raiyana Malone, Minority Press
Secretary; Shyann McDonald, Minority Staff Assistant; Kota
Mizutani, Minority Deputy Communications Director; Veronique
Pluviose, Minority Staff Director; Banyon Vassar, Minority IT
Administrator; Joan Hoyte, Minority NLRB Detailee; Jay Palmer,
Minority GAO Detailee.
Chairman Bean. Ladies and gentlemen, a very good morning.
Welcome to Washington, DC. The House of Representatives and the
Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Elementary and Secondary
Education, we are glad to have you here. This meeting is hereby
called to order, and without objection, the Chair is authorized
to call a recess at any time.
That recess is going to come really close to probably 11
o'clock. The Subcommittee hearing today is to hear testimony to
examine the prevalence of inappropriate content in libraries in
schools. The Biden administration's troubling response, and
State and local level solutions.
Before I get started, I need to make a disclaimer. If you
are watching at home or if you are in the Committee room, we
are going to be handling some very sensitive mature issues
today. We will be discussing widely inappropriate books that
are accessible in school libraries. This content is
uncomfortable for Members of Congress, and it is certainly
inappropriate for young children.
As such, the Committee recommends anyone with small
children in the audience, or if you are watching on C-SPAN, or
if this is a tape recording and you are watching it, you just
want to reconsider young people watching this meeting.
Additionally, children should not watch at home.
We are holding this hearing to make sure that young
children are never exposed to this type of graphic content, not
to further expose them to it. With that warning out of the way,
welcome. We are glad to have you here. We have got some great
witnesses. I have met with some of you this morning. I think we
are going to have a great chat, a great discussion as we go
forward on this hearing.
Like every flashpoint in the America's culture war, the
media has distorted the truth, and fueled public outrage, and
discontent. Today, this Committee will set the record straight
with the American people. Inappropriate books in school
libraries, and local communities are within their right to
remove them.
Some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle will
inevitably accuse Republicans of engaging on widespread
campaign to ban books. You will hear that term today, ban
books. What does that mean? What are we doing to ban books
because of animus or prejudice against LGBT students, however
the evidence suggests books are being removed for no other
reason than it is just inappropriate.
It is explicit content. In fact, 7 of the 10 most
frequently removed books feature explicit heterosexual content.
Additionally, the LGBT books are being challenged by parents,
such as Lawn Boy and Gender Queer. They are so sexually
explicit that their respective authors have advised that nobody
below a teenager is ready for these books.
I do not recommend this book to kids, that is what the
author has said. These books are so obscene that reciting the
passages, these passages, mere passages has gotten adults
censored in adult forums. School board officials in Clay
County, Florida had to cut a microphone. A father who was
talking about reading from the book that his daughter had
access to for reading Lucky, for fear the explicit passages
would violate the FCC laws regarding, since the school board
meeting was being televised.
Late night television refused to air an ad featuring
language from Gender Queer. If these books are too
inappropriate for adults, then they are certainly inappropriate
for children. The Committee will ask ourselves today do
communities have the right to remove inappropriate content from
library shelves? Of course they do.
School boards, communities and parents constantly set
standards of decency, but removing a book from a library shelf
is not akin to pouring gasoline on it and setting it ablaze. It
is not criminalizing the ownership of the book it is not even
making them less accessible.
If you can check out a book from a public library, it is
not banned. If you can order a book from Amazon and have it
delivered to your home the next day, it is not banned. In fact,
the most removed books are still wildly popular on Amazon. Age-
appropriate content, moderation by local school officials and
the districts is a right deeply engrained in the principles of
localism and federalism.
Federalizing the book review process by putting it in the
hands of D.C. bureaucrats that are taking parents out of the
equation would be the worst possible solution, yet that is
exactly what the Biden administration is doing. President Biden
appointed a book review czar to monitor the actions of local
school boards and potentially penalize them for simply
reviewing books.
I see this as a dangerous step, and a violation of Federal
principles. Today's hearing should not be about creating more
bureaucrats or more laws, or scoring cheap political points,
but how to best empower parents to be the greatest possible
advocate for their child's education.
My final appeal goes to parents. Keep demanding that your
school board reflect the values of your communities. Keep
involving yourself in your children's education, and most
importantly keep doing what is best for your kids. With that, I
yield to the Ranking Member for her opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Bean follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Chair Bean, and thank you to our
witnesses. More than 7 months ago our Republican colleagues sat
in this hearing room and vehemently denied any interest in
addressing the banning of books. Then House Republicans passed
a bill they said was about parental rights, but in fact should
be called the Politics Over Parents Act because it is
essentially a blueprint for book banning.
Now, today the majority is holding a hearing specifically
about what books should or should not be allowed in school
libraries. I will note that this, the U.S. Congress, is not a
school board meeting. Sadly, this far right conservative
movement is having a profound real-life effect on children,
educators, and importantly on school librarians.
Research shows that as of 2021, more than 4 million
students had their freedom to read curtailed because of book
bans. That includes students across more than 5,000 schools,
138 school districts and 32 states. Specifically, PEN America
found that 41 percent of banned content focuses on LGBTQI+
themes, protagonists, or characters.
40 percent focuses on characters of color. Rates of
teachers citing burnout and what they feel are unsafe working
conditions as a reason for leaving the profession have
skyrocketed. At least seven states have passed draconian laws
in the past 2 years, subjecting school librarians to years of
imprisonment and fines for providing books deemed to be
explicit, obscene, or harmful. That is incarceration.
These censorship laws are being enacted by extreme MAGA
politicians under the pretext of parental rights, while in
reality it is a coordinated and apparently well-funded vocal
minority of parents and conservative organizations pushing
their personal agenda on others.
We can all agree that books in school libraries should be
age appropriate, and we all use to agree that the Federal
Government should not dictate school curricula, or what books
are in school libraries. Regrettably, it seems that my
Republican colleagues have abandoned these previously shared
values, although I do note that Superintendent Degenfelder
expressly says in her testimony, ``so how do we solve this
issue? It certainly should not be up to the Federal
Government.''
A book's age appropriateness and its ability to tell
challenging, culturally significant stories representing
diverse perspectives--those are not mutually exclusive. For
example, The Hate You Give is a powerful novel taught in middle
and high schools about a young, black girl who finds her voice
and stands up for racial justice as she grapples with the
trauma of witnessing her friend being murdered by police
officers.
This important book elevates black voices, and centers a
historic civil rights struggle, but it has been challenged by
Republican officials and parents in at least four states. I
want to remind my colleagues that it is students who are most
affected by these policies.
In 1982 a group of students stood up for their rights, and
they challenged the constitutionality of book bans. The case,
the Board of Education Island Tree Union Free School District
Number 26 vs. PICO, went to the U.S. Supreme Court, which
considered whether a local school board's decision to prohibit
certain books from its junior high and high school libraries
because of their content violated the First Amendment free
speech safeguards.
The Court decided that local school boards may not remove
books from school library shelves simply because they dislike
the idea contained in those books. I am concerned that my
colleagues are waging these cultural wars in part to undermine
our public education system, and to try to justify defunding
public schools and libraries, preferring instead to funnel
public dollars into low-quality private voucher programs. We
have seen that before.
Thankfully, under President Biden's leadership the
Department of Education is using its legal authority under the
Civil Rights Act to fight book bans in schools, including in
Texas and Georgia, and is working to protect the civil rights
of students. Well, we do not have students testifying today,
Mr. Chairman, but their voices should be heard.
I am just going to share just a few, and these are students
from across the country. This is from a New York Times article
last year titled, What Students Are Saying About Banning Books
from School Libraries. Deeya, who is from Arkansas said,
``Hiding away things that make us uncomfortable doesn't make
them go away, even if we don't talk about it. Racism, sexual
assault, genocide and many other complex issues will still
exist. We have to face the discomfort to keep it from happening
again. While those supporting the book banning movement claim
that it is an issue of parental rights, it's really an issue of
people trying to ban things that make them uncomfortable.''
Jason, a student from Maine said, ``As a teenager, I'm
still trying to find my way into this world, and I want to know
as many other viewpoints as possible, so I know my thoughts are
my own, and not just a product of a limited amount of
information. Trying to force a community to get rid of a book
is a way of forcing one's beliefs on the entire community.''
Jordan, from Norwood High School said, ``Reading the
article about book banning and these comments just makes me
think, geez, the fact that these books are being challenged
shows how much some people need education on the subjects in
them.''
Finally, the Democrats on this Subcommittee will continue
to reiterate our focus during each hearing this Congress. Let
us work together on important issues that will help our
students succeed. According to the American Library
Association, 2 and a half million students nationwide are
enrolled in school districts where there are no school
libraries.
At a time when many students are not proficient in reading
and still struggling with literacy, we should focus on
supporting librarians and educators, and their work to help
every student read and feel safe and welcome in their school.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to the discussion.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Bonamici
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Thank you, Ranking Member Bonamici. Pursuant
to Committee Rule 8-C, all Committee members who wish to insert
written comments into the file may do so by submitting them to
the Committee Clerk electronically in Word format by 5 p.m., 14
days after the hearing, which is November 2, 2023. Without
objection, the hearing record will remain open for 14 days
after this hearing to allow such statements and other
extraneous materials referenced during the hearing to be
submitted for the official hearing record.
I note for the record that the Subcommittee from my
colleague from Pennsylvania, Mr. Smucker, waives on to the
Subcommittee for the purposes of today's hearing. Ladies and
gentlemen, we have got an all-star panel. We went across the
Nation to find some minds and opinions that could bring light
on this subject.
To help me introduce our all-star panel, I first will yield
to the gentleman from Utah, Mr. Owens. Ms. Miller from
Illinois, Ms. Miller, Mary Miller.
Ms. Miller. Thank you. It is my honor to introduce Mrs.
Lindsey Smith. Mrs. Smith is a Montgomery County, Maryland,
Chapter Chair for Moms for Liberty. She worked as a nurse for
15 years until 2 years ago when she became a full-time at home
mom. She is a mother of four, author of two books, 45 Days of
Prayer and Daughter of the King, and she is usually found on a
sporting field supporting her kids.
Thank you so much for the work you are doing and for being
our witness.
Chair Bean. Ranking Member Bonamici also would like to
introduce an all-star panelist.
Ms. Bonamici. Dr. Johnathan Friedman is a Director of Free
Expression and Education Programs at PEN America. He oversees
research, advocacy, and education related to academic freedom,
educational gag orders, book bans, and general free expression
in schools, colleges, and universities.
Dr. Friedman was a 2019-2020 fellow of the University of
California's National Center for Free Speech and Civic
Engagement. He holds an M.A. and Ph.D. in international
education from NYU.
Chairman Bean. Thank you so much. Our third panelist is Mr.
Max Eden, he is a Research Fellow at the American Enterprise
Institute right here in Washington, DC. Mr. Eden is a research
fellow at the American Enterprise Institute where he focuses on
education reforms, specifically K through 12 and early
childhood education.
Before joining AEI, he was a Senior Fellow at the Manhattan
Institute, in addition to a number of reports and studies on
education Mr. Eden is the co-author, there he goes, there is so
many Wall Street Journal, U.S. Today bestseller, Why Meadow
Died, the People and Policies that Created the Parkland Shooter
and Endanger American Students. He has been publishing policy
journals and the popular press including the Hill, The
Washington Post, and USA Today. Welcome Mr. Max Eden.
Finally, our final witness. We will now go to Mr. Burgess
Owens, the gentleman from Utah. Got it. Let me do this if it is
okay, and I am sorry I did not coordinate with you, but our
final panelist is Megan. She is the Superintendent from the
Wyoming, and I met with her earlier. She has the State that is
rocking in Wyoming. Yes. Burgess Owens, you have got the full
story. Let us go back to the gentleman from Utah.
Mr. Owens. Sorry about that guys. Ms. Megan Degenfelder,
Superintendent, Wyoming Department of Education in Cheyenne,
Wyoming. Ms. Megan, Megan is elected to the Wyoming State
Superintendent of the Public Instruction. In November 2022,
Megan was one of the youngest elected statewide officials in
Wyoming history.
Megan grew up in a six generation ranching family in Casper
and graduated from the University of Wyoming. Megan serves as
the Chief Policy Officer at the Wyoming Department of Education
under Superintendent Jillian Balow. She oversaw multiple
divisions, including standards and assessments, accountability
and a halfway scholarship, as well as 30-million-dollar budget,
and a 25 person staff.
Megan also comes from years of private sector experience in
the field of coal and gas, oil and gas where she worked to
lessen regulation burdens, and government overreach. Welcome
Megan.
Chair Bean. Welcome, Ms. Smith and Mr. Owens. I talked to
some of you about the 5-minute rule. There will be a clock.
Five minutes is if you hear this try to wrap it up. Dr.
Friedman, welcome, I did not get a chance to talk to you, but
you are familiar with our 5-minute rule. Let us go ahead and
get to testimony. Ms. Smith, first of all welcome to the
Committee. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

THE STATEMENT OF MS. LINDSEY SMITH, PARENT, MONTGOMERY COUNTY,
MARYLAND

Mrs. Smith. Thanks. Chairman Bean, Ranking Member Bonamici
and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for having me today.
Today I sit in front of you wondering how in the world did we
get here. How did we get from protecting our children to the
argument of stop book banning?
This is not a case of heterosexual verses LGBT Plus, nor is
this the political issue as many would call it, book banning.
This is about the innocence and protection of our children. I
would not expect my child to walk into one of your homes and be
able to easily access Playboys or pornographic photos, yet here
we are today discussing the argument of these kinds of books
being accessible in our public school's library, all in the
name of education.
I sit here in front of you as a mother of four, three of
them were students of the public school system, and what I have
witnessed in the last 18 months being allowed access into our
schools is appalling. Instead of education being the focus, we
have completely lost our focus, and now have an issue of
sexually explicit books being accessible to children 3 years
and older.
Books easily available to children within their own school
media centers. One example is an innocent looking book with
bright colors and a puppy dog on the front. To three-and 4-
year-olds this book is appealing to them, yet the language of
this book is far from appropriate.
In the hide and find glossary, three-to 4-year-olds are
encouraged to find images of leather, drag queen and underwear.
I want you to imagine very briefly with me that your 3-year-old
son with a speech delay, who is in the school for a language
delay comes home with this book, and also read it out loud in
class.
This was my story, and one of the reasons why I am here
before you today. When I found that this was available to my
youngest son, and would be used as curriculum, this mom began
to speak up. In speaking up in front of my Board of Education
and asking questions about the appropriateness, and age
appropriateness, I found out that not only did parents not know
this existed, but they had been approved by committees not even
known to the lay public.
One book brought to my attention during this was Gender
Queer, and the purchase of eight copies at one high school
alone by adults. Adults I do not even know will not even look
at this book. Let me tell you why. On the pages of this graphic
novel we see a sexual fantasy play out.
If you need help imagining this book, in one portion of the
book a strapped-on penis on the partner, with oral sex being
performed graphically. The nexus of a sexual position of two
sexual adults with both parties private parts all being
displaced. This is just one of the 70 plus books in my county's
media libraries available to kids 18 and younger.
One schoolteacher alone requested eight copies for his
class and media center. Keep in mind policy states that any
book can also be used for resources in classrooms in my county.
I would like to address too, the lie that parental groups and
Mom's for Liberty are book banning. If removing a sexually
explicit book from school library is what you see as book
banning, then we need to re-evaluate our language.
These books are available to anyone who wishes to purchase
them, they are available at my local library, my Amazon
account, Barnes and Noble, or anywhere else that you wish to
purchase the book. The books that are being addressed are
sexually explicit books, like the one example above, and go
against the very laws and policies that State representatives
of the people created.
We call these laws in most states minor indecency and
obscenity laws. According to my State, Maryland Code Criminal
Law Title 11 Indecency and Obscenities, Subtitle II, obscene
matter section, ``Sale or display of obscene item to a minor
states that obscenity is the act of human genitals, sexual
intercourse, sodomy, fondling of/or eroded touching of human
genitals.''
This law goes on to State that it is prohibited to show any
minor willingly, or unwillingly, display or exhibit to a minor,
and person may willingly or knowingly, engage in the business
of displaying, exhibiting, showing or distributing to a minor,
an item with obscenity.
Gender Queer is just one of the many examples that parent
groups and so-called book banners are actually speaking up
against. The sexually explicit and detailed content does not
belong in our schools, and we are here asking you to hold the
very laws and policies that were created on the very local
level. We do not show porn in the name of education to
children, and children as young as 3, like my son, were exposed
to these books.
What will start as library books will flow into the
classrooms. Montgomery County is a perfect example of this, as
it became the pilot across the Nation for the next phase of
anything new. It has been since the 70's from the research I
have heard and seen, and it already is spilling into the
classrooms of elementary kids in my county.
It is time for us to actually be the adults and leave the
sexually explicit books out of the schools, and refocus our
attention on the failing of our schools to our children in
regards to reading, writing and mathematics. A generation of
kids needs to stop being divided over sexuality, and actually
start to stand up for the innocence of their minds.
How do we start? Parent representatives from all different
walks of life should be a part of committees that review these
books, one of the things that we have seen since we started to
speak to the Board of Education at the local level is the
ability for parents to actually begin to review these books and
have a 30 day window for them to sit in the library before they
are put onto a library shelf.
The parents are advocates for their kids. We should not be
silencing them, but rather refocusing on the innocence of
children. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lindsey Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Well done. Thank you so much. Right on time,
and a powerful story that you told. Up next is Dr. Jonathan
Friedman. Dr. Friedman, welcome to the Committee, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. JONATHAN FRIEDMAN, DIRECTOR OF FREE EXPRESSION
AND EDUCATION PROGRAMS, PEN AMERICA, NEW YORK, NEW YORK

Mr. Friedman. Thank you, Chairman Bean, Ranking Member
Bonamici, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify today. My name is Jonathan
Friedman, and I serve as Director of Free Expression and
Education Programs at PEN America.
PEN America stands at the intersection of literature and
human rights to protect free expression in the United States
and worldwide. We are a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization
with an unwavering commitment to free speech--a principle that
we view as an underpinning of democracy and a cause above
politics.
Today we face an alarming attack on free expression on the
freedom to read, learn, and teach. Organized groups of
activists and some politicians have launched a campaign to
exert ideological control over public education, unprecedented
in its scope, scale, and size.
In 2021, after speaking with authors about rising efforts
to ban their books, first in Texas, but soon after in Florida,
PEN America launched a research project to track and record
book bans nationwide. Our most recent report on the 22-23
school year recorded over 3,000 instances of books banned, an
increase of 33 percent over the year prior, and these bans
occurred in 33 states across 153 public school districts.
Since we started our research, we have maintained a clear,
consistent, and transparent methodology with one guiding
principle: student access. If on Monday a student has access to
a book, and on Tuesday she does not as a result of a challenge
over that book's content, ideas, or themes, then that book has
been banned.
For that student, ready access to the book has been
diminished, or entirely restricted, whether that book is now
locked in an administrator's office, moved to an upper-grade
library or permanently removed from circulation, or whether
that book eventually gets returned to the shelf after some
indeterminate period of review.
For the duration, that student can no longer access that
book. It is banned. Why? Because the circumstances surrounding
such decisions are rooted in efforts to restrict access to
information and ideas implicating students' First Amendment
rights. In our society, the loss of First Amendment rights,
even minimally, is injurious.
Let me be clear. Parents play a primary role when it comes
to their own children's education. That is why schools have
Parent Teacher Associations, parent teacher conferences, public
school board meetings. I am a parent of three school age
children. I check my kid's homework, read books to them, and
advocate for them when the need arises.
We can, and we must, distinguish between a single parent
raising a concern with a school, and the current campaign to
disrupt public education writ large. Between a parent who wants
to accommodate a kid's learning needs, and one who grabs the
list of books online they have not read, and then demands that
no other family should be able to access them in public
institutions.
Our students deserve to be able to access high-quality
educational resources, to access works of literature that
reflect their identities and the complexities of their lives.
Not every book is for every kid. Not every book is for every
family. The unifying principle is that a wide variety of choice
means kids and families can determine what is relevant to them.
That is the purpose and the power of a public library. That
is freedom. Around the country that freedom, that liberty is
being turned on its head, remaking school's librarians from
educators into censors. Again and again, we see targeted,
organized, and replicated efforts to ban books with
protagonists of color, books about African American history,
books about LGBTQ identifies.
Efforts to take away the very books that many students,
families, and educators say they want to access. Books that
they say save lives. Over the past 2 years I have spoken to
teachers, librarians, parents, and students across the country.
The stories I have heard are dire. Some have experienced direct
threats. Others have been told that if they teach certain
subjects, order certain books, or fail to ban certain books it
will put their career in jeopardy, or worse, will lead them to
being charged with a crime.
I have spoken with authors whose works have been
mischaracterized and attacked, over 1,200 offers were affected
by the bans in the past school year alone. Ask any of them why
they write. Over and over, they say the same reasons: to help
kids see themselves, and allow others to be seen, to provide
kids the books they wish they had when they were growing up.
As Poet Nicky Grime says, ``to plant seeds of empathy and
compassion.'' That is what is at stake in today's movement to
ban books. Whether we can live in a diverse society that
upholds our traditions of freedom and democracy for us all, or
whether we want to allow a vocal minority, with a
discriminatory intent to narrow our students' educational
horizons. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Friedman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Dr. Friedman, well done. Right on the money.
Thank you so much for sharing your thoughts and ideas. There
will be questions for you in just a minute. Let us go to Mr.
Max Eden, welcome to the Committee. You are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. MAX EDEN, RESEARCH FELLOW, AMERICAN ENTERPRISE
INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Eden. Thank you. Chairman Bean, Ranking Member
Bonamici, members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting
me to testify. My name is Max Eden, and I am a Research Fellow
at the American Enterprise Institutes. For years now, American
parents have been slandered by left wing advocacy organizations
and the media as book banners.
My testimony today is simple. Books are not being banned,
but many parents prefer that school libraries not stock
pornographic materials, and some school board members agree
that this is reasonable. Now citizens who hear the word book
ban can be forgiven for being alarmed, unfortunately, their
alarm is not rooted in reality, but rather in the twisted abuse
of the English language.
The media keeps using the word banned, but that word does
not mean what you think it means. In common usage, banned means
made unavailable, and of course the most banned book, Gender
Queer, is still available on Amazon. The conversation, rather
centers on school library availability. If ban means made
unavailable, then virtually every book ever published has been
banned, but that is not even what that word means here.
Indeed, a book can be both banned and freely available to
students. The media has run with the twisted definition of ban
offered by PEN America. As Dr. Friedman said, if a book is
present on Monday, pulled for review on Tuesday, and then back
on the shelves on Wednesday, that book has, according to them,
been banned.
If a parental permission requirement is placed on a book,
that book has allegedly been banned. If a book is moved to a
guidance counselor's office, that book has been banned. It is a
good thing that Orwell is still an author. To provide an
account that is not utterly linguistically dishonest, the
Heritage Foundation Jay Green, Madison Marino and I, set out to
assess how man of the 2,532 books that PEN's 2022 report
labeled as banned, were actually removed from school libraries.
We did this with one simple trick. We checked the card
catalogues. As it turns out, nearly three-quarters of the books
that PEN labeled as banned, were still in the school libraries.
You may have heard that books are being banned because of race
or LGBT issues, but that is not really true.
PEN America labeled the Black Lives Matter inspired The
Hate You give, as the fifth most banned book. A book that Ms.
Bonamici referenced in her opening statements. She will be
relieved to hear that we found that book in every single school
library present. You have also heard that this is about LGBT
issues, but when the Washington Post examined over 1,000 review
requests made by parents, less than 7 percent said LGBT,
without also using the word sexual, although those book
requests may have contained words like pornographic or obscene.
That is what this issue is really about. The provision of
sexually explicit material to children by public employees. Now
this is a question of adult judgment. Hustler has close-up
genital photos, and most believe this is not appropriate for
school libraries. Romeo and Juliet have lyrical illusions to
sex, and most believe this is fine for school libraries.
A line must be drawn somewhere between those two points,
but where exactly? Take the previously mentioned Gender Queer,
that graphic novel famously includes a picture of oral sex
being performed on a wearable sex toy. Is this okay for kids? I
have lost count of the number of times that parents have tried
to read these passages at school board meetings, only to be
cutoff because school board members insist it is too obscene to
be read out loud, because you know, kids could be listening.
If you examine the top ten most actually removed books here
is what you find. Gender Queer, orally inserting a wearable sex
toy. This book is gay. A how to guide for meeting strangers for
sex-on-sex apps. Out of Darkness, Rape. Later Gator, a
discussion of the finer points of oral sex. All Boys aren't
Blue, Underage Incest, It's Perfectly Normal, Drawings of kids
masturbating. Lawn Boy, 10-year-olds performing sodomy on each
other. Jack of Hearts, disposing of a condom soiled from anal
sex. Prank, a meth fueled rape. Lucky, rape, no meth involved.
A Court of Mist and Fury, which contains comparatively tame
sexual intercourse.
The Biden Department of Education's Office of Civil Rights
is investigating and threatening to withdraw Federal funding
from school districts that even think about removing these
books. For example, the Forsyth School District in Georgia
reevaluated Me, Earl and the Dying Girl. Why? Well in one
passage, which maybe I should not read verbatim, one character
asks another if he knows how to perform oral sex on a woman.
The other character replies no, but that he has been taught
by Papa Gaines how to perform oral sex on an anus. Now if you
are a school board member who thinks that maybe schools do
not--libraries do not need reference to oral sex being
performed on anuses, you will be investigated by the Biden
Department of Education.
If you are a mom who believes that maybe a reference to
oral sex and anuses is inappropriate material for a school
library, you may be accused of being basically akin to a Nazi
by an organization like PEN America.
Why is it exactly that leftwing nonprofits, the media, and
the Biden administration are so keen to enforce stocking school
libraries with this material? I am not quite sure, but what I
do know is it is perfectly reasonable for parents to not want
this material, and it is perfectly reasonable for school board
members to meet their preferences.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Max Eden follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Mr. Eden, thank you very much. There will be
questions for you in just a moment too. Let us go to
Superintendent Degenfelder. We are glad to have you here,
welcome. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. MEGAN DEGENFELDER, SUPERINTENDENT, WYOMING
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, CHEYENNE, WYOMING

Ms. Degenfelder. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Bean,
Ranking Member and Committee for the opportunity to speak with
you today. My name is Megan Degenfelder, and I am the elected
State Superintendent of Public Instruction for the State of
Wyoming.
I ran for this position because I am passionate about
public education as one of the most important tools of lifting
people out of poverty and fulfilling the American dream. The
fundamental purpose of public education is to prepare students
for jobs, and to be good American citizens. This purpose
becomes compromised when our parents lose trust and confidence
in our public schools.
During the campaign, I spoke with voters all across the
State regarding their concerns on public education. At the top
of the list, among all varying communities, was fear of
inappropriate and sexually explicit materials in schools. This
issue is destroying trust and confidence in our public
education. I met a mother whose teenage daughter approached her
with a book she was uncomfortable with at school.
The mother, rather than having a knee jerk reaction, and
storming a school board meeting, read the book herself. What
she found was appalling. Sexually depicted, graphic acts. As a
survivor of childhood sexual abuse, this mother was not only
triggered by the book, but also fearful that other minors
reading this book may become conditioned to the material, and
not speak up as victims themselves.
When they asked the teacher to opt out of the book, several
other students spoke up almost immediately. They too felt
uncomfortable. What came of standing up against this book? The
teacher became their bully, asking the child what the big deal
was, and why she was pushing this?
This child now fears going to school and begs to attend
virtual education. Her younger siblings will now be home
schooled because this parent has lost trust in public
education. Is this happening with every teacher in every
school? Of course not. We have many incredible teachers and
librarians, but there are books available, paid for by taxpayer
dollars, with graphic depictions of sexual acts that are made
available to minor children under the age of sexual consent.
I have included in your materials, Excerpts from Wyoming,
one of the most conservative states in the country. Mentioning
details of this book feels wildly inappropriate in a
congressional hearing. Why then is it available to our
children? Graphic and erotic images of any sexual orientation
are not suitable for minor children and are a complete misuse
of taxpayer dollars.
It is common sense that a child should not have access to
pornography while at school. When did protecting our children
become so controversial? Why do parents have to opt in for
field trips and medical care, but not sexually explicit
materials?
We must understand that schools are temporary custodians.
They do not have free reign. Our parents do not cede their
rights and responsibilities at the schoolhouse door. There is
absolutely no room for distractions or inappropriate influences
when ACT scores are at a record low, and the national average
of students proficient or above on NAPE are only 26 to 35
percent.
How do we solve this issue? It certainly should not be left
up to the Federal Government. I respect local control in
government, including authority of books and curriculum by
locally elected school boards. However, through our research we
found that many districts do not have a robust system, or
policies in place for appropriate library materials, and they
need support from the State level.
My approach at the State level has become working with
stakeholder groups to create statewide library guidance, to be
released in the coming weeks with sample definitions, model
policy, and allowing for a transparent public process. Our
committee includes parents, librarians, school administrators,
school board members, all of varying backgrounds and
viewpoints.
This issue of sexually explicit material in schools must be
addressed, so that we can return our focus to the fundamental
purpose of education and regain trust in public education. I
will never stop fighting for the safety of Wyoming children.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Megal Degenfelder follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bean. Well done. All of our panelists are all-star
panelists, get an A plus for coming in on time. If you are
watching at home, we are talking adult material here, so a
warning to all that are watching or are here present. I will
yield myself 5 minutes for questions. Dr. Foxx, get ready. I
will yield extra time to you. Let us go with Ms. Smith.
In Montgomery County, Maryland when you have said this is
wrong to school board officials, and other elected officials
there, how have they received you? Have you found them being
welcoming and say we are going to fix this problem, or have
they rebuffed you?
Ms. Smith. To be honest, they do not like when I speak up
because then other parents start getting involved. What we have
seen since then has been thousands of parents coming to the
Board of Education, Muslims, Ethiopians, you name it, and
parents are just shocked and honestly appalled that we are even
having these discussions at Board of Education.
Montgomery County is the richest county in the U.S.
Chairman Bean. Are we making progress in Montgomery County,
Maryland?
Ms. Smith. No, sir.
Chairman Bean. I am sorry to hear that. Let me go to the
Superintendent from Wyoming. What do we want to take away? What
does the rest of the Nation need to take away? You are having
success in Wyoming. What do other states need to do?
Ms. Degenfelder. Mr. Chairman, I believe wholeheartedly in
local control and decisionmaking as close to the people as
possible. As I mentioned, knowing that school board members are
made up of volunteers, and have a heavy task ahead of them. My
father served on our local school board. We need to make sure
that we provide support to them, model policy and guidance from
the State level.
At the local level, I think it is incredibly important to
have transparency, to have processes in place, and to have
public input. Those things are important, and for our local
schools and leaders to remember that again, they cannot step
beyond the bounds of the rights of parents.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much, and Mr. Eden, what is a
better definition? You have already said others have wild
definitions of what ban means. What is a real definition of ban
that you want to put forth that we should consider?
Mr. Eden. Yes. I mean a book could be considered banned
when you are no longer able to access it.
Chairman Bean. That is simply not the case. We are just
talking about what is appropriate for children?
Mr. Eden. Correct. As I mentioned, about three-quarters of
the books that are allegedly banned are actually still in
school libraries.
Chairman Bean. Amen. Amen. Thank you very much. I yield the
remaining 3 minutes to our Chairman Dr. Foxx. You are
recognized.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank all
of our witnesses for being here today to discuss this very
timely subject. It is something very, very important to the
American people. Mr. Friedman. I have a quick question for you.
Do you condemn Hamas?
Mr. Friedman. Yes, I do.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. I am glad we agree on that.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back to you. I appreciate that.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. The Committee will now
yield time to Ranking Member Bonamici for questions. You are
recognized.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I begin, I
want to enter these into the record, two letters. One from the
American Library Association pointing out, among other things
that a parent does not have a right to restrict through
government action what another parent's child may choose to
read, which would intrude on the other parent's right to decide
for their own child.
Chairman Bean. Without objection.
[The letter of Ms. Bonamici follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Bonamici. Another letter from the Penguin Random House
opposing censorship.
Chairman Bean. Without objection.
[The letter of Ms. Bonamici follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Bonamici. Mr. Chairman, we are 9 months into this
Congress, and many of our colleagues on your side of the aisle
continue to focus on culture war issues, rather than working
together on bipartisan solutions that support public schools,
students, parents, and educators, by uplifting extremist
efforts to ban books, rewrite curriculums, and silence diverse
perspectives.
That denies students and their families an inclusive
representative education that allows students to become
critical thinkers in the next generation of problem solvers,
who will lead our Nation. We do not need more efforts that turn
parents against educators, or transfer taxpayer dollars to
private schools, or attempt to extinguish the rights of LGBTQ
students.
Dr. Friedman, I want to start by setting the record
straight. There have been some allegations that PEN America's
statistics on book bans are inaccurate or inflated, so please
clarify the accuracy of your organization's information, data,
and research methods.
Mr. Friedman. Sure. I would be happy to. You know I do a
lot of work on education, trying to help people understand
freedom of speech. I think one of the aspects that is so
troubling about this moment is that a fundamental freedom that
belongs to us all is being misunderstood, misrepresented, and
twisted.
Our definitions with regard to the banning of books and the
restrictions in schools is tethered very tightly to clear,
First Amendment juris prudence, numerous decisions in the
history of this country that honestly, they have not been up
for debate in half a century.
The idea that schools have to conduct themselves in
accordance with the transcendent imperatives of the First
Amendment, that you know, no official high or petty should be
prescribing what should be orthodox in public institutions.
With regard to our data, it is based on news reports. It is
based on scanning board minutes.
Our data is completely transparent, and critically our data
is a snapshot in time. If we are saying these books were banned
in 21-22 school year, we are tracking the range of
prohibitions. The reason we are doing that is because the range
of prohibitions is wildly unprecedented.
PEN America has been doing work on book bans for on and off
100 years as these issues have flared up, and I can tell you
that 3 years ago, 4 years ago, there was nothing like this on
the scene. When a story would come out about a book ban
somewhere in the country, it really commanded this attention,
but something changed.
A movement to encourage people to try to censor information
and ideas, and so----
Ms. Bonamici. Okay. I am going to try to get another
question in too, Dr. Friedman.
Mr. Friedman. Sure.
Ms. Bonamici. I just think that thing was in the mid 1960's
when Justice Potter Stewart said I know it when I see it for,
you know, what is pornography. I mean there is so many
different definitions, and who is defining I think is part of
the problem. Republicans talk about the danger of exposing
students to books they deem inappropriate because of their
personal values or preferences, but we really need to highlight
the danger of ignoring, or worse, erasing history by removing
school library books that portray representations of
marginalized people, culture, experiences.
Books like Home Going, and The Kite Runner. Those are
outstanding or modern day works of historical fiction. Books
like All Boys Aren't Blue, a captivating memoir. It is
affirming for young LGBTQ readers, especially those who are
black, as they establish their identity and grow up in a world
that can be unforgiving and discriminatory.
I think about the Spanish American philosopher George
Santayana, who wrote back in 1905 in The Life of Reason,
``those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat
it.'' Dr. Friedman, how important is it for students to have
access to a wide variety of books from which they can learn
about the world before them, and the world around them?
Mr. Friedman. Oh, it is absolutely critical, and those are
the kinds of works that we have seen under attack sometimes
directly through challenges. Other times almost carelessly, you
know, somebody gets a list of books and is not even checking
it, and just issues a prohibition on everything on the list,
and does not even realize that that book, that that list of 400
books contains picture books for children, biographies of
historical figures of color in American history. I mean that is
what we are facing right now, and it is critical that we stand
up to it.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, and just for each witness, just
yes or no please because I'm about out of time. Is it important
for students to have access to a school library that includes
books from authors and on topics spanning different cultures,
backgrounds, identities, and perspectives?
Ms. Smith. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Bonamici. Dr. Friedman, is that important?
Mr. Friedman. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Eden. Yes.
Ms. Degenfelder. Yes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much. I yield back the balance
of my time.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much Ranking Member Bonamici.
Let us go to Utah where Mr. Owens, Burgess Owens, you are
recognized for questions.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. Thank you so much Mr. Chairman, and
your guests and our witnesses. Some say that we are here today
to talk about so-called book burning in K through 12 school
libraries. Our nation's most consequential book banning was
done by Supreme Court in 1963, when officially mandated Bible
reading, this book, is banned from all of us, anything to deal
with Federal it's no longer you can see it, can no longer read
it.
I think that some that are listening today, they probably
think this is totally unconstitutional, and I can even hold it
up. Due to the banning of this book, generations of Americans
today have no knowledge of the tenants upon which this country
has been founded.
It is based on a belief that with God and time we can truly
become a more perfect union. To ban the knowledge of basic
truths of happiness, like the Judeo Christian concepts of the
Golden Rule, which says we should treat others the way we want
to be treated, or abandon the knowledge of the Ten
Commandments, among these, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not
kill, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall honor their
father and their mother.
We instead find the greatest distain for these laws
wherever Democrats rule. We find the banning of parents for
school board meetings. We find where Democrats rule, we find
the banning of parents from knowledge of the mental State of
their children. Wherever Democrats rule, we find the banning of
knowledge what other adults, strangers, are doing to sexualize
our kids.
These are samples of books that Democrats, the National
Library of Association, demand that we do not ban. Gender
Queer, features pictures of oral sex performed on sex toys.
This Book is Gay, provides a how to guide for strangers for sex
on gay sex apps. Out of the Darkness contains rape. Lucky
contains rape. All Boys are Blue contains underage incest. Lawn
Boy contains a passage with 10-year-old boys performing oral
sex on each other.
These books are available to school age children, and there
is no shame from those who say this is not right. I am very
proud of the engagement of parents who now recognize that rot
and filth is being pushed on innocence of vulnerable children.
There is a reason why the two words, too young, are never
spoken by those who have no respect for parents, their
children, or the family unit defined by God to raise and
protect them. Last year, Utah passed H.B. 374, a bill that
prohibits child access to pornography in our school systems,
because in Utah we get it right. We care more about our kids
than our ideology.
Bills have been passed to protect children from internet
pornography at schools, but students need the same protection
from books. Our Republican majority this year passed H.R. 5,
the Parents Bill of Rights, that protects students, and ensures
parents of their rights to know what books are in school
libraries.
Not one of my Democratic friends voted yes. Not one.
Moving forward, our Republican majority will work to stop
the entrapment of children in institutions who prioritize
sexual indoctrination, instead of reading, writing, and
thinking and succeeding.
Every child, regardless of city, State, zip code, should
have the right to educational freedom, as released in the power
of the free market and our democracy, parents will have the
civil rights to access a quality education for their child.
Mrs. Smith, one of the things you mentioned--the library
books do not stay in the library, essentially on the shelves,
they can be used directly for school curriculum. Is this
correct? What is the implication of how this might be used
inappropriate content?
Mrs. Smith. Yes, sir. Actually, my second grader last year
was read one of these books off the shelf, and he was very
uncomfortable, and actually had to leave the library and asked
to go to the bathroom because he was uncomfortable. I do not
think we should ever put a 7 year old in that predicament.
I think that we need to start thinking that these books
should not be available to these kids in the first place. For a
7 year old to be bold enough to actually walk out, that we
should not even put our kid in that situation in the first
place.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. Mr. Eden, we have talked a lot about
book removal. What do you know--what I would like to know is
how do these books get into school's libraries in the first
place?
Mr. Eden. Yes. They get in, in large part, innocently
enough on the behalf of school librarians, who look at a list,
and see that certain titles are recommended as being LGBT
inclusive, and so they purchase the books. They are looking at
lists from organizations such as the American Library
Association, which at this point, is a wholly ideological
organization run by a self-proclaimed Marxist, who has said
that school libraries need to be sites of socialist organizing.
There is an agenda, in terms of what is presented to school
librarians. School librarians take that agenda, possibly
innocently at first, and then are surprised and defensive when
they find that they are being objected to, and that is kind of
how we are here today.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I am running out of time. I will just
say, Dr. Friedman, that you have made the strongest case I
could think of, of why we need to have educational choice and
freedom because people like yourself who will look at facts,
and studies and try to convince all of us that parents will
know better for their own children.
This is a fundamental concept in our country. Parents have
the rights to make sure their kids are educated, not the way
other people want, particularly when it comes to sexual
content, but the way we want. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you, Mr. Owens. Thank you very much.
Let us go to Arizona where Mr. Grijalva is recognized for 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As a
former school board member that spent 12 years on a school
board with Tucson Unified, back home, the importance of public
schools, and in particular, the value of libraries, and the
value of a diverse opportunity for all students to be able to
access information, and to be able to learn.
That is the environment and the values that I learned being
a school board member. They represent the values of this
country. I think access is the most important thing. The other
important thing is we are protecting the children that attend
those schools. Treating those children with the importance that
they deserve and the teachers.
One of the things that I see is that erosion of that public
institution, and part of it is trying to control what people
read and do not read, and one of the things I was going to ask
you, Dr. Friedman, and I think that is a huge threat to public
education. Part of this whole dismantling agenda that goes
around about our public schools.
I wanted to ask you a question, Dr. Friedman, and thank you
for your testimony. I represented that school district, and
much of the traditional because it was predominantly of color,
the community that I represent now, and the school district
then was very significant of color. Traditional academic
cannons did not reach those students.
The curriculum did not reflect them. The books did not
reflect them. The subjects and characters did not look like the
students that were going to those schools. Can you just expand
briefly upon the potential impacts of banning books in Florida,
Roberto Clemente. I mean he is a God, and that was put aside
for a while.
Certain poetry. Our superintendent of public education in
Arizona, Tom Horn, feels that we should not talk about race at
all because it offends some, and that way we do not have to
talk about history because it is a part of the story. My
question is: tell us how it impacts students and communities.
Mr. Friedman. Yes. Our schools are becoming more diverse,
and research shows that young people are going to be more
engaged in learning in schools when their libraries and the
books that they have ready access to reflects their identifies,
reflect their families, reflect a range of their life
experiences, deal with the complexities of the lives that they
are living.
The purpose of a library is in fact to be that kind of well
spring of information. That is what school librarians are
charged with doing. They are not charged with exercising a kind
of censorious mindset about how different people in the
community might feel about one content or other, they are
charged with producing a robust, diverse collection, and that
is what is critical.
Mr. Grijalva. Yes. I think--and I asked that question
because the efforts at least in my home State, and led by the
superintendent then, and now again, superintendent, has to do
more with the discussion today is about protecting children,
the title, from explicit sexual content. Content is also the
issue.
Could you talk about examples where banning has to do with
the content about what you disagree with an idea, a point of
view, versus trying to twist ourselves into a pretzel to try to
fit the people's decision in terms of a definition of banning.
Mr. Friedman. Yes. I think it is just quite clear, and you
really cannot separate the facts of what is been going on
around the country the past years in terms of how many stories
there are of people who are trying to remove books and being
successful at removing books that are about black stories by
black authors, about LGBTQ lives.
You cannot pretend that is not happening. There are stories
in the news. There was a story just this week in Iowa about
hundreds of books being removed under one of these laws, and
that is been the theme for the past 2 years.
Mr. Grijalva. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Sadly, we are out of
time. I want to thank each of our panelists for our all-star
panelists. You did not disappoint, how about that? Each of you
has added to this conversation. I want to say that for any
member who wishes to submit questions for the record please
submit them to the Committee Clerk electronically by November
2, 2023.
I will yield time to Ranking Member Bonamici. Any final
thoughts before we adjourn?
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think this is an
important discussion, but I want to also share some words from
the award-winning children's author, Judy Bloom. She said, ``I
believe that censorship grows out of fear, and because fear is
contagious, some parents are easily swayed. Book banning
satisfies their need to feel in control of their children's
lives. This fear is often disguised as moral outrage. They want
to believe that if their children don't read about it, their
children won't know about it, and if they don't know about it,
it won't happen.''
Mr. Chairman, this is an important issue. We have freedom
of speech in this country, but we also have freedom of
religion. My colleague with the Bible, I am not sure where he
was going with that, but we need to continue this conversation,
but we also need to get back to doing what is best for
children. Let us talk about the schools where they do not even
have a library. Let us focus on that and work together.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I just want to point out what I
mentioned about how people have different definitions. There is
a school I believe in Florida, where a teacher was sanctioned
for showing students pictures of Michaelangelo's famous statue
of David.
That is bordering on the absurd, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to thank the witnesses, and we can all agree
that we need to do what is best for our students. Let us
continue the conversations about how we get there, and I yield
back.
Chairman Bean. Thank you very much. Here are our takeaways.
Inappropriate content is a real problem. All of our witnesses
really testified, I know we have different angles of how we
come to the solution. Wyoming should be one of our leaders to
let local control, I believe, local control is one of the
answers.
The Biden administration's book banning tzar is a real
threat, and hopefully will still allow local control for school
boards. Each of you traveled a long way, and you have added to
the conversation to Ranking member, thank you for a great
Committee today, and with that there being no further business
before us, this Committee is adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 11:16 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
