- BAD FOR BUSINESS: DOL'S PROPOSED OVERTIME RULE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BAD FOR BUSINESS: DOL'S
PROPOSED OVERTIME RULE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WORKFORCE PROTECTIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, NOVEMBER 29, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-28
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-007 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WORKFORCE PROTECTIONS

KEVIN KILEY, California, Chairman

GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina,
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York            Ranking Member
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
MARY MILLER, Illinois                HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              MARK TAKANO, California

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on November 29, 2023................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Kiley, Hon. Kevin, Chairman, Subcommittee on Workforce
Protections................................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Adams, Hon. Alma, Ranking Member, Subcommittee Workforce
Protections................................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8

WITNESSES

DeCamp, Hon. Paul, Member, Epstein, Becker & Green P.C.......    10
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Panwala, Jagruti, Member of Board of Directors, American
Hotel and Lodging Association..............................    24
Prepared statement of....................................    26
Conti, Judith, Director of Government Affairs, National
Employment Law Project.....................................    32
Prepared statement of....................................    34
Holtz-Eakin, Dr. Douglas, President, American Action Forum...    44
Prepared statement of....................................    46

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Chairman Kiley:
Letter dated November 28, 2023 from Associated Builders
and Contractors........................................    62
Letter dated November 29, 2023 from Credit Union National
Association............................................    63
Letter dated November 7, 2023 from Independent Electrical
Contractors............................................    65
Letter dated November 7, 2023 from Independent Woman's
Forum..................................................    69
Letter dated November 7, 2023 from National Association
of Wholesaler-Distributors.............................    74
Letter dated November 7, 2023 from America First Policy
Institute..............................................    80
Letter dated November 7, 2023 from Partnership to Protect
Workplace Opportunity..................................   104
Letter dated November 29, 2023 from American Society of
Travel Advisors........................................   132
Letter dated November 29, 2023 from the College and
University Professional Association for Human Resources   139
Letter dated November 7, 2023 from the College and
University Professional Association for Human Resources   143
Letter dated November 29, 2023 from the National Retail
Federation.............................................   163
Foxx, Hon. Virginia, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina:
Letter dated November 2, 2023 from the American Bus
Association............................................   168
Letter dated December 1, 2023 from the Customized
Logistics and Delivery Association.....................   170
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', a Representative in Congress
from the State of Virginia:
Letter dated November 28, 2023 from the Center for Law
and Social Policy......................................   172
Letter dated November 27, 2023 from the American
Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees....   178
Takano, Hon. Mark, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California:
Signed letter dated November 7, 2023 to Acting Secretary
Julie Su...............................................   181

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record by:
Ms. Judith Conti.........................................   184
Hon. Paul DeCamp.........................................   187

BAD FOR BUSINESS: DOL'S
PROPOSED OVERTIME RULE

----------

Wednesday, November 29, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Workforce Protections,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:16 a.m.,
2175 Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, DC, Hon. Kevin
Kiley [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Kiley, Grothman, Miller, Burlison,
Foxx, Walberg, Adams, Stevens, and Takano.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Nick Barley,
Deputy Communications Director; Mindy Barry, General Counsel;
Isabel Foster, Press Assistant; Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff
Assistant; Sheila Havenner, Director of Information Technology;
Paxton Henderson, Intern; Alex Knorr, Legislative Assistant;
Georgie Littlefair, Clerk; John Martin, Deputy Director of
Workforce Policy; Hannah Matesic, Deputy Staff Director; Audra
McGeorge, Communications Director; Kevin O'Keefe, Professional
Staff Member; Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Seth Waugh,
Workforce Policy Director; Maura Williams, Director of
Operations; Nekea Brown, Minority Director of Operations; Ilana
Brunner, Minority General Counsel; Stephanie Lalle, Minority
Communications Director; Kristen Lemus, Minority Intern;
Raiyana Malone, Minority Press Secretary; Kevin McDermott
Minority Director of Labor Policy; Kota Mizutani, Minority
Deputy Communications Director; Kyra Patterson, Minority
Intern; Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director; Jessica
Schieder, Minority Economic Policy Advisor; Dhrtvan Sherman,
Minority Committee Research Assistant; Bob Shull, Minority
Senior Labor Policy Counsel; Clinton Spencer IV, Minority Staff
Assistant; Banyon Vassar, Minority IT Administrator
Chairman Kiley. The Subcommittee on Workforce Protection
will come to order. I note that a quorum is present. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to call a recess at any
time. The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
the Department of Labor's Proposed Overtime Rule, including the
Department's failure to analyze the impact of its proposed rule
properly, and the costs and burdens that will be imposed by the
rule on workers and businesses, especially small businesses.
Good morning, everyone, and welcome to today's hearing. On
June 9, 2016, over 7 years ago, this Committee held a hearing
titled ``The Administration's Overtime Rule and its
Consequences for Workers, Students, Nonprofits and Small
Businesses.''
Back then the Obama administration proposed a rule to
increase the overtime salary threshold by more than doubling
it. Former Chairman John Kline, while recognizing that the
overtime threshold should be responsibly reformed, called the
administration's drastic move extreme and partisan.
Today we are in much the same place. President Biden has
proposed a new poorly conceived rule to change the overtime
requirements, and it could not come at a worse time. As
businesses and nonprofits work to recover from the pandemic
era, and still face record high inflation, the Biden
administration wants to implement a new rule that will
jeopardize their survival and put workers at risk.
What is more, this rule has been issued under the supposed
authority of an Acting Secretary of Labor, Julie Su, who the
U.S. Senate has declined to confirm for 9 months. Every action
of the Labor Department is under a legal cloud as long as this
end run around the Constitution continues.
Today I am again calling on President Biden to end the
tenure of the now longest serving Acting Secretary in the
United States history. The President must nominate a Secretary
who will perform his or her duties competently, who will be on
the side of American workers, and who can win Senate approval.
Only then will the Labor Department be free of the legal
uncertainty that currently clouds its important work.
This administration's proposed overtime rule poses a threat
to the livelihoods of the very people that the administration
claims it wants to help. The rule is expected to impact an
estimate 3.6 million working Americans and cost employers an
estimate 1.3 billion dollars, sticking them between a rock and
a hard place. If employers cannot afford the new mandate, many
will be forced to simply lay-off their employees.
Employees currently exempt from overtime statuses enjoy
greater freedom to pursue professional development
opportunities that fit their unique interests and enhance their
lifetime earning potential. Nonprofits, especially, benefit
from being able to offer exempted employees flexible work
arrangements, like telework, which will be less practical if
more employees become subject to strict timekeeping
requirements.
While some employers may choose to increase salaries to
surpass the new threshold, these possible benefits to a small
percentage of the workforce must be balanced against the many
certain harms, cost hikes at certain universities that students
will face in the form of higher tuition, the greater
administrative costs will be shouldered by charities, resulting
in fewer services to those in need, the diminished efficiency
in Federal grant research that will affect all taxpayers, and
of course the harm to workers themselves, as well as to
consumers. The most concerning part about this rule is that it
puts the policy on autopilot. Future changes should be subject
to the regular policy review, including consultation with
stakeholders, rather than a one size fits all formula.
Automatic increases are bad policy and bad government
practice. Americans are already struggling to recover from the
economic challenges imposed by Bidenomics. This new rule is
simply unneeded at this time. It was just updated by the last
administration. That update, unlike its proposal, only came
after a very careful consultation process where the necessary
stakeholders were involved.
It represented a widely agreed upon consensus, and now the
Biden administration is trying to undue the goodwill produced
by those conversations, and the eventual salary increase. I
urge the DOL to withdraw the proposed rule until it has
completed a more thorough consultation with stakeholders. It
must permanently withdraw the provision which would tie the
hands of future administrations and Congresses.
With that, I yield to the Ranking Member for an opening
statement.
[The statement of Chairman Kiley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for your testimony today. The investments made by
congressional Democrats and the Biden administration spurred
the historic economic and wage growth, effectively rebuilding
our economy from the bottom up and middle out.
It is not a talking point. That is a fact. The Economic
Policy Institute reports that from 2019 to 2022, low wage
workers experienced the fastest real wage growth during a
business cycle peak of any time since 1979, and our economy has
added more than 14 million jobs since President Biden took
office. This historic economic growth was not coincidental.
It is a direct result of congressional Democrats and
President Biden's policy choices to support workers and
businesses. For example, the American Rescue Plan Act passed
without a single congressional Republican vote, secured
investments that helped vulnerable workers make ends meet, and
keep them in the workforce.
The Inflation Reduction Act accelerated economic growth,
lowering costs for workers and families and helping them keep a
roof over their heads and food on their tables. Furthermore,
President Biden has fully embraced a progressive, pro-worker
regulatory agenda by raising Federal contract workers pay to
$15.00 an hour, and repealing harmful restrictions imposed by
the previous administration that allowed unscrupulous employers
to misclassify workers, and deny them overtime pay, minimum
wage and worker's compensations, just to name a few.
Additionally, the Biden administration proposed a rule to
raise the overtime threshold for an additional 3.6 million
Americans. Moreover, it includes safeguards to automatically
and routinely update the threshold so that employees and
businesses do not have to wait for future Federal updates.
These protections are essential for workers who must work
long hours to provide for themselves and their families. You
know working hard is not enough if you do not make enough.
However, I am concerned that my Republican colleagues are
attempting to undermine workers financial security by limiting
their access to overtime pay.
Employees should not have to bargain for what they are due
by their employers. Your companies should pay you for every
hour you work, including time and a half. It is that simple.
Regrettably, Committee Republicans proposals would instead
protect unscrupulous employers at the expense of hardworking
American's wages, and well-being.
For example, in the last Congress Committee Republicans
reintroduced the Working Families Flexibility Act, which allows
private sector employers to compensate hourly workers with comp
time instead of overtime pay. In stark contrast, congressional
Democrats have reintroduced the Wage Theft Protection and Wage
Recovery Act, which authorizes a civil penalty, and increases
the maximum penalty for employers who fail to adequately
compensate workers for overtime work.
Congressional Democrats also reintroduced a Family and
Medical Insurance Leave Family Act to ensure that every worker
can access paid leave. I would welcome my colleagues' support
on these proposals to help improve the lives of workers and
their families. I want to thank the witnesses again for their
time. I look forward to a productive discussion. Mr. Chair, I
yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Adams follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Pursuant to Committee Rule 8-C, all
Committee members who wish to insert written statements into
the record may do so by submitting them to the Committee Clerk
in Microsoft Word format by 5 p.m., 14 days from the date of
this hearing, which is December 13, 2023.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days after the date of this hearing to allow such statements
and other extraneous material referenced during the hearing to
be submitted to the official hearing record.
I will now turn to the introduction of our distinguished
witnesses. The first witness is Hon. Paul DeCamp, who is a
practicing wage and hour attorney at Epstein, Becker and Green
in Washington, DC. He previously served as Administrator of
DOL's Wage and Hour Division during the George W. Bush
administration.
In this role he was the Chief Federal Officer responsible
for interpreting and enforcing the Nation's wage and hour laws,
including the FLSA.
Our second witness is Ms. Jagruti Panwala, who is
testifying on behalf of the American Hotel and Lodging
Association that's located in New Hope, Pennsylvania. As an
owner of multiple hotel franchises, Ms. Panwala has spent many
years in various positions from administrator to owner
operator.
The third witness is Ms. Judi Conti, who is the Director of
Government Affairs at the National Employment Law Project,
which is located in Washington, DC. Ms. Conti previously served
as Co-Founder and Executive Director of the D.C. Employment
Justice Center.
The fourth witness is Dr. Douglas Holtz-Eakin, who is the
President of the American Action Forum, which is located in
Washington, DC. Dr. Holtz-Eakin previously served as Chief
Economist of the President's Council of Economic Advisors from
2001-2002, and Director of the Congressional Budget Office from
2003 to 2005.
We thank all of the witnesses for being here today and look
forward to your testimony. Pursuant to Committee rules, I would
ask you each to limit your oral presentations to a 5-minute
summary of your written statement. I would also like to remind
the witnesses to be aware of their responsibility to provide
accurate information to the Subcommittee. I will first
recognize Mr. DeCamp.

STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL DECAMP, MEMBER OF THE FIRST EPSTEIN,
BECKER AND GREEN P.C., WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. DeCamp. Good morning, Chairman Kiley, Ranking Member
Adams, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee. Thank you
for inviting me to testify at this hearing to address the
Department of Labor's proposal to amend the regulations
implementing the executive, administrative, and professional
exemptions set forth in Section 13 A-1 of the Fair Labor
Standards Act.
I am here today to express my opposition to that proposal,
focusing on four main points. First, the proposed rule rejects
85 years of Department of Labor practice and would transform
the salary threshold into a completely unprecedented regulatory
device.
Since 1940, the Department's regulations have consistently
embodied the principle that the purpose of the salary threshold
is to screen out obviously nonexempt employees. Weeding out
those individuals avoids the Department, employers, and workers
wasting time analyzing job duties of employees whose pay is so
low that there is little chance that they would satisfy the
duty's test for exemption.
The Department has repeatedly cautioned that the salary
level must not be so high as to exclude a substantial number of
workers, yet the proposed rule acknowledges that it would deny
exempt status to at least 3.4 million workers who duties
qualify for exemption today.
The Department admits in a footnote that the real salary
threshold it intends to put into the final rule is quite a bit
higher than the already high level stated in the proposal. In
short, the proposed threshold of more than $55,000.00 per year
would, for the first time in the near century long history of
the FLSA, transform the salary threshold into an entirely new
regulatory tool, one that operates to deny exempt status to
millions of workers whose job duties qualify for exemption.
It is not up to the Department to rewrite and to undermine
in this manner the law Congress enacted. Second, the proposed
salary threshold increase is wildly out of step with prior
increases. In the most recent update to the salary threshold,
the Department raised the $455.00 weekly standard established
in 2004 to the current level of $684.00 per week, effective at
the start of 2020.
Today, less than 4 years later, the Department aims to
increase the salary threshold again by just under 55 percent to
$1,059.00 per week, and perhaps quite a bit more than that.
That change would represent roughly an 11.5 percent average
annual rate of increase from the previous change.
Looking back at all the salary threshold increases from
1940 to 2020, the average annual rate of change has varied from
a low of roughly 2.6 percent to a high of just under 7 percent.
The proposed rule, however, represents an average annual rate
of increase that is between two and three times the historical
norm, and nearly 66 percent higher than the highest level of
annual increase ever seen over the past 80 plus years.
Such a dramatic increase is unwise and unnecessary. Third,
the proposed rule seeks to implement automatic updates to the
salary threshold every 3 years without further formal
rulemaking. The Administrative Procedures Act, however,
requires agencies to use notice and comment rulemaking when
issuing substantive rules.
There can be no doubt that change in the salary threshold
involves a substantive rule because the Department uses the
threshold as part of the legal test for distinguishing exempt
workers from the nonexempt.
Nothing in the FLSA or the Administrative Procedure Act
allows the Department to avoid formal rulemaking for future
changes to the salary threshold, merely because the Department
currently believes that it would like to adhere to the same
method for selecting the salary threshold in perpetuity.
Finally, if anyone should make the kinds of policy laden
broadly impactful choices reflected in the proposed rule, it is
Congress, not the Department. The FLSA says nothing about a
salary requirement for these exemptions.
From the very beginning the Department's approach to both
the salary threshold and the job duties requirements for these
exemptions has proceeded from a legally invalid premise: that
the law supposedly requires narrow interpretation of the
exemptions. The Department invoked that principle in its 1940
rulemaking where it first established the salary requirement
and substantially revised the duty standards. It has done
nothing since then to undo the effect of weaving that principle
into the entire fabric of the regulations.
More recently, the Supreme Court has made it clear that
because the exemptions are just as much a part of the FLSA as
the overtime requirement itself, it is legal error to construe
exemptions narrowly. In the end, there is no objectively right
salary threshold that one can determine through expertise in
wage and hour law, or experience in enforcing the law.
As underscored by the present proposal's stated goal of
undoing what the Department accomplished when it revised these
regulations a generation ago, what is really at issue here is
nothing more than policy preferences that oscillate from
administration to administration.
Congress, not the Department, should set Federal labor
policies. This concludes my prepared remarks. I welcome any
questions that the members of the Subcommittee may have. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. DeCamp follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you for your testimony. I will next
recognize Ms. Panwala.

STATEMENT OF MS. JAGRUTI PANWALA, PRINCIPAL, SITA RAM LLC, NEW
HOPE, PENNSYLVANIA

Ms. Panwala. Good morning, Chairman Kiley, Ranking Member
Adams, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify before you today. My name is
Jagruti Panwala, my family and I own and operate eight hotels
across the United States.
I am a first generation American, an entrepreneur and a
franchisee. I was born in Gujarat, India. My family and I
immigrated to the United States in 1988 in the search for
opportunities for education and entrepreneurship. Very shortly
after graduating from college I decided to take the biggest
risk of my life in purchasing a hotel at the age of 22 years
old and going into business for myself.
Today, we own and operate eight hotels located in
Pennsylvania, Texas, New York, New Jersey and Ohio. Among these
properties we employ over 200 people and maintain a closely
knit relationship with each of them. In addition to running my
own family business, I currently serve on the Board of
Directors for American Hotel and Lodging Association.
I am here today to explain my perspective as a small
business owner and a hotel operator, and to describe how the
Department of Labor's proposed changes to the overtime rule
will have damaging, devasting effects on my business, my
employees and the lodging industry.
It is critical to note that the proposal does not simply
increase salaries for a few employees at a marginal level,
rather up to 70 percent increase will drastically impact the
entire business plan well beyond compensation. We expect not
only a significant jump in direct staffing costs, but also
substantial increases in associated labor costs, including
payroll taxes, Federal and State unemployment taxes, insurance,
and none of which seems to be included in much of the
discussion.
In order to handle these increases, employers will be
forced to take actions that we do not want to take, including
actions that could set workers back in their careers. The last
thing small business owners want to do is to lay-off their
employees. Unfortunately, some hotels may be forced to do so
because of this new rule in order to stay in business.
While it is true that some exempt workers may see their
salaries increase to the new minimum threshold, in order to
ensure they remain exempt from overtime pay, many workers will
likely be reclassified from salaried to hourly, making them
nonexempt, but also constraining their access to benefits,
hours, potential flexible work arrangements, and even
opportunities for career advancement.
As I have shared earlier, I have spent my entire adult life
in the hotel business, and have done every job there is to do
from housekeeping to maintenance, to bookkeeping and
management. I know firsthand what it takes to advance in a
career. The benefits of salaried positions afford employees the
opportunity to learn aspects of the business, beyond their
immediate job duties.
The Department seems to have ignored the fact that
different regions of the country have significant variations in
the cost of living, and therefore will see significant
variations in the impact of the proposed rule on their economy.
In 2023, the first line housekeeping supervisors in New
York earned an average in the range of $62,000.00, while the
same position in Texas saw an average earning of $42,000.00.
Finally, the Department's effort to implement automatic updates
to the minimum salary threshold will create immense problems
for the hotel leaders, especially regarding financial
projections and their ability to plan for the future.
According to the proposed rule the automatic updates will
occur every 3 years, regardless of economic circumstances at
the time, which means that the threshold will be updated even
if there's an economic problem that exists.
Chairman Kiley, Ranking Member Adams, and the members of
the Subcommittee, I sincerely thank you for the opportunity to
share my story with you today. In the hotel industry our
employee's success is our success. This misguided rule by the
administration will provide less flexibility and many will be
forced to lay-off their employees just to stay in business.
This is an outcome no one wants.
I strongly urge you to consider the adverse implications of
the overtime proposed rule on small businesses owners, and
workers when deliberating policy proposals. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Panwala follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you very much for your testimony. I
will now recognize Ms. Conti.

STATEMENT OF MS. JUDI CONTI, DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS,
NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT LAW PROJECT, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Ms. Conti. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Kiley, Ranking
Member Adams, and members of the Subcommittee. My name is Judy
Conti, and I am the Government Affairs Director at the National
Employment Law Project, an advocacy organization with the
mission to build a just and inclusive economy, where all
workers have expansive rights and thrive in good jobs.
I am grateful for the opportunity to testify, and I will
make three primary points. One, DOL's proposed overtime
regulation corrects the current, overly broad exemptions that
end up excluding overtime eligible workers from the legal
protections they should enjoy.
Two, employers have ample tools at their disposal to handle
the new salary threshold proposed in the regulation, and three,
automatically updating the salary threshold is good for both
workers and employers. The FLSA's guarantee of premium pay for
overtime hours was meant to discourage dangerous overwork of
employees, and to encourage employers to spread out work to
more people, thereby creating jobs.
The executive, administrative and professional employee
exemptions are meant to be limited to workers who both earn
salaries and have job duties that truly set them apart from
those entitled to overtime pay. Unfortunately, because of
decades of administrative neglect and flawed rulemaking
processes, the current salary threshold is so low, and the
duty's test made so weak and opaque by the 2004 revisions, that
it allows employers to easily misclassify millions of workers
each year, giving them titles that sound like they should be
exempt, even when the vast majority of their job duties are
clearly nonexempt.
Because the duties test is so opaque, workers by and large
do not know any better, and end up deprived of wages they have
earned and should be paid. In January this year, the National
Bureau of Economic Research released a report documenting that
in 2019 alone, employers avoided paying about 4 billion in
overtime that workers earned with these phony job titles.
Clearly, this is a problem that DOL needs to mitigate and
given the scope and consequences of the misclassification, and
the sheer impossibility of wage and hour enforcement adequately
solving the problem, it must be done through regulation. By
raising the salary threshold to $55,068.00 per year, DOL will
provide new and enhanced protections for approximately 3.6
million people who are now working more than 40 hours per week
for free.
By historical standards, this is actually a rather modest
threshold. In 1975, 63 percent of full-time salaried workers
were covered by overtime protections, regardless of their
duties. Today that share is a mere 9 percent. Had the relevant
1974 salary threshold for the current duties test merely been
updated for inflation, it would stand at nearly 68,000.00 per
year, and make no mistake about it, excessive overtime is
dangerous for workers, leading to cardiovascular disease,
stress, depression, increased alcohol and tobacco use, and
mental health issues.
It can also lead to increased absenteeism, low
productivity, low morale, and higher turnover, all of which are
significant costs to employers, and make their workplaces less
attractive to their current workforce for potential job
candidates.
Employers have many tools available to manage the new
overtime obligations, it can raise salaries over the new
threshold, decide to pay overtime, reassess workloads, better
manage their worker's time, hire additional staff, or give more
hours to part-time workers, fostering both healthier work life
balance, and an environment where employees are compensated
with fair pay and better working conditions that will result in
higher productivity and less turnover.
To be clear, while the significance of this new regulation
will be profound on the affected employees, the overall impact
on employers is quite small, especially because the threshold
is pegged to the lowest wage region in the country. According
to the Economic Policy Institute, the new threshold will
account for a mere 0.023 percent of the total wage bill
employers paid in 2022.
Of course these costs are aggregate to employers as a
whole, and circumstances do vary by individual employers, but
there are many voices of small businesses in the administrative
record, including Mitch Cahn, of the Unionwear in Newark, New
Jersey, Rebecca Hamilton of W.S. Badger Company, and Brian
England, owner of BA Auto Care in Columbia, Maryland, who
enthusiastically support this new regulation and write
compellingly about how good overtime policies are good for
their business and their bottom line.
Finally, the proposal to update the threshold is beneficial
for both workers and employers. It will ensure that overtime
workers protections do not erode for workers, and employers
will benefit from regular, predictable increases that are
pegged to the economic circumstances of the times, and they can
plan for them and implement them.
Thank you for your time and attention today, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Conti follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you for your testimony. I will next
recognize Dr. Holtz-Eakin.

STATEMENT OF DR. DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN
ACTION FORUM, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Thank you, Chairman Kiley, Ranking Member
Adams, members of the Committee for the privilege of being here
today to discuss the proposed rule that would raise the
threshold for the salaries test from roughly $36,000.00 to
$55,000.00, and indexes automatically rise further thereafter.
I want to make three points about the proposed rule. First,
based on sort of traditional criteria, there is no compelling
case for raising the threshold at this time, and instead the
rule is advertised as an attempt for distributional policy, to
compensate low wage workers.
Interpreting from that perspective it is a really poorly
targeted redistributional policy. $55,000.00 is only $2,000.00
below the median of the wage distribution, so these are hardly
the lower tail of the wage distribution. These are, in many
cases, very highly compensated people.
Our estimates done using the 2022 survey of income and
program participation say there will be about 3.1 million
workers affected. Only 2.4 percent of them live in families in
poverty, and fully 45 percent of them are three times the
poverty line. This is hardly the kind of distributional policy
that most people would endorse.
The biggest point is that we estimate that about 20 billion
dollars-worth of additional wages and salaries should have to
be paid to compensate for the overtime, and simply passing a
rule doesn't create the economic resources to pay those wages.
They have to come from somewhere.
First could be imagined to react in a variety of ways. They
could not hire people, in which case we would essentially
redistribute this income from people without a job, to people
with a job, which is a perverse form of redistribution at best.
It could come at the expensive of raises for those people who
are retaining their job, but do not work any overtime. It could
be very low wage non-overtime workers.
The redistribution would be perverse within the firms. It
could come at the expense of additional investment by these
firms. They could not upgrade their capital stock. They could
not adopt new technologies. In the long run this has a
predictable consequence; productivity will be lower, the wages
paid to all workers in those firms will be lower, and again,
the consequence is not to make workers better off, but
ultimately to harm them.
Certainly, an initial impact might be that firms would try
to pass along these additional costs in the form of higher
prices. As the Committee is well aware, the preeminent economic
challenge of this era has been 40-year highs in inflation.
Adding additional cost pressures to firms at this time is an
unwise course for policy.
It is hard to defend this particular proposal, and the
economic fallout is by and large going to be negative for the
U.S. economy, so I thank you for the chance to be here, and I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Douglas Holtz-Eakin
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. Thank you very much. Under Committee Rule
9, we will now question witnesses under the 5-minute rule. The
representative from Missouri, Mr. Burlison, is recognized.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. DeCamp, the
overtime proposed rule is deeply concerning for the well-being
of our Nation's small businesses and all other employers, even
universities. The Department of Labor's approach has raised
serious issues, particularly regarding the insufficient comment
period, and the lack of consideration for the challenges that
it is going to be to the businesses that are impacted.
The rush to push through this rule without reasonable and
meaningful comment period is a disservice to both employers and
workers because a 60 day window is insufficient. In your
experience, have you ever seen such a short comment period for
a policy of this magnitude?
Mr. DeCamp. Not of this magnitude. I have seen other,
lesser impactful rules that have 60-day comment periods, but
typically when the Department engaged in major rulemaking with
broad economic impacts throughout the economy, it tends to
honor requests for extensions of the comment period.
Mr. Burlison. Why do you think that they have had such a
short comment period? Why are they trying to rush this through?
Mr. DeCamp. You would have to ask them. They want to move
quickly.
Mr. Burlinson. In addition, it is important that we
recognize that we have been here before. The past
administration, the Obama administration, issued a similar
change, and it faced legal challenges. I think it was
determined to be arbitrary and capricious. What do you foresee?
What legal challenges do you foresee with this rule?
Mr. DeCamp. Essentially the same challenge, coupled with
the argument that the proposed rule is contrary to the FLSA.
The ruling out of the District Court of Texas, which remains on
the books, was that the Department's decision in 2016 to raise
the salary threshold so substantially that it would exclude
millions of people at the time--I think that one was 3.6
million people--from exempt status, based solely on their
compensation, and without regard to their job duties, was
inconsistent with the FLSA.
It was arbitrary and capricious, and not what Congress
intended. I think we would see a similar challenge to this
proposal if it were to become a final rule because again, we
would have a very large number of individuals denied exempt
status without regard to their job duties, based solely on
their compensations, and I think we would see a similar
challenge now.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you. Ms. Panwala, this proposal that we
are discussing, as you have said in your testimony, fails not
only to address the need for modernization, but also poses a
significant burden on businesses like yours. As a hotel owner
and operator, how do you anticipate that this rule will affect
your business and the rules that you have with your employees?
Ms. Panwala. Yes, no, absolutely. You just mentioned the
60-day implementation. Look, I am a business owner, and I am
busy doing day to day, you know, the hotel operations, but not
many business owners, or not many hotel owners, will even
understand, or will have enough time to understand what this
rule means to their business, their financial projections.
I think we all can also agree that running a business now
versus 10-15 years ago, it has changed completely. There is a
lot of higher costs, a lot of fixed costs involved. When we are
implementing a rule with this just succeeding implementation,
the business owners will have to make a lot of changes very
quickly.
One of the changes will be that the employees that they
have for 10-15 years, who are not salaried employees, who feel
like they are a part of the business, they are part of the
winning team working together, will have to be moved to salary,
and that is in my opinion, demoralization for other employees.
I do not think as a business owner I want to take that
step, and I do not think my employees would be happy with that
action either, so it is a lose/lose situation on both sides
when it comes to the employers and employees.
Mr. Burlison. I mean, I did not even think of this
question, but as you are talking this through, I am thinking of
my previous career, and most of my career I worked as an IT
professional. A lot of my salary probably would have fallen
under this new rule, and I would have seen it as a demotion. I
know that people may not understand that, but I would have seen
it as a demotion.
I enjoyed, as a salaried employee, not having to clock in
and clock out, right? Not having to have every minute of my day
tracked. I think that at the end of the day the employer and I
had a relationship that you do the work you get paid,
regardless of how much time that you are here, and so if you
can.
Ms. Panwala. Yes. I would like to just add one more thing.
We are not looking over the shoulders for most of our team
members, and I call them team members when I am with them
instead of employees, because they are part of the team. We are
not looking at--OK, what time are you coming in, what time are
you leaving?
I will give you a perfect example. This morning when I was
up, you know, six in the morning, I received a text from one of
my employees, and I have a text saying ``hey, I need to leave
one o'clock today, is it OK,'' because she is changing her
apartment from one apartment to another location, and they have
people helping today.
Now this was not something that was expected, it was a
last-minute thing. Stuff like this happens. I want to say not
like once in a while, I would say weekly basis if somebody has
to go to the doctor's, or they have to pick up their child,
there are so many examples that I can give you.
Mr. Burlison. Yes.
Ms. Panwala. As a business owner, but because the
relationship with our employees is so close that they also know
that Jagruti is never going to say no, because she knows how
important the family and your medical situations are.
Mr. Burlison. Right.
Ms. Panwala. I think a lot of this relationship would
change, and I think that would be devastating, especially for
me as a business owner, to see my employees in that position,
and to see my business in that position as well.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Chairman Kiley. The Ranking Member, Dr. Adams, is
recognized.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again I want to
thank the witnesses. I will say it again, working hard is not
enough if you don't make enough. I am--I want to direct my
question to Ms. Conti. First of all, let me just say I am
concerned with how we cannot just protect worker's paychecks,
but also protect their time, so that people can earn a
meaningful income, and have the time to enjoy it.
The overtime threshold has been allowed to stay flat for
long periods of time. In fact, at one point it had stayed the
same for 29 years. If the overtime threshold is set at a flat
unchanging amount, what does that mean for worker's pay and for
worker's time?
Ms. Conti. Well, actually ma'am, if the overtime threshold
is set at what seems like a static amount, it actually is a
changing amount because every year it erodes, and it means less
in terms of absolute dollars. Whether we index for inflation,
which just keeps the status quo, or we set a number that erodes
every year, it is a number that continues to change in effect,
and in reality every year.
It is detrimental to workers. I mean we saw that period
from what 1975 to 2004 when there was no change of the
threshold. The Trump administration signaled that it planned to
revisit the threshold every 3 years, acknowledging that that is
a best practice, but of course we have not been able to revisit
it that quickly again.
The administrative process is by definition time-consuming,
expensive, it is fabulous government practice to do something
that is efficient, that keeps things steady for workers, and
again keeps things steady for employers. I have been doing this
work for 30 plus years, and I have testified at a number of
these hearings before, and what I always hear from my
colleagues in the business community is they want to be able to
plan. They want predictability, and they want bright line
rules.
Well, this rule gives them a bright line threshold, and the
predictability that every 3 years there will be modest
increases that just keep pace with costs, and if we are in a
recessionary period, in fact, there would probably be no
increase, or there might be a decrease in fact in the
threshold.
Ms. Adams. Thank you. Let me ask you, let me say that the
venture capitalists and entrepreneur Nick Hanauer writes that
the low overtime threshold has enabled some employers to reduce
jobs that just by converting three 40-hour work week jobs into
two 60 hour work week jobs, and to pocket the 40 hours in lost
wages.
Do you agree, and what would the Biden administration's
proposed overtime rule mean for jobs?
Ms. Conti. I absolutely agree that is what is happening.
The National Bureau of Economic Research confirmed that in its
groundbreaking study this year. We see lawsuits and media
accounts all the time, in particular in retail and in
hospitality, and I am certainly not saying this about my
distinguished colleague here, but in the restaurant industry,
that people are routinely working 50, 60, sometimes more hours
per week, with phony job titles, if you will.
They are not only not getting paid overtime for those
hours, they are not getting paid anything at all extra for
those hours. Then they are losing time with their families and
in their personal lives as well.
Ms. Adams. OK. Let me ask about other policies that could
protect worker's time and ability to balance work and life. For
example, who in our economy is working variable hours each
week, and what do we know about the importance of a predictable
scheduling on worker's mental health?
Ms. Conti. Yes. By and large it is low wage workers who are
subject to what we call just in time scheduling where they do
not have enough advanced notice to plan adequately for
childcare, transportation, other aspects of their life
including things like going to take care of their health. They
can all finish a report for work and not have enough work to
do, and then are sent home, so they do not earn the full wage
that they expect to that day, even if they have already brought
their child to daycare, and paid for a whole day.
This just in time and unpredictable scheduling really
wreaks havoc, not just on the temporal lives of workers, but it
really impacts their ability to build a steady work history, to
have predictable incomes, to build security as they go along,
so that is why we support the Schedules that Work Act, which
would give workers substantial advanced notice about their
schedules.
When they show up they get an adequate wage, an adequate
number of hours, and they are able to plan the rest of their
lives.
Ms. Adams. Well, thank you very much. You have answered the
questions before I asked, I appreciate it very much, and thank
you for your testimony. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Conti. You are welcome, ma'am.
Chairman Kiley. The representative from Illinois, Ms.
Miller, is recognized.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Chairman Kiley. Over the past 2
years we have seen record high inflation, supply chain issues,
and workforce shortages. In addition, hundreds of harmful, new
Federal regulations issued under the Biden administration. This
proposal by the Biden Department of Labor will create yet
another burden for small businesses struggling to survive in
the Biden economy.
In my district, I hear countless sad stories from employers
about the difficulty in finding employees. The Biden
administration is putting 3.6 million American jobs at risk
with this proposed rule, which will only add to the current
workforce shortage.
Ms. Panwala, if this rule goes into effect would the hotel
industry be forced to fire or lay-off some of their employees?
Ms. Panwala. Thank you, both. Unfortunately, that will be
the scenario. The hotels run on a very, very, very tight
margin, and I think one of the aspects that also has changed
now is the borrowing money, right? When we have to renovate the
property, or anything to do with the property, the rates have
increased.
I will just give you a quick example. Two of our properties
out of eight properties went through the refinancing, and where
we were paying the lower rate, now it is double the rate. Our
debt, pretty much doubled what we were paying. In this time
period where we are struggling as business owners to just
keeping everything steady, just to make sure that even we can
keep all of our businesses open because at the end of the day
we are successful when our employees are successful, and vice-
versa.
I think it is really, really important that, you know, not
losing flexibility, making sure that we're keeping our
employees, we are making sure that they have a consistent
paycheck, and they have stability. Because that is one of the
major things the employees look for is this stability,
consistency and also flexibility and I have said that example
to you, which I have thousands of examples.
I think that really keeps the employee morale up, and I
feel like it keeps the economy going because the businesses are
running, and the economy is also running.
Mrs. Miller. Well, in light of talking about flexibility,
what challenges would this cookie cutter nature of this rule
create for hotels and other businesses that are operating in
multiple states?
Ms. Panwala. Yes, no, absolutely. If you have somebody who
is just coming in at nine o'clock to five o'clock, and who is a
manager, manager position, when there is a time of crisis, if
somebody is checking in late, or checking out late, if there is
a computer issue there is nobody there to take care of the
customers, or the hotel, and that creates a challenge.
Like I said, the flexibility is one thing, but also on an
operations side it will create a major issue because now we
have to really look over the shoulders of our managers of the
property and say OK, did you get this done, what time did you
come in? Right now when they are on a salary, they feel like
they are a part of the business. They are coming in, not just
doing A, B, C, but learning about more aspects of it as I
stated in my testimony, they are learning and broadening the
horizon on some of the other things that, you know, for the
hotel.
I think the operations would be very tight, and also to
figure out how if this was implemented, how do you have the
financial projects for the business, right? How do you make
sure that you are still able to pay your mortgage? You will
still be able to pay electricity? You are still able to make
sure to pay your employees?
It would just be devastating in my opinion to the hotel
business.
Mrs. Miller. Specifically, if a business owner had
operations in multiple states, how would this rule impact them?
Ms. Panwala. Oh yes, absolutely, and so you know, that's
the one thing. Its a regional difference, right? The cost of
living is different, so we have a hotel in Ohio, and we have a
hotel in New York. The cost of living is very different, as we
all know. Even running a property is very different when the
property that we purchased in Ohio and purchased in New York,
has a completely different parameter.
Keeping everything, putting everything, and saying that one
size fits all approach, it does not really work.
Mrs. Miller. Absolutely. I want to thank all of our
witnesses for being here today and I yield my remaining time to
Chairman Kiley.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you. The representative from
Michigan, Ms. Stevens, is recognized.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you. How much time do Americans spend
working, and how much are they compensated for it? Dr. Holtz-
Eakin, you were citing some of the facts surrounding overtime
in your testimony, referencing depression era standards. When
was the Great Depression? Wast that almost 100 years ago?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. The depths of the Great Depression were
1932.
Ms. Stevens. Right. Are you aware, sir, of the average cost
of a home in the United States of America?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. There are estimates in the median house
prices every month.
Ms. Stevens. Right. Are we aware of what economists are
saying now that an American worker needs to make for the median
price of a home today to qualify? It is $100,000.00, sir.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. A little higher.
Ms. Stevens. Look, I think that we are reckoning with a
reality here on this Committee and in this country, in terms of
not raising the minimum wage for as long as we have refused to
raise it. Obviously, salary and what people bring home is often
times deeply personal.
My colleague, the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee,
talked about daycare. Certainly, you can drop your kid off at
daycare and then commute. Dr. Holtz-Eakin, I am not sure if you
are aware of the average commute time of Americans.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I am not.
Ms. Stevens. Yes. It is 330 hours a year, so people spend
upwards of 2 weeks. American workers spend upwards of two full
weeks commuting, and they are not compensated for that, all
right? They are paying for it. They are paying energy costs,
they are paying for daycare, their clock does not start when
they begin their commute.
As we start thinking about worker fairness, and obviously
Democrats on this Committee were, you know, delighted about the
40-hour work week, and what that meant historically. Certainly,
I believe that the 40-hour work week came about when we
primarily had single earning households. Now we have dual
income earning households, raising children, getting them to
school, checking through doctor's appointments.
I come from Michigan where we just had an incredible
victory for the American worker led by the UAW, talking about
worker wages, and increasing wages. We are so proud of a 21st
Century labor movement that hails from the American auto
industry, led by the UAW and our manufacturing base.
I think that it is incumbent on us here in this Committee,
and as true partners with the Biden administration on the
Democratic side for the American worker, to think about what
this means to increase the wage, the qualifying wage for
overtime. Because who else is going to pay it? We have
colleagues on the other side of the aisle who voted for, you
know, a tax scam bill.
It certainly did not help the middle-class worker. We are
coming out of a pandemic, we have got global wars, we have got
rising costs, we have got an energy challenge. I certainly want
to thank Ms. Conti for her contributions to today's hearing,
and I would like to take a minute to ask you about how we
expand long hours at work, and how that is hurting working
families in the additional responsibilities they bear.
According to a 2019 Gallop poll, 52 percent of full-time
workers reported working over 40 hours a week.
Ms. Conti. We see that workers are increasingly willing to,
especially younger workers, are willing to leave jobs where
they have to do mandatory overtime, especially if it is
uncompensated. They are willing to strike over it like the
FritoLay workers did, over all of the forced overtime that they
had to do.
We are also reckoning with a generational shift where
younger workers do not feel the same need to be paid their dues
so to speak, that people in my generation did for example.
Employers have to be responsive to that as well. Part of the
workplace shortages we are seeing right now is not because
there are not workers, but there are not workers that want to
work for the jobs when the conditions and the pay that
currently exist.
Ms. Stevens. As a daughter of small business owners, I grew
up in that environment. I saw it and you know, certainly
appreciate our small business owner testimony. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I yield back.
Chairman Kiley. The Chair of the full Committee, Dr. Foxx,
is recognized.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Chairman Kiley. I appreciate it, and
I thank our witnesses for being here today. It is an important
issue, and I am very grateful for this. I will make one just
brief comment before I ask my question. Unfortunately, what Ms.
Conti was talking about is there is just a lot of people in
this country who do not want to work period, and want somebody
else to take care of them, and that is not what this country is
all about. What we need, we have great opportunities in this
country for people to be successful if they want to work hard.
Ms. Panwala, being considered an exempt employee, has benefits
for both the employer and employee. As noted in your written
testimony and in your comments, for many the flexibility of
being a salaried employee allows them to grow within the
organization.
As you said earlier to Ms. Miller, to feel a part of the
organization. What else can you tell us about how your
employees value their exempt status that you might not have
said to Ms. Miller?
Ms. Panwala. I think--thank you, Chairwoman, and I will go
back to what you just said. When I started in 1991 in the hotel
business, actually 2001, I will correct that. When I started
the hotel business, I did everything. I did the housekeeping, I
did the front desk, I did the maintenance. I cleaned the
toilets, everything that I needed to do.
Even during the pandemic, to your point, when we had a huge
labor shortage, nobody wanted to work, I was doing that. I was
doing that with my kids. My daughter is 19 years old. I was
doing that with my husband. I think the flexibility is a huge
part of it for our employees, because as I mentioned earlier to
Congressman Miller, that it is not a once in a while kind of
situation.
It is pretty much almost a weekly basis with the different
employees. That is definitely one of it. I also think that the
relationship and demoralization of the employees is also--if I
am on a salary for five to 10 years with my employer, and all
of a sudden I am on hourly because of this new rule
implementation, how would that--how would I pay my bills on a
consistent basis?
We have hotels, a couple of hotels in New Jersey by in
Ocean City, and during the summer we have more occupancy. In
winter, we have a very small occupancy, there we have 10-15
rooms per day. Our salaried employees are salaried throughout
the year because they are getting a consistent paycheck
throughout the year. They are not worried that oh, now in
wintertime I have to find another job, or fill my hours.
I think that there are a lot of things, but my concern is
not just the financial burden, which is a huge concern, the
implementation, and also how the relationship turnout between
the employee, employees that we have had.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. DeCamp, we have heard
from countless industries and individuals that this rule is bad
for exempt employees. Based on your experience with wage and
hour division regulations, what will be the effect of raising
the overtime salary threshold on currently exempt employees,
who will need to be reclassified?
Mr. DeCamp. The main issue that happens when you get
reclassified from exempt to nonexempt is that you go from the
security of a week in, week out salary or a bimonthly salary.
It is regular--you can pay your bills to a great level of
insecurity of knowing that your income depends on the
vicissitudes of the workflow.
It is also seen, and it has been said by other witnesses,
it is a huge demotion, morally. When you are thinking about it
you lose the opportunity to participate in the higher level of
benefits that are typically available for exempt employees. You
lose flexibility in your working arrangement, and the employer
now does not have the ability to offer the same kind of
training and developmental opportunities to you because now
that comes in a marginal cost per dollar.
Mrs. Foxx. Right. Why did the Department of Labor
originally implement an overtime salary threshold?
Mr. DeCamp. The purpose was very simple. The purpose was to
weed out those individuals who merely had a title of manager or
supervisor but were not really doing manager supervisory work.
The notion of the bona fide executive administrative or
professional employee really focuses on people who were doing
the real work that those exemptions were meant to cover.
The salary threshold was meant to essentially weed out
people whose pay was so low that there was very little chance,
very little likelihood that they would actually be exempt under
the duty's test. It was never meant to do anything more than
that. It was never meant to weed out people who are actually
performing exempt, qualifying duties who are bona fide,
executive, administrative or professional.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, my time has
expired. I yield back.
Chairman Kylie. Thank you very much. I would like to focus
my questioning on weighing the costs versus the benefits of
this policy to workers themselves, and Ms. Panwala, I think you
did an excellent job of laying out a lot of the costs to
workers, and so I want to ask you some more questions about
that.
First, let us actually look at the purported benefits,
because I do think it is probably true that there are some
folks out there who are falling through the cracks of the
existing regulatory scheme, and probably do deserve overtime
and are not getting it right now. As we just heard from Mr.
DeCamp, the lever that is being pulled in an unprecedented way,
in a very aggressive way, with this particular regulation or
proposed rule, is not the appropriate one to hone in on those
folks who really are falling through the cracks.
What is more, we heard from Dr. Holtz-Eakin that the folks
who will benefit are not necessarily the ones who really need
the help the most. I think that was a really important point
that you made, and so I just want to give you a chance to
repeat it. When you said that this would only benefit 2.4
percent of the people who would benefit are living in poverty.
Is that correct?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. That is correct.
Chairman Kylie. What was your broader point there about the
distributional effects of this policy?
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. Well, you know, as my colleague said, this
was intended as a backstop to catch people who were
misclassified, and this aggressive raising of the threshold
appears to be not driven by those considerations, but instead
by just an attempt to redistribute wages toward lower wage
individuals.
Viewed from that perspective, it is a really poorly
targeted policy. It does not help those who were living in
poverty. Nearly 50 percent of it goes to families who are at
three times the poverty level, and it comes with a set of costs
that we are going to distribute to some people, but it has to
come from somewhere.
Chairman Kiley. That is right.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. In many cases the implied redistribution
is very perverse. It is people who do not get a job, people who
have a job. You never want to do that.
Chairman Kiley. Right. The benefits are fairly poorly
targeted, and certainly not overwhelming for all that many
folks who really need help, so let us, you know as a
policymaker, again those are the benefits, now to weigh those
against the costs.
Ms. Panwala, you told us a little bit about your personal
story. You immigrated from India and came to the United States
in search of opportunities for education and entrepreneurship.
Bought your first hotel at age 22. You now own eight hotels,
employee 200 people. Would you say you are an example of the
American dream?
Ms. Panwala. 100 percent yes. I would say that there is
just not me, there are many, many, many immigrants who you
know, work really, really hard, and I know one of the
Congresswomen mentioned that she grew up a small business
owner, so she would understand that. As an immigrant when you
come with nothing, you are basically doing everything, right?
I started in this industry in the same exact way. I started
my job as a housekeeper. I was doing housekeeping. I was doing
everything I needed to do. I think yes, I would agree that that
is really.
Chairman Kiley. You said something that I found very
interesting. You said the single most important aspect of our
business is our employees. What did you mean by that? You want
to give them the chance of the American dream as well, right?
Ms. Panwala. I have always believed, and I think many
business owners will look at that as it is a team effort, a
business, right? When you are running a business, you want to
make sure that everybody is a part of not just the
decisionmaking process, but they feel like they are part of
that organization. That is how I view our employees as part of
our team.
Chairman Kiley. Yes.
Ms. Panwala. When you are with them for so many years, you
want to make sure that you are taking care of them, which we
are.
Chairman Kiley. Right.
Ms. Panwala. We are always taking care of our employees by
providing flexibility, proper pay. If you--if the government
gets involved, which it seems like it is, and starts doing the
regulations, that hurts the relationship between employers and
employees.
Chairman Kiley. That is a great point.
Ms. Panwala. Nothing is broken, well what are we trying to
fix? In my opinion, at least for my business perspective, I can
see that.
Chairman Kiley. It interferes with the relationship, right?
You in fact made a point here that hotels operate on very tight
margins. Shocks to your businesses handed down by the
government with barely any time to adjust, could be the
difference in staying open and closing doors.
Do you think hotels will shut down if this goes into
effect?
Ms. Panwala. Absolutely. Absolutely.
Chairman Kiley. Then what happens to the workers?
Ms. Panwala. They do not have a job.
Chairman Kiley. They do not have a job.
Ms. Panwala. They do not have a job, right. If like I said,
our success, our employee's success, is our success. If we are
not successful, if we are not able to keep our lights on and
keep the doors open, and keep the business running, then those
200 employees, the majority of employees would be out of a job,
and they would have to go somewhere else, you know, look for
different positions.
Chairman Kiley. Then even those who are able to stay open,
do you think they might have to lay off workers if this rule
goes into effect?
Ms. Panwala. Yes. Yes. Obviously, there is a tight budget
over on your property, and as I mentioned, especially now,
because of so much fixed costs are going up, and because of the
lending part of it. Like so, when I mentioned the refinancing
of the property, when you have a property that we are paying 5,
5 = percent, all of a sudden that interest goes to 10, 10 =.
Your debt now doubles on a monthly basis, so those projections.
We know as owners how to handle those, but then on top of
that, if you are putting regulations, such as overtime rule, it
would be just very difficult. If they want the business to
still stay open, we would have to move some of the salaried
employees to hourly employees, to make sure that we are
managing the budget.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you. My time has expired. I now
recognize the representative from Michigan, Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Chairman, and thanks to the
witnesses for being here today. During the 114th Congress, as I
had the privilege to chair this Subcommittee, and along with
over 200 of our fellow House members, I introduced the
Protecting Workplace Advancement and Opportunity Act, which
would have prevented the Obama DOL from implementing the flawed
2016 version of the overtime rule.
Thankfully, seldom do I say that about the courts, but
thankfully that rule was invalidated by the court. However, the
Biden administration has now sought, as we are discussing
today, to resurrect a similar flawed approach. Just 4 years
ago, the Trump DOL raised the overtime limit over 50 percent to
its current $35,568.00 level in a widely supported compromise.
Now I understand the importance of returning to regular
adjustments in the salary threshold, however I am concerned
that raising the threshold an additional 55 percent in such a
short timeframe will impose significant burdens on businesses,
and limit opportunities for workers as has been clearly brought
up today.
Dr. Holtz-Eakin, as succinctly as possible, from a guy who
has written widely on this, and maybe could write another book
on it as well, what economic difficulties are likely to surface
should the proposed overtime rule go into effect just 4 years
after the previous rule?
I say succinctly, because simple sometimes catches our
attention more, especially those who will be reading the
documents.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin. There are two kinds of costs imposed by
the rule. The first is the administrative implementation of the
rule, the burden imposed on businesses to comply. That is the
billion dollars or so that we've seen in most of the `16, `19
and this proposed rule. That is not to be ignored. This
administration has finalized 750 rules in its time in office,
and they have imposed a 437-billion-dollar cost on the U.S.
economy.
That is a record pace of burdens on the private sector to
comply with rulemaking. This would be yet another burden of
that type. The second costs are those of the economic
adjustments to accommodate the additional wages and salaries
that must be paid, either by raising salaries to keep people
exempt, or by paying the overtime itself.
That is very simply not captured in the regulatory analysis
because it is viewed as a transfer in the private sector. That
transfer has real consequences. Some people will not get a
raise because you have to pay someone else more. That comes at
their expense. Some businesses will--they want to modernize.
They will not be able to expand.
That will come at the expense ultimately of the worker's
productivity and their ability to raise their wages. Some
businesses will try to pass this along as additional price
increases at a time when that is the No. 1 economic problem.
That will hurt consumers broadly, and so this is not a costless
move in any way.
It has administrative costs, and it has deep economic
consequences.
Mr. Walberg. Yes. It adds to the pain of Bidenomics,
significantly more. Thank you. Mr. DeCamp, in your written
testimony you note that the proposed salary threshold is
historically excessive. Could you discuss the history of these
adjustments in more detail?
Mr. DeCamp. Sure. When we look at the adjustments that have
happened over the years it is sometimes difficult on an apples-
to-apples basis to compare them because we see increases that
happen over different increments of time, and so sometimes they
raise it after 4 years, sometimes they raise it after 29 years.
In my testimony, I have tried to level for that by looking
at the average rate of increase between different changes to
the regulations. What we see is that historically before this
proposal, the average annual rate of increase over the past 80
something years varied between about 2.6 percent per year, and
a high of 6.97 percent per year.
This proposal would increase 11.55 percent or more per
year. I say, ``or more'' because the actual number that the
Department will use will probably be higher than the figure
represented in the proposed rule. This proposed increase is
again, two to three times the historical average annual rate of
increase, and it is about two-thirds higher than even the
highest increase the Department has ever adopted at any point
in the last 85 years.
Mr. Walberg. Amazing. The impact that that could be
primarily for political purposes, and hurting the people
allegedly that the administration says they want to help. Thank
you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Chairman Kiley. Without objection, I enter into the record
letters of support from the Associated Builders and
Contractors, the Credit Union National Association, Independent
Electrical Contractors, the Independent Women's Forum, the
National Association of Wholesaler Distributors, the America
First Policy Institute, the Partnership to Protect Workplace
Opportunity, the American Society of Travel Advisors, College
and University Professional Association for Resources, and the
National Retail Federation.
[The information of Mr. Kiley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Kiley. I would like to thank our witnesses again
for taking the time to join us today, and I now recognize the
Ranking Member for a closing statement.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for your testimoneys today. Today's hearing has
underscored why President Biden's proposed rule to raise the
overtime threshold is critical for American workers, businesses
and the economy.
Everyday millions of hardworking Americans work long and
strenuous hours without adequate pay to provide for themselves
and their families. I will say it again, working hard is not
enough if you do not make enough. Adding insult to injury, many
workers push 50-to-60-hour work weeks without fair pay, or
adequate overtime pay protections.
These unscrupulous practices encroach on worker's rights,
and they hinder their ability to have a work life balance where
they can spend quality time with their family, get adequate
rest, and work a full-time job. A basic promise of work that
workers organized for decades to secure. That is just not
right.
Employees must be paid for every hour they work, including
time and a half. Now is not the time to shortchange America's
workers. Republicans should join Democrats in supporting
overtime pay protections and building upon President Biden's
work to build our economy from the bottom up and the middle
out.
Thank you very much for your testimony, and Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Kiley. Thank you very much, and I want to again
thank all of our witnesses today. This is a Subcommittee on
Workforce Protections. Unfortunately, again and again, we have
seen from this administration attacks on American workers.
Anti-worker agenda that is truly a central feature of what
has become known as Bidenomics. We have seen it, for example,
with the attacks on independent contractors, with potentially
millions of workers losing their livelihoods with a new rule
that is being proposed by this administration.
When you see a rule like the one that we have considered
today that says we are going to deny by fiat, millions of
workers their exempt status, their ability to work under
conditions that they have chosen, that is something that I
think ought to raise serious alarms for everyone on this
Committee, on both sides of the dias because that is our
charge.
We are the Subcommittee on Workforce Protections, and here
you have an administration that is looking to strip rights away
for millions of workers. They argue that nevertheless, eroding
the rights of workers is justified in this case, because of
benefits that might follow in a material sense.
I think the testimony we have heard today has thoroughly
debunked that argument when you weigh the costs versus the
benefits. We have seen that the benefits are actually quite
narrow, and not really targeted to the folks who really need
help, whereas the costs are sweeping for workers themselves.
First of all, we are going to see if this rule goes into
effect, many businesses will be forced to shut down and all of
their workers will lose their jobs. Other businesses will be
forced to lay people off because they simply cannot afford the
additional costs that this rule would pass on to them. Those
workers will lose their jobs as well.
You have some workers who are in seasonable industries, the
hotel industry is one of them, who now are not going to be able
to get the sort of hours they need when they need it and face
unpredictable work schedules, whereas if they are salaried, and
they have a predictable paycheck that is coming each month,
those folks are going to suffer.
You have people who want to be salaried employees, who get
workplace flexibility, who can telework, who get better
benefits in those sort of situations who have opportunities for
career advancement, who can learn other facets of the business
in order to promote their career, and to enhance their lifetime
earnings. All of those opportunities are going to be taken away
from potentially millions of workers by this proposed
regulation.
Those are all of the costs. That is the basic balance of
the sort of fairly minimal benefits to workers, and the
sweeping cost to workers, not to mention the other costs
associated with this policy. Raising costs for consumers at a
time when inflation has already made life so difficult for so
many families.
Making it more difficult for non-profits to operate and to
serve vulnerable populations. Raising administrative costs at
universities to make tuition even higher for consumers. When
you look at the erosion of rights, and the very significant
costs of this policy, it really is not even a close call from a
policymaking perspective, which is why perhaps the
administration is trying to take this out of the hands of
policymakers, by really imposing a policy that in the first
instance is more properly crafted by Congress.
Perversely, it is saying we are now going to lock this
policy in, and have a stipulated increase every 3 years without
Congress having an opportunity to participate, without even
having a new process under the Administrative Procedures Act,
at the agency's level, without having stakeholders have the
opportunity to participate in that process, and it is going to
happen by the way, regardless of the State of the economy,
regardless of the unique circumstances that may counsel for or
against a change at any given time.
It is really a perfect example of why Americans across the
board, across party lines, overwhelmingly say that we are on
the wrong tracks when it comes to the economy. Bidenomics has
been a failure for the economy, and it has been a failure for
workers. I will tell you in closing, that as someone who comes
from California, we do not need to speculate about what the
further consequence of this agenda is going to be because the
sort of policies that are being proposed here by this
administration, we--they have already taken effect in
California.
By the way, who was the Secretary of Labor in California
for our current Governor? It was Julie Su, the current Acting
Secretary of Labor for this administration. The effect of these
policies in California is right now we have the second highest
unemployment rate in the country.
Last year we had the lowest level of wage growth of any
State in the country, or 50th out of the 50 states, and we have
the highest level of rate of real poverty in the country as
well. That is not what I want for the rest of the country, and
so I would strongly urge the administration to withdraw this
rule, to certainly withdraw the nomination of now the longest
serving Acting Secretary in U.S. History, Julie Su, and to take
a new approach toward economic stewardship that respects the
rule of Congress and respects the rights of workers. Without
any further business, this Committee stands adjourned.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

[all]
