- EXAMINING THE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT'S POLICIES, PRIORITIES, AND FY 2023 FINANCIAL AUDIT FAILURE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT'S
POLICIES, PRIORITIES, AND FY 2023
FINANCIAL AUDIT FAILURE

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE
WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, MAY 7, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-48
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

59-984 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania           Virginia, Ranking Member
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia                 Northern Mariana Islands
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          MARK TAKANO, California
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   MARK DeSAULNIER, California
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MARY MILLER, Illinois                PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
MICHELLE STEEL, California           SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RON ESTES, Kansas                    LUCY McBATH, Georgia
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
KEVIN KILEY, California              ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
AARON BEAN, Florida                  HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
VACANCY

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director

------

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on May 7, 2024......................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Foxx, Hon. Virginia, Chairwoman, Committee on Education and
the Workforce..............................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', Ranking Member, Committee on
Education and the Workforce................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9

WITNESSES

Cardona, Miguel, Secretary, U.S. Department of Education.....    12
Prepared statement of....................................    14

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Burlison, Hon. Eric, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Missouri:
Report titled ``Institutional Compliance with Section 117
of the Higher Education Act of 1965''..................   198
Jayapal, Hon. Pramila, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington:
Report dated February 2024, titled ``Overlooked and
Almost Out of Time''...................................    46
Article dated March 14, 2024, titled ``Grocery cards and
car repairs: How Covid aid changed the way schools can
help homeless kids''...................................    79
McBath, Hon. Lucy, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Georgia:
Article dated January 11, 2024, from Georgia State News
Hub titled ``National Institute for Student Success at
Georgia State Awarded $7.6M to Study Benefits of AI-
Enhanced Classroom Chatbots''..........................    90
Moran, Hon. Nathaniel, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas:
Letter dated April 30, 2024, from Tyler ISD..............   238
Letter dated May 7, 2024, from Van Independent School
District (Van ISD).....................................   239
Steel, Hon. Michelle, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California:
Credo Report titled ``As a Matter of Fact: The National
Charter School Study III 2023''........................   107

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record by:
Secretary Cardona........................................   251

EXAMINING THE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT'S
POLICIES, PRIORITIES, AND FY 2023
FINANCIAL AUDIT FAILURE

----------

Tuesday, May 7, 2024

House of Representatives,
Committee on Education and The Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:17, a.m., in
Room 2175, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Virginia Foxx,
[Chairwoman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Foxx, Wilson, Thompson, Walberg,
Grothman, Stefanik, Allen, Comer, Smucker, Owens, Good,
McClain, Miller, Steel, Kiley, Bean, Burlison, Moran, Chavez-
DeRemer, Williams, Houchin, Scott, Courtney, Sablan, Wilson,
Bonamici, Takano, Adams, DeSaulnier, Norcross, Jayapal, Wild,
McBath, Hayes, Omar, Stevens, Leger Fernandez, and Manning.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Nick Barley,
Deputy Communications Director; Mindy Barry, General Counsel;
Christina Delmont-Small, Investigator; Isabel Foster, Press
Assistant; Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant; Sheila Havenner,
Director of Information Technology; Amy Raaf Jones, Director of
Education and Human Services Policy; Georgie Littlefair, Clerk;
Hannah Matesic, Deputy Staff Director; Audra McGeorge,
Communications Director; Gabriella Pistone, Oversight
Legislative Assistant; Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Mary
Christina Riley, Professional Staff Member; Chance Russell,
Economist and Policy Advisor; Kent Talbert, Investigative
Counsel; Maura Williams, Director of Operations; Brittany
Alston, Minority Operations Assistant; Amaris Benavidez,
Minority Professional Staff; Nekea Brown, Minority Director of
Operations; Ilana Brunner, Minority General Counsel; Scott
Estrada, Minority Professional Staff; Rashage Green, Minority
Director of Education Policy & Counsel; Christian Haines,
Minority General Counsel; Emanual Kimble, Minority Professional
Staff; Stephanie Lalle, Minority Communications Director;
Raiyana Malone, Minority Press Secretary; Veronique Pluviose,
Minority Staff Director; Theresa Tilling-Thompson, Minority
Professional Staff; Jamar Tolbert, Minority Intern; Banyon
Vassar, Minority IT Administrator, Samantha Wilkerson, Minority
CBCF Fellow.
Chairwoman Foxx. The Committee on Education and Workforce
will come to order. I note that a quorum is present. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to call a recess at any
time.
Mr. Secretary, I was truly excited that a person with your
personal and educational background was named Secretary of
Education. You know I have told you that. However, you have not
lived up to your potential. The educational decline was not
without warning. Upon your confirmation I issued a press
release saying the teachers' unions and left-wing special
interest groups are keeping our schools closed, despite the
serious consequences for students' academic success and mental
health.
Serious consequences may have been the understatement of
the century. Since the last time you testified the National
Assessment of Educational Progress, NAEP, released its 2022
math and reading scores. The results were disturbing. Reading
scores plummeted to the lowest level in the history of NAEP
testing.
Across all subjects American K-12 students saw a steep drop
in educational attainment, thanks in large part to the Biden
administration's lockdown policies. The negative consequences
of learning loss for this generation's future employment and
earnings will be devastating. If I were to grade your tenure
based on the State of K-12 schools, I would give you an F.
Failing NAEP scores are not the only negative development
in education since our last oversight hearing. Over the past 7
months, colleges across the Nation have seen an unprecedented
regression in moral and institutional legitimacy as
antisemitism and pro-Hamas protests have engulfed campuses.
Turn on the news and universities such as Columbia and UCLA
look like unrecognizable war zones.
From the beginning I have urged a firm hand in dealing with
the explosion of that antisemitism on campus, and I have led by
example. You on the other hand, refused even to say that the
from the river to the sea chant is antisemitic. I saw this as a
failure of moral clarity, deeming you unfit for public office,
and called for your resignation in February.
With the outbreak of campus riots I am only more resolute,
but I will say it again. You must resign. If I were to grade
your time as Secretary based on the State of postsecondary
education, I would also give you an F. My final report card
grade is based on your tenure as an administrator.
Again, I warned of the potential pitfalls of mismanaging
programs, such as the FAFSA rollout, and the student loan
return to repayment, but the Department managed to bungle both.
FAFSA's simplification has been the law for the entirety of
your administration, but last year was filled with delays and
excuses. In March 2023, after months of refusing to
communicate, the FAFSA release date, the Department announced
it would push the implementation of the FAFSA Simplification
Act back from October 1st to what ended up being December 30,
2023.
The October deadline should have come as no surprise.
Congress had already granted the Department an additional year,
and you still could not get the job done. Then the December 30
soft launch was filled with glitches. Prospective college
students fought through random crashes and lengthy waiting
rooms to submit their completed FAFSA application, only to be
met with uncertainty.
For the applications that did make it through, large
percentages contain errors, were unable to be corrected or
both. In some cases, these errors took months to be fixed. A
financial aid administrator surveyed schools just last week
found that over 30 percent of schools have still not even begun
to package aid offers thanks to your delay.
The delays and uncertainty have crushed students and
universities. FAFSA completion rates have fallen 30 percent
nationally, with declines likely even higher among low-income
students. Universities are expecting decreased enrollment in
the fall that could be even worse than the pandemic.
Attending college is one of the most consequential choices
that some may ever make. For many students with very limited
means, who depend on the FAFSA, that choice has been denied for
them. Some will inevitably put education on the back burner for
life. That is what troubles me the most about this. May 1
should have been college decision day, but instead students are
still stuck waiting for financial information, paralyzed by
your ineptitude.
FAFSA should have been a top priority. Instead, your
actions proved time and again that it was not. When the
Department should have been pouring time and resources not
FAFSA, it was pouring time and resources into the latest
student loan debt scheme. The new scheme, the IDR SAVE Plan,
adds to your Department's actions that cost taxpayers up to 1
trillion dollars.
For perspective, these actions are more expensive than all
postsecondary education spending before 2020. The Higher
Education Act passed in 1965, yet you are projected to spend
more on just the Biden student loan debt scheme, than all other
Secretaries spent since 1965.
I have completely lost faith in this administration to
govern. Your radicalism has alienated loan services and caused
the administration to bungle the return to repayment. 9 million
borrowers missed their first repayment. I am not sure this
administration ever wanted repayment. I think you see it as
politically advantageous to kick the can down the road, and you
did.
Therefore, if I were to grade your tenure as an
administrator, I would give you an F. On all the broad strokes
you have a failing grade, but there are plenty of other
specific issues to discuss today. The Department has failed to
protect young women with its Title 9 rewrite, failed to return
employees to the office to work in person, and failed to pass
its 2023 financial audit.
I see each of these failures as a result of the original
failure, that the Federal Government inserted itself into
education in the first place. There are good reasons why the
word education does not appear in the Constitution. Education
is done best when it is handled at the local level.
The solution is not more of the same, which is what the
President's budget represents, but less of what has sidetracked
our country's educational system, the Department of Education
itself. As President Ronald Reagan once famously said, ``The
nine most terrifying words in the English language are I am
from the government and I am here to help.'' With that, I yield
to the Ranking Member for an opening statement, Mr. Scott.
[The Statement of Chairwoman Foxx follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Scott. Thank you, Dr. Foxx, and good morning, Mr.
Secretary. Thank you for being with us today. 70 years ago, in
this month, Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote the majority
opinion and the unanimous opinion of Brown v. Board of
Education. In these days it is doubtful that any child may
reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is denied the
opportunity of an education.
Such an opportunity by the State has undertaken to provide
it is a right, which must be made available to all on equal
terms. The court went on to say that segregation of students by
race denies the children of the minority race of an equal
education opportunity because segregated schools are inherently
unequal. Regrettably, today we must acknowledge that in 2024
America's public schools are as segregated by race and class as
they were in the late 1960's.
Today we have a chance to hear from Secretary Cardona about
how the Biden Harris administration is working to finally
fulfill the promise of Brown, and bolster support for students
and teachers, while also tackling the systemic inequities
present in our public school system.
For example, last Congress Democrats and President Biden
enacted to pass the American Rescue Plan Act, without the
support of a single Republican vote, to deliver the largest
one-time Federal investment in K through 12 education in our
Nation's history. The investment was allocated using the Title
1A formula, meaning that the greatest resources went to the
communities with the greatest need.
These resources also allowed the school districts to make
up for missed time in the classroom, respond to students'
mental and socioemotional needs, and support educators. What
the research shows is the Federal investments resulted in
marked improvement in school children in Chicago, Burmingham,
Nashville and other cities and counties around the country.
Additionally, the Department of Education has also taken
historic steps to relieve student borrowers of mountains of
unaffordable debt. This administration has forgiven more than
160 billion dollars in student loan debt for 4.6 million
borrowers, including some who were duped by their universities.
By enhancing the income driven repayment plans, and the
public service loan forgiveness program, future borrowers now
have a clear path to repayment. Today I look forward to hearing
from the Secretary about how the Department, what the present
status is in getting the free application for student--for
Federal student aid, the FAFSA rollout back on track.
As you know, the Committee has communicated with you our
concerns about the impact on the many delays of the students'
college decisions. Committee Democrats have pressed for
policies to ensure that every student has access to a quality
education. At the same time, Republicans have prioritized
divisive culture war issues that politicize classrooms, pushed
book banning legislation, and were consumed with who uses which
bathroom.
Moreover, my colleagues frequently speak about the
commitment to fighting campus discrimination, yet their actions
tell a different story. Congressional Republicans have
advocated significant cuts in the Department of Education's
Office of Civil Rights Funding, which would inevitably hinder
its ability to investigate and prosecute campus related
discrimination claims.
Unfortunately, this seems to be where my colleagues are on
the other side of the aisle, and when we often come to an
impasse because complaining about a problem is not a solution.
At the end of the day if we want to reduce rising tensions on
college campuses, we need to advance meaningful legislation to
actually address the problem.
Passing meaningless resolutions week after week and turning
the Committee room into a political spectacle only seems to
have exacerbated the problems instead of diffusing them. Our
students deserve more than to be used as pawns in political
games and fundraising schemes.
To that end I want to thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your
testimony and look forward to what I hope to be a productive
discussion. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
[The Statement of Ranking Member Scott follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Scott. Pursuant to
Committee Rule 8-C, all members who wish to insert written
statements into the record may do so by submitting them to the
Committee Clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5
p.m., 14 days after the date of the hearing, which is May 22,
2024.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days to allow such statements and other extraneous materials
referenced during the hearing to be submitted for the official
hearing record.
I now turn to the introduction of our witness. We have as
our witness Secretary Miquel Cardona from the Department of
Education located in Washington, DC. We thank you for being
here today and look forward to your testimony. I remind the
witness that we have read your written statement, which will
appear in full in the hearing record.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 8-D, and Committee practice, I
ask that you limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute summary
of your written statement. I also remind the witness to be
aware of his responsibility to provide accurate information to
the Committee. I now recognize Mr. Secretary for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SECRETARY MIGUEL CARDONA, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Secretary Cardona. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking
Member Scott, distinguished members of the Committee. Thank you
for the opportunity today to testify on President Biden's
Fiscal Year 2025 budget request for the United States
Department of Education.
My purpose here today is to propose a budget that helps
protect and support our Nation's students. To be clear, it is
not to create a spectacle for the benefit of the media, or to
provoke divisions that inflame culture wars and political
sideshows but do nothing to help our young people succeed.
Our nation's parents and students are looking for us to
recognize that we have common ground, and to build on that by
making responsible choices together to invest in education as
the foundation for American opportunity. It is a responsible
choice to sustain our Nation's academic recovery from the
impacts of the pandemic through 82.4 billion dollars in
calculated investments to accelerate learning and success.
It is a responsible choice to invest in a stronger future
for all Americans by boosting funding to close opportunity and
achievement gaps in low-income communities through Title 1.
Support students with disabilities through IDEA, support multi-
lingual learners through Title 3. Recruit, prepare, retain and
develop great teachers.
It is the responsible choice to invest in safer schools,
and the mental health of our students by making more funding
available for more school counselors, and mental health
professionals.
It is the responsible choice to give more young people
access to the American dream by building more pathways to
rewarding careers and opening doors to higher education for all
students by improving college affordability, retention and
completion, including through free community college, and
increased student supports.
It is the responsible choice to fully honor the caps under
the bipartisan Fiscal Responsibility Act, as this budget does.
Let me emphasize, when we get beyond all the noise and efforts
by some to create division, there is in fact so much common
ground about what matters most for our Nation's students, such
as getting all students to read by third grade.
Providing mental health supports in the midst of a youth
mental health crisis, opening up college and career pathways,
so students have more options for rewarding lives and rewarding
careers. Making higher education more affordable, and more
accessible for those who choose that path.
I know too, that we have common ground when it comes to our
horror at the appalling antisemitism, we are seeing on some
college campuses. As the President said last week, there should
be no place on any campus, no place in American for
antisemitism, or threats of violence against Jewish students.
There is no place for hate speech, or violence of any kind.
The Biden Harris administration, including the Department of
Education, is taking action each and every day to help ensure
that schools and colleges are free from discrimination and safe
for Jewish students, and all students, and we will continue to
do so.
Make no mistake, antisemitism is discrimination, and it is
prohibited by Title 6 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Dissent
is essential to democracy, but dissent must never lead to
disorder, or to denying the right of others so students can
finish their semester and their college education.
Hate has no place on college campuses. Every student
deserves to learn in an environment where they can feel free to
be themselves without discrimination or fear for their safety.
That is why our budget provides for more resources for our
Office of Civil Rights to continue its strong response.
I hope to work with you in partnership and in constructive
dialog. We can raise the bar for our Nation's students, and we
can do it together. I look forward to working with you to do
so. Thank you.
[The Statement of Secretary Cardona follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Under Committee
Rule 9, we will now question the witness under the 5-minute
rule. I ask members to keep your questions succinct, so the
witness has time to answer. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Secretary, you have been proudly volunteering the
taxpayers to take on the student loan debt of largely wealthy
college graduates. Do you believe that students who spend their
time in college calling for the destruction of an ethical,
religious group, or spend their time preventing students of a
particular ethnic or religious group from walking around campus
freely, or spending their time occupying campus buildings,
deserve to have their education paid for by taxpayers?
Secretary Cardona. I could not hear you that well, but if
you are making reference to the student debt relief plan that
we have done, I am really proud of the work that we are doing
to provide a lifeline for students who chose to go to college,
and are living----
Chairwoman Foxx. Well, I am talking about the students who
are being antisemitic and stopping Jewish students from being
able to go to class and threatening them. Do you want to have
the taxpayers pay their loans off?
Secretary Cardona. I believe that students who are breaking
the law and are disrupting the educational environment should
be held to account. I believe it is important that all students
have access to their higher education classes and graduation.
Chairwoman Foxx. Well, then will you commit to ensuring
that no student who has harassed other students, or preventing
other students from going to class, or broken laws, receives
any form of student loan forgiveness?
Secretary Cardona. We are committed to ensuring that
campuses are safe. I condemn any form of hate, or any violence
on campus. I have spoken to students and educators who have
experienced that, and it is our responsibility.
Chairwoman Foxx. Well, we would like you to follow through
on those who do break the law, and make sure they do not
receive student loan forgiveness. Mr. Secretary, the COO at FSA
needs to have a deep and vast knowledge of how loan operations
work, given FSA is de facto the largest consumer bank in the
country. Indeed, the performance-based organization's statute
contemplates high expectations of the COO.
The COO needs to be an operational and lending expert, and
have a keen understanding of massive lending operations. Will
you commit to finding a replacement for Richard Cordray, who
has real world experience leading a massive lending operation
so that we can be assured that the financial interests of the
taxpayers are protected?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for the question. I am
committed to making sure we have a Chief Operating Officer that
has experience, and I would look forward to working with you on
a process to select.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. In a similar vein since
September 19, 2023, I have been asking for the performance
bonus for fiscal year 1922 of COO Cordray in fiscal year 1923,
for Senior FSA staff, including COO Cordray. This has been met
with delay after delay after delay. This should not be hard, as
these bonuses are required to be made public.
If I do not receive the information requested by noon on
the 14th, you will be facing a subpoena. As I mentioned
earlier, FSA is a performance-based organization and has the
ability to award funds to select employees, including the Chief
Operating Officer. Did the errors that KPMG found in Fiscal
Year 202022 and Fiscal Year 202023, in conducting the
Department's financial audits, result in a reduction or
elimination of bonuses paid to senior Department and FSA staff?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for the question.
Chairwoman Foxx. Simple answer, answer yes or no.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for the question, Chairwoman
Foxx. We take responding to your requests very seriously, and
we will continue to share information with you. I will make
sure that we are communicating with your team on a timeline for
providing you the information.
Chairwoman Foxx. Did the audit have an impact on the
bonuses, yes or no?
Secretary Cardona. Within the communication, I would make
sure that the answers to your question are there. I can tell
you that we take, you know, the audit information that we
receive very seriously, and----
Chairwoman Foxx. What are the practical consequences of the
Department's failure to obtain a clean audit for each of the
last 2 years?
Secretary Cardona. Well, you know, we recognize how
important it is to work with our auditors, and we have gotten
disclaimers of opinions in the past, and we are continuing to
work with our auditors to make sure that the information they
provide us is used as we continue to improve practices every
year.
Chairwoman Foxx. Okay. On March 16th--on March 6th, I
transmitted a letter to you voicing the concerns about the
Department's 16 percent occupancy rate. It has been 2 months
since I wrote to you about it, and three and a half months
since the White House Chief of Staff requested you and other
Federal department leaders submit a return to office action
plan.
Will you commit to me today you will provide the
information and documents that I requested no later than May
17th?
Secretary Cardona. I absolutely commit to providing you
with that information as quickly as possible. I hope before May
17th, and I know that we have increased those numbers
significantly, so I am proud of the progress we are making.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I now recognize
Mr. Courtney for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and Secretary
Cardona, thank you for your service and your presence here
today. Last Friday, the U.S. Department of Labor issued its
monthly jobs report. It showed that the U.S. economy added
175,000 new jobs, defying again, all the skeptics and nay
sayers, we are now at a place where for 27 consecutive months
the U.S. unemployment rate has been below 4 percent.
That has never happened in the history of this country.
Even with those numbers, we still have 8.5 million job openings
in the U.S. economy. You know, one of the things that I think
is so unique about your life experience and what you bring to
the job is that you are a graduate of a career and technical
high school, Wilcox Tech in Meriden, Connecticut.
Who today, along with career and technical schools all over
the country are on fire in terms of making sure that young
people are able to take advantage of this record number of job
openings. One of your initiatives at the Department of
Education has also been the career connected high school
program, which again is about getting not just trade schools,
but comprehensive high schools into the act as far as
connecting young people to the right skills and closing the
skills gap.
Can you again talk about, you know, progress with that
program, and certainly I have seen it in my district.
Secretary Cardona. Sure. Thank you very much, Congressman.
You know, I talk about common ground in my remarks. This is
something that we should really be coming together. For far too
long in this country we have had a 4-year college or bust
mentality that I believe has underserved our students, our
communities and our country.
I am unapologetically in support of making sure that all of
our high schools, not just our technical schools, have pathway
programs for students to explore careers, apprenticeships,
internships, dual credit programs, so these students could get
those credentials that they need to pursue a 4-year degree,
which is what I did after technical high school, or go into the
workforce, or get a credential, get a high-skilled, high-paying
career.
We are committed to that at the Department of Education. I
often talk about the evolution of our schools. The career
connected learning grant, which is something that we are
proposing a 57 million-dollar increase, would do just that. I
visited schools that have done a really good job, K-12 schools
that are connected with 2-year colleges, oftentimes 4-year
colleges, and then industry partners, or labor partners for our
students to have better access earlier to the trades, to the
careers that exist now.
This is something that I believe there is a lot of common
ground on. Our budget reflects interest in that, and we are
committed to supporting it.
Mr. Courtney. I completely agree. I have visited a high
school in district, Tourtellotte, it is a public high school up
in Thompson, Connecticut where again, because of the career
pathways approach, which your program encourages, employers are
getting into the game in terms of helping fund these programs,
particularly in the healthcare sector because right now in that
8.5 million job openings in healthcare, that is probably one of
the most acute shortfalls that exist.
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Mr. Courtney. These kids are getting a chance to get
certified as CNAs, along with their diploma when they graduate
from high school. Some will go right into work others are going
to go into nursing programs. It is not like an either/or for
higher education, or going into the workforce. Either way, you
are really getting a meaningful, sort of stimulus to students
in terms of just showing up for school, which again helps
attendance, which by the way is something we all should be
encouraging.
I want to again, just for the last minute, talk about the
fact that when you took office, the Department of Education was
under numerous court orders for failure to obey the law for
public service loan forgiveness. The prior administration had
denied 98 percent of the applications for loan discharge under
the public service loan program, which was created with a
bipartisan vote in the House in 2007.
I was there and remember when George Bush, President Bush
signed that into law. Again, as we are going back to you know,
the recovery mode, in terms of these programs, can you talk
about PSLF in terms of just again, the progress that you have
made?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question. Just
broadly speaking, public service loan forgiveness program was
one of the programs that was broken, that was not being
implemented the way that you intended it to be in a bipartisan
fashion. 7,000 people got it in the last administration, 98
percent denial rate.
In 3 years, we have provided 875,000 borrowers, these are
teachers, nurses, veterans, with almost 62 billion dollars in
debt relief. I will bring attention to a teacher that I spoke
to in New York who took out a loan for $30,000.00, ended up
having to pay $60,000.00 because of interest.
Well, she received debt relief, and now she is able to buy
a home. These are the stories that are happening with public
service loan forgiveness.
Mr. Courtney. You are obeying the law. I yield back.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Courtney. Mr. Wilson, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I--my
wife is a teacher. I just have such a high regard for the
education profession, that is why I want it to be local. I
believe in local elected school boards. I did not favor the
creation of the Department of Education. Every effort of
evolution back to the states.
We have got a great superintendent, Ellen Weaver, in my
home State of South Carolina. Every way to send it back to
elected school boards is what should be done. Every local
school board is different, and every community is different
within the school districts, and so the Federal Government
cannot possibly understand or address the issues properly.
With that in mind, another issue of course that you have
just referenced, with Section 117 of the Higher Education Act,
requires institutions of higher education that receive Federal
financial assistance to disclose semi-annually to the U.S.
Department of Education any gifts received, and any contracts
with a foreign source that alone or combined are valued at
$250,000.00 or more in a calendar year.
Your administration has decided to remove this Section 117
enforcement to the Federal Student Office of Federal Student
Aid, which is already overworked. What is the status of these
reports, and this is critical because we have got dictatorships
today, whether it be War Criminal Putin, it could be the
Chinese Communist Party, it could be we know the regime in
Tehran, all are trying to, through disinformation, destroy our
country.
What is being done to try to stop any disinformation?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question,
Congressman. First of all, happy Teacher Appreciation Week to
your wife, and to all the teachers across the country. You
know, Section 117 is a very important section, and we take the
responsibility of communicating gifts very seriously. We have
reported close to 39,000 foreign gifts worth 21 billion dollars
already.
We believe that transparency is critical, and having it
move under FSA allows us to do that more succinctly. As you
know, we are a member of the FBI's national counterintelligence
taskforce. We communicate regularly to ensure that the law
enforcement arm, or the investigation arms are informed with
information that we have.
That system is working well, and I agree with you that we
need to protect our schools from foreign influence.
Mr. Wilson. You do not have to do this right now, but I
would like a--a question I would like for the record if you
could get back to me is what is the status of maintaining the
quarterly reports?
Secretary Cardona. Okay.
Mr. Wilson. This is just critically important because it is
so sad at Yale, Stanford and Harvard, in particular, there have
been countless examples of raging antisemitism on the campus.
These schools also had Section 117 investigations under the
Trump administration. Your Department has opened Title 6 of the
Civil Rights Act's investigations into these schools in the
last few months.
We again, see dictatorships trying to impact the American
people as they are trying to promote their totalitarian,
authoritarian view of the world. We have just got to be
prepared. Are you coordinating the 117 investigations with the
open Title 6 investigations?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question. We have, as
you know, a significant increase in Title 6 investigations
since October 7th attacks alone, over 100 new cases that we
have, which is why we are asking for an increase to make sure
that we have enough investigators to move on to these cases.
We take into account, depending on the investigation
request, we take into account many different factors. While I
am not speaking generically, I can tell you that our Office for
Civil Rights does take into account different factors when
requests come into account for an investigation.
Mr. Wilson. Well, I am greatly concerned. The FBI,
Commissioner Wray, Director Wray, has warned that an attack is
imminent here, or attacks are imminent across our country, and
they can be facilitated by not acting against these
antisemites, who hey, from the river to the sea, that is just a
code for murder of the people of Israel.
We know that the Hamas covenant of August 18, 1988,
provides Section 7, that you chase every Jew behind a rock and
tree until you find the last Jew and then with the last Jew
behind a rock you--and let me make--let me restate and make
clear because all of God's children should know.
That is that Section 7 of the Hamas Covenant calls for
chasing every Jew behind a rock or tree until you find the last
Jew behind a rock, and you kill him. It should be known by all
Americans, and this should not be misunderstood. With that, I
yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Wilson. Mr. Sablan, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you, Madam Chair. Secretary Cardona,
welcome.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you for your service, sir. I appreciate
it. Thank you for continuing the PSLF program, the student loan
program. I appreciate that. You mentioned in your testimony,
Mr. Secretary, you mentioned mental health program. May, as you
know, May is Mental Health Awareness Month, which presents a
good opportunity to raise the importance of access to mental
health services, especially for our students and school
communities.
We must also fight this month that every month to erase all
stigma around seeking treatment for mental health concerns. I
have heard firsthand from parents, teachers, school
administrators, and students themselves about their concerns
for the well-being, their well-being, and I share this concern
with students, Mr. Secretary.
One transformational step toward addressing this growing
need was the bipartisan Safer Communities Act. Let me--may I
ask you, Mr. Secretary, can you tell me the status of different
programs, also stronger connections to grant programs, the
school based mental health services grant, and the mental
health professional demonstration grant.
How do these programs help meet the mental health needs of
today's students?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for the question. You are
absolutely right as Dr. Vivek Murthy identified. We are in a
huge mental health crisis. If we go back to the schools that we
had in 2019, we are failing our children. We need to do better.
I am proud that the bipartisan Safer Communities Act provided
an education 2 billion dollars for mental health supports, for
professional development for staff, for stronger connection
dollars to help ensure that school safety plans are
appropriate, and up to date.
Those dollars have made a significant difference. We have
seen a 40 percent increase during that time of school social
worker availability. We have seen close to 30 percent more
school nurses available to our students and our schools. It is
sad to hear that we have normalized schools not having school
nurses. We have to do better.
Our current budget asks for 40 million dollars in mental
health supports for our K-12 schools, knowing that students are
six times more likely to access mental health supports if they
are provided in our schools. We are proud of that work, and we
ask you to support that measure.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you. Thank you very much. Mr. Secretary,
on a small item that is very, very huge, most large in my
district. The Department's implementation of the FAFSA
Simplification Act has regrettably produced uncertainties for
students in my district, from the Northern Mariana Islands in
particular have faced numerous obstacles throughout this
application cycle.
It must have been in the window we are designing,
engineering the system because you kept the one place in the
United States out from the system. My district. The only place
in the United States which does not have access to the FAFSA
unless they declare themselves a foreign student, foreign
school.
Your Department was notified of this in January, and today
4 months, sir, and the issue remains. You have provided a work
around, but I hope this is--and I know this is unacceptable,
even for you, sir, but could you tell me what the Department
needs in order to ensure a smooth FAFSA application process for
the next cycle? What would you do differently?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for much for that, and you
know, I can assure you that our team will followup with you to
make sure that the students that you represent get the best
support, and make sure that they have what they need to fill
out FAFSA.
Let me just tell you, you know, 30 years ago I did not fill
out FAFSA. It was an intimidating process. I did not want to
give it over to my parents to fill it out. It was an hour-long
process, and I knew the system was broken. Two years ago, when
I filled it out for my son it was an hour-long process. I can
see why, you know, we are hovering around 60 percent completion
rate before the simplification.
The rolling out of the plan has been a challenge, and I----
Mr. Sablan. Mr. Secretary, it is 100 percent in my
district. No student can complete the FAFSA application. I
understand it is one of the items that, you know, outstanding
issues that need to be resolved. I am just asking you, could I
please have your commitment that this will be resolved before
the next school year?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you. That is it, Mr. Secretary. Thank you
very much for your service, sir.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Mr. Sablan. This will be my last time before you on this
kind of hearing, but I know you will be back, thank you.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Sablan. Mr. Thompson, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Madam Chair. Secretary Cardona, my
line of questions has to do with learning to earn. As you know,
I am a strong advocate for career and technical education, and
the Co-Chair of the bipartisan Career and Education Caucus for
over a decade.
I am immensely proud of the CTE programs throughout the
country, but especially those in my district, like the
secondary CTE programs at St. Mary's Area School District I had
the privilege of visiting just a few weeks ago.
Mr. Secretary, were you aware that while the overall high
school graduation rate around the country is 87 percent,
secondary CTE programs graduate at least 96 percent of their
students, according to the President's budget justification for
Fiscal Year 2025?
Secretary Cardona. Yes, I am.
Mr. Thompson. Are you aware that postsecondary CTE programs
on average have higher completion and placement rates than non-
CTE postsecondary programs?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Mr. Thompson. As you know, CTE programs help students gain
credentials in demand sectors throughout the economy. For
example, in the most recent program year there were nearly 1.8
million postsecondary CTE concentrators. Over a quarter of
those were enrolled in CTE programs in the science cluster, and
we are all keenly aware of the shortage of healthcare workers
throughout the country.
Do you agree that CTE programs, particularly in the wake of
the pandemic have aligned with local labor markets, responded
to employers, and met local demands?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Secretary, I know you visited a lot of
programs in your time as Secretary. That is much appreciated.
Given all this information, those visits and the record
enrollment in these programs, do you agree that the expansion
and improvement of CT programs through Perkins V has been a
major success?
Secretary Cardona. I believe that the evolution of Perkins
includes CTE is where we need to go, and it has been successful
to get states to look at it differently.
Mr. Thompson. When Congress passed Perkins V with unanimous
success in both chambers, we included language stipulating the
Department of Education can only issue regulations to the
extent, ``To the extent necessary to administer and ensure
compliance with the specific requirements,'' of the law.
Perkins V has been successfully implemented now for 6 years,
and my colleagues on both sides of the aisle have recognized
the successful implementation and impact of these programs on
students.
With this in mind, what exactly is your Department planning
to regulate regarding Perkins V, and why has this
administration decided it is critical to do so at this
particular time, despite the law having been implemented
successfully for 6 years, and states currently submitting new 4
year plans this month?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
I agree with you wholeheartedly that earning while you learn is
not only good for students to stay engaged, but it is better
pedagogy when students learn better. I visited across the
country programs that, you know, hearing from students directly
when they feel like they have an opportunity to be successful.
I am totally in agreement with you, this is one of those
areas that I believe we have a lot of common ground. As an
educator, as a former school principal, district leader,
Commissioner of Education, I think that Perkins is
underutilized. I think we need to do a better job making that
the rule, not the exception, that we provide pathways to
students.
I look forward to working with you on how we can do that
because I know we have common ground here where we can move the
needle on this, and make sure that all schools take advantage
of it.
Mr. Thompson. Now I appreciate that wholeheartedly. Your
Department has Perkins regulations on the regulatory agenda
with a notice of proposed rulemaking scheduled to be issued in
August of this year. Can you explain what aspect of the law
your Department is suddenly not able to administer after 6
years of successful enactment, and having never issuing
regulations on Perkins prior?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. Again, you know, this process
of making sure the Perkins grant is being utilized for what the
intention was, and opening access to earn to learn programs and
apprenticeships is more readily available is what we are I
think, collaboratively want to do across the country. We
believe that we have an opportunity here to make sure that the
Perkins grant does that.
Unfortunately, in many districts, it is relegated to very
small programming, and does not really touch the mainstream
programming of our high schools, so the goal here is to really
get to what you and I both agree is necessary for our country,
which is more access to career and technical education
programs.
Mr. Thompson. Well, it will soon be time for
reauthorization, so I certainly encourage any thoughts that the
Department may have on aspects of law that could be updated
based on the 6-years of implementation feedback from CT
programs, as it seems you all do well.
I would hope you would provide these recommendations to the
Committee so they could be considered during that legislative
process.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Thompson. Ms. Bonamici, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you and thank you Secretary Cardona. I
want to join my CTE Caucus Co-Chair Representative Thompson and
thanking you for making career technical education a priority.
I also support so many of the budget priorities you have
proposed, including Title 1, IDEA, behavioral health, bilingual
education, preserving Title 4A funding.
You even have a demonstration program to incentivize high-
quality public preschools, very much appreciate that. I also
want to say thank you to the Department for the work that you
have done updating the Title 9 Rule. The updated rule is going
to better protect and empower students and employees that are
victimized by discrimination, including LGBTQI+ individuals who
have been often excluded from protection in the past, so thank
you for that work.
I also appreciate the Department's work to support
borrowers as student loan payments resume following the COVID
pause. As of January, the share of borrowers making payments
officially turned to the same repayment level of January 2020.
Prior to the pandemic, however, I also remain concerned about
vulnerable borrowers who may be at risk of default or
delinquency.
I have reintroduced my SIMPLE Act, Streamlining Income
Driven Manageable Payments on Loans for Education, to
automatically enroll struggling borrowers in income driven
repayment plans. Mr. Secretary, can you please talk about what
steps the Department is taking to help borrowers as they
restart payments, including communicating with borrowers about
their repayment options, and also connected with that, we have
heard some allocations that loan forgiveness is essentially a
free ride for students.
Will you please talk about in general numbers, what
percentage of borrowers who qualify for loan forgiveness have
been making payments on their loans?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question. You know, I
just want to kind of preface this by saying we have a broken
higher education system, and everything we have done from day
one is intended to make higher education more affordable and
more accessible. From providing debt relief that was passed in
a bipartisan fashion here, to going after institutions that are
taking advantage of first-generation students.
We introduced the SAVE Plan, which is an affordable income
driven repayment plan that caps interest. Oftentimes it is the
interest that makes people go into default. We must remember we
had over a million people going into default every year, and we
are fixing that.
Even the better FAFSA, which is as frustrating and
challenging as it has been, and delayed, and I apologize to the
families and students who have had to deal with delays. I know
how frustrating that is. This is all intended to fix a system
that for too long has kept people out.
With regard to repayment, we had the Fresh Start Program,
which allows folks to get back on without hurting their credit.
I mentioned the SAVE Program, which allows you to pay based on
your income. We have teachers, I mentioned before, teachers
whose starting salary is at $38,000.00 a year, having to pay
$700.00 a month on their old loan plans, but if they sign up
for SAVE, it is going to be more affordable.
They are going to be more successful in paying their loans.
Specifically, in regard to your questions, the folks who are--I
do not call it a scheme, I call it a lifeline.
Ms. Bonamici. Right, right.
Secretary Cardona. For millions of Americans who are trying
to get back on their feet, and we are proud that not only are
we helping them get back on their feet, but we are opening the
door to higher education. Many students think it is
unreachable.
Ms. Bonamici. I am going to try to get another question in,
but you are right. The people I have spoken with who have had
their balance forgiven owed more than they borrowed originally.
Just on FAFSA, and we appreciate your apology, but it has been
really struggling. Families have been struggling.
We know that the number of high school seniors who have
completed the form is down significantly. Particularly with
communities of color, and students from low-income high
schools. What is the Department doing? How are you informing
students and families about the process?
Secretary Cardona. Sure.
Ms. Bonamici. Do you have a strategy to quickly increase
FAFSA completion, especially as many high school students lack
access to counselors, for example?
Secretary Cardona. Sure. Thank you for that question. I
want to give you a quick update. We have over 9 million
processed applications. If a student applies today on
studentaid.gov, and we are encouraging students to fill it out.
You apply today, by Friday the colleges will have the
information. Two-thirds of the colleges have communicated with
us that letters have gone out already.
The system, while delayed, is working. We have a strategy,
a nationwide strategy to get students to fill it out. We are
working with superintendents, teachers, school principals,
YMCAs, Boys and Girls Club have an all hands-on deck approach,
and we have just used--we have moved 50 million dollars to help
accelerate that process to make sure that we are giving
students and families the support that they need.
Ms. Bonamici. Are you seeing the occasions increase now
with that push?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely, absolutely.
Ms. Bonamici. Perfect. Please keep up that work, it is real
important.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Bonamici. Mr. Walberg, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you
Secretary for being here. The title of this hearing is
Examining the Policies and Priorities of the Department of
Education, and I have to say I am deeply concerned about how
the Department is choosing to prioritize its efforts.
The Department has since 2020 to prepare for the new FAFSA
rollout, yet the political leadership chose to spend time
canceling student debt, rewriting Title 9, and I would say that
to the detriment and endangerment of female athletes and
females in general. Making it harder for proprietary schools to
exist, schools that are preparing individuals for real world
jobs, with tremendous success.
Now we are witnessing an explosion of antisemitic incidents
on college campuses, and I am concerned the Department is not
living up to its obligation of upholding Title 6 of the Civil
Rights Act. Secretary Cardona, as of this morning the
Department of Education's website listed 145 open
investigations, based on shared ancestry under Title 6 of the
Civil Rights Act.
On average, let me ask this question, on average how long
does it take the Office of Civil Rights to conclude Title 6
shared ancestry investigations, on average?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. The antisemitism and shared
ancestry cases have increased, and we have had over 100 since
the attacks on October 7th.
Mr. Walberg. 145 as of this morning.
Secretary Cardona. Right. Just since October 7th, so we
have 145 open cases. On average--it is hard to give an average
because every case is different, but roughly six to 8 months.
Mr. Walberg. Currently, how many investigators does the
Department of Education have on Columbia's campus?
Secretary Cardona. I cannot comment specifically on one
case, but I can tell you that we have investigators looking
into the cases that we have opened, which is why sir, we are
asking for an increase. We have 60--approximately 60 less
investigators than we did in 2009 and triple the number of
cases.
Mr. Walberg. Well, then it ought to be easy for you to tell
me how many investigators you have on Columbia's campus, on
UCLA's campus, on George Washington's campus?
Secretary Cardona. I am sure you know sir, that I cannot
speak on open cases. What I can tell you is that we are taking
these cases very seriously. We condemn antisemitism and any
forms of hate on campus, and we are moving as quickly as we
can. Your support of our budget proposal, sir, would help us
move that along.
Mr. Walberg. Well, let me go in this direction then. How
many investigations has the Department closed, and how many of
those investigations have resulted in resolutions and policy
changes? We cannot comment on the investigations that are open,
how many are closed?
Secretary Cardona. Right. There have been two cases that
have been closed around antisemitism.
Mr. Walberg. Two cases?
Secretary Cardona. Correct. Two cases. We are vigorously
attending to the open cases now. As you know, when Congress
passed this regulation here, or this law, we have to make sure
that we are negotiating with universities on compliance and how
they are going to address the issue.
Mr. Walberg. As I understand it, the Office of Civil Rights
Case Processing Manual indicates that the Office of Civil
Rights has the authority to launch its own investigations. Can
launch that, with your own decisionmaking process, you do not
have to wait for specific complaints. Have you launched any
proactive investigations into antisemitism.
Secretary Cardona. What I can tell you is as recently as
this morning we have provided guidance to all colleges, not
just the ones where we might have issues. Friday I sent
communication to over 5,000 university leaders. This morning,
we have a letter and.
Mr. Walberg. You have not launched any investigations?
Secretary Cardona. We have, as I have said earlier, 145
open cases, which are--were woefully understaffed to handle.
The existing cases, and I am asking for a budget increase so we
can continue to get to those cases, sir.
Mr. Walberg. Let me put it this way. Will you commit to
launch compliance reviews of campuses within the next 30 days?
Secretary Cardona. We have a process where we are providing
information to campuses. We have done more in the last six, 7
months than the previous administration has done in 4 years.
Mr. Walberg. It is not working. It is not working from what
we have seen in the last 2 weeks. You know, I appreciate the
fact that the University of Michigan did not negotiate. Ended
up going on with its commencement, speaking parochially here,
but Jewish students are still in fear of their lives and their
academic success on that campus and many other campuses.
The opportunity that you have to launch these reviews, you
have solely. It does not take Congress or anyone else to ask
you. I certainly hope you will make this a priority because it
is for the future and present of students and universities and
colleges under your priority supervision. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Walberg. Mr. Takano you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. I have a question for my colleague. It is a
question. Mr. Walberg, your concern for the Office of Civil
Rights is well-taken. Would you support a supplemental
appropriation authorization to fund the Office of Civil Rights?
Mr. Walberg. I think we have--if I am allowed?
Mr. Takano. I yield for questions, so yes or no. I do not
have much time.
Mr. Walberg. We have the Secretary here, so.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Walberg, I mean I asked you a simple
question.
Mr. Walberg. I would suggest you ask him questions.
Mr. Takano. The Committee has, on the majority side,
continually tried to lower and decrease the funding for the
Office of Civil Rights, and Mr. Secretary, you could do more if
you had more money. Is that right?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, welcome. Can you
describe the newly finalized Title 9 Rule, what it does, and
why your Department felt it was important to create it?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question. For us, it
was really important to make sure that we are being very
explicit about protecting students. It is about keeping our
students safe in school.
It strengthens protections for students, and sex-based
harassment, promotes accountability and fairness, and empowers
students and families, and requires schools to respond promptly
to all complaints. It does not require multiple incidents for a
school to respond.
Mr. Takano. Great. Well, thank you. This rule represents
the most comprehensive expansion of Title 9 since its original
passage. It significantly bolsters Title 9's protections and
strengthens its core tenant. All students are entitled to
participate in educational programs, and activities free from
all forms of sex discrimination.
A lack of explicit protections and enforcement powers have
long excluded many women, LGBTQ, pregnant and parenting
students from the full freedom to pursue a quality education.
Mr. Secretary, how will this rule impact students?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. You mentioned pregnant
students. Historically there have been cases where students who
are pregnant were encouraged to leave school, or accommodations
not being made. This protects them. In the past we have had
students who have been afraid to come forward after
experiencing sexual violence because the process put them out
there in a way that they were vulnerable to more attacks.
What we have done is make the provisions now to make it
safer for students to come forward, and to protect students who
have been marginalized or under attack in our schools,
including LGBTI students.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. Is it safe to say this rule will
better protect female and LGBTQ students also across the board?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Mr. Takano. Great. Since several states have filed a suit
enjoining the rule from going into effect, at least one State
Governor suggested that this State will simply not follow the
rule. Republicans claim that the rule's interpretation of sex
discrimination infringes on women's rights. Mr. Cardona, is
that true?
Secretary Cardona. No. That is not true. It does not
infringe on rights. It protects more students.
Mr. Takano. How would such blatant disregard for a rule put
the educational program of such a State in jeopardy?
Secretary Cardona. Well Federal rules trump State rules,
and it is unacceptable for leaders to pick and choose which
students they choose to protect. That is unacceptable.
Mr. Takano. It is unacceptable for a Governor to say we are
only going to protect some students, but not all students?
Secretary Cardona. Correct.
Mr. Takano. That you take your role as Secretary of
Education very seriously, to make sure that all students have
the right to pursue an education.
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Mr. Takano. What tools of implementation has the Department
offered to the schools to understand the parameters of the new
rule, and to ensure that they are in compliance successfully?
Secretary Cardona. We developed almost like plug and play
material, more so with this, than with any other rule we rolled
out because we want to support schools in the implementation of
this.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Secretary, thank you. Currently, 83 percent
of LGBTQ+ face victimization at schools, including bullying,
harassment and assault. How would the new rule impact LGBTQ
students?
Secretary Cardona. It provides protection for these
students to have access to programming that all other students
will have and prevents schools from discriminating against them
because they're LGBTQI.
Mr. Takano. Is it accurate to say that a lack of
protections and enforcement could result in higher rates of
absenteeism for these students?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Mr. Takano. Well, thank you. As you may be aware, last
Friday the University of California Riverside, which I
represent, became the first school in the University of
California's system to reach a peaceful resolution with student
protestors. Students had set up an encampment on Monday, April
29th, following negotiations between college administration,
and the leadership of the protests, the encampment was
dissolved peacefully by the Friday of that same week without a
single arrest.
UC Riverside Chancellor Kim Wilcox announced the terms of
the agreement in a letter to the UCR community, along with a
list of frequently asked questions about the terms. I am
thrilled that UCR is leading by example in peaceful resolution.
Secretary Cardona, is there anything we might be able to take
away from this example?
Secretary Cardona. Yes, thank you. That it is critically
important that college leaders engage in communication and
model by discussing with students how to get to a peaceful
resolution. Also, they should observe safety on campus, and
make sure that students are able to go to class without fear.
Mr. Takano. I am sorry. My time is up. Thank you. I yield
back.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Takano. Mr. Grothman, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. One of my colleagues had a
question on public service loan forgiveness, and you felt the
program was broken because it was ``not being implemented the
way you and Congress intended.''
By the same logic, will you admit that you broke the FAFSA,
which Congress intended be implemented in a timely and error
free fashion?
Secretary Cardona. Yes. We have had significant delays that
we are working tirelessly to implement correctly.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. Across the U.S. the number of
students who successfully submitted the FAFSA was down 29
percent from this time last year, which is very significant.
Has the Department owned up to your mistakes? I guess you are
taking responsibility.
Should any employee, I guess I should say are there any
employees of the Department of Education, political or
otherwise, lose their jobs over the FAFSA rollout?
Secretary Cardona. Let me just clarify, sir. The difference
is less. We are about 15 percent. We have reduced the number
from 30 percent to 15 percent, given our nationwide strategy
that we are using. We are seeing over 9 million students apply.
The information is being processed, and students are receiving
letters. I just wanted to give you that update on that.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Anything--did you chastise anybody, or
were there any consequences for them?
Secretary Cardona. Yes. Thank you for that question. Yes,
we take this very seriously, and it is concerning to us that
there were delays, and yes, there will be opportunities for not
only accountability, but restructuring to make sure that this
does not happen again.
As a parent of a high school senior, and a student in
college, I know how important this is for our families, and we
are committed to getting it right and making sure we open doors
to access higher education for more students across our
country.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Wisconsin has an impressive tech
college system, and more and more people are going there all
the time. We wish there were more going there, as opposed to
our traditional university. These colleges have flexible
scheduling options, summer classes, and these are popular among
the students.
However, due to the obvious inefficiencies within your
Department, numerous students interested in summer courses this
year are unable to access timely financial aid. During my
conversations with my local tech schools, in my district, they
revealed a lack of guidance from the Department of Education on
how to proceed and advise students.
Can you offer immediate guidance to these institutions?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely, sir. I am committed to
working with you and those institutions to get them the
information that they need, the resources, and if necessary,
and ensure that we are funding FAFSA clinics for those students
in that community. I think, you know, one thing that I want to
share sir, is you know, in Wisconsin there was a 61 percent
completion rate of FAFSA prior to the simplification.
Together, I know when we work together, we are going to do
better than that. More students deserve an opportunity to
access FAFSA and achieve their goals through higher education.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. One of the major goals of President
Biden has been some of the student loan forgiveness, and
probably when I get back in my District, that is not one of the
major topics. The topic is brought up by people who have paid
their student loans, you know.
It is not unusual for people to say have two jobs at one
time.
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Mr. Grothman. They are going to get that clear the decks,
get that loan paid off, and after they get the loan paid off in
four or 5 years, working extra hard, all of a sudden, they find
out that President Biden is looking at forgiving them on his
own.
What would you like me to stay with my constituents who
have gone through maybe a degree of hardship, or maybe just
spent less money on other junk, and paid off their student
loans that way. How would you respond to those folks?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you, Congressman. Look, I am one
of those people who paid off my loans, and I am recognizing now
as Secretary, that over a million people go into default. What
I would say to those folks is we are fixing a broken system
that will allow more access, better return on investment for
higher education.
When you are fixing broken policies to make it--this is not
something that will need to happen every 5 years, we are
addressing it in different ways.
Mr. Grothman. I will agree with you there, but what I am
saying in the past, broken or not, there are people who paid
off their loans, even paid them off prematurely because they
did not like being in debt.
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Maybe they worked extra hard, maybe
they gave up other things you can do with your money, but they
paid them off early, and now they feel like suckers for being
responsible. How would you respond to that individual person?
If I ran into a guy, or a parent of somebody who says, you
know, my son worked two jobs. He paid off his loan, why in the
world are these others getting it paid off for nothing?
Secretary Cardona. Well, I think, you know, it is important
to recognize where we are right now. A similar case can be made
for those who received PPP loans, and got debt forgiveness,
small businesses, they were given help at a time where it was
tough.
Right now, our higher education loan system is broken. We
have introduced the SAVE Plan, and quite frankly, people going
into default in their community do not help the local economy.
For the teacher that I spoke to who is now able to buy a
home, that is helping the community. If you look at our
programs, it is public servants. It is people who were
defrauded by their colleges, so we are taking the interest off
of loans that have gone on for over 20 years.
Mr. Grothman. That was not really an answer to my question,
but thanks.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Grothman. Dr. Adams, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Ranking Member, and
Secretary Cardona, thank you. Thank you for your leadership,
thank you for being here, and certainly I appreciate your visit
to my district. I would love to have you come back.
I just reintroduced an IGNITE, my bill, I guess we are
calling it REIGNITE, we are reigniting it, which attempts to
codify some of the same efforts we are facing, and I know the
President's Fiscal Year 2025 budget proposal requested an
increase for HBCUs, MSIs, and other underserved communities.
These institutions, of course, do play a vital role in
educating this country's youth, especially as higher education
grapples with ongoing attacks on diversity, equity and
inclusion.
Can you speak briefly about the work that the Department is
undertaking to ensure sufficient funds are made available for
institutions who have Title 3 or Title 5 designations under the
Higher Education Act?
Secretary Cardona. Yes. Thank you very much for that
question, and you know I enjoyed visiting your District, and I
have to tell you in my visits to HBCUs, whether it was Jackson
State, Bowie State, or the AUC, you know, I always speak of the
black excellence that I see there, the entrepreneurship and the
sense of punching above your weight as HBCUs.
I can tell you that I have also heard from HBCUs that say,
you know, our infrastructure is not adequate. Decades of
underinvestment have put us behind the eight ball, and we need
more. I am proud that the President in his budget has not only
an additional institutional capacity request of 93 million over
Fiscal Year 2023, but also 100 million dollars to expand our
research and development.
You know, our HBCUs need--they need the labs to be able to
compete for the contracts. You know, we recognize because we
work closely with our HBCUs the additional need that they have,
and how they are working hard to make it happen, so this budget
does reflect the conversations and the work that we have seen
in the HBCUs.
Ms. Adams. Great. Thank you very much. I just returned from
Oklahoma to visit Langston University and do the commencement
there. Since January of this year, roughly one institution per
week on average has announced its closure or intends to merge.
Following school closures, many students struggle to
continue their higher education journey. One study shows that
fewer than half of students at colleges that have closed
transfer to other institutions, and of those students, fewer
than half end up receiving their degrees.
I had a situation just in my District that when I first
came into Congress pretty much. How has the Department enhanced
its oversight of institutions at risk of closure since the
start of the Biden administration, and can you share more about
the efforts to improve the closed school discharge process to
support borrowers whose institutions specifically are closed?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that. We have done a lot
there. We have seen students who were left out in the cold, and
left with debt and no degree, no earning potential to pay off
that debt. We are acutely aware that this is a challenge. We
have worked closely with universities on communication
strategies, holding them accountable for recouping where that
is possible, and we are tightening up our oversight, especially
if these are institutions that have historically taken
advantage of students.
One last thing, and I think it is very appropriate. We are
also working very closely, and I remember having conversations
with college leaders and my Office of Undersecretary to make
sure that credits transfer. We have helped those students land
well in another institution.
Ms. Adams. Okay. Great. The Federal Pell Grant program is
the cornerstone of Federal student aid, and it has expanded
access to millions of low-income students since its inception.
Can you share a little bit more about the economic significance
of the Pell Grant program?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely. For many students, you know,
it is that opportunity. It is that door to higher education. We
know college graduates on average make a million dollars over
the course of their career more than high school students. We
recognize the importance of Pell.
The President has been pushing for an increase, a doubling
of Pell. A $900.00 increase has already been pushed for, and we
recognize that you know it is up to like $7,400.00 per student
per year. That is significant. We are going to continue to push
for that. We are going to continue to simplify the process,
make sure it works for our students, so they can have access as
well.
Ms. Adams. Yes. In terms of the programmatic cuts and the
harm to future Pell Grant recipients, can you speak briefly
about that?
Secretary Cardona. Can you repeat the last part?
Ms. Adams. The cuts, the programmatic cuts that harm
current Pell programs?
Secretary Cardona. Well, you know, the implementation of
not only better FAFSA, but also return to repayment for 28
million borrowers. The USDS servicing took place just last year
with the flat funding last year, so we are requesting in our
budget additional funds so we can do a better job delivering
for the American people.
Ms. Adams. Thank you so much, Mr. Secretary, for your
service, and Madam Chair, I yield back. My time is up.
Mr. Owens. [presiding]. Thank you. I would now like to
recognize Mr. Allen.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Secretary, I
have got 5 minutes, so we have got to get through this quick.
You know, you continue to hear a lot of frustration that your
Department of Education has neglected its congressional
mandated priorities for a partisan political agenda.
I have heard from constituents and colleges in my District
in Georgia, who have been let down by the Department's
inability to meet FAFSA's deadlines, and fix errors. You have
not had all hands-on deck. Instead, you have marched forward.
These past few months using time and resources that propose
another set of time-consuming regulations.
Parents, universities, regional school boards, teachers,
are not happy. Costs are escalating, as experienced by the
behavior in this meeting today. We are a deeply divided
country. I know debt is a problem. You know, how do you explain
to young people that they owe $100,000.00 the day they are born
in this country? $100,000.00 the day they are born. What shot
have they got?
Do you believe it was in the immediate best interests of
students and families to assign Department staff to your
negotiated rulemaking priorities since January?
Secretary Cardona. The negotiated rulemaking process does
require staff, and we do believe that we are doing.
Mr. Allen. That is a yes?
Secretary Cardona. Of fixing a broken system sir, yes.
Mr. Allen. Uh-huh. Districts online education has opened
the doors to postsecondary education for all types of students,
including helping adults connect to credential programs in
demand fields, such as cybersecurity and the many technology
careers our economy and security depends on.
Do you support allowing students to have access to distance
education that is a flexible option for working students?
Secretary Cardona. I do recognize that online institutions.
Mr. Allen. Yes. Okay. Do you believe colleges of all sizes
should be able to provide distance education programs that meet
the standards of their students and the workforce?
Secretary Cardona. Sorry, I could not hear your question. I
was responding to the last one.
Mr. Allen. Okay. Do you believe colleges of all sizes
should be able to provide distance education programs that meet
the needs of their students and the workforce?
Secretary Cardona. If they can do it in a high-quality way.
I would not make a blanket statement that all schools could.
Mr. Allen. Then why has the Department proposed a
requirement which would prohibit a college that enrolls more
than 500 students in a distance education program from being
authorized by the State through a reciprocity agreement?
Secretary Cardona. We recognize the importance of giving
students an opportunity to have online learning, and even with
institutions that are not in their State. We want to make sure
what we are doing is protecting students also, and if a school
closes, or if there was a challenge with their programming,
that they would be protected from paying loans, and an
education could be received.
Mr. Allen. Mr. Secretary, with all due respect, let me tell
you what this proposal would do. Here is one example. Georgia
Tech offers one of the lowest cost, online master's degree
programs in the country. Prestigious university in my State,
less than 10,000 dollars, this degree prepares workers for
cybersecurity, computer science and data analytics careers.
Georgia leads the Nation in the development of cyber talent
and research, with ten of our colleges and universities focused
on cyber. The U.S. Army Cyber Command is headquartered in my
District, and professional degrees that prepare the cyber
workforce should not be stopped by arbitrary regulations that
will only stifle cost-effective education.
Why is 500 the magic number? Where did you get the number?
Do you believe distance education programs with 501 students is
somehow not worthy of an innovative approval process, and they
must jump through more burdensome hoops to be offered?
Secretary Cardona. I agree with you. Georgia has some
amazing institutions, and I want to make sure I work with you,
and my team works with you to identify the concerns there, and
work with you to make sure Georgia schools have the
opportunities.
Mr. Allen. Mr. Secretary, I got just about a minute left. I
need to move on. Last year, I asked you if you believed
canceling student loans would reduce the cost of college.
Here we are today, and CPO predicts annual borrowing will
increase by 10 to 15 billion over the next decade because
colleges will raise tuition rates, and since they know
taxpayers will forgive loans as a result of your student loan
agenda.
Mr. Secretary, I need a clear answer for the record today.
Yes or no, are you still committed to making hard-working
Georgians with no student loan debt pay for the student loans
of terrorist supporting Columbia University students who have
over $100,000.00 in debt?
Secretary Cardona. We are committed to fixing a broken
higher education system, sir, and we can get a lot farther if
we work together to make sure the students in your District can
benefit from it.
Mr. Allen. Well, it is college campuses have been thrown
into chaos. Americans are waking up to what happens as a result
to radical, progressive agenda, and Americans do not like it.
This includes radical debt cancellation, and I yield back.
Mr. Owens. I would like to now recognize Ms. Jayapal.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome Secretary
Cardona, and thank you for your dedication to our students
throughout your life, and here in this position. Since taking
office the Biden administration has worked to erase the burden
of student debt. This includes canceling debt for 876,000
people, including teachers and firefighters through the Public
Service Loan Forgiveness Program.
It includes canceling debt for almost 1 million people
through improving income driven repayment, and 1.6 million for
defrauded students. Just last week students who were scammed by
the now defunct Art Institute of Seattle, who I had met with in
my district, finally saw relief after more than a decade.
While the previous administration made the process so
unworkable that Congress rebuked it on a bipartisan basis.
Together these steps have canceled 160 billion dollars for 4.6
million borrowers, and my understanding is that another 20 to
25 million students will be eligible through programs that you
recently announced.
This is financial breathing room for students and families
who are just trying to get a higher education, improve their
skills, so they can contribute to our communities, our economy
and our country. All borrowers turn to loans as a step toward
economic prosperity, but student debt makes it so impossible
for many.
I think it is important that we remember that more than 80
percent of borrowers report that it holds them back from being
able to become homeowners, something you were talking about
just in a previous answer. Additionally, 56 percent of
borrowers have to choose between repaying and affording rent
and groceries, rent and groceries. No one should be stuck with
these kinds of payments that they cannot afford.
Secretary Cardona, your Department released the first of
its two proposed rules to provide additional student debt
relief. What type of borrowers will benefit the most, and how
will this improve their financial well-being?
Secretary Cardona. Well, thank you for that. The borrowers
that would benefit most are those who have had runaway
interest, and I mentioned a teacher who had $30,000.00 just in
interest, that prevented her from being able to even attack the
principle of the loan, so that is one.
I mentioned public servants. You know, you talked about
teachers, and firefighters. A bipartisan bill, we want to make
sure that you do not have to jump through hoops to apply for
that. If you worked for 10 years in public service, if you have
paid your loans, it should be automatically discharged.
We have a teacher shortage. We have a nurse shortage. We
wonder why? We are trying to make it simpler to have access to
a bipartisan bill that was passed in 2007.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you. Textbooks have been an enormous
strain on students' finances. They can cost up to $1,200.00
annually, and textbook costs are on track to double every 11
years. Students can save by buying used books, or renting, or
borrowing from their library, but some institutions
automatically bill students for their books.
What is your Department doing to prevent students from
spending more than needed on their books, or on other hidden
fees that are really preventing students from accessing the
kinds of support they need for a quality education?
Secretary Cardona. Well, thank you for that question. As
you know, this is in negotiated rulemaking, so I really cannot
comment on specifically, you know, where we think we are going
to end up.
We are taking a very close look at what students are paying
for. You know, I will have two in college next year, and I
recognize the different fees, and what they add up to, and we
want to make sure that our students are--the information is
transparent, and they are getting what they are paying for.
It is not something that is assumed that they are going to
need.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you. I want to discuss Federal K-12
education funding for children experiencing homelessness. Your
Department's 2023 guidance for American Rescue Plan homeless
youth funding has really been an incredible lifeline for those
families. For example, it helps schools provide gas cards, and
cover car repairs in an emergency to increase attendance.
I know that these funds are expiring soon.
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Ms. Jayapal. What support does the Department have in place
for families experiencing homelessness, including for after
these funds expire?
Secretary Cardona. Sure. Thank you. You know you identified
an issue that is increasing in our country, homelessness.
Making sure that are students are protected, and are able to
learn, and the conditions for learning are right. We are
requesting a 129 million dollar budget request for Fiscal Year
2025.
You know, programs like preschool programs, supplemental
instructions for students that fall behind because of the
trauma of being housing insecure, before and after school
programs, transportation. I was a school principal, and let me
tell you, that was the most expensive thing.
Making sure that a student does not have to bounce to five,
six, different schools under the McKinney-Vento Act, to have a
solid, consistent education, so transportation, and then
healthcare referrals is also something that is required.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Mr. Chairman, I ask
for unanimous consent to enter into the record this report from
School House Connection called Overlooked and Almost Out of
Time, as well as an article called Grocery Carts and Car
Repairs, how COVID Aid Changed the Way Schools Can Help
Homeless Kids.
Mr. Owens. No objection.
[The Information of Ms. Jayapal follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jayapal. I yield back. Thank you very much.
Mr. Owens. I would like to now recognize Ms. Houchin.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Cardona, I
appreciate you being here today. I did wonder if you might show
up given that you seem to have little respect for our
congressional inquiries into the goings on at the Department of
Education.
As you know, I recently sent you a letter about the failed
2024-25 FAFSA rollout, but much like parents and college
students across the country, as of today we have not received a
response on what you are doing to remedy the problems you
created for millions of American families.
Today, with my time, I would like to ask a few of these
questions now. I am a parent to a college student and a high
school senior. I would like to understand what contributed to
the delayed and ineffective rollout of the 2024-25 FAFSA.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question, and I just
want to assure you that I take oversight very seriously, and
communicating information with you is important to us. Our
Department has provided over 50,000 pages and responded to 35
letters from this Committee alone. I take it seriously, and
will continue to take it seriously.
We have had many delays with FAFSA, frustrating delays that
we have have been able to fix. It is working now, and I
encourage students who are listening to sign up if you sign up
today.
Ms. Houchin. What would you say contributed to the delays,
and the ineffective rollout? What were the contributing
factors?
Secretary Cardona. There were some programmatic issues that
required our engineers to reprogram codes, and have----
Ms. Houchin. How much time were you given from the time the
bill passed, to the time that you were supposed to roll out?
Secretary Cardona. Excuse me?
Ms. Houchin. The FAFSA Simplification Act, how much time
were you given between the time that that bill passed to the
rollout date?
Secretary Cardona. I believe it was passed in the last
administration.
Ms. Houchin. Do you know how many years that was?
Secretary Cardona. It is 3 years.
Ms. Houchin. Three years, Okay. What is your Department
doing now to support students and parents who have been unable
to submit it, who have been given incorrect financial aid
information, or who have not received their estimates? What are
you doing for those students?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question. That is
something we take very seriously, and we are working very
closely to provide resources for families and different
languages.
Ms. Houchin. What kinds of resources?
Secretary Cardona. Well, videos on how to figure it out. We
have 50 million dollars now going into communities to make sure
that we are knocking on doors for those students and families
that still have to fill it out. We have tutorial videos, we
have a national strategy in partnership with the Boys and Girls
Club, YMCA, school districts.
We are working closely with districts, and I have to say,
you know, we have also worked on return to repayment. USDS
servicing contracts, and what we are doing now to make sure
that we improve processing, is make sure that our FSA
department is designed for the work that is being expected of
it, so we are asking for a budget increase.
Ms. Houchin. Given that you had 3 years to get this right
the first time, why should we expect that this upcoming FAFSA
would be ready by October 1st? I know when the Senate
Appropriations Committee recently said your expectation was
that it would be ready, why should we believe that?
Secretary Cardona. Well, look. I would be happy to share
what we are doing on a day-to-day basis, but we are taking this
very seriously. We know how important it is to our families,
and to our schools, and you know our schools have been extra
patient and working very closely with us to deal with the
updates, and I am happy to say that two-thirds or more are
already processing.
We are committed to making it better every year, and
opening doors to higher education. I can tell you that 60 to 70
percent of our students on average were applying for FAFSA.
That is not acceptable. We need to be closer to the 95 percent
range, and that is what we are going to work toward, and we are
going to make sure that it opens doors to higher education for
most people.
Ms. Houchin. Although the frustration that I experienced in
trying to do the FAFSA certainly would deter people from
participating in that this year. As you know, the soft launch
was--that is a generous term using the word ``launch''. It was
clear that it was a hasty release to barely meet the letter of
the law, by all measures.
In my view, it was a disastrous failure. What grade would
you give yourself and the DOE on the botched FAFSA rollout?
Secretary Cardona. I am committed to improving it and----
Ms. Houchin. What grade would you give yourself?
Secretary Cardona. I am not in a classroom now. I am not
going to be arguing----
Ms. Houchin. Well, you are the head of the Department of
Education, sir. What grade would you give yourself?
Secretary Cardona. We are committed to making the FAFSA----
Ms. Houchin. Okay. You are not going to answer the grade
level. I would give you an F. I think millions of American
families would do the same. Question, were you given a
congressional directive by law to bailout student loans? Yes,
or no?
Secretary Cardona. I was not given a congressional
directive.
Ms. Houchin. Okay. Were you given a congressional directive
by law to simplify FAFSA?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Ms. Houchin. You spent a great deal of Department hours I
understand, on this student loan bailout, but apparently not
very many Department hours were spent on simplifying the FAFSA
that you had 3 years to do. Your answers are about as unhelpful
as the new FAFSA rollout. Seeing as how 5 minutes is not enough
to have this thorough conversation, I sure hope you will
consider responding to my letter. Thank you very much Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize Mr.
DeSaulnier.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I
would grade you differently. I think you have done a great job
under very difficult circumstances. I want to followup on the
questions that Mr. Sablan asked. I have asked you this before
about the areas about mental health.
Cognitive development specifically, we know from CDC and
the Surgeon General that almost a third of adolescent girls in
this country have seriously considered suicide, or attempted
suicide in the last year. We know from HHS that young people in
2003, about 5 percent were identified with serious issues about
anxiety and depression in 2003. In `23 that number went to 30
percent.
We know from working with TANF I think I mentioned this the
last time you were here, Susan Linn at Harvard, Susan or Anna
Lembke at Stanford, their work on cognitive development in
social media.
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Penetration of algorithms to adolescent
neuroscience. The urgency of fixing this. As you see it, sort
of the continuum of care for kids in your Department. I have
been to 70 schools in the 10-years I have been in Congress, and
it always comes up in conversations with students,
administrators and teachers.
They need more behavioral health. They feel like they are--
--
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Overwhelmed. You saw this in your career in
Connecticut. I dealt with my good friends, our two
superintendents of public instruction, both of whom are
constituents, Tom Turlikson in California and Tony Thurmon.
This is a real epidemic. The long-term societal cost to the
United States is very, very serious.
Tell me a little bit about what we are doing, and how we
are partnering with the private sector research to make sure
that we are doing this in a non-partisan evidence-based way to
deal with this really epidemic of anxiety and depression, and
cognitive changes for future generations.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question, and you
know, I just kind of bring it back to my opening statements
that said we have a lot of common ground here, and mental
health support for our students is one of those. I am proud
that the bipartisan Safer Communities Act provided 2 billion
dollars to increase the number of social workers in our
schools.
There is 40 percent more school social workers. I am proud
that there are 30 percent more nurses, that there are proactive
strategies to help students address anxiety, or mental health
needs. We know students are six times more likely to access
mental health support if they are provided in our school. In
our budget we asked for 200 million dollars for full-service
community schools because we know they work to support mental
health.
You mentioned what we can do together. Medicaid
reimbursement for students who do not have an IEP, we
simplified that process, so all states can have sustainable
dollars. We know that there will be a sunset of BISCA, and
ARPA, so we want to make sure that they are sustainable
dollars.
We are working in a bipartisan fashion to make sure states
and Governors know what to do. That is sustainable dollars for
mental health. We cannot go back to the system we had in 2019
of emergency room model of mental health support.
Mr. DeSaulnier. On a related, but how you work with other
departments, when I am old enough to remember that when we
did--reform, the biggest obstacle to people getting on their
feet and getting a job, usually single women of color, were
what you talked about in your opening comment, transportation
and childcare.
What are we doing with the different departments to
coordinate those efforts? Twenty years later we still have the
same identified problem. It has become worse where I live in
the Bay Area because transportation and childcare intersect
with behavioral health for this community to be able to get a
job and be independent, which is non-partisan, hopefully non-
partisan.
It is still a challenge, and departments working across
with each other, your department, DOT, working together and
with State agencies and local agencies.
Secretary Cardona. Fair. We have a whole government
approach to a lot of things. I mentioned the Medicaid
reimbursement, we are working very closely with Health and
Human Services to make sure that we are simplifying the process
in an interagency fashion.
In our budget proposal, in the President's budget proposal
you will see an increase in early childhood education, which
allows not only for students to address gaps before they grow,
but parents are able to work, and the cost of childcare is very
high. We are working very closely at the staff level, and at
the Secretary level to make sure that our efforts are working
to support those same families.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Good. Well, I would love to followup with
you, and be able to show where our successes and failures have
come about so that we continue to measure those in a thoughtful
way, and deal with these real epidemics that young people are
facing and their parents. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize myself. Mr.
Secretary, you are going to great lengths to argue that the new
Title 9 Rule will not have an impact on athletics. Setting
aside the actions of core decisions preventing it and setting
aside the fact that athletes as noted probably over 30 times in
the rule description, I have some very simple questions, three
or four questions.
I just hope I get some yesses. With the energy put into
Title 9 Rule changes, it is a 3-year effort, can you assure us
that your rules do not change the protection that our girls
have had for over 50 years? Can you assure us that protecting
biological girls from competing against stronger, genetically
stronger, bigger, and faster biological men, will not be
considered a Federal discrimination?
Secretary Cardona. I thank you for the question,
Congressman. You are referring to athletics, am I right?
Mr. Owens. Yes.
Secretary Cardona. Yes. That rulemaking process is
underway. We have not----
Mr. Owens. Okay. No, and really, it is----
Secretary Cardona. We have have not finalized that rule,
sir.
Mr. Owens. Okay. Is it a possibility that this girls
competing against boys, or refusing to, would be considered
discrimination?
Secretary Cardona. As I said.
Mr. Owens. Is that a possibility?
Secretary Cardona. I am here to discuss, you know, what we
are doing in education to help children. The proposed rule,
whether it is----
Mr. Owens. It is really yes and no. I mean it should be a
yes and no. It is a bridge that we all know that you are trying
to get across, so is this something that you are looking at
doing right now, a possibility?
Secretary Cardona. I do not want to comment on a proposed
rule that we have not finalized yet. We have over 140,000.
Mr. Owens. Okay. Let me just continue then. Secretary, Mr.
Secretary, you are in a unique position to impact the lives,
futures and fortunes of millions of female athletes. Americans
on both sides of this debate, need to know how deep your
commitment is. Would you force your daughter to undress in a
bathroom with boys who are also undressing?
Secretary Cardona. I am not going to be commenting on
athletics rules that we have not proposed.
Mr. Owens. Okay. You cannot say yes or no on that?
Secretary Cardona. I would be happy to talk about----
Mr. Owens. Okay. If your daughter was reported, she felt
uncomfortable in a boy's presence in a bathroom, a locker room,
would that be considered by your administration discrimination
or bigotry?
Secretary Cardona. As an educator for over 25 years----
Mr. Owens. You cannot say yes or no to that?
Secretary Cardona. I would love to respond to your
questions.
Mr. Owens. Okay, so yes, or no? Would it be considered
discrimination if she did not want that to happen?
Secretary Cardona. As an educator for 25 years, we have had
the responsibility----
Mr. Owens. Okay. All right. I do not have but a few minutes
here. Girls have now entered in contact sports of boxing or
wrestling would you allow your daughter to physically fight and
get beat up by a boy who called himself a girl? Yes or no?
Secretary Cardona. I would be happy to once we finalize our
regulations on Title 9 athletics, to come back and have a
conversation with you.
Mr. Owens. All right. Let me just say this real quick.
There is a Cherokee proverb that says a man's highest calling
is to protect women, so she is free to walk the earth unharmed.
I will say this, Mr. Secretary, before I go into this next
topic. With all due respect, I pray that our country will
never, ever have the vision that your policies are now driving
us toward in terms of manhood.
It is a vision that teaches our boys that harming girls is
no big deal. I pray that we remain a country that produces
overwhelmingly mass majorities of men that feel the way I do
about my girls. I would give my life in a heartbeat for my
girls. The blessings I have is they have no doubts about that.
It means that men and women across this country that do not
have faith, do not have trust in you protecting our girls
because of the policies you cannot say yes or no to. By the
way, those are not very hard questions as a father, it is
either yes or no. You could not answer. Okay. I am going to
switch really quick.
At the Senate Appropriation Committee hearing we had last
week you stated that there is an active investigation at
Columbia University, but your staff is not onsite. As protests
and harassment of Jewish students continue at Columbia
University, this is an opportunity for the Office of Civil
Rights to see firsthand what is occurring, and how Columbia is
failing to protect the rights of their students.
You implied earlier that you were running out of funds. I
have a hard time believing the Department of Education is
broke. I think it is more of a priority. Is there a reason why
that this has not been happening on these campuses, they do not
have a presence, and if it had been black Americans dealing
with KKK bigots, would you have the same sense of presence or
priorities?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for the question. Let me tell
you I am a father, and you cannot choose which students you
want to protect.
Mr. Owens. You cannot choose what?
Secretary Cardona. You cannot pick and choose which
students you want to protect. As Secretary of Education, it is
my responsibility----
Mr. Owens. I am sorry I missed that. Could I choose--I am
sorry, as a father you cannot choose what? I am sorry?
Secretary Cardona. Which students you want to protect.
Mr. Owens. You protect all of them, particularly our women,
right?
Secretary Cardona. Including our LGBTQ students, sir.
Mr. Owens. Okay. If in other words you are choosing those
students over women? I am talking about boys versus girls, that
is a very simple question there.
Secretary Cardona. The new Title 9 regulations increase
protections to all students and increase protections for women.
Mr. Owens. This is why American parents are really
concerned about this administration. You cannot answer a basic
question that makes common sense
Secretary Cardona. All means also.
Mr. Owens. I would say this, I know how to protect my
girls, and I will leave it at that. I am going to recognize Ms.
McBath.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you Mr. Chair, and Secretary, it is good
to see you again today. Thank you so much for being before us,
and I have read your testimony. Is there anything else you
would like to expound upon a little bit before we get started?
It looks like there might have been something else you wanted
to say. Please feel free.
Secretary Cardona. No. I think I wanted to--time fell
short, but I wanted to comment that in 2009 we had 58 more
investigators for Title 6, and we had a third of the cases. We
are desperately in need of additional support to make sure that
we could investigate the cases that we have in front of us, so
I welcome support of the budget on both sides of the aisle.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you so much. Well once again, thank you
for being with us today. For the last few decades, we have been
focusing on our efforts getting students into college. Making
sure they get educated, but not enough of them on ensuring that
they actually finish getting those degrees or those
credentials, and actually achieving the goals that they set out
to accomplish for themselves, to set themselves and their
families up for future success.
Not just with a job, but really a lifelong career, and
career path. Millions of Americans owe tens of thousands of
dollars in student debt, and they have no degrees or
credentials to show for it. It is obvious that this is not a
result of user error on behalf of the American people. It is a
result of this country's failure to actually provide the
targeted resources, and foster the school climate that is
needed to ensure that every student can get the skills that
will help them to achieve greater levels of success than was
possible before they actually walked on campus for the very
first time, or before the very first time that they actually
logged into a classroom computer.
Now we know that there are many paths to success when it
comes to education, and developing a strong and successful
workforce. Each is deeply personal, and I am very proud that
three legislative initiatives that I actually led in this very
Committee recently passed the House, and echo our mission of
meeting the needs of our students wherever they are.
My colleagues claim that the American people are fiscally
irresponsible, but those are not the Georgians that I know, and
that I live among every single day, and those are not the
Georgians that I represent here in Congress. The reality for
most Americans is that the only way for them to be able to
afford school is to take out a student loan.
Usually at a very high interest rate. For decades, we have
been telling people every single day that one of the best ways
to get ahead in life is they have got to have a college degree.
Now we are punishing them for trying to partake in the very
thing that we encouraged them to do, and to doing, and that is
obtaining the skills that are necessary to move the families in
this country forward.
Georgia State University, one of the Nation's leading
leaders in student retention and success, and my state's
largest university, received a postsecondary grant, student
success grant to study their use of modern technologies. They
are using AI chat box in the first year, freshman year for
those first-year students in math and also literature courses,
and their potential to improve the student outcomes.
Actually, I would like to ask the Chair may I please
include in the record, Georgia State News Hub article?
Chairwoman Foxx. Without objection.
[The Information of Ms. McBath follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. McBath. Thank you. In 2016, Georgia State began this
AI to stay in contact with students over the summer, and
successfully helped to cut the number of high school graduates
who were accepted into GSU, but the failed to follow through on
everything that they needed to do to be registered and prepared
for the fall session.
This new technology and use of technology is helping more
students live out their dream of attending college because GSU
was actually able to cut down that number of students that were
not registering and being prepared. They cut it down by half,
and I think that is amazing.
According to Dr. Tim Reznick, who testified before the
Committee earlier this Congress, at the invitation of our
Chair, these technologies support students by reminding them
about their assignments, answering questions after hours, and
are generally far more accessible for students that may have
been busier schedules. Some students are parents.
Some students are caretakers for family members, so through
programs like this that truly puts students first, we can
address specific factors that are preventing our students from
succeeding in the classroom, and getting the credentials that
they sorely deserve and need, and they are really working
toward.
My question to you, Secretary Cardona, is postsecondary
student success grants, which I have just talked about, have
the potential to become a premier grant program that will
assist colleges and universities with their efforts to improve
retention and completion rates, and ensure student success.
However, we know that this program is kind of flat funded, at
45 million for the past 2 years.
Could you please explain how the Department's 2025 budget
request of 100 million will provide the students with the
necessary means of support that they need to reduce these
barriers to their success?
Chairwoman Foxx. Ms. McBath, I have to say you began your
question with 2 seconds left, and you are 40 seconds over. I am
going to ask the Secretary to submit an answer to you in
writing. Thank you. Mr. Good, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Good. Thank you, Madam, Chair, and thank you Secretary
Cardona for being with us today. Mr. Secretary, do you think it
is a person's responsibility to pay their own student loans?
Secretary Cardona. I am sorry. Could you repeat the
question?
Mr. Good. Do you think it is a person's responsibility to
pay their own student loans?
Secretary Cardona. I do believe students who take out loans
should pay loans.
Mr. Good. They should pay them back, thank you. What if it
is hard or if it is difficult to pay it?
Secretary Cardona. Many of the loans that we are providing
relief for are loans that folks are eligible for, like----
Mr. Good. Well, we have long had relief in place that
allowed folks in you know, difficult financial situations, or
reduced income to you know, give them some relief in paying
their student loans. What if somebody just does not want to pay
their student loan, or wishes they did not have a student loan?
Should they still pay for it?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Mr. Good. Very good. That is all I am looking for. They
should pay for it. Now, do you understand how Federal spending
is paid? Federal spending, how is that paid for?
Secretary Cardona. The work that we are doing----
Mr. Good. What I am asking is do you understand how Federal
spending is ultimately paid for? It is not a trick question, it
is a simple question.
Secretary Cardona. Right. I want to just kind of go back to
the----
Mr. Good. No. I would like to know if you know how Federal
spending is paid for ultimately?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Mr. Good. How is it paid for?
Secretary Cardona. I am here to answer questions about the
Department.
Mr. Good. Who pays for Federal spending?
Secretary Cardona. Taxpayers.
Mr. Good. Okay. Taxpayers pay for--exactly, whether it is
higher taxes, or lower purchasing power from Biden inflation,
or Biden's higher interest rates, they have diminished
purchasing power as they suffer under inflation as a result of
Federal spending. I appreciate you confirming that.
So student loan debt you would say is legitimate? It is
legitimate debt; correct?
Secretary Cardona. The work that we are doing to address--
--
Mr. Good. Is student loan debt legitimate? Is it legitimate
debt, or is it illegitimate somehow, and it is not----
Secretary Cardona. When I talk to students who have been
defrauded by----
Mr. Good. What I am asking is student loan debt legitimate?
In other words, I would assume it is presumed you would say a
mortgage loan is legitimate, a car loan is legitimate, a
personal loan or a credit card, it is legitimate debt. You
would presume those are legitimate debt?
Secretary Cardona. Yes. I would love to communicate how we
are helping your constituents with----
Mr. Good. When someone invests in themselves and borrows
for education, is that illegitimate debt, or is it legitimate
debt that should be paid for by the person who borrows it? Is
there something illegitimate about student loan debt?
Secretary Cardona. The work that we are doing to provide--
--
Mr. Good. Okay. I am just going to say that you are not
going to say it, so you agree that it is not illegitimate debt.
Do you think we should continue to make student loans when you
and the administration is trying to transfer all the debt to
the taxpayers, with the latest scheme that has been estimated
to be worth--going to cost maybe 750 billion dollars.
Should we continue to make student loans if we are not
going to ask folks to pay the loans? Should we instead
reclassify them as taxpayer provided gifts, or should we
continue to make student loans?
Secretary Cardona. Sure. The 75,300 constituents you serve
would not call it a scheme. They would call it a lifeline.
Fixing the system----
Mr. Good. We continue to make student loans that we are not
going to ask people to pay back, or should we go to taxpayer
provided education gifts?
Secretary Cardona. I understand your line of questioning,
sir, and if I can get an answer.
Mr. Good. What I would like to know is should we keep
making student loans if we are not going to ask people to pay
back their student loans?
Secretary Cardona. We are improving the repayment process
through the SAVE Plan so people can be successful paying their
loans.
Mr. Good. Is there any reason, if I may, that people who go
to the most so-called elite universities, you know, the ones
with the pro-Hamas protests on their campuses right now,
students that go those universities, which tend to be the elite
because they are very expensive, my children could not. I
certainly could not afford to go to a school like that.
It would have been a waste of money, I would submit. Those
who go to the schools and can make up to $125,000.00
individually, $250,000.00 as a family, based on the previous
original student loan transfer scheme, should others who did
not go to college, who worked their way through college, who
tried not to incur student loan debt, or paid off their student
loan debt, should they have to pay student loan debt for those
from those elite schools making above average incomes?
Secretary Cardona. People are paying their loans back, sir.
Mr. Good. Other people should not pay those student loan
debt for them?
Secretary Cardona. That is not what I said. People are
paying their loans back. The return to repayment is underway. I
would be happy to have my staff share with you how the
information----
Mr. Good. Yes. I am going to get one last question in,
thank you, sir. In February, the Department published a draft
proposal that lists 16 different indicators that the Secretary
yourself will use to determine whether a borrower is an
economic hardship, and therefore able to have his or her loan
balance paid, or really transferred to the taxpayers.
However, it notes that the borrowers can have their debt
canceled, again transferred to the taxpayer, based on any other
indicators of hardship identified by yourself as Secretary. Is
that correct?
Secretary Cardona. We have over a million people----
Mr. Good. Is it correct that it allows for you to decide
any reason why someone can have their debt canceled? Any other
indicator of hardship? Is that correct, or not correct?
Secretary Cardona. We are fixing a broken system that
requires----
Mr. Good. What Constitutional authority do you have to
unilaterally decide whether or not someone should pay their
student loan debt, or whether the taxpayer should pay that.
Secretary Cardona. I would welcome to answer. It is not as
simple as you are asking it, so if you allow me to answer, you
might get the answer you are looking for.
Mr. Good. Madam Chair, my time is expired, so I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Good. Ms. Hayes, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. Before I start my questioning, I
would just like to say that mortgage loans are a legitimate
debt, and I can remember in 2009 I was a teacher. I had a
contract being paid $37,500.00 a year. I was also a taxpayer,
and I was not a homeowner.
The country decided that we would bail out the mortgage
company through the Home Affordable Mortgage Program. As an
American, I recognize that that was good for our economy, and I
went to work every day, and I paid my taxes, and we bailed out
the mortgage industry and the finance industry, and the auto
industry.
The idea that we draw the line at student debts and people
who just want a chance to get ahead, or have a fighting change
in this society is just something I cannot wrap myself around.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here, and Happy National
Teacher Appreciation Day.
Across the country, university students are exercising
their First Amendment rights. I am going to talk a little bit
slow here because this is what I used to have to do in my
classroom when I talked about the First Amendments because my
students would always say, ``But Miss, why are there so many in
this one Amendment?''
The First Amendment protects the freedom of speech, the
press, freedom of assembly, the freedom of religion, and the
right to petition to the government for a redress of
grievances. All of those things are protected by the
Constitution, and are imperative to a functioning democracy.
When my students would ask me why are they all in this one
amendment I would generally respond that it is the way that we
define who we are as individuals in a complex, changing, self-
governing society. There are so many things that I can ask you
about today because I believe so deeply in the work that the
Department of Education does.
I know that work is life changing, and it is the only shot
that so many of our young people have. I am deeply concerned by
the rise in antisemitism, and Islamophobia on college campuses.
Like you, I know like myself, I know that you believe that
there is no place for hate speech, or discrimination in
education.
I also know that as an educator, it is beyond Pedagogy. If
students do not feel safe and protected in their academic
environments, they will not learn. This is what the Department
is dealing with right now. As of April 30, 2024, the Office of
Civil Rights at the Department of Education, which oversees
investigations of discrimination at institutions of higher
education has reported many cases of discrimination.
Past reporting by industry drive has shown a severe backlog
in the processing and investigation of discrimination cases by
the OCR, due to funding challenges over the years. Secretary
Cardona, in your testimony you mentioned that the Department of
Education is asking for a 22 million dollar increase in funds
for Fiscal Year 2025 to expand staffing capacity.
Additionally, this funding would be used to address the
alarming reports of rising antisemitism and Islamophobia. Many
of my Republican colleagues believe that the entire
Department's budget, including OCR should be flat funded. I
think we have to stop admiring the problem, and actually invest
the resources to address it.
Secretary Cardona, how would flat funding impact the
ability of the Department to process these claims in a timely
manner?
Secretary Cardona. It would impact it significantly, over
90 percent of the budget requests are for investigators.
Mrs. Hayes. You have also said that the investigator
caseload is at historically high rates, with at about 42 cases
per investigator. This would rise to 71 per investigator, which
you describe as unmanageable. If funding for the OCR was to be
increased, what would the Department spend that money on,
please be specific?
Secretary Cardona. Investigators to investigate these open
cases.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. We had university Presidents here a
few weeks ago, and one of the things that they stated was that
more guidance from the Department would be helpful as they
navigate in this space. What has the OCR done to proactively
address claims of antisemitism, and antimuslim sentiments on
campus?
Secretary Cardona. Well, Friday I sent a letter out to over
5,000 university leaders. Myself this morning, we released a
Dear Colleague letter with very specific examples. If you visit
our Ed.gov, there is a button there supporting campus safety.
There are hundreds of resources there that were made
specifically to support universities.
Mrs. Hayes. I guess in closing, I would just like to add
that it is I think easier for my colleagues on this Committee
to dismiss certain groups of constituencies, but as an
educator, I know like you know, that our job is to protect all
students, and make sure that all students have access to an
education, and that we are working just as hard on their behalf
as for any other group.
Thank you for being here, and again, Happy Teacher
Appreciation Day. I yield back.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you Ms. Hayes. Ms. McClain, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you Madam Chair, and I too agree with
my colleague on free speech, but let me just share with you
what free speech does not protect, and that is it does not
protect violence. It does not protect defamation of property.
It does not protect threats on one's life.
I am for the First Amendment, but let us be clear, we know
what the First Amendment is. I also want to make sure that I
understand, before I get into my questioning, that the
Department of Education's budget is 78.8 billion dollars, and
we are asking--you are asking for a 3.7 billion for a total of
82.5 billion dollars, and that is just not enough money to do
your job.
That is amazing to me, but there is no inefficiencies that
we can find if we just give you more money, everything will be
great. That was my rant, so thank you for listening to me on
that. Mr. Secretary, President Biden's Department of Education
has canceled 153 billion dollars in student loans, with plans
to cancel 1.4 trillion dollars.
The House of Representatives said no. We passed legislation
on that. The Senate said no. The Fifth Circuit Court said no,
and the highest court in the land, the Supreme Court said no.
You continue to march on. I would like to know what makes you
qualified to ignore the majority of Congress and the Supreme
Court?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you, Congresswoman, and let me
just repeat hate has no place in schools. I agree with you, and
as the President said, we are not going to condone it,
antisemitism on our campuses.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you. We can agree on that.
Secretary Cardona. For sure. We recognize the higher
education system is not accessible, not affordable, and it is
broken, and we are working within the law to provide debt
relief.
Mrs. McClain. The House of Representatives said no. The
Senate said no. The Supreme Court said no. You say yes. How is
that possible?
Secretary Cardona. The Higher Education Act gives me
authority, and if----
Mrs. McClain. You alone have the authority. Am I correct on
that?
Secretary Cardona. Implementation of----
Mrs. McClain. You are higher than the Congress, the Senate
and Supreme Court?
Secretary Cardona. No. That is not what I am saying.
Mrs. McClain. Okay. I did not think that was, but.
Secretary Cardona. I will give an example. The Public
Service Loan Forgiveness, a bipartisan bill, passed in 2007.
Poorly implemented for 4 years, only 7,000 people benefited
from it. 98 percent of the people were denied. We are
implementing----
Mrs. McClain. Mr. Cardona, I appreciate that. My question
is really simple. What qualifies you to be higher in authority
than the Congress, the Senate, and the Supreme Court?
Secretary Cardona. I do not believe I am higher than those
groups.
Mrs. McClain. Your actions would show that?
Secretary Cardona. I am acting within the right, the law,
with the Higher Education Act.
Mrs. McClain. I would strongly disagree. The Senate would
strongly disagree, and the Supreme Court would strongly
disagree. I am confused on rights versus responsibilities. If
you have a right to a loan, do you not have a responsibility to
pay it back?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you. You are in agreement with me if
you and I make a deal and I say hey, I want to buy this car
that I should pay that car loan back.
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Mrs. McClain. You have a right if I buy a mortgage that I
am responsible, not my neighbor, not the person across the
street, but I am the one that took out the loan. I knew the
risks. I have a responsibility. Why is education in loan
forgiveness different, because I should have a house?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question, and we have
predatory institutions that are preying on students, putting
them in debt, and not----
Mrs. McClain. We have slippery car salesmen that are
preying on people too, so should we forgive their loans?
Secretary Cardona. We have----
Mrs. McClain. I am asking a question.
Secretary Cardona. I would like to answer.
Mrs. McClain. Yes, I mean we have bad actors across the
board, so if you are a bad actor under that concept, I should
forgive your loan. If a slippery car salesman sells me a car,
and gosh, I just got in a little bit over my head, we should
forgive that? I mean using that same principle?
Secretary Cardona. We have a responsibility.
Mrs. McClain. I am asking a question. Are we going to car
loans next? If you are a shady character and sell me a bad car
loan, the government, well not the government--you, because you
have more authority than Congress and the Supreme Court, we
should forgive those car loans too?
Secretary Cardona. We have a responsibility.
Mrs. McClain. The answer is of course not. We would not do
that because we have responsibilities in this country. I love
how we talk about free education. It is not free. Are the
teachers teaching for free? Are the teachers teaching for free?
Really simple, I know we struggled with this last time, but?
Secretary Cardona. No.
Mrs. McClain. No. They are not teaching for free.
Secretary Cardona. No, that was not my response. They are
underpaid.
Mrs. McClain. Somebody is paying for it, and the people who
are paying for it are the American taxpayers. If you have a
right, you have a responsibility, and shame on you for going
over Congress, and the Supreme Court, and with that I am over,
thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. McClain. Pursuant to the
previous order, the Chair declares the Committee in recess,
subject to the call of the Chair. We will reconvene in 5
minutes. Thank you. All guests should remain in seats until the
witness is allowed to leave the room. The Committee stands in
recess.
[Recess.]
Chairwoman Foxx. The Committee will reconvene and come to
order following our recess. Ms. Leger Fernandez, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much Madam Chairwoman,
and thank you so much Secretary Cardona for being here today.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. For keeping the focus. I know it has
been hard because of the manner in which the questions get
asked, but I keep seeing you keeping the focus on the issue of
education because we know that education is both the foundation
of our democracy, as well as the path for prosperity, for our
families.
Now I wanted to give you the time to answer a bit about the
question that came up earlier. You really were not given the
time, or I am sorry, the respect to be able to explain the
authorities that you have under the Higher Education Act.
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. To forgive student loans. That
authority was given to the Department through the Higher
Education Act. Would you like to take a--do a quick response to
why you are acting in this regarding student loans and the
authority you are doing it in?
Secretary Cardona. Well, we are looking very carefully at
the authorities that I have under the Higher Education Act, and
the authority that was used by the last Secretary as well. The
crisis that we are in with our higher education loan system,
and the access to college. We are using our authority carefully
to make sure that we are making targeted decisions to help
students accomplish their goals of reaching college, and
following up on in a bipartisan fashion what Congress approved
through the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program. Thank you
for that opportunity.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. All right. I think it is important
that Congress is constantly assisting different industries,
assisting different corporations, and the idea that we are
going to be investing in our future workforce, in our children
through education is no different, right?
To say that Americans should not help with this endeavor is
very short-sighted.
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. If we do not invest through education
in our workforce, we do not have a future. I am glad you are
making those decisions. I wanted to touch on another topic,
which we know that during the pandemic it was hard on
everybody.
Our former President was doing a disastrous job of handling
COVID, but then President Biden came in, and under a Democrat
led Congress, we passed multiple laws. We passed the American
Rescue Plan, which gave schools a lot of flexibility in how to
respond to these dire situations we found ourselves in.
Schools use that flexibility. They used it to accelerate
student learning, to address student mental health, to support
educated workforce. Schools themselves, it was a philosophy of
schools themselves would know best where to spend that money.
I loved reading your testimony that you think that
bilingual, being bilingual is a super power. I agree. In New
Mexico, some of those emergency relief funds were used for dual
language teachers for certifications. I am concerned about the
different things that are going to happen as ESSR funds expire.
How is your Department preparing to assist schools with
things like educator professor development preparation for dual
language teachers? How are we looking at the transition? How
does your budget address this issue of the transition, and
focusing on some of these needed areas?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question, and
absolutely bilingualism is a superpower, and I think what we
need to do is make sure we are empowering our students to learn
more languages, so they can be prepared for global
competitiveness. I really believe that strongly.
Our budget does request additional dollars for, you know,
or ELA office that focuses in on English language acquisition.
It is important while maintaining your native language that you
are learning English, so we have a request there for 50 million
dollars above last year, Fiscal Year 2023 budget.
We are continuing to support sustainability efforts,
working with states. I was on the phone with the Governor of
New Mexico yesterday, talking about how the Department of
Education can support New Mexico, in insuring that those
strategies that we have seen work, and I appreciate you
mentioning the American Rescue Plan dollars.
We have seen more growth in the 22-23 school year as a
result of the use of those dollars than we have seen since 2009
for students in reading, mental health access. So the goal
really is to make sure that we are continuing on those efforts
that we know work. After school programming, summer
programming, and mental health supports.
We are working with states on how they can use existing
funds, and our annual budget does show we are increasing Title
3 dollars, Title 1 dollars, to make sure that schools have the
dollars that they need to be successful.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Right, and those Title 1 dollars are
so important because if we want America to succeed, we need to
make sure our working families, and those families that are
living in the highest areas of poverty have the support they
need. Thank you very much for your work, and I yield back.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Miller, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Miller. Mr. Secretary, in West Virginia five female
students were barred from competing in track and field after
refusing to compete against a biological male. In Wisconsin,
young girls were forced off their volleyball teams because they
felt uncomfortable sharing a locker room with biological males.
When the school district was asked about their transgender
athlete policy, they said that they crafted it according to
your Title 9 interpretation. Mr. Secretary, what consequences
will female students face if they do not want to share a locker
room with a biological male under your Title 9 rule?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question. Schools
have the responsibility to make sure all students feel safe,
including using the bathrooms, and as a lifelong educator,
these are decisions that I have had to make as a school
principal, as a district leader.
Mrs. Miller. Well, I am so glad that you brought up that
you are concerned about the safety of students, but the Title 9
rule and the guidance that you are putting out, that you have
been putting out for 3 years is taking away the safety of our
daughters in their private spaces, in their locker rooms and
showers, and taking away their athletic and educational
opportunities.
Girls in Wisconsin and West Virginia refused, and they were
kicked off their teams. These schools are basing their
decisions on your rule. This is happening because of you and
Joe Biden. Mr. Secretary, in health education class if a
teacher says that men cannot become pregnant, and then a
student goes to the Title 9 coordinator and says he is
uncomfortable that the health teacher insists men cannot get
pregnant, what should the Title 9 coordinator say?
Secretary Cardona. I would be happy to refer that question
to the Office for Civil Rights to provide guidance, and I can
tell you that in our Title 9 rules that we recently put out,
there is more guidance that goes along with it. I would welcome
an opportunity for my team to work with your constituents to
make sure that the implementation of Title 9.
Mrs. Miller. What I want to know is in biology class if the
health teacher, or the health class if the teacher says that
men cannot get pregnant, and someone reports that to the Title
9 coordinator, what should the Title 9 coordinator say? Because
you are in charge?
Secretary Cardona. Right. I would be very happy to have
your constituents get support to make sure that their Title 9
coordinators have information. We have provided a plethora of
technical assistance, and we are going to continue to support,
regardless of----
Mrs. Miller. What would you say?
Secretary Cardona. Republicans or Democrats.
Mrs. Miller. What would you say? What would you say? Should
that teacher get in trouble?
Secretary Cardona. I do not want to comment on
hypotheticals without enough information.
Mrs. Miller. Okay.
Secretary Cardona. What I will tell you that I respect
there are different opinions across the country, and we are
committed to supporting schools.
Mrs. Miller. You respect a health teacher, or a biology
teacher saying that a biological male cannot get pregnant. You
are recognizing biological sex, but in athletics you are wiping
out biological sex, and going with gender identity. I want to
know, gender identity is not defined in your rule.
Can you give me the official definition of gender identity?
Secretary Cardona. I think the statement that you said was
inaccurate. We have not released our Title 9 athletics rules.
Mrs. Miller. Actually, you have for 3 years, you have been
putting out Title 9 guidance rules. I brought them with, as you
can see, and it does have to do with athletic teams. Moving on,
could you please tell me what the official definition of gender
identity is?
Secretary Cardona. We are in the rulemaking process for
athletics. As you know, that was submitted maybe 9 months after
the proposed rule for Title 9, so we are in the process of
listening to 140,000 comments, which has different----
Mrs. Miller. Well, the schools are being threatened to have
their Federal funding pulled because they are afraid of the
consequences, the real world consequences of your Title 9 rule,
and your guidance that you have put out. I do want to know what
would you say to a female athlete who would have won a gold
medal, but now is getting a silver medal because a biological
male took it?
Secretary Cardona. As I said, Congresswoman, our athletics
rules have not been finalized, and I would be happy to work
with whoever you want our team to work with.
Mrs. Miller. Okay. Well, I do have to say you are not
protecting everyone. I am here to protect girls, and to stand
up for families and parents across the country that are
outraged over this. You are not protecting girls. You are
making a choice. You are choosing boys over girls. You are
satisfied with letting the girl take the silver medal while the
boy, biological boy, takes the gold.
You are going to be remembered as the Education Secretary
under Joe Biden who erased girls' sports for an entire
generation. You should withdraw your Title 9 Rule or resign.
Thank you, and I yield back to Dr. Foxx.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Miller. Ms. Wild, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and Secretary
Cardona, thank you so much for taking the time to speak to our
committee today. I was not here for the entire hearing because
I had another hearing across the hall as things work in
Congress.
I have been briefed on the earlier testimony. I know that
you have been asked an awful lot of questions about FAFSA, and
so I am going to be limited to that and get to another issue
that I think is really important.
I will say, and I know you have heard this from everybody,
the number of concerned parents, as well as the institutions of
higher learning in my district that I have heard from, has been
overwhelming. I am sure your job has been quite overwhelming
this year, given everything that is going on.
On the FAFSA issue, I do not want to repeat things that
have already been asked and answered. I have heard from some
institutions that about 30 percent of the initial institutional
student information records, otherwise known as ISIRs and for
the benefit of those who may not know, that is something
produced by the FAFSA system. That includes data about a
student's financial aid eligibility, right?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Ms. Wild. I have heard that about 30 percent of those sent
to the colleges have errors and need to be corrected. Might be
higher. That number might be higher for institutions that serve
low income and first gen students.
Has the Department determined how it will handle instances
where institutions award students' higher amounts of Federal
aid due to incorrect ISIRs?
Secretary Cardona. Yes, we have corrected that issue. Thank
you for that. We have corrected that issue. There were several
issues in programming. There was an issue with information for
tax data information that we have also worked to correct.
We have communicating daily with schools and, you know,
they have been bending over backward and the financial aid
directors, the college presidents have been extremely
communicative in terms of sharing what concerns they have and
helping us determine what the best support strategies are.
I just want to commend them publicly and thank them for
their patience and flexibility to meet the needs of students.
We have communicated with colleges directly. I have spoken to
over 100 college presidents myself, to make sure that we are
hearing what their concerns are and how we can address those,
and through daily communication we have been updating
information on, you know, what their challenges are and how we
can address them.
Ms. Wild. Are some colleges or institutions of higher
learning being required, are they having to claw back some of
the financial aid that they had offered to a student?
Secretary Cardona. No. We have communicated with them that
the information that they were given could be used. Many
schools asked us to just reprocess it, and we have done the
reprocessing for schools to have the updated information.
Ms. Wild. Okay. I want to shift gears to another really
critical topic, mental health. Secretary, according to a 2022
study by the National Center for Education Statistics, only 13
percent of public schools strongly agreed, and 43 percent
moderately agreed that they could effectively provide mental
health services to all students in need.
That data deeply concerns me. It indicates a significant
gap in providing essential support to our students' emotional
well-being. Can you discuss your Department's initiatives in
addressing mental health issues in our schools, particularly in
light of the $1 billion allocated to the Stronger Connections
grant program?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely, thank you. Thank you for
acknowledging the importance of mental health support for our
students. You know, certain general rightly, you know,
communicated that we are in a youth mental health crisis, and
access to mental health supports is critically important for
our students.
We know students are six times more likely to access mental
health supports if they are provided in our schools.
Ms. Wild. Uh-huh.
Secretary Cardona. Which is why we are big proponents and
supporters and asked for an increase of $200 million for full-
service community schools, that connect with community partners
who provide mental health support.
The BSCA dollars, Bipartisan Safer Community dollars, have
been used to increase the number of school social workers by 40
percent, the number of school nurses by 30 percent.
Ms. Wild. At what levels are we talking, K to 12?
Secretary Cardona. K to 12, yes.
Ms. Wild. Okay.
Secretary Cardona. They have provided access. We are also
working to improve Medicaid reimbursement for sustainable
dollars. As the BSCA dollars sunset, there are sustainable
reimbursement dollars from Medicaid. We are working with HHS.
We have currently 13 states that have signed on to do that, and
we are working aggressively to get as many other states signed
up to get Medicaid reimbursement.
The goal is never to go back to a system where we had an
emergency room model of mental health in our schools.
Unfortunately, we often wait until the trauma happens to
provide support. What we are seeing these dollars being used
for are proactive strategies to support students.
Ms. Wild. Thank you very much. With that, I yield back
Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Wild. Ms. Steel, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Steel. Thank you, Dr. Foxx, and thank you Secretary
Cardona. You are appearing to us today and you know, I am just
most concerned about foreign influence on our universities.
When it comes to foreign influence on our universities, we know
that the Department's disclosures are just the tip of the
iceberg when it comes to the billions of foreign fund schools
do not submit.
More importantly, submissions are useless if your
Department does not take enforcement seriously, because in fact
for 117, Section 117 and China are not mentioned a single time
in your ten-page written testimony today. If I am wrong, please
let me know.
Your Department maintains a list of open Section 117
investigations, but every single one has opened by under Trump
administration. If you added more or you, you know, what I
found was you closed only five universities.
You know, how many we are under the investigation and how
many added and how many? It is not because--it seems like we do
not have clear communications between the Department and us.
Since taking the office, why have you not launched a single
Section 117 investigation and do you believe the universities
should view relationship with dangerous countries like China,
and you know, other countries of concern that accept those
exact same as our allies?
Do you think certain countries of concern with national
security threats warrant increased scrutiny? Should those
relationships be treated differently?
Secretary Cardona. Yes, thank you for the question,
Congresswoman Steel. I can assure you that I agree with you. We
should not allow foreign influence in our schools, and make
sure we protect our schools and our students from foreign
influence.
To that end, the Department of Education takes very
seriously the responsibility of providing public information on
gifts from other countries. I want to make sure I correct that.
We have provided almost 39,000 foreign gifts totaling over $21
billion in the last 3 years, which is much more than the last
administration.
We are a part of the FBI's National Counterintelligence
Task Force, where they provide--we share information and if
there is a need for investigations, that task force is the one
that does it. We believe that by having transparency not only
to that task force but to the public, we can communicate where
foreign gifts are coming from, and the law enforcement arms are
best suited to investigate.
Ms. Steel. I hope that, you know, we have much better
communication to our department--our Committee and your
Department, so we understand exactly what kind of tangible
steps that you are taking in your Department.
When we see the report and it is not there, then you know
what? We do not know exactly what you are doing and what kind
of tangible steps you are taking.
Just one more thing that I want to just ask, charter
schools, because you remember last year you came out and you
support charter schools. A 2023 study from Stanford's Center
for Research on Education Outcomes found that in math, charter
school students on average learn the equivalent of an
additional 6 days per year, and in reading an added 16 days of
learning.
Chairwoman, I want to submit this on the record, that this
publication.
Chairwoman Foxx. Without objection.
[The information of Mrs. Steel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Steel. Students in poverty achieve an additional 23
days of learning in reading and 17 days in math. However, the
Biden administration proposed $40 million cut to the Federal
charter school program. Why? Such excellent results for at-risk
students that the administration would like cut, because we
have to add more charter schools?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for the question. I agree with
you that parents should have options for their children, and
charter schools are a viable option.
Ms. Steel. Thank you for agreeing with us.
Secretary Cardona. Yes, yes. You know, and I have to be
very frank. You know, the fiscal responsibility to act is
something we take very seriously. We have to look for where we
can provide cuts in our budget proposals that would not impact
students. There were several. We cut comprehensive centers by 9
percent. Innovation and research grants, we cut that by 5
percent.
While the charter school grant was cut, the proposal was
cut, I can assure you that it would not impact any of those who
are currently under the grant. The demand for that has
decreased. I would be happy to have my team share more
information about that.
It is still the largest K-12 competitive grant that we
oversee at the Department of Education. I think that is
testimony to the fact that we do support charter schools as an
option for families who choose it.
Ms. Steel. There is no impact on charter schools?
Secretary Cardona. No.
Ms. Steel. A $40 million cut is a lot for the charter
schools.
Secretary Cardona. What we have had to do, and again it is
speaking about the lack of demand, what we have had to do is,
using the grants, front-load dollars. It would not affect any
of the CSP awards for years.
Ms. Steel. Thank you. My time is up. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Thank you, Ms. Steel. Ms.
Wilson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Wilson. Secretary Cardona, thank you so much for
joining us today. I just loved your visit to my elementary
school, and I want you to come back again.
I want to express my gratitude for the Biden-Harris
administration's dedication to our students. Our former
Secretary of Education had stated her goal was to eliminate
schools. That is what you call insanity on steroids. The Biden-
Harris administration----
[Pause.]
Ms. Wilson [continuing]. Want to be somebody's students in
their effort to secure the promise of higher education, and I
thank you Secretary for your work on that, on that issue. No
other President has tackled this debacle that cripples so many.
No other President.
That is why I have proposed the Loan Act that would build
on this administration's effort to cancel student loans.
Secretary Cardona, last September you and Secretary Vilsack
sent a joint letter to multiple Governors, including Florida,
urging investment in HBCUs.
As you know, President Biden has repeatedly called on
raising teacher pay, and during this Teacher Appreciation Week
I would hope the Department of Education reaffirms its
commitment to our teachers.
I want to also thank the Department for its recent Title IX
changes that combat sexual harassment and discrimination. It is
crucial that we reaffirm our commitment to safeguarding the
LGBTQI Plus community in combatting sexual misconduct on
college campuses, and I thank you for that.
One thing of concern to me is the recent FAFSA rollout that
has disrupted educational opportunities for thousands of
students. I know, together this administration with your help,
will work to deliver for our students, to ensure we deliver a
high-quality education across these United States.
My question is, are there any updates or information you
want to share with this Committee that we have not addressed?
The floor is yours.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you very much, thank you. Let me
just start off by saying we are working around the clock to get
more students to fill out our FAFSA. The delays created
frustration for the families and students who had to deal with
that. I recognize how difficult that was.
I myself have a senior in high school, and you know, they
should be thinking about college and all that and not the
delays. I am proud to say though, we processed over nine
million applications. The gap between last year and this year
is decreasing significantly, and we have a nationwide strategy
now, working with our principals, our superintendents.
If students go to studentaid.gov right now, fill out FAFSA,
it should be a 15- to 20-minute process. If their contributors
fill it out, by Friday the schools will have their information.
It is up and running and now we have allotted $50 million to
assist in the implementation, meaning having people help
students get it done.
This is important to us. I know as a first-generation
college student, how important it is to make sure you have
access to FAFSA. That is a priority and thank you for
acknowledging Teacher Appreciation Week.
We believe strongly that the shortage that we have in our
country is a symptom of a teacher respect issue, and I am
really proud that President Biden and Dr. Biden elevated it to
a State dinner for National Teachers of the Year.
It really sends the message that we need to provide agency,
better working conditions and a competitive salary to our
educators. We are strong believers that we need to defend
public education, not defund it. Doing that includes supporting
our educators, who give their best to our children. Thank you.
Ms. Wilson. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Wilson. Mr. Kiley, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kiley. Good afternoon, Mr. Secretary. A few days ago,
you wrote a letter to universities, condemning the rise of
antisemitism on campuses, and you specifically spoke about
incidents of students being physically assaulted, subjected to
virulently antisemitic statements, being subjected to verbal
abuse, finding swastikas on their dorm room doors. You said
``These and other incidents are abhorrent. They have no place
on college campuses.''
I am glad that you wrote that letter. You recognized the
platform that you have to try to influence behavior for the
better on our university campuses. However, there are a lot of
things going on there that your letter left unaddressed.
I wanted to take a moment to ask you about a few of them.
For example, we have seen at a number of campuses such as UC-
San Diego and UCLA, protestors who have blocked physically
Jewish students from entering campus or entering spaces on
campus. Do you condemn that behavior?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for the question and let just
start off by saying hate has no place in our schools.
Mr. Kiley. I understand and I thank you for that. Can you
please address the specific question. Do you condemn those who
are physically blocking Jewish students from entering their
campuses?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Mr. Kiley. Thank you. I appreciate that. I think that is a
very important message. How about the encampments themselves,
these protestors who have set up tents on campus, and are
refusing to leave in violation of university rules and often
the law. Do you condemn that?
Secretary Cardona. I condemn behaviors that are unsafe, and
I leave it to the university leaders and their board of
Governors to address how they handle encampments or other
issues that are happening on campus. What I will say----
Mr. Kiley. Sure.
Secretary Cardona. If I can finish, please. What I will say
is acts of intimidation or violence toward Jewish students or
any students for that matter, are not tolerated. That is not--
as the President said that is not protesting. That is
creating----
Mr. Kiley. I appreciate that, and that is an important
message. The encampments themselves, when they violate
university policies and the law, do you condemn them?
Secretary Cardona. The university has the responsibility to
follow--to uphold their rules on campus and----
Mr. Kiley. Can you tell me right now yes or no, if you
condemn these encampments?
Secretary Cardona. Again, those are decisions for the
universities to make. I know that in some cases, universities
are engaging in dialog with students to come up with a
strategy. I do not want to get into the details of cases that I
do not have----
Mr. Kiley. Sure. You just wrote a letter to university
leaders, in which you called out things that you think that
they ought to do, and so I am asking about one of them. Let me
put it this way. For students or whoever they might be who are
in these encampments who have been told to leave, who have been
told to disburse and move along and are refusing, what is your
message to them?
Secretary Cardona. Yes. For me, it is really important to
think about this from the perspective of giving the university
the opportunity to engage but keeping students safe. I think
about those students who should be thinking about graduation,
and we want to make sure that all students have access to their
classes.
Mr. Kiley. Okay, but for students who have been told to
leave or other protestors in encampments and are refusing to do
so, what is your message to them? Will you tell them as the
Secretary of Education that they need to leave when they have
been told to do so?
Secretary Cardona. Students, all students, whether they
have encampments or not, have to follow the rules of the
school, and make sure that they are not engaging in behaviors
that are unsafe.
Mr. Kiley. Students or others who are in encampments and
have been given orders to leave, they should leave, yes?
Secretary Cardona. If the university directs them to leave,
they should leave.
Mr. Kiley. Thank you. I appreciate that. We have also seen
examples of faculty who have said, for example at the
University of Chicago, that they are willing to be arrested
with the students who refuse to leave the encampment. Do you
condemn those faculty members who are standing in the way of
the rules being enforced?
Secretary Cardona. You know, my responsibility under Title
VI is to make sure that students are not being attacked or
harassed----
Mr. Kiley. Do you condemn faculty members who are
interfering with university or law enforcement efforts to clear
encampments, yes or no?
Secretary Cardona. I believe university officials should
adhere to the rules in their university----
Mr. Kiley. That is a yes? You condemn faculty members who
are interfering with efforts to clear encampments?
Secretary Cardona. I support university officials following
the rules of their universities, yes.
Mr. Kiley. How about some of these universities that are
negotiating changes in university policy toward Israel is as a
demand of those who are in the encampments. Do you think that
is appropriate?
Secretary Cardona. My responsibility under Title VI is to
enforce, with the Office of Civil Rights, violations of Title
VI and----
Mr. Kiley. No no, Mr. Secretary. You have been very
outspoken on a number of issues. I am asking you your view. Do
you think that is appropriate for universities to cede to
demands of those that are in encampments, and actually change
policies toward Israel in response?
Secretary Cardona. I think it is my responsibility to be
very clear, that we will not condemn--we will not accept hate
on campus, and we stand against that.
Mr. Kiley. We have seen some universities talk about ending
Study Abroad programs to Israel. Do you think that is
appropriate?
Secretary Cardona. Our Title VI regulations make it very
clear, and if you go to our website, ed.gov, there is a
supporting statement----
Mr. Kiley. Okay. I am not asking about your website. How
about demands to cut ties with Hillel. Do you condemn those
demands to cut ties with Hillel at universities?
Secretary Cardona. There is guidance there for
universities, where a lot of the questions that you are asking
makes it very clear.
Mr. Kiley. Okay, but your letter said that certain things
are abhorrent on campus. Would you say that is one of them,
calls for universities to cut ties with Hillel. Is that
abhorrent, to use your word?
Secretary Cardona. Violence toward students, antisemitism
on campus----
Mr. Kiley. Mr. Secretary, you are not willing to condemn
calls to cut ties with Hillel? Will you condemn that, yes, or
no?
Secretary Cardona. We are responsible for adhering to Title
VI and enforcing it, and your support of our budget would help
us get to that level, instead of creating division, as I said
at the beginning of my call. I would like for us to work
together.
Mr. Kiley. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Kiley. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary. Ms. Manning, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Madam, Chair, and thank you Mr.
Secretary for being here today. Mr. Secretary, I have just
returned from a Holocaust Memorial ceremony in the Capitol,
that seemed all too relevant today, because we were reminded
that the Holocaust did not start with the death camps.
It started with Jews being demonized, harassed,
dehumanized, blamed for evils they did not commit. Over the
last few months, I have met with Jewish students on college
campuses, who are being demonized, harassed, dehumanized,
blamed for evils they did not commit.
I have visited Columbia University and I have seen signs
that can only be interpreted as calling for the elimination of
the State of Israel and genocide against Jewish people around
the globe. I am pleased that you have put out the letter that
you put out today.
It is detailed. It contains real world examples of the
kinds of things that can be considered worthy of an
investigation by the Office of Civil Rights. I appreciate the
detailed examples because we need more reasons for schools to
do their job and keep Jewish students safe, and make sure that
we stop the antisemitism that is happening on college campuses.
What I am interested in today is finding out what more you
can do from your position, to stop the antisemitism that has
exploded on our college campuses. If you were giving, given the
funding that you need, could you enforce more of the Title VI
requirements, and help schools and administrators understand
what their obligations are?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely. We could not only--you know,
you mentioned a Dear Colleague letter that we submitted today.
There was a letter from myself to college presidents Friday
with examples.
By investigating, closing out investigations, which the
funding that we are asking for will help us to do, we can
create, you know, case studies or lessons learned from examples
of cases closed that are happening today. We strongly encourage
support of the budget.
Ms. Manning. Yes. As you know, the Department of Education
plays a major role in the U.S. National Strategy to counter
antisemitism. President Biden is the first U.S. president ever
to issue a National Strategy.
I have introduced a bipartisan, bicameral bill that would
codify the National Strategy, and it designate a senior
official at the Department of Education to serve as your
primary advisor on countering antisemitic discrimination in
higher education.
Among other duties, this official would proactively visit
institutions, to remind students of their rights, the
administrators of their responsibilities. How would this,
having this senior official help you in your obligation to
combat antisemitism?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. Any resources that we can get
to have human capital to close out cases----
Ms. Manning. Specifically, a senior official whose job it
was, to monitor and combat antisemitism. Would that be helpful
to you?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely, absolutely yes. That person
would be paying attention to what is happening daily, reaching
out to colleges, students and families and addressing
antisemitism.
Ms. Manning. I understand that you have deployed personnel
to several schools that are currently facing protests. Which
schools are the Department's employees visiting, and how are
they working with school administrators to restore calm and
protect Jewish students?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. We have many open
investigations, and we have staff and schools. I can have a
more detailed list sent to you. We are communicating regularly
with schools, and not only through the investigations but also
engaging with them around how to use the materials that we are
providing, to prevent antisemitism on campus.
Ms. Manning. You testified before the Senate Appropriations
Committees, Committee rather, that schools in violation of
Title VI, which protects students from antisemitism, will have
their Federal funding revoked. That is a serious position to
take.
Where do institutions cross the line into violating Title
VI, and are you prepared to enforce the law against
institutions that cross that line?
Secretary Cardona. I am. It is the last step. The goal is
to change behaviors and make campus safe for all students and
address the underlying issues that led to the report. If a
school openly refuses to adhere to Title VI, revoking funds is
something that I can do, and I would do.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. My time has expired, I yield back.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Manning. Mr. Bean, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bean. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Good morning to
you, good morning, Committee and Mr. Secretary, welcome back.
It is great to see you. You, Mr. Secretary, have a very
impressive resume. You have been a teacher in Connecticut. You
have been an administrator. You were a principal.
Would you agree that one of the hardest parts of being an
educator is planning the logistics of how many kids you have,
how many little resources you have to make that out. Is
planning a really tough part of being an educator?
Secretary Cardona. Planning is an important part of being
an educator.
Mr. Bean. Very good. You would agree then when--when I hear
from school districts of how hard it has been, the massive
influx of illegal immigrants into our school system. You would
agree that that is--that is real, that is real that they are
having a hard time managing all this influx of students that
they did not know were coming?
Secretary Cardona. Planning for new students as a school
principal is something that--was something that we had to take
into account.
Mr. Bean. It is a curve ball. Do we know how many illegal
immigrants are in our school systems right now?
Secretary Cardona. I can have my staff reach out to you
about that information. I do not have it off the top of my
head.
Mr. Bean. Do you have any idea? Is it--is it in the
millions? Is it in the hundreds, or thousands? Do you have a
general idea? Here is the thing. I should know the answer. I do
not know. I have gone online to try to find the answer. I do
not know the answer.
I would have--I would assume the Department of Education,
you would know. You do not know how many are here?
Secretary Cardona. I would be happy to have my team
followup with you on the specifics.
Mr. Bean. No we--actually I am sincere when I say I would
like to know. Does there come a number though? Is there a
number in the future that you would say we just cannot take
anymore?
Is there a number that you would agree that we just cannot
take anymore? Is it causing our numbers, teaching our kids to
suffer when we just cannot logistically plan for the future?
Would you--is there a number that you would say ``enough is
enough''?
Secretary Cardona. It is the----
Mr. Bean. There is not a number?
Secretary Cardona [continuing]. The responsibility of
educators. As a school principal, I can tell you----
Mr. Bean. Oh, you take everybody? I am with you, and I
understand that is the law. Anybody that comes, you take in. Is
there a time you are going to say ``enough''? We have got to
call time out. You would tell Joe Biden time out; we just--we
are stressed.
Secretary Cardona. As educators, it is really important
that we meet the needs of our students----
Mr. Bean. There is no number, and I was hoping you would
tell me there is a number so I can say help is on the way and
we will hit that max. There is no end in sight; we are all on
our own. Are you aware how many schools have been either shut
down or partially taken over to house illegal immigrants?
Secretary Cardona. I am aware of cases of schools that----
Mr. Bean. How many? Do you know how many?
Secretary Cardona. Off the top of my head, I do not.
Mr. Bean. It is a--it is a bunch, and one would be too many
for those students that have to do that. That is something to
be aware of. That is when I hear educators, we have a lot of
struggles with numbers right now.
I chair the Subcommittee on K through 12, and our numbers
since COVID have plummeted. We have got work to do, Mr.
Secretary, and this is something that hopefully they will not
have to do it.
I want to congratulate you, because you have done something
few have done. You have united Republicans and Democrats, House
members and Senators, on coming together to say that the
Department of Education does not have the authority to give
money that is not theirs away, in terms of student loans.
Are you aware that even the Supreme Court has come out and
said this is outside of your authority? Are you aware that, the
Supreme Court, the highest court in the land, has said
Department of Education, this is not your purview. It is not
your money. This belongs in Congress. Are you aware of that,
Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Cardona. The decision of the Supreme Court was in
reference to the Heroes Act. I am acting under the Higher
Education----
Mr. Bean. You are interpreting it differently. You are
saying that you trump Congress, and you trump the courts. Is
that what you are saying, Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Cardona. That is not what I am saying.
Mr. Bean. Well, that is what it appears, and that is why
people are struggling with it. People will think it is
arbitrary, but yet you have picked winners and losers of who
you allow to forgive the money that is not ours. It is the
taxpayers. It is not forgiven. It comes back to us.
First of all, are you aware that a lot of times, and I have
been in hearings, and I was a banker and made loans. A lot of
student loans do not actually go to fund education, where the
students have rolled in credit card debt or taken trips or
bought cars.
Are you aware that it is not all actually going to
education? Are you aware of that?
Secretary Cardona. The work that we are doing with public
service loan forgiveness and borrower----
Mr. Bean. You may not be aware, so I will tell you. I have
been to hearings and the way they do it, they combine that. You
have, you have put--picked winners and losers, because for
those students that have chosen a religious-based school or a
private school, you have not forgiven their loans.
Is this your way of declaring war on those that pick a
religious school or a private school?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely not. We are working for the
working-class folks who need a break. Instead of tax breaks to
millionaires, we are trying to focus on helping those who are
trying to get their education and not be in a lifetime of debt,
sir.
Mr. Bean. I want to make you aware of so many things out
there. Thank you very much. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Bean. Ms. Omar, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Omar. It is good to see you, Mr. Secretary. Thank you
so much for joining us. I got a little jealous about everybody
thanking you for coming to their districts. We should soon see
you in CD 5.
I wanted to talk a little bit about the rise in targeting
and harassment of students on campus that are protesting
against the genocide that's taking place in Gaza, including
Jewish students, black, brown, Arab and Muslim students.
Emotions and fears are running high, as students of all
backgrounds say they are fearful of escalations of
antisemitism, Islamophobia and bigotry. My office has received
countless stories from Jewish students, Arab students, Muslim
students, who have been targeted, harassed and alienated on
campus, just because they are standing against the genocide
that is happening in Gaza.
I know that you have been meeting with students, parents
and leaders. Is there something that you can share with us
about the rise of antisemitism and Islamophobia on college
campuses?
Secretary Cardona. Yes. Thank you for the opportunity. You
know, what I hear from students and families directly, they are
scared. They are scared. You know, safety on campus is
something that they do not feel like they should compromise.
You know, we strongly condemn any acts of violence or
discrimination on campus. We have been very clear about that.
What I am hearing from families is you know, that they are
scared, that children are having to hide symbols of their faith
on their way to class, so that they are not targeted.
That to me is, you know, as a father and as an educator,
something that I stand against.
Ms. Omar. Yes. I know that the administration has condemned
a lot of speech on campus. What I have not heard be condemned
is statements like ``kill all Muslims, kill all Arabs, level
Gaza.'' Do you condemn those kind of comments?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Ms. Omar. Thank you. Will you give your commitment to this
Committee and the American people that the Department will
investigate complaints of Islamophobia, anti-Palestinian, anti-
Arab and anti-Muslim discrimination?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Ms. Omar. Thank you. What additional support could Congress
provide for you to be able to ensure robust oversight and
investigation and accountabilities carried out?
Secretary Cardona. Well thank you for that. We are asking
for a $22 million increase in our budget. We were flat funded
last year. In 2009, we had 58 more investigators and a third of
the cases that we have today. In 2019, there were 10,000 cases
a year. In 2021-22 there were 19,000.
The increase is extremely high. We need additional
investigators to close out these cases and make sure we are
providing support for our students.
Ms. Omar. Do you have an idea of the number of cases that
are pending at the moment?
Secretary Cardona. We have 149, oh excuse me, 145 cases on
shared ancestry open.
Ms. Omar. On college campuses?
Secretary Cardona. On college campuses, yes.
Ms. Omar. I want to pivot. Last time you were here, I asked
you about the Mohela frustration that a lot of borrowers were
experiencing, feeling like their rights were being violated. We
talked about how concerned I was about renewing their contract.
I know that the Department has done some work in taking some of
the cases off.
It seems like they are--that you all are going through some
processing pauses as the transition happens. How are you
ensuring that the borrowers do not have an interruption as in
the transition in the PSLF?
Secretary Cardona. Sure. Thank you for that and let me just
go back to--we have 145 open cases, 100 cases since October 7th
and they may include K-12. 100 cases since, and I believe those
are college. I can get that information to you.
We are transitioning some cases as Mohela requested to
other services. We are communicating with borrowers to try to
minimize disruption for public service loan forgiveness.
Ms. Omar. Okay, and I am wondering how the Department is
planning to make sure those that remain with Mohela are able to
receive a better service?
Secretary Cardona. Well look. I think part of fixing the
broken higher education system is making sure that we are
looking at it from the perspective of the consumer. We need to
improve student borrower services really, and part of that, a
lot of the work that we are doing at FSA and just contracting,
is to improve services.
We are also holding folks accountable, all servicers, and
there have been payments that we have withheld because the
services were not great to our borrowers. We are holding them
more accountable and we are providing more sources, and as you
mentioned with Mohela, we are moving some cases over at their
request to make the process smoother for our borrowers.
Ms. Omar. Wonderful. Thank you. I yield back.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Burlison, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Secretary, since
coming to Congress, I have been really--when people ask me what
are your thoughts, one of the things that I have--that I have
taken away from this place and tried to convey back home is the
shocking amount of espionage and activity from foreign
adversaries in the United States.
Some of those briefings that we have had, including here in
the Education Committee particularly when it comes to China and
their involvement and their form of elite capture that occurs.
My question has to do with Section 117 of the Higher Education
Act, that mandates that the universities and colleges must
report twice each year to the Secretary whenever they receive
foreign monetary or non-monetary gifts in excess of $250,000;
correct?
Secretary Cardona. Correct.
Mr. Burlison. Okay. In October 2020, the Department of
Education under the Trump administration conducted a study, and
they issued a report entitled ``Institutional Compliance with
Section 117 of the Higher Education Act of 1965.'' This is the
copy of the study. I am sure that you have reviewed that study
before.
Secretary Cardona. I have been briefed, yes.
Mr. Burlison. Yes. Madam Chair, I would like to enter this
into the record, if that is possible.
Chairwoman Foxx. Without objection.
[The report follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burlison. Thank you. In this study, they document a
shocking number of universities and colleges that were out of
compliance with Section 117. Do you have any comments regarding
that?
Secretary Cardona. Yes, thank you. I share your concern. I
am a big believer that we have to stop any foreign influence in
our schools. We are committed to that, and we are committed to
working with you, to make sure that we communicate what we are
doing on that.
I can tell you that the Department of Education has taken
it seriously. We have provided foreign gift reports of over,
almost 39,000 foreign gifts that were given to universities,
over $21 billion. This is something that we communicate openly.
We believe in transparency.
Additionally, sir, we are part of the FBI's National
Counterintelligence Task Force, to make sure that our agency is
working with law enforcement, an investigative arm, to make
sure that not only are we transparent about the information and
clear which universities are getting which gifts from which
countries, but that the arm that does the investigations has
the information.
We take it very seriously and we will continue to do that.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you. Have you followed up on this
report and the information with an updated report? Particularly
what I am interested in is how many universities are in
compliance today versus were in compliance in 2020?
Secretary Cardona. Uh-huh. I can have that information
looked into and sent to you sir.
Mr. Burlison. Okay. If--so if you have not done a report,
would you agree that you would do a followup--you would be
willing to do a followup report on that?
Secretary Cardona. I would be happy to have some followup
with you on the questions that you have.
Mr. Burlison. I am not trying to be--I am not trying to be
rigorous. I am actually asking a legitimate question, because I
would think based on what came out of this report that you
would genuinely want to know where the universities stand and
how many of them are in compliance with Section 117.
Secretary Cardona. Yes. We are definitely interested in
making sure foreign influence is out of our schools, which is
why we have reported more gifts than the previous
administration, and we are going to continue to work with the
FBI's National Counterintelligence Task Force on
investigations.
Mr. Burlison. Then my--with my limited time, I wanted to go
into an extension of this, which has to do with I think what
we're seeing is obviously the uprise in antisemitism on our
college campuses. There has been some connections made to
groups like Students for Justice in Palestine and other groups.
Are you investigating any foreign involvement or
connections between foreign entities and funneling money into
some of these groups?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you. Currently, we have 145 open
investigations. Many of them are shared ancestry. What I can
tell you is when we initiate an investigation, information
comes out during the investigation that might move the
investigation or broaden it.
While I cannot comment specifically on your question, I can
tell you that that is within the scope of information that we
receive from schools, and if that is part of our investigation
request, then it is something that would be investigated.
Mr. Burlison. These groups can receive the money, but only
directly through the universities; is that correct? Can they
receive money directly from the outside?
Secretary Cardona. I could have my team followup with you
on that information.
Mr. Burlison. Okay. That would be good to know. Thank you.
My time has expired.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Burlison. Mr. Scott, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, excuse me. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Mr. Secretary, you heard a lot about the FAFSA and
we expect you to get that back on track as quickly as possible.
You also heard a lot about the student, student debt problem
and whether or not the taxpayer ought to be paying for the--for
the loan forgiveness, whether people who are not students
should be paying for the loan forgiveness.
Do you hear the Republicans complain about the Trump tax
cut, where 80 percent of the benefits went to the top 1
percent? Did you hear them complain that the 99 percent that
actually paid for that, or did you hear them complain about the
PPP loans, people who do not own a business had to pay for the
forgiveness of those PPP loans? Did you hear any complaints
about it?
Secretary Cardona. No sir, I do not.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Now how many colleges and universities are
there in the United States?
Secretary Cardona. There are well over 5,000, sir.
Mr. Scott. On how many campuses are there active
encampments or protests at this point?
Secretary Cardona. I could not tell you off the top of my
head, but it is a small number, sir.
Mr. Scott. About 30 or 40, about 1 percent, 50 maybe? About
1 percent?
Secretary Cardona. That is about right.
Mr. Scott. On those campuses, how many students are
actually participating in the protests?
Secretary Cardona. Well you know, it depends on the campus,
but I would say probably a smaller percentage.
Mr. Scott. A small group, okay. Now you have been asked how
to intervene on how the campus should be handling these,
without much information and it varies from case to case. If a
student had a protest about better food in the cafeteria, would
you be expected to intervene and tell the college how to deal
with that?
Secretary Cardona. I would likely not, sir.
Mr. Scott. You indicated that all students have a right to
be safe on campus. That means they all have the right to be
protected under Title VI and Title IX. That means free from
antisemitism, but also Islamophobia, homophobia, racism, Asian
hate, gender, gender identity.
Did I indicate--did I hear you say that there were about
140-some cases of, what did you say, ``shared heritage''?
Secretary Cardona. Ancestry. Yes, shared ancestry, 145.
Mr. Scott. A hundred--and that would include all of the
antisemitism cases?
Secretary Cardona. Correct.
Mr. Scott. How many--how many open cases do you have on
everything else?
Secretary Cardona. We have 145 under shared ancestry. I can
have that information provided for you, to have more accurate
numbers. I do not have that in front of me.
Mr. Scott. The number of open cases is over 10,000, is it
not?
Secretary Cardona. The number of cases that we get a year
is probably closer to 19,000.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Under the implementation of Every Student
Succeeds Act, that implementation was disrupted by the
pandemic, and it had three major provisions.
One is that the--you have to ascertain whether or not there
are achievement gaps and have credible strategy to do something
about it, and resource equity. How are we getting back on track
to implement the provisions of Every Student Succeeds Act?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you, Ranking Member. We take very
seriously the accountability that ensures that our students are
making gains. You know, academically we have been paying
attention to not only NAPE data but statewide data that tells
us that students have recovered a third of the pandemic
learning loss in math, a quarter in reading, and that the gains
have been two times as high in math than in typical years, and
in reading, five times as much growth.
We are seeing growth, based on the implementation of the
dollars. However, that is--it is important that we continue to
use the assessment data that is provided by states, that our
Office of Elementary and Secondary Education have regular
conversations and meetings with states, to monitor growth and
subgroup information in terms of students that are achieving.
Mr. Scott. Now is some of that growth, because we had
significant funding under Title I in the American Rescue Plan
Act?
Secretary Cardona. Sir, I would say as a teacher and
principal, it was because of the additional funding and the
great use by our educators in the field.
Mr. Scott. I just have, I guess one. I have several other
questions that I will submit, but can you say a word about
after school program funding?
Secretary Cardona. They are critical, and we have to do
better as a country. In our grant, in our proposal, we have
funding for after school programs to reduce summer slide. We
have to do better. We cannot go back to where we were.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Scott. Mr. Moran, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Secretary Cardona,
we spoke last year, and I want to followup with some of what we
talked about last year. Let me start with just making sure that
those in my Texas district are aware of this new Title IX rule
that is being proposed by the Biden administration.
On April 29th, 2024, this new regulation was published, and
this final rule dramatically, in my opinion, changes the
existing Title IX regulations. It weakens protections for women
and girls and dilutes due process protections for those accused
of sexual harassment as defined under the regulations.
The rule also expands the definition of sex to include
gender identity. As you well know, this is going to result in
the removal of female only spaces for women and girls,
effectively forcing them to share bathrooms and showers with
biological males. It's atrocious, in my opinion.
I want to go back to what you said last year when we
talked. I asked you specifically about local control, and you
stated ``When I was at the local level and even at the district
and State level, I prefer that those decisions be made at the
local level. That's where it should be.''
That is exactly what you said. Those were your words. You
also went further last year, and you said ``You are working
with local school boards to make sure we are staying in our
lanes. Our country was designed to have local control.''
Frankly, I was shocked that you would tell me that last year,
given the over-reach of the Department of Education.
I was glad that you said that, and so now I have even more
problems with what is going on, not in the words you gave last
year but in the actions of the Department of Education and in
particular in this new rule. Do you still stand by those
statements that you made last year?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely.
Mr. Moran. All right. Having stood by those statements, I
am going to tell you what my districts back home are telling
me. I have got two letters I want to introduce. Madam
Chairwoman, I ask for unanimous consent to introduce into the
record an April 30th, 2024, letter by Tyler ISD, which is my
largest school district.
Chairwoman Foxx. Without objection.
[The letter of Mr. Moran follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Moran. I also ask for unanimous consent to enter into
the record a letter from Van Independent School District dated
May 7th, 2024.
Chairwoman Foxx. Without objection.
[The letter of Mr. Moran follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Moran. I will tell you. Some of the statements that are
made by the superintendent to me as it relates to this Title IX
atrocious rule talks about it being Constitutionally over-
reaching, an illegal edict that is so offensive to our
daughters, wives and mothers.
That is one of the statements he makes to me on the local
level, and I can assure you the rest of my school districts
share that opinion. Also says in this letter that it is ``an
inexcusable Federal assault toward girls and women that has no
place in schools.''
That is what the local communities in Texas, in East Texas
where I represent, think about the Title IX letter. From Van
Independent School District, it says in their letter ``The
changes to Title IX forces schools to treat boys as if they
were girls, and to accept every student's self-declared gender
identity.''
I have said before and I will say it again today proudly. I
say that I believe men and women were created by God with equal
and eternal value but very different, very different. It is not
up to us to try to change that identity and our humanity. Do
you agree with that, or you disagree with that?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for the opportunity to
respond. I want to correct some of the provisions under Title
IX. It is creating greater protections. You mentioned that it--
--
Mr. Moran. I asked you about my statement. Do you agree or
disagree with the statement that I made about our creator
creating men and women differently but equally?
Secretary Cardona. I can tell you what--as a school
principal too, that I do believe in local control, but I do not
believe that it is my responsibility----
Mr. Moran. We covered local control last year. I am asking
you about a very specific--about the creation by God of men and
women, and whether or not they are equally but differently
created?
Secretary Cardona. It is my responsibility to protect all
students, not just the ones that some people pick and choose.
Mr. Moran. Well, this is--you know, that should be an easy
question. We have seen this before. People sit before a panel.
We have seen it with the college presidents here recently,
where there are moral truths, there are moral foundations that
seem very evident to a lot of folks, that people that somehow
sit in your chair cannot answer directly.
It is atrocious in my opinion. I want to end my statement
today, because this is Teacher Appreciation Week by saying
this, because I do appreciate all of the hard work that all of
our teachers across this United States actually does for our
students day in and day out.
In the State of Texas, there are well over 300,000 teachers
that serve our five million students. I have met with a lot of
teachers across my district, and just like you said last year,
they do not want the Federal Government telling them how to do
their job and what their job is.
It is unfortunate this administration continues to do just
that, and issue rules and regulations that are contrary not
just to local control, but frankly morality. With that, I yield
back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Stevens, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Madam Chair and it is so great to
see you, Mr. Secretary. I am absolutely in awe of not only your
work with the Department of Education, but just really your
performance here today. You are so good at answering questions
very clearly and succinctly, and I also appreciate your written
testimony.
I would just like to reflect too. There are so many
critical topics that intersect with your purview, and we
appreciate that you are here to review the President's annual
budget proposal and answer some of the questions from us.
Earlier this term, I introduced the Aid Act, the Student
Aid Act to make yet again another adjustment to FAFSA,
recognizing that there are parents of students going to
college, parents who still have student loan debt themselves,
but yet their student does not qualify for financial aid.
I came up with this idea while knocking on doors in Hazel
Park, Michigan, and I reached a UAW household. Both mom and dad
work with the UAW in various automotive plants around Metro
Detroit. Dad had said to me, Haley we are so excited to send
our kids off to Michigan State, but we didn't qualify for
financial aid, even though I am still sitting on tens of
thousands of dollars of student loan debt myself.
It is a bill that has received a lot of support from my
colleagues. I just wanted to put it on your radar. I also
wanted to remind you that in Michigan, our Governor, who has
been so dedicated to the plight of educators in our schools and
has really accomplished some incredible things, free and
reduced lunch for all.
I know that is within the Department of Agriculture
largely, but it is something that you care deeply about. Free
pre-K as well as free, an affordable 2-year degree programs,
which are at the community college level.
Then last in Michigan, we have been rocked by school
shootings. Michigan State in February of `23 and of course the
Oxford School shooting, students at Oxford High or Middle
School when I was marching further lives in Detroit after the
Parkland shooting.
We know that we have a great runway following the
bipartisan passage of a gun safety bill, and particularly
additional resources that are going to communities to tackle
school shootings. Sir, I just want to commend you for your
leadership and thank you so much.
Then with my remaining time, I just wanted to give you a
few minutes to talk about your work and the administration's
work and particularly with the budget on funding for IDEA.
Really near and dear to my heart, something that I have rallied
all the Oakland County School System around in terms of full
funding for IDEA.
Just, just wanted to get some of your input here on better
coordination of services, what we will get from this budget
proposal, you know. Thrilled to see some of the numbers in here
with 15.4 for IDEA, as well as some of the, you know, different
components of our--that are coming down.
Secretary Cardona. Yes, thank you for that opportunity.
First of all, let me just say, you know, working as a teacher
and a school principal, I remember countless meetings with
families, parents whose children are receiving special
education services.
It was really important to remember that they receive the
core curriculum first, right? They are students first, and then
they get extra support. We are asking for an increase in IDEA
to get us to the--I think it is like 10.7 percent of the
funding of it in fiscal year `24. The increase is 10.3 for `25.
We recognize that this is not yet in keeping with what the
Federal commitment was set to be, but we are seeking more
dollars than has ever been asked before. The students and
families deserve it. We know caseloads of special education
teachers across the country is exceedingly high, which prevents
our students from getting the individualized support that they
need.
IDEA, support for students with disabilities is critical
for us to--in our budget and the work that we do ahead.
Ms. Stevens. Yes, and we recognize that the President makes
a series of tradeoffs when proposing his budget, and it is our
responsibility here in the Congress, as authorizers on this
Committee who knock on the door of the appropriators, to really
push for that original mandate, that 50 year mark that we are
about to hit of fully funding special education in the United
States of America.
This will be a game-changer for our schools, our educators.
I certainly call on my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle to push for that as appropriations season is upon us, and
with that Madam Chair, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Stevens. Ms. Chavez-
DeRemer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you, Madam Chair. Secretary
Cardona, it's been a busy time for you and in this time in
history, not for very good reasons. This Committee's unsettled
by the failures of both you and your staff in handling the
FAFSA debacle, and rising antisemitism on college campuses.
I want to start with the FAFSA. Over the past months, my
district has been handling a high number of cases for parents
seeking help with the FAFSA and how to deal with your
Department. They can't get a real person on the phone. They've
spent hours on hold, and eventually are told their issues are
technical, which is--with zero guidance on what the next steps
might be.
All the while, their kids missed early acceptance
deadlines, because they did not know how much financial aid
they were going to be working with. That part really frustrates
me. Actually, when I think about do I get mad about certain
things, those are the kind of things of unresponsiveness, and
it has been 100 percent to my office of non-responsiveness, not
even a confirmation of receiving the case when we submit one.
I pride myself on casework. The congressional phone line
for the Department sometimes allows the team to leave a
message, but no one ever calls us back. I have been frustrated.
Other agencies at least respond. They will get back to me with
an answer.
I ask myself who did you hire, because it seems
unacceptable, and really quite frankly I have hired and fired
throughout my career people, and it seems pathetic to not be
able to at least hire people who can return a message.
The Department of Education, if it exists for a real
purpose, it has to increase access to education. You and your
staff seem to have failed spectacularly unfortunately in the
casework, in clearing that bar.
Let me talk now about another low bar the Department seems
to be struggling with, on an--after October 7th, antisemites on
college campuses came out in droves. Jewish students have
openly stated that they feel threatened and unsafe, and some
have been physically assaulted.
About a week ago, one rabbi affiliated with Columbia
University advised Jewish students to leave campus for
Passover. Schools have canceled their commencement ceremoneys,
and last week G.W. University's Law School here in D.C.
relocated its final exams to an undisclosed and secure
location.
Our schools in Oregon are dealing with a similar situation,
and I have talked to those university presidents and what the
future could look like. It really is the greatest crisis in
American education in decades.
Last week before a Senate Appropriations Subcommittee, you
mentioned the Department's Office of Civil Rights roughly had
145 investigations into the universities and schools, and the
school districts for potential Title VI violations.
This of course is the legal basis for investigations and
actions regarding discrimination based on race or religion, in
this case countless Jewish students. You somewhat touched on it
today, but what is the timeline for the resolution of these
investigations, and when will penalties, if appropriate, be
announced and imposed? I really would hope that you do not
answer if you will give us more money, you will have those
answers.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for the questions. I agree
with you that hate has no place on our campuses and we must
act. I just want to go back and say this is the administration
that reopened schools, provided debt relief and overhauled the
40-year-old FAFSA system.
While delayed, we are working 24-7 to serve the people that
you represent, and I am committed to making sure you have
information. I will ask someone from my team to reach out to
you this week on your questions.
With regard to antisemitism, it is unacceptable, and we
take a very strong stance on that. We have more cases open. We
have closed more cases than the last administration already. We
are committed to it. We have guidance within two clicks of our
website that provides a Dear Colleague letter that was sent out
today, a letter that I sent out Friday. This is something we
take very seriously as well.
Ms. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you, and so what I--the reason
these investigations are important to get through is because it
really does not seem to protect students when they need it
most, and that is immediately.
Secretary Cardona. Right.
Ms. Chavez-DeRemer. On December 6th, you received a letter
from the leaders of the Jewish Orthodox Jewish Congregations of
America. They asked you to issue that guidance, and I was glad
to see this morning that you issued that new guidance for the
administration pre-K to post-grad to fill those Title VI
obligations.
Mr. Secretary, exactly how many forms of guidance have you
now circulated since October 7th?
Secretary Cardona. We have had over 100 actions, and I can
tell you with the guidance, I have to say at least three or
four that I can think of off the top of my head. There could be
more. Visit ed.gov, click on Supporting Campus Safety and----
Ms. Chavez-DeRemer. I appreciate that. Thank you.
Secretary Cardona [continuing]. There is a whole list there
for you and for your constituents.
Ms. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you. It also says schools have a
legal responsibility to address the discrimination against
those students, and it sounds like that you would include when
protestors shout ``From the River to the Sea'' at Jewish
students, and yet out of roughly ten reference examples, this
new guidance provides the chant is never mentioned.
Two final questions before my time is up. Does the
Department recognize that screaming ``From the River to the
Sea'' at Jewish students is a call for genocide, and two, if
schools do not follow this guidance, will you impose penalties
such as withholding funding as you committed to Congresswoman
Manning that you will do that?
Secretary Cardona. Calls for genocide are abhorrent, and we
stand against those, and if brought forward in an
investigation----
Ms. Chavez-DeRemer. Will you withhold funding as you
committed to for Congresswoman Manning?
Secretary Cardona. Absolutely. If schools refuse to adhere
to Title VI, absolutely.
Ms. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Smucker, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you, Secretary----
Chairwoman Foxx. I am sorry Mr. Smucker, and after your
questioning, we will take a break and then come back. Thank
you.
Mr. Smucker. Yes. Thank you, Secretary, for being here
today. I am deeply concerned about the fact that your
department failed two financial audits for two consecutive
years. After inspecting your department numbers, your
independent auditor was unable to complete the audit, and
instead was forced to issue what is known as a disclaimer of
opinion, which by the way has not happened in two decades and
is a really big deal in the auditing world.
Your auditors said in effect that they had no confidence in
your numbers, and how the Department carries out estimates and
assumptions for the direct and FFEL student loan portfolios. My
staff followed up and spoke with your auditor and learned that
during the course of the 2023 audit, your department discovered
22,000 anomalies in the data.
That is the basis for your--for the student loan portfolio,
and then after doing additional investigation, your department
discovered another eight million anomalies in the data. This
means that the underlying data you were feeding into the
student loan portfolio was just simply filled with errors.
All in all, a very highly irresponsible financial
management from the Department, particularly of a $1.6 trillion
portfolio owned by 43 million borrowers. If the Department were
a private bank, you would be held accountable to your
investors, and you would be out of business by now.
It certainly undermines any confidence that anyone can have
in your estimates and assumptions that the Department has used
in these portfolios. Why should the Department of Education and
the Office of Student Aid be treated any differently than a
private financial institution?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for the question. I agree with
you that it is really important to make sure that we are up to
date on our financial audits, and I just want to correct the
statement. It was not a failure; it was a disclaimer of
opinion. Those are two different things based on the
information that they were provided. We are doing new things
that have never been done at the Department of Education.
No. 2, the errors in the data. You are absolutely right. I
am proud that our team found this and is correcting it. It is
been there for several administrations. It was our team that
found it and is fixing it. You know, we operate on two-tenths
of 1 percent of a budget for a $1.6 trillion portfolio. We are
not being treated like other banks. What we are asking is for a
modest increase----
Mr. Smucker. You are not being treated how? I am sorry, I
missed.
Secretary Cardona. No, funding-wise. You know, to
administer a $1.6 trillion portfolio, we are operating on two-
tenths of 1 percent for administrative cost. We are asking for
additional dollars to help make sure that we cannot only
implement the comments from auditors, but also improve services
for our stakeholders.
Mr. Smucker. How do you think we should be providing
additional funding? Do you think the American taxpayer should
be satisfied with the funding that you have today, with the way
that you are handling $1.6 trillion in taxpayer dollars?
Secretary Cardona. We found the errors and we are
correcting that. We are providing better services, and it is
our goal to do a better job of providing services for our
borrowers. Your support of the budget will help that.
Mr. Smucker. I want to get to the clock hour rule, which is
the Department has reversed what is known as the clock hour
rule, which allows career-oriented education programs that are
offered at community colleges and career colleges, to provide
students with the education, with the amount of hours that they
feel that students need to be successful in the career.
Specifically, to extend the number of hours to more than
150 percent of the state's minimum, and then still receive the
Federal financial aid. As I said that policy, it is important
for a lot of these programs are complicated careers, and the
schools and the students feel they need additional hours to be
adequately prepared.
I think that policy's going to result in less students
having access to education and that will lead them to these
good-paying jobs. In response to industry concerns, the
Department announced that it will use, and I quote
``enforcement discretion'' when enforcing the rule between July
2024 and January 2025.
There is no guarantee for schools that they will be given
the time they need to get all the necessary approvals by State
legislators, accrediting agencies and Federal regulators.
First, why the policy in the first place? Why would the
government mandate that schools can only offer a bare minimum
of hours to students?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you for that question. Look, I
think we are on the same page. We want to make sure we have
opportunities for students to engage in, whether it is CTE or
industry-connected fields. We want to make sure that while we
are providing greater opportunities, we are also providing high
quality programming.
What I am hearing from you is that there is some concerns,
and we want to make sure that we are listening and responsive
to the concerns. I will ask----
Mr. Smucker. I will ask one additional question; I am
running out of time. You mentioned discretionary enforcement. I
do not know exactly what that means. Can you simply delay the
full implementation of a rule until January 2025?
Secretary Cardona. Thank you, sir. We will take that into
consideration, and I will have my team followup with you on
those.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Smucker. We do have members
who are coming back after votes, so we are going to take a
break right now for votes, and we will be back 5 minutes after
the third vote begins.
[Recess.]
Chairwoman Foxx. Mr. Secretary, thank you very much for
coming back after our break for votes. I now recognize Mr.
Comer for 5 minutes.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Madam Chair and thank you Secretary
Cardona for being here today. You acknowledge in your testimony
that a budget is a statement of values. I hope you will agree
that the hateful and vile foam that is being spewed on many
college campuses are not in any way the values of the
Department of Education.
Over the last several years, we have seen university
presidents begging for assistance from local law enforcement,
including those like George Washington University, facing
resistance from local elected officials several blocks away
here in Washington, DC. I know that because I met with the
university president last week.
Mr. Secretary, President Biden asserted that there is the
right to protest, but not the right to cause chaos. Do you
share those values and sentiments with the President?
Secretary Cardona. I do.
Mr. Comer. Do you condemn the illegal activities and
antisemitic and discriminatory speech we have seen over the
last several weeks on college campuses?
Secretary Cardona. I do.
Mr. Comer. Have you been in contact with George Washington
University president Ellen Granberg regarding her request for
assistance in clearing the unlawful encampment?
Secretary Cardona. I have not spoken to the president. We
are--our staff is available to work with colleges. We have
spoken to hundreds of presidents in the last several months,
and we will continue to make ourselves available.
Mr. Comer. Have you spoken with Washington, DC. Mayor
Bowser regarding the request from George Washington University
to utilize law enforcement to clear the trespassers who have
invaded the campus?
Secretary Cardona. I have not spoken to the mayor.
Mr. Comer. Well, I will note, and Madam Chair also serves
on the House Oversight Committee, the Mayor will be in
attendance here tomorrow on an emergency hearing we called on
the Oversight Committee, to try to understand why the mayor has
refused to assist with the request from George Washington
University.
Mr. Secretary, do you believe preventing law enforcement
from providing security within their jurisdiction is a
dereliction of the Mayor's duty?
Secretary Cardona. Sir, I can tell you that hate has no
place in our schools, and we take the role of enforcing Title
VI very seriously. We are committed not only to compliance, but
also to building capacity and providing resources, so that
university leaders and the public in general have tools at
their fingertips on how to keep campuses safe.
There is too much hate happening on our campus that we have
to address, and we are adamant that we are providing more
materials and compliance, oversight given the resources that we
have. I strongly suggest, sir, that you support our budget,
which will allow us to have more investigators to expeditiously
move forward on these cases.
Mr. Comer. Well, let me ask you this, Mr. Secretary. Will
you commit to supporting President Granberg and George
Washington University administrators in similar situations and
other university administrators in similar situations, in
restoring order and removing illegal encampments from
university grounds?
Secretary Cardona. You know, it is my responsibility to
make sure that campuses are safe, that students have a safe
learning environment, that they can proceed with graduations--
--
Mr. Comer. Will you commit--well, I can tell you because I
have walked through the encampments. It is not a safe learning
environment. We heard from several Jewish students at George
Washington University who were threatened. They were being
threatened while they were escorting us through the encampment.
The university president begging the city of Washington,
D.C. police to come in and remove the trespassers, and they are
refusing to do so. I believe we are in the second week now. I
believe it is almost been 14 days. We are approaching the third
week of this violation of the law, of trespassers,
intimidation, of Jewish students, desecration of statues.
It is George Washington dressed as, it appeared to me, a
Hamas soldier. I do think the Department of Education should
bear some responsibility. I do think it is the role of the
Department of Education ensure that these students' lives are
being protected, that they are in a safe environment, and from
what I saw firsthand at George Washington University, I do not
think that is the case, especially for Jewish students.
I guess my question is will you commit to working with
these university presidents and administrators who are begging
these local law enforcement officials in these, I hate to say
this, but blue cities who are refusing, for whatever reason, go
in and remove the trespassers?
Will you commit to working with these university
presidents, because they are reaching out asking for help from
somewhere. The House Oversight Committee has jurisdiction over
the city of Washington, D.C. We are going to do everything we
can, but there are a lot of campuses in a lot of cities around
the United States where the administrators are begging for
assistance.
Can they call the Department of Education, and will you
assist?
Secretary Cardona. Yes, they can call the Department of
Education. We are going to make ourselves available to support
them, and ultimately make sure students are safe on campus.
Thank you.
Mr. Comer. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Comer. Mr. Williams, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Mr. Secretary,
you have made it this far. Are you a hockey fan?
Secretary Cardona. I love--I am a big football fan.
Mr. Williams. Okay. That would be a no, but that actually
is a good lead-in to my question. You have probably heard of
Wayne Gretsky, a famous hockey player who used to say that what
made him great is that he would skate to where the puck was
going to be.
In everything I have observed, you have done an
extraordinary job of skating to where the puck is not going to
be. I would call it your greatest skill, and maybe that is
because you are a football fan. I think the efforts that you
make to avoid answering questions seem to be antithetical to
the purpose of these kinds of hearings.
You know, are you going to be--is your department going to
have all the kinks worked out on FAFSA enrollments by October
1st, by the beginning of the 2024-2025 deadline?
Secretary Cardona. Yes, we recognize how important FAFSA
is, and we are committed to making----
Mr. Williams. I am so glad itis important. Are you going to
be ready on October 1st? This is the executive branch you are,
right? I mean you are in charge of that?
Secretary Cardona. Certainly, I am in charge of that.
Mr. Williams. Okay, and so October 1st, 2024, what should
parents expect?
Secretary Cardona. My expectation is that FAFSA will be
ready to go, and that they are going to have information on----
Mr. Williams. Are you committing to that? I mean these
parents are planning. Are you committed to October 1st, 2024?
Man, that FAFSA thing, you know. A year late, I am sorry, but
it is going to work.
Secretary Cardona. As I said before and I will repeat it
again, I am making sure that the staff knows this is the
highest priority, and that it is my expectation that on October
1st it is ready.
Mr. Williams. Do you have the authority to make things
happen in your department?
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Mr. Williams. You are certain?
Secretary Cardona. The answer was yes.
Mr. Williams. Okay, good. Thank you. One of the things that
I have seen is that we have campuses that are essentially being
burned down on Title IX issues, and I am sorry on Title VI
issues, and you are spending a lot of time on rewriting Title
IX issues.
We have Jewish students afraid to go to classes. We have
disruptions, classes being canceled, commencement being
canceled. Which of these accomplishments are you most proud of?
Secretary Cardona. This morning we issued a Dear Colleague
letter for college leaders. Friday, I submitted a letter to
5,000 leaders. We are committed to ensuring Title VI is adhered
to. We have more investigations on shared ancestry, and we are
working diligently to move those investigations to completion.
Your support of the budget would be helpful, and so we are
committed also to providing resources to universities on how to
comply with Title VI.
Mr. Williams. A little later, is it not?
Secretary Cardona. No. We did not just start this. This is
like our third set of guidance. I would ask you to visit the
resource page that we put together with input from parents,
students, Jewish leaders and universities.
Mr. Williams. I will be happy--in good faith, I will be
happy to do that. You mentioned your budget, that you are
asking for an increase of $3 billion, is that right?
Secretary Cardona. For FSA? Are you saying for Federal
Student Aid?
Mr. Williams. For the--I do not think----
Secretary Cardona. In general, yes.
Mr. Williams. I thought it was for the whole thing, yes.
Secretary Cardona. Yes.
Mr. Williams. You are cutting charter schools by 40
million; is that correct?
Secretary Cardona. No. We are proposing a reduction of $40
million to the charter schools grant.
Mr. Williams. What is the difference between your cutting
by 40 million and you are proposing that you do that, because
this is--again, this is where the puck is and it is sort of
opposite of the use of the English language that I have grown
accustomed.
Secretary Cardona. Sure. Well, that is fine. We are
proposing a $40 million decrease to the budget that we had
before.
Mr. Williams. Students in my district, and particularly in
some of the poorest neighborhoods in my district, there is
waiting lists to get on charter schools, and they depend on
this. I understand from your previous testimony that it will
not cut any services to charter schools. I think that was your
representation in testimony today, is that right? Is that your
expectation?
Secretary Cardona. The charter school grant that we
operate, which is still the largest competitive K-12 grant that
we have, we would not see a reduction in CSP awards, correct.
Mr. Williams. Well, I encourage you to stick with football,
because hockey's not going to be your sport. Thanks so much for
your time. I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Williams. Ms. Omar, do you
have a closing statement you would like to make?
Ms. Omar. Our education system must break down barriers,
not create them. We must ensure that every student, regardless
of zip code, has access to equitable and high-quality
education. As we near the 70th anniversary of Brown v. Board of
Education, it is disheartening to see racial and economic
segregation persist in America's schools.
Secretary Cardona, a good quality education should be a
right afforded to every student. Thank you, and to the Biden
and Harris administration, we have seen great strides in our K
through 12 and higher education system.
While Democrats continue to push for progress, our efforts
have been dampened by Republicans' extreme culture war field
agenda. We must prioritize meaningful solutions over harmful
and divisive rhetoric. We must put people over politics. As we
move forward, Democrats are committed to supporting the
Department, to reflect our commitment to an equitable
education. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Omar. I now recognize
myself for a closing statement. Mr. Secretary, you admitted
here today that college graduates earn over a million dollars
more than those who don't go to college. Let me repeat that.
In your own words, college graduates are wealthier. Why in
the hell should Americans who have chosen a less expensive path
to a career pay the student loan bill of their wealthier peers?
From the regressive and inflationary repayment pause, you
continued for over 3 years with blanket bailouts for borrowers
making over $300,000 through your so-called SAVE plan that
ensures lawyers and those with advanced degrees pay back a
fraction of what they owe.
Your Department is simply transferring wealth from
disadvantaged families you claim to care about to your
political donor class you need to help you win this year's
election. It is shocking how much the debt cancellation agenda
has steered your ship, and despite all of this, your
Department's Fiscal Year 202025 budget request shows that under
your leadership, students will default at greater rates going
forward than those who borrowed at the peak of the COVID-19
pandemic.
If that truly is the case, I do not know how to
characterize your tenure other than an abysmal failure.
Now I want to turn to antisemitism. You unequivocally
condemned anyone saying, ``kill all Muslims.'' Good for you. We
all should condemn that, and yet when given multiple
opportunities, you would not condemn ``From the river to the
sea,'' nor would you condemn calls for campuses to eliminate
Hillel.
How can the Jewish community in this country trust you to
address antisemitism on campuses if you have such double
standards about antisemitism? Americans are waking up to the
radicalism on campus, and the radical, progressive agenda that
has consumed the Department of Education, and thank God they
are.
With that, I adjourn the Committee, and thank the Secretary
for being here.
Secretary Cardona. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 2:40 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.

[Questions and Responses for the Record by Secretary Miguel
Coardona]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
