- MEMBER DAY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEMBER DAY

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, DECEMBER 1, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-30

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-138 PDF            WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on December 1, 2023.................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Foxx, Hon. Virginia, Chairwoman, Committee on Education and
the Workforce..............................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', Ranking Member, Committee on
Education and the Workforce................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5

WITNESSES

Finstad, Hon. Brad, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Minnesota.........................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Kilmer, Hon. Derek, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Yakym, Hon. Rudy, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Indiana.................................................    13
Prepared statement of....................................    15
Castro, Hon. Joaquin, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas.............................................    16
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Fitzpatrick, Hon. Brian, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Pennsylvania..................................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Wenstrup, Hon. Brad, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Ohio..............................................    26
Prepared statement of....................................    28

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Fitzpatrick, Hon. Brian, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Pennsylvania:
Letter dated November 29, 2023 from Boys & Girls Clubs of
America (BCGA).........................................    24

MEMBER DAY

----------

Friday, December 1, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The committee met pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., 2124
Rayburn Building, Hon. Virginia A. Foxx [Chairman of the
Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Foxx, and Scott.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Mindy Barry,
General Counsel; Isabel Foster, Press Assistant; Daniel
Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant; Sheila Havenner, Director of
Information Technology; Paxton Henderson, Intern; Georgie
Littlefair, Clerk; Hannah Matesic, Deputy Staff Director;
Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Maura Williams, Director of
Operations; Savoy Adams, Minority Intern; Nekea Brown, Minority
Director of Operations; Rashage Green, Minority Director of
Education Policy; Christian Haines, Minority General Counsel;
Emanual Kimble, Minority Professional Staff; Stephanie Lalle,
Minority Communications Director; Kristen Lemus, Minority
Intern; Raiyana Malone, Minority Press Secretary; Kevin
McDermott, Minority Director of Labor Policy; Kota Mizutani,
Minority Deputy Communication Director; Kyra Patterson,
Minority Intern; Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director;
Clinton Spencer IV, Minority Staff Assistant; and Banyon
Vassar.
Chairwoman Foxx. Good morning, everyone. The Committee on
Education Workforce will come to order. I note that a quorum is
present. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to call a
recess at any time. Thanks to all of our guests for joining
this year's Member Day Hearing.
Non-Committee members are invited to share stories,
policies and issues from their home districts to help inform
our decisionmaking as we move forward with legislation. The
Committee plans soon to pass key pieces of legislation
impacting postsecondary education and the workforce.
We greatly value the input of members regarding their
priorities. As one of the hardest working Committees in
Congress, the Committee on Education and Workforce is an
effective audience and advocate for member's concerns. We have
reported 23 bills and resolutions from this Committee so far
this year, and 11 have passed the full House.
Furthermore, I am a firm believer that no Committee speaks
to the issues impacting everyday working Americans quite like
the Committee on Education and the Workforce. Our jurisdiction
spans from childcare to classrooms, pension funds and
everything in between. For these reasons, a wide variety of
perspectives are not just admissible, but welcomed and
encouraged.
I look forward to members providing the Committee with
views today which help broaden our horizons. With that, I yield
to the Ranking Member for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Foxx follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chair. Today the Committee is
gathered to hear from Members of Congress about their
priorities for improving our education system, supporting
workers, making healthcare more affordable, and strengthening
our economy. Its jurisdiction covers a wide range of policy
areas impacting Americans throughout the country from birth to
retirement.
In fact, in the last Congress Committee democrats advanced
legislation that reduced the unemployment rate to historic
lows, added millions of jobs to the economy, reduce healthcare
costs and save the pensions of over 1 million workers and
protected thousands of businesses all while fulfilling our
promise to ensure that students have access to high-quality
public education through the most significant one-time Federal
investment in K through 12 education in our history.
Regrettably, this Congress has not been quite as
productive. We focus mainly on culture wars and ways to
undermine labor unions, and despite the unprecedented rise in
child labor and multiple requests from the minority, we have
yet to hold a single hearing on what Congress can do to end
child labor law violations.
We are responsible for receiving input and ideas from
Members of Congress representing all parts of this diverse
nation. Today's hearing provides us with an opportunity to hear
from members not on this Committee on the work they believe
remains to be done to support our communities further. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and I want to thank the members for being
with us today.
We welcome your input and look forward to working together
to ensure that America is a country where everyone can succeed.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Scott follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6138.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6138.003

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Scott. Before I dispense
with the legal aspects, as you all know, votes are going to be
called fairly soon and we would like very much to get this done
before we have to leave to go to vote.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 8C, all members who wish to
insert statements into the record may do so by submitting them
to the Committee Clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format
by 5, after the date of this hearing, which is December 15,
2023. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 14 days to allow such statements and other extraneous
material referenced during the hearing to be submitted for the
official hearing record.
Members will have 5 minutes to discuss their education and
workforce related priorities. I remind those members that they
are also able to submit written testimony in support of their
legislation. I now recognize Representative Brad Finstad from
Minnesota.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRAD FINSTAD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA

Mr. Finstad. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx and Ranking Member
Scott, for the opportunity to present an important issue to the
Education and Workforce Committee. I am proud to represent
Minnesota's First congressional District, and advocate on
issues that are top of mind for southern Minnesotans. As you
both know, the largest COVID-19 fraud in the Nation Feeding our
Future took place in Minnesota.
Feeding our Future exploited USDA child nutrition programs
to steal over 250 million dollars from taxpayer money meant to
feed hungry children. Indictments later revealed that
fraudsters purchased luxury homes, vacations, cars, and even
private jets on the taxpayer's dime.
To date, 60 individuals have been charged by the U.S.
Department of Justice in connection with this fraud scheme. I
have been proud to work with Chairwoman Foxx, Chairman Comer,
Chairman Thompson, and the rest of the Minnesota republican
delegation in conducting oversight of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture and the Minnesota Department of Education, and
their oversight of improper payments to Feeding our Future.
I look forward to continuing this work until all
responsible parties are held accountable, and we get to the
bottom of how these agencies allowed this fraud to happen.
Unfortunately, USDA and the Minnesota Department of Education
have not fully complied with this Committee's oversight
efforts. It is time to take further action to ensure
accountability and identify the bureaucratic failures that led
to this massive fraud scheme.
I urge you to consider H.R. 4786, the Feeding Children Not
Fraudsters Act, which would audit any cases of COVID-related
fraud committed through USDA's child nutrition programs, to
provide Congress the information necessary to fix any
bureaucratic failures and hold those responsible accountable.
I look forward to working with members on both sides of the
aisle to advance this legislation, and I hope the Committee
will strongly consider this important step to conduct proper
oversight of this massive fraud scheme. Thank you again for
convening this hearing, and for the opportunity to list my
priorities. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Rep. Finstad follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much, Mr. Finstad.
Representative Kilmer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DEREK KILMER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Mr. Ranking Member.
I appreciate you having this Member Day hearing. I know we
submitted a written testimony to you, so I am just going to
talk a little bit about one of my priorities, and tell you the
genesis of it.
A few years ago, I got invited to a YMCA in my district,
thinking they were going to talk to me about gymnasiums losing
money during the pandemic. That is not what they wanted to talk
to me about. They wanted to talk to me about fights breaking
out in their YMCA over politics. Over the t-shirt someone was
wearing, the hat someone was wearing, the cable news channel
they were watching on the elliptical. They literally had fights
breaking out.
They said it has become so bad we cannot ignore it anymore.
We have actually hired a consultant that is training our staff,
training our Board in conflict resolution. We are going to host
some events to try to bridge some of the differences in our
community so that the Y does not turn into the Jerry Springer
show.
They said just out of curiosity any Federal support for
that? I said no, not that I know of. A few months later I got--
we had some bad news in my district. We had a series of attacks
on religious institutions. The Islamic Center was burned to the
ground. We had a church vandalized, we had two Buddhist faith
leaders assaulted outside of their temple.
In the spirit of something good coming out of something bad
they held an interfaith solidarity event. It was awesome. It
was powerful. People saying, you know, that is not what we are
about, a part of living in a religiously and otherwise diverse
pluralistic democracies. You are going to live next to people
who think and look and pray differently than you do, and it
cannot come to violence and conflict.
Afterwards, one of the faith leaders came up to me and said
you know that was a pretty powerful--90 minutes. If we are
going to do this right, we are going to do this in an ongoing
way. They said any Federal support for something like that. I
said not that I know of, at least not currently. I looked into
it.
The United States actually does spend tens of millions of
dollars trying to build bridges and foster social cohesion as a
means of strengthening democracy in other countries through the
National Endowment for Democracy. We do not do that here in
America. I introduced a bill called the Building Civic Bridges
Act.
When we introduced it, we introduced it with 12. In the
last Congress, there were 12 democratic sponsors and 12
republican sponsors, who would set up a pilot program through
AmeriCorps to support some of these hyper local efforts in our
communities to try to bridge some of these differences across
lines of difference.
We chose AmeriCorps in part because they have footprints in
most of our communities, and under their authorization they are
able to do some of that grant making. One of the other things
in the bill is to actually provide training to AmeriCorps
members so that they learn these skills related to bridge
building, so that we can actually have people on the ground
trying to bridge some of the differences in our community.
This bill has received the support of civic bridge building
organizations of faith leaders and faith groups, the business
community, groups like the U.S. Chamber and the Business
Roundtable have endorsed it, and institutions of higher
education who just want to see us overcome some of this toxic
polarization in our country.
We hope to introduce this bill again, and I would ask as
you know, certainly as someone who has announced that I will be
leaving Congress next year, this is something I would love to
see us actually make some progress on. I think this is
something we have got to--I do not want us to just accept this
level of dysfunction--and polarization in our communities as
just something to get accustomed to.
I will just quickly mention because I know we are short on
time. I was heartened when we met earlier. You were working on
WIOA reauthorization as we met--the new democrat coalition has
a number of priorities in that space. My Investing in Digital
Skills Act was previously included in WIOA in the last
Congress. I am hoping that it can be included again.
The New Dems are also advocating for new ways for Americans
to be introduced to STEM and trades, both in K-12 and in
community partnerships. There is a bipartisan bill called the
Creating Opportunities to Thrive and Advance Act that I co-lead
that would expand career counseling and allow for public
outreach so more folks can learn about those opportunities.
Those are some of the priorities that I know when we met
with you, Madam Chair, through the New Dems, that we are hoping
that this Committee can consider. With that, I know you are
short on time, so I will yield back the remaining 50 seconds
and thank you again for your consideration.
[The prepared statement of Rep. Kilmer follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Kilmer. Representative
Yakym, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RUDY YAKYM, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF INDIANA

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Chairman Foxx and Ranking Member
Scott. I appreciate you giving those of us who are not on the
Education and Workforce Committee an opportunity to present our
priorities. I also want to thank you for calling a hearing next
week to examine a topic that I would like to introduce today:
the outburst of antisemitism that has gripped college campuses
in the wake of the October 7th attack on Israel.
Madam Chair, in the nearly 2 months since October 7th, we
as House members have met with the families of hostages and
victims. We have borne witness to the utter inhumanity
inflicted by Hamas terrorists on innocent men, women, children
and babies. We have seen the images and video footage that will
forever haunt us. Closer to home we have also heard disturbing
accounts from Jewish and Israeli college students, and faculty
who have faced threats, intimidation, vandalism, and even
physical violence.
They say they do not feel comfortable wearing symbols of
their faith. Hillel Houses, are hiring extra security. Such a
climate of fear and intimidation on our campuses is
unacceptable. It is baffling that so many of these institutions
who police the most micro of microaggressions seem to be
meeting this actual wave of antisemitism, this actual wave of
aggression with nothing more than a yawn.
They will throw the book at someone who uses the wrong
pronouns. They will spend time compiling a 13-page handbook of
banned words including American, immigrant and grandfather.
Yet, elimination of chants of ``From the river to the sea
Palestine will be free.'' ``Globalize the intifada.'' Ring out
among groups marching across the quad. Signs are raised that
show a star of David in a trashcan with the caption that reads,
``Keep the world clean.''
A sign at a recent protest at Reed College even read,
``Hitler would be proud.'' Madam Chair, what is going on on
these campuses? Some university leaders have stepped up with
forceful words and actions, and they should be commended. Too
many have not.
As this Committee knows well, most colleges and
universities these days seem to have offices for diversity,
equity and inclusion, or DEI. I was curious to know what
exactly is happening with the I in DEI in the wake of October
7th, and that is why on November 6th I sent a letter to the top
DEI officials at 110 colleges and universities asking some
simple questions.
Does the DEI office maintain an official written definition
of antisemitism? Does it consider things such as slogans and
signs that I described earlier to be antisemitic? Does it have
any employees dedicated to educating or raising awareness about
antisemitism, handling the allegations of antisemitism and/or
promoting inclusion of Israeli and Jewish students and faculty?
What actions have been taken, and what resources provided
since October 7th to promote an environment of inclusion for
Jewish and Israeli faculty and students? These 110 schools were
not chosen at random, they were chosen because of at least one
verified incidence that could be considered antisemitic. It
could have been chants or signs, it could have been something
worse like Jewish students being forced to barricade themselves
for safety.
It could have been statements from Jewish and Israeli
students and faculty expressing unease with their campus
environment. Some campuses have obviously been worse than
others, but it is sadly proved easy to find at least one
example in all 110. In fact, I have taken this opportunity to
announce that my office today will be sending an additional 16
letters to DEI officials.
Let me be clear. One incident, one action by a few students
does not damn a whole university, but it also does not make any
of these questions less valid. If a DEI office is proud of its
response and feels that it has got a good story to tell, I want
to know. These letters represent an opportunity to confront or
confirm the skepticism that many have about DEI offices.
Madam Chair, it has become clear that October 7th revealed
an antisemitic rot in the floor boards of our institutions of
higher education. A recent Anti-Defamation League survey found
that only 38.6 percent of students feel very or extremely
comfortable on campuses in the wake of October 7th.
That is compared with 63.7 percent before October 7th. I
applaud your efforts to examine this important topic, and I
hope we can work together moving forward to ensure that
antisemitism has no place on our college campuses. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Rep. Yakym follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Yakym. Representative
Castro, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOAQUIN CASTRO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member
Scott. Good to be with you all again. Thank you for holding
this hearing and allowing me to share some of my constituent's
priorities with the Committee today.
Despite gains in educational attainment since the original
Higher Education Act was passed in 1965, Hispanic adults are
less likely to hold a college degree compared to their peers.
Hispanic students constitute a significant and growing portion
of the United States student population. It is imperative that
we address the gaps of educational success in college degree
attainment.
There are more low-income students and students of color
enrolling in college than ever before because a college degree
remains the most certain path to upward mobility in the United
States. However, these students face many obstacles to
completing their education, including high school course work
that fails to prepare them for college, and additional barriers
to enrollment, financial aid and other processes.
These students may also face unique challenges with
reliability transportation and child care, unstable housing,
and limited on campus support. To address these issues,
Congress must take greater steps to ensure the historically
underserved students have the resources they need to succeed in
college. This means investments in K through 12 education
programs that fund America's public schools.
Investments in teacher training, support and compensation,
investments in retention and completion, and investments in
research and development at Hispanic serving institutions or
HSIs. I urge this Committee to take up two bills I have
introduced this Congress to address these issues.
The Hispanic Educational Resources and Empowerment, or HEAR
Act, I introduced with Senator Alex Padilla would authorize
grants to fund partnerships between HSIs and school districts
that serve a large percentage of low-income and Latino
students, fostering a college going culture and preparing
students for college success.
Together with Senator Cory Booker, I also introduced the
Advanced Coursework Equity Act, which would increase the
enrollment and performance of under-represented students in
advanced courses, including eighth grade algebra, advanced
placement, international Baccalaureate and dual programs and
more.
When I got to college in the fall of 1992, I met students
who had earned dozens of college credits through advanced
course work before they even got to campus, accelerating their
path to graduation and preparing them for the rigors of a tough
school. At my Title I public high school in San Antonio, there
were only three AP courses available, and very few students had
the same opportunities as my future classmates at Stanford.
I think my time may have run out, and so I want to thank
you all for having us today, and urge you to consider these two
pieces of legislation.
Chairwoman Foxx. Two minutes remaining, but if you want to
yield back, we will----
Mr. Castro. Well, the timer went out. I am sorry. No. I
will just finish up real quick. Across the country the story is
the same for millions of students. A 2020-2021 Department of
Education Civil Rights data collection showed that 39 percent
of more than 31,000 public middle schools did not offer algebra
I. Of the more than 26,000 public high schools across the
country, only 75 percent offered chemistry.
67 percent advanced mathematics, 61 percent offered
physics, 49 percent offered computer science and 48 percent
offered calculus. Disparities and access to advanced courses
for under-represented students, including black and Latino
students is particularly concerning.
For example, approximately 35 percent of schools with high
enrollments of black and Latino students offered calculus,
compared to 54 percent of schools with low enrollments of black
and Latino students. Latino students represented 27 percent of
total high school student enrollment, but account for 20
percent of students enrolled in AP science and AP computer
science courses, and 19 percent of students enrolled in AP
mathematics courses.
Talent is distributed across every American community. I
think we would all agree on that, but equal opportunity is not,
so thank you for your consideration, and I urge consideration
of these bills.
[The prepared statement of Rep. Castro follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. Representative
Fitzpatrick, you are recognized--Fitzgerald.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRIAN FITZPATRICK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Fitzpatrick. Fitzpatrick. You had it right the first
time.
Chairwoman Foxx. I had it right the first time.
Fitzpatrick, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member
Scott, and members of the Committee. Thank you for allowing us
to advocate on behalf of our constituents here today before
your committee. The mental health crisis facing our Nation,
specifically amongst our kids throughout this country requires
immediate action by this Congress.
Over the last decade cases of anxiety, depression and other
mental health challenges have dramatically increased amongst
our youth. In fact, it is estimated that over 40 percent of our
school students throughout this country do not have adequate
access to comprehensive mental health resources.
Madam Chair, Ranking Member, the combination of these
increased needs for mental health resources at our schools, and
the national shortage of professionals in this field have
exacerbated this crisis, and as Co-Chair of the bipartisan
Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Task Force, the
largest bipartisan task force in this body, I am proud to
support the efforts that will directly address the needs of our
students.
That is why I introduced H.R. 3228, the Mental Health in
Schools Excellence Program Act. This bipartisan bill will
authorize the Department of Education to partner with higher
education institutions across America to assist in covering the
costs of students pursuing careers as school psychologists,
school counselors, and school social workers.
Strengthening the workforce pipeline will increase access
to comprehensive mental health resources for students to ensure
that our kids have the resources they need to succeed. I
encourage all of our colleagues, particularly those on this
Committee, to join us in addressing this mental health crisis
amongst our school students by working to provide sufficient
resources to ensure that no student is left behind in their
fight to succeed in this country.
I would also like to address the importance of
strengthening and modernizing our Nation's nutrition programs,
supporting our children, specifically the special supplemental
nutrition program for women, infants and children. The WIC
program is a crucial source of nutrition for low-income women,
nursing mothers, infants and children, and one of the most
successful and impactful initiatives the Federal Government
operates.
As a result of the global pandemic, the WIC program had to
find new ways to offer services to ensure that participant
needs were met. In this new remote environment, it became clear
that there had to be ways to modernize this program, and I am
proud to lead H.R. 2424, the Modern WIC Act, which will
streamline access to WIC benefits.
This bipartisan bill will provide remote service options
for WIC applicants and participants. Madam Chair, Ranking
Member Scott, modernizing this program will allow more families
to receive and utilize benefits and ensure that our children
have a healthy start to their lives.
I urge my colleagues to continue to support these
commonsense initiatives that will modernize our bureaucracy in
an effort to support American families, and particularly
America's youth. Finally, I would like to address the issue of
increasing educational opportunities in schools and
prioritizing out of school time programs.
Investing in a robust, skilled workforce begins with
investing in our kids. H.R. 3416, the Youth Workforce Readiness
Act would establish a grant program for eligible after-school
programs to equip our students with the skills they need to
succeed in today's very complex workforce environment.
Expanding leadership development programs, expanding
financial literacy lessons, and expanding mentorship
opportunities are all essential parts of many OST programs.
These will better prepare our next generation of students. I
would like to insert, Madam Chair, for the record a letter from
the Boys and Girls Club of America regarding their support for
the Youth Workforce Readiness Act.
Chairwoman Foxx. Without objection.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and the
Ranking Member. Thank you for the opportunity to address these
critical issues, not just from my constituents, but for women
and children across America, and with that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Rep. Fitzpatrick follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The information of Rep. Fitzpatrick follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Fitzpatrick. Representative Wenstrup,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRAD WENSTRUP, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Mr. Wenstrup. Well thank you, Chairwoman Foxx and Ranking
Member Scott for hosting this Member Day hearing, and for the
opportunity to speak this morning. I appreciate it. The
Education and Workforce ittee is vital to advancing policies
that help students learn, workers succeed, and job creators to
thrive.
As a physician who serves in Congress, I am focused on ways
that we as Members of Congress can enact policies to make
America the healthiest nation on the planet. When we talk about
health in general, we should be discussing things that make
Americans healthy, and this Committee plays a vital role in
that effort by overseeing programs that affect all Americans
from early learning and well beyond that.
I appreciate the role this Committee plays in education
policy and look forward to continuing to work with you on all
ways to improve the education of Americans in an effort to have
a healthy nation. One of my highest priorities in Congress is
H.R. 2630, the Safe Step Act, which I have worked on for
several years with my colleague, Dr. Ruiz from California.
The Safe Step Act is based on State laws that have passed
in 38 states, including my home State of Ohio, as well as North
Carolina and Virginia. This important bill would ensure that
employer plans offer a medically reasonable and expedient step
therapy exceptions process.
Currently health plans, particularly self-insured employer
plans that are exempt from State laws often require patients to
try and fail on insurer preferred drugs before the plan will
cover the treatment initially selected by the patient and their
provider. The insurer never saw the patient, does not know the
patient and their medical history.
When medically inappropriate, such delays in care brought
about by someone other than the patient's doctor, it can lead
to severe or irreversible consequences. Earlier this year I was
proud to see the Safe Step Act favorably reported out of the
Senate Help Committee, as one of the only patient driven bills
under consideration.
In a nation that makes unprecedented investments in
innovative treatments and cures and has the potential to offer
the best healthcare in the world, these delays in care are
regressive. Step therapy, when used inappropriately, disrupts
the doctor patient relationship by making it more difficult for
a physician to prescribe the care their patient needs.
The Safe Step Act allows plans to continue to apply step
therapy to drug decisions, yet it ensures that plans allow
patients and providers to access a quick exceptions process if
a step therapy protocol is inappropriate for that patient. I
commend the Committee for their support in addressing this
bill, and the continued work of your committee staff as well as
all of my colleagues on the Committee who have joined as co-
sponsors, and I look forward to seeing the Safe Step Act pass
out of this Committee.
I thank you for your time and consideration today. Thank
you once again for holding this Member Day hearing, and I yield
back.
[The prepared statement of Rep. Wenstrup follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Dr. Wenstrup, for your
testimony, and again, thank you again Mr. Kilmer for your
testimony. Under Committee Rule 9, we would now question
witnesses under the 5-minute rule. Are there any witnesses, or
any members who wish to ask questions of our colleagues who
testified?
Hearing none, I would like to thank you again for taking
the time to testify before the Committee today. Without
objection, there being no further business, the Committee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:30 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
