- HOLDING CAMPUS LEADERS ACCOUNTABLE AND CONFRONTING ANTISEMITISM

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HOLDING CAMPUS LEADERS ACCOUNTABLE
AND CONFRONTING ANTISEMITISM

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, DECEMBER 5, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-31

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-239 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on December 5, 2023.................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Foxx, Hon. Virginia, Chairwoman, Committee on Education and
the Workforce..............................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', Ranking Member, Committee on
Education and the Workforce................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9

WITNESSES

Gay, Dr. Claudine, President, Harvard University.............    13
Prepared statement of....................................    15
Magill, Elizabeth, President, University of Pennsylvania.....    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Nadell, Dr. Pamela, Professor of History and Jewish Studies,
American University........................................    26
Prepared statement of....................................    28
Kornbluth, Dr. Sally, President, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.................................................    38
Prepared statement of....................................    40

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Chairwoman Foxx:
Letter from Talia Khan...................................   166
Article from WSJ dated December 3, 2023..................   171
Open Letter to American Colleges dated 2022 from
endjewhatred.com.......................................   175
Ranking Member Scott:
Letter dated December 4, 2023 from Council on American-
Islamic Relations......................................   182
Letter dated December 2, 2023 from MIT Jews for Ceasefire   186
Letter dated December 2, 2023 from MIT Coalition Against
Apartheid..............................................   193
Letter dated December 6, 2023 from Yad Vashem............   201
Letter dated December 4, 2023 from MIT Jewish Alumni.....   202
Testimony of Eboo Patel..................................   211
Comer, James, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Kentucky:
Report from the Network Contagion Research Institute.....   104
Wilson, Hon. Frederica, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida:
AJC Action Plan for Confronting Campus Antisemitism......    48

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record by:
Dr. Claudine Gay.........................................   216
Dr. J. Larry Jameson.....................................   219

HOLDING CAMPUS LEADERS ACCOUNTABLE
AND CONFRONTING ANTISEMITISM

----------

Tuesday, December 5, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:19 a.m., 2124
Rayburn Building, Hon. Virginia A. Foxx [Chairwoman of the
Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Foxx, Wilson, Thompson, Walberg,
Grothman, Stefanik, Allen, Banks, Comer, Owens, Good, McClain,
Miller, Steel, Letlow, Kiley, Bean, Burlison, Moran, James,
Chavez-DeRemer, Williams Houchin, Scott, Courtney, Wilson,
Bonamici, Takano, Adams, DeSaulnier, Norcross, Jayapal, Wild,
McBath, Hayes, Stevens, Leger Fernandez, Manning, and Bowman.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Nick Barley,
Deputy Communications Director, Mindy Barry, General Counsel;
Hans Bjontegard, Legislative Assistant; Christina Delmont-
Small, Investigator; Isabel Foster, Press Assistant; Sheila
Havenner, Director of Information Technology; Amy Raaf Jones,
Director of Education and Human Services Policy; Georgie
Littlefair, Clerk; Hannah Matesic, Deputy Staff Director; Audra
McGeorge, Communications Director; Gabriella Pistone, Oversight
Legislative Assistant; Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Mary
Christina Riley, Professional Staff Member; Chance Russell,
Economist and Policy Advisor; David Samberg, Associate
Investigative Counsel; Brad Thomas, Deputy Director of
Education and Human Services Policy; Maura Williams, Director
of Operations; Savoy Adams, Minority Intern; Amaris Benavidez,
Minority Professional Staff; Nekea Brown, Minority Director of
Operations; Ilana Brunner, Minority General Counsel; Kadia
Diakite, Minority CBCF Fellow; Rashage Green, Minority Director
of Education Policy; Christian Haines, Minority General
Counsel; Eric Hale, Minority Grad Intern; Emanual Kimble,
Minority Professional Staff; Stephanie Lalle, Minority
Communications Director; Kristen Lemus, Minority Intern;
Raiyana Malone, Minority Press Secretary; Olivia McDonald,
Minority Staff Assistant; Kota Mizutani, Minority Deputy
Communication Director; Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff
Director; Clinton Spencer IV, Minority Staff Assistant; and
Banyon Vassar, Minority IT Administrator.
Chairwoman Foxx. Good morning. The Committee on Education
and the Workforce will come to order. I note that a quorum is
present. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to call a
recess at any time. Before we begin, I would like to begin with
a moment of silence to recognize all the Israelis and others
who have been killed, injured or taken hostage by Hamas
terrorists.
Thank you. Today, each of you will have a chance to answer
to and atone for the many specific instances of vitriolic hate-
filled antisemitism on your respective campuses that have
denied students the safe learning environment they are due.
As you confront our questions in this hearing remember that
you are not speaking to us, but to the students on your campus
who have been threatened and assaulted and who look to you to
protect them.
Several of those students are with us in this room,
including Jonathan Frieden, who is the President of Alliance
for Israel and a Harvard law student, Eyal Yakoby who is a
student at UPenn, Talia Khan, who is the President of MIT
Israel Alliance, and an MIT graduate student, Bella Ingber, who
is Co-President of NYU Students Supporting Israel and a junior
at New York University.
Israel Ingber who is expected to start at the University of
Chicago in the fall after taking a gap year to study in Israel,
after being sent home right before the atrocities of October
7th. Mya Cufer who is a freshman at UPenn and Liam Crez who is
an American Israeli sophomore at UPenn.
We have a short video that we will play now that shows what
these students are facing.
[Playing video.]
Chairwoman Foxx. I want to do something which I rarely do,
quote the Senate Majority Leader from New York, Chuck Schumer.
On Wednesday, he took to the Senate floor to deliver an address
on antisemitism stating, ``Many of the people who express these
sentiments in America are not neo-Nazi's or card-carrying clan
members, or Islamist extremists.
There are many cases of people that most Liberal Jewish
Americans felt previously were their ideological fellow
travelers. Not long ago many of us marched together for black
and brown lives.''
You see this speech by the most powerful elected Jewish
politician in America was addressed to many on his left flank.
He questioned how these elements of the left, which pride
themselves on diversity and inclusion, could be responsible for
fomenting such hatred for liberal Jewish Americans.
I quote Majority Leader Schumer to you, Presidents Gay,
Magill and Kornbluth because I understand this speech to be a
sort of reckoning for the Jewish identity with the radical
left. For 40 minutes he fails to use the word university a
single time. However, after the events of the past 2 months it
is clear that rabid antisemitism in the university are two
ideas that cannot be cleaved from one another.
A prime example of this ideology at work is at Harvard,
where classes are taught such as DP385, Race and Racism in the
Making of the United States as a Global Power. The Harvard
Global Health Institute hosts seminars such as ``Scientific
Racism and Anti-Racism History and Recent Perspectives.'' Even
the Harvard Divinity School has a page devoted to ``Social and
Racial Justice.''
Harvard also, not coincidentally but causally, was ground
zero for antisemitism following October 7th, and is the single
least tolerant school in the Nation according to the Foundation
for Individual Rights and Expressions, 2024 College Free Speech
Rankings.
UPenn is right behind them at 247 of 248. MIT is in the
middle of the pack. What I am describing is a grave danger
inherent in assenting to the race-based ideology of the radical
left. Senator Schumer has not put the pieces together, but the
picture is far too clear now to American Jews.
Institutional antisemitism and hate are among the poisoned
fruits of your institutions' cultures. The buck for what has
happened must stop on the President's desk, along with the
responsibility for making it never again true on campus. Do you
have the courage to truly confront and condemn the ideology
driving antisemitism?
Or will you offer weak, blame-shifting excuses in yet
another responsibility dodging taskforce? That is ultimately
the most important question for you to confront in this
hearing. I will close with this. I appreciate your appearances
today on behalf of Harvard, UPenn and MIT respectively. It
proves your universities have at minimum, a sense of
accountability to the American people.
My praise for postsecondary education is very limited these
days. Harvard, UPenn and MIT, you have a very big role to play
in shaping the future for all of academia. This moment is an
inflection point. It demands leaders of moral clarity, with the
courage to delineate good from evil and right from wrong.
With that, I look forward to each of your testimoneys. I
yield to the Ranking member for an opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Foxx follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Scott. Thank you, Dr. Foxx, and thank our witnesses for
appearing today. Historically college campuses have been hubs
for students and faculty to foster intellectual thought and
expression. Regrettably, following Hamas's October 7th attack
on innocent civilians in Israel, with the ongoing conflict in
Gaza, college campuses have become polarized, and we have been
witnessing a disturbing rise in incidents of antisemitism and
Islamophobia.
To be clear, this discrimination is nothing new on college
campuses. Indeed, nothing new in society generally. Any student
of history knows that it did not start with the October 7th
attacks, or any one new event, and it did not start with
diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives.
My colleagues would do well to recall this country as a
century's long history of racism and white supremacy. At the
same time, free speech is a Constitutional right, the bedrock
of our democracy in colleges and universities are often on the
front lines of defending this right. Schools are also
responsible for fostering campus environments that promote
understanding, respectful dialog and above all else, student
safety.
Today we will hear from representatives at the universities
on their efforts to protect students and address discrimination
on campus. Of note, this is an opportunity that my republican
colleagues denied us in 2017 when Committee democrats called
for a hearing 6 years ago on campus discrimination when white
supremacists marched through the University of Virginia grounds
shouting, ``Jews will not replace us.''
We could not get a hearing back then. While my colleagues
to be committed to combating discrimination on campus, they are
also contradictorily and simultaneously stoking culture wars
that can be divisive and discriminatory. Moreover, House
republicans are proposing significant cuts to the Department of
Education's Office of Civil Rights, the very office responsible
for upholding students' civil rights and investigating
discrimination claims.
You cannot have it both ways. You cannot call for action
and then hamstring the agency charged with taking that action
to protect student's civil rights. In stark contrast, the Biden
administration has taken an active role in helping
institutions, protect students as part of the White House's
national strategy to combat antisemitism. Under President
Biden's direction, the Department of Education has provided
additional guidance to colleges and universities on how to
uphold their obligation under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964, and better address antisemitism, Islamophobia, and all
forms of discrimination on campus.
They have also opened investigations into recent incidents
on many campuses including Harvard, Columbia, Cornell, Wesley,
University of Pennsylvania, University of Tampa, just to name a
few. In closing, I want to echo my colleague, and I will quote
Senator Schumer again.
``All Americans share a responsibility and an obligation to
fight back whenever we see the rise of prejudice of any type in
our midst.'' Today I hope my republican colleagues will
denounce the culture wars that have distracted us from
protecting many vulnerable students, and I hope we can stand
behind the Biden's administration's critical work to ensure
that every student and educator has access to a campus free of
discrimination, harassment and violence. To that end, I yield
back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Scott follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Scott. Pursuant to Rule 8-
C, all members who wish to insert written statements into the
record may do so by submitting them to the Committee Clerk
electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5 p.m., 14 days
after the date of this hearing, which is December 19, 2023.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days to allow such statements and other extraneous material
referenced during the hearing to be submitted for the official
hearing record.
I now turn to the introduction of our witnesses. Our first
witness is Dr. Claudine Gay who is the President of Harvard
University in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Our second witness is
Ms. Liz Magill, who is the President of the University of
Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Our next witness is Dr. Pamela Nadell, who is a Professor
of History and Jewish Studies at American University in
Washington, DC. Our final witness is Dr. Sally Kornbluth, who
is President of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
I note Dr. Kornbluth will monitor her diabetes during the
hearing. We thank you all for being here today and look forward
to your testimony. I would like to remind the witnesses that we
have read your written statements, which will appear in full in
the hearing record.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 8-D, and Committee practice, I
ask that each of you limit your oral presentations to a 5-
minute summary of your written statement. I also would like to
remind the witnesses to be aware of their responsibility to
provide accurate information to the Committee.
If we have a demonstration that gets unruly, we will ask
the campus police to take people out immediately. I now
recognize Dr. Gay for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. CLAUDINE GAY, PRESIDENT, HARVARD UNIVERSITY,
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS

Ms. Gay. Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member Scott, and
distinguished members of the Committee. My name is Claudine
Gay, and I am the President of Harvard University. It is an
honor to be here today representing a community of more than
25,000 undergraduate and graduate students, more than 19,000
faculty and staff, and more than 400,000 alumni, including
multiple members of this Committee.
Thank you for calling this hearing on the critical topic of
antisemitism. Our community still mourns those brutally
murdered during the Hamas terrorist attack in Israel on October
7th. Words fail in the face of such depravity. The deadliest,
single day for the Jewish community since the horrors of the
Holocaust.
In the 2 months since the atrocities of October 7th, and
the subsequent armed conflict and humanitarian crisis in Gaza,
we have seen a dramatic and deeply concerning rise in
antisemitism around the world, in the United States, and on our
campuses, including my own.
I know many in our Harvard Jewish community are hurting,
and experiencing grief, fear, and trauma. I have heard from
faculty, students, staff and alumni of incidents of
intimidation and harassment. I have seen reckless and
thoughtless rhetoric shared in person and online on campus and
off. I have listened to leaders in our Jewish community who are
scared and disillusioned.
At the same time, I know members of Harvard's Muslim and
Arab communities are also hurting. During these past months the
world, our Nation and our campuses have also seen a rise of
incidents of Islamophobia. During these difficult days I have
felt the bonds of our community strain.
In response I have sought to confront hate while preserving
free expression. This is difficult work, and I know that I have
not always gotten it right. The free exchange of ideas is the
foundation upon which Harvard is built. Safety and well-being
are the pre-requisites for engagement in our community.
Without both of these things our teaching and research
mission flounder. In the past 2 months our bedrock commitments
have guided our efforts. We have increased security measures,
expanded reporting channels, and augmented counseling, mental
health and support services.
We have reiterated that speech that incites violence,
threatens safety, or violates Harvard's policies against
bullying and harassment is unacceptable. We have made it clear
that any behaviors that disrupt our teaching and research
efforts will not be tolerated. Where these lines have been
crossed, we have taken action.
We have drawn on our academic expertise to create learning
opportunities for our campus community. We have begun
examinations of the ways in which antisemitism and other forms
of hate manifest at Harvard, and in American society. We have
also repeatedly made clear that we at Harvard reject
antisemitism and denounce any trace of it on our campus or
within our community.
Antisemitism is a symptom of ignorance, and the cure for
ignorance is knowledge. Harvard must model what it means to
preserve free expression while combating prejudice and
preserving the security of our community. We are undertaking
that hard, long-term work with the attention and intensity it
requires.
Once again, I thank the Committee for the opportunity to
discuss this important work. I have faith today that through
thoughtful, focused and determined effort, we will once again
meet adversity and grow. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gay follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Dr. Gay. Ms. Magill, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. LIZ MAGILL, PRESIDENT, UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA, PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA

Ms. Magill. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member
Scott and distinguished members of this Committee for the
opportunity to be here today. My name is Elizabeth Magill, and
I am the President of the University of Pennsylvania. Let me
begin by saying that I, and the University of Pennsylvania are
horrified by, and condemn Hamas's abhorrent and brutal terror
attack on Israel on October 7th.
There is no justification, none, for those heinous attacks.
The loss of life and suffering that are occurring in Israel and
Gaza during the ensuing war are heartbreaking.
This pain, sorrow and fear extends to our campus and to our
city of Philadelphia. This hearing this morning takes place
just 2 days after the Philadelphia community witnessed in
horror the hateful words of protestors who marched the city and
then near our campus.
These protestors directly targeted a center city business
that is Jewish and Israeli owned, a troubling and shameful act
of antisemitism. Philadelphia Police and Penn Public Safety
were present, and thankfully no one was injured, but these
events have understandably left many in our community upset and
afraid.
Antisemitism, an old, viral and pernicious evil has been
steadily rising in our society, and these world events have
dramatically accelerated that surge. Few places have proven
immune, including Philadelphia and campuses like ours. This is
unacceptable. We are combating this hate on our campus with
both immediate and comprehensive action.
I have condemned antisemitism publicly, regularly, and in
the strongest possible terms. Today, let me reiterate my and
Penn's unyielding commitment to combating it. We immediately
investigate any hateful act, cooperating with both law
enforcement and the FBI where we have identified individuals
who have committed these acts in violation of either policy or
law.
We initiate disciplinary proceedings and engage law
enforcement. We have acted decisively to ensure safety
throughout and near our campus, expanding the presence of
public safety officers at our religious life centers and all
across campus. On November 1st, just over a month ago, I
announced Penn's action plan to combat antisemitism.
This builds on our antihate efforts to date, and it is
anchored firmly in the United States' national strategy to
counter antisemitism. The plan centers on three key areas and
has many elements. Those areas are safety and security,
engagement and education.
As part of this plan, I have convened and charged a task
force to identify concrete actionable recommendations,
directing them to provide me with the recommendations both in
real time, and then a final report in a couple of months. To
ensure that our Jewish students have a direct channel to share
their experiences with me, I have created a Student Advisory
Group on the student experience.
Today's hearing is focused on antisemitism, and its direct
impact on the Jewish community, but history teaches us that
where antisemitism goes unchecked, other forms of hate spread
and ultimately can threaten democracy. We are seeing a rise in
our society in harassment, intimidation and threats toward
individuals based on their identity as Muslim, Palestinian or
Arab.
At Penn, we are investigating all these allegations for
members of our community, and providing resources to support
individuals experiencing threats, online harassment and doxing,
we will continue to deploy all the necessary resources to
support any member of the community experiencing hate. As
president, I am committed to a safe, secure, and supportive
educational environment so that our academic mission can
thrive. It is crucial that ideas are exchanged, and diverse
viewpoints are debated. As a student of constitutional
democracy, I know that we need both safety and free expression
for universities and ultimately democracy to thrive. In these
times these competing principles can be difficult to balance,
but I am determined to get it right.
We must get this right. The stakes are too high. Penn would
not be what it is without its strong Jewish community past,
present and future. I am proud of this tradition and deeply
troubled when members of our Jewish community share that their
sense of belonging has been shaken. Under my leadership we will
never, ever shrink from our moral responsibility to combat
antisemitism and educate all to recognize and reject hate.
We will remain vigilant. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Magill follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Magill. Dr. Nadell, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. PAMELA NADELL, PROFESSOR OF HISTORY AND JEWISH
STUDIES, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Ms. Nadell. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx and Ranking Member
Scott for inviting me today. I am Pamela Nadell, I am a
Professor of Jewish History at American University, and I am
currently writing the book, Antisemitism, an American
Tradition, supported by a National Endowment for the Humanities
Public Scholar Award, and I am delighted to be here today
because this gives me an opportunity to thank Congress for
sustaining through the NEH scholarship essential to
understanding our Nation's past.
This is the third time I have testified about this topic
before Congress. The first was in 2017, just 3 months after
white supremacists chanting ``Jews will not replace us,''
paraded through the University of Virginia, brandishing torch
lights, echoing Nazi storm troopers strutting through Germany
in the 1930's.
I emphasize this because the antisemitism igniting on
campuses today is not new. It is part of a long history of
American antisemitism. While antisemitism is difficult to
define, historical examples convey some of its contours.
Antisemites believe that Jews have been corrupted by money
since Judas betrayed Jesus for 30 pieces of silver, and they've
employed code names for avaricious Jews, Shylock, Rothschild,
and in the 21st Century George Soros.
Antisemites believe Jews conspired to destroy Christian
western civilization. These conspiracy theories gained currency
in the 1920's when Henry Ford's newspaper ran the series, The
International Jew, the World's Foremost Problem. Today, the
charge that the Jews are internationalists, have been replaced
by the dog whistle globalist, implying that Jews are the puppet
masters of the worldwide order.
Across American history people from all walks of life have
conveyed antisemitic ideas since 1654, when New Amsterdam
Governor Peter Stuyvesant tried to expel, and I quote, ``This
deceitful race, such hateful enemies and blasphemers of the
name of Christ.''
Now, more than 350 years later we have just marked the
fifth anniversary of the murders at Pittsburgh's Tree of Life
Synagogue. On city streets abuse is hurled at orthodox Jews,
and Swastikas are graffitied on dorm doors, and also at the
State Department. The long history of American antisemitism
left its mark in higher education. Quotas on the admission of
Jewish students began in the Ivy League in the 1920's and
spread to more than 700 private colleges and universities.
The campuses also wrestled with the challenge of
antisemitic speech before this fall. In the early 1990's
Holocaust deniers took out full page ads in college newspapers.
Those ads launched furious debates about free speech on campus,
and also helped propel Holocaust courses into the university to
respond to the disinformation.
Anti-Israel invective has been flaring on campus well
before this fall. I could look back more than 20 years. In
October 2000, 200 students at the University of Michigan
yelled, ``Israel is a fascist state'', and protested a Hillel
teaching. The barbarity of the Hamas terror of October 7th adds
a terrible new chapter to Jewish history.
Anyone who claims to care about human rights should
denounce these horrors. That so many on campus not only did
not, but that they justified the savagery in name of opposition
to Israel has caused Jews around the world deep anguish. While
I deplore all hateful speech, antisemitic speech remains in
America protected. Free speech stands at the core of the
liberal arts education, an education which almost every Member
of Congress benefited from when they were students.
Free speech does not permit harassment, discrimination,
bias, threats, or violence in any form. When they occur our
institutions, and not just the campus, but our Nation, they
have in place mechanisms to respond. The American Jewish
community has long strategized about how to reduce
antisemitism.
Their efforts received a stunning confirmation when the
U.S. national strategy to counter antisemitism was published. I
believe this is the first time any nation has developed such a
document. I urge Congress to do everything in its power to
support the national strategy, and also the forthcoming
national strategy to counter Islamophobia. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Nadell follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Dr. Kornbluth, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. SALLY KORNBLUTH, PRESIDENT, MASSACHUSETTS
INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS

Ms. Kornbluth. Thank you. Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking Member
Scott, and distinguished members of the Committee. Thank you
for this opportunity to describe how MIT is fighting the
scourge of antisemitism. My name is Sally Kornbluth. I have
been president of MIT since January of this year.
As an American, as a Jew, and as a human being, I abhor
antisemitism. My administration is combating it actively. Since
October 7th my campus communications have been crystal clear
about the dangers of antisemitism, and about the atrocity of
the Hamas terror attack.
Let me repeat what I said in my very first message to
campus. In that video I said, ``The brutality perpetrated on
innocent civilians in Israel by terrorists from Hamas is
horrifying. In my opinion, such a deliberate attack on
civilians can never be justified.''
I also made clear that students were feeling unsafe because
of their Jewish faith, or their ties to Israel and said, ``That
should trouble every one of us deeply.'' I have reinforced this
message, including in a November 14th campus video, as I said
then, ``Antisemitism is real and it is rising in the world. We
cannot let it poison our community.''
I have been direct and unequivocal, and such leadership
statements are important, but they must be paired with action.
This is just what we are doing at MIT. Months before October
7th, MIT joined the International Hillel Climate Campus
Initiative which helps universities build awareness of and
actions against antisemitism.
We have launched an MIT wide effort called Standing
Together Against Hate. It will emphasize both education and
community building, especially in our residence halls. In
addition to fighting antisemitism, it will address
Islamophobia, also on the rise and also under reported. MIT
will take on both, not lumped together, but with equal energy
and in parallel.
Importantly, as is clearly visible on campus, we have
increased the police presence. Safety has been our primary
concern. Nonetheless, I know some Israeli and Jewish students
feel unsafe on campus. As they bear the horror of the Hamas
attacks, and the history of antisemitism. These students have
been pained by chance in recent demonstrations.
I strongly believe that there is a difference between what
we can say to each other, that is what we have a right to say,
and what we should say, as members of one community. As
President of MIT, in addition to my duties to keep the campus
safe, and to maintain the functioning of this national asset, I
must at the same time ensure that we protect speech and
viewpoint diversity for everyone.
This is in keeping with the institute's principles on free
expression. Meeting those three goals is challenging, and the
results can be terribly uncomfortable, but it is essential to
how we operate in the United States. Those who want us to shut
down protest language are in effect arguing for a speech code,
but in practice, speech codes do not work.
Problematic speech needs to be countered with other speech,
and with education. We are doing that. However, the right to
free speech does not extend to harassment, discrimination, or
incitement to violence in our community. MIT policies are clear
on this. To keep the campus functioning we also have policies
to regulate the time, manner and place of demonstrations.
Reports of student conduct that may violate our policies are
handled through our faculty led Committee on Discipline.
Our campus actions today have protected student's safety,
minimized disruptions to campus activities, and protected the
right to free expression. We are intensifying our central
efforts to combat antisemitism, the vital subject of this
hearing. I note that I am also deeply concerned about the rise
in prejudice against Arabs, Muslims and Palestinians,
nationally and in our community.
We are determined to combat that as well. We are also
supporting faculty, staff and student initiatives to counter
hate. Thanks to an inspiring group of faculty members, we are
seeing more discussion among students with conflicting views.
We know there is further work to do, but we are seeing
progress, and MIT's vital mission continues. Thank you. I am
happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Kornbluth follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Dr. Kornbluth. I will begin the
questioning of our witnesses. I am going to ask members--before
I ask my questions, let me do some housekeeping. Under
Committee Rule 9, we will now question witnesses under the 5-
minute rule. I remind members that I will strictly enforce the
5-minute rule, so members are advised to keep your questions
succinct, so the witnesses have time to answer.
Please do not talk for 4 minutes and then ask the witness a
question. That--we have heard from many students that they do
not feel safe. You have talked about that in your statements.
The antisemitism we have seen on your campuses did not come out
of nowhere. There are cultures at your institutions that foster
it because you have faculty and students who hate Jews, hate
Israel, and are comfortable apologizing for terror.
How did your campuses get this way? What is it about the
way that you hire faculty and approve curriculum that is
allowing your campuses to be infected by this intellectual and
moral rot? President Gay, I am going to ask you to give me a
brief answer. I also would invite you to followup with more in
writing, and we will followup with you, so I will go down the
line, President Gay, then President Magill and President
Kornbluth.
Ms. Gay. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx. Again, antisemitism
has no place at Harvard. When we recruit faculty, we do so with
the understanding that they are joining a community where we--
we honor, celebrate and nurture open discourse, both on the
campus and in the classroom. To be a successful teacher and
educator at Harvard, requires the ability to draw out all of
the viewpoints and voices in your classroom, irrespective of
one's political views.
We devote significant resources to training our faculty in
that pedagogical skill and to prioritizing that in our
recruiting and hiring.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you.
Ms. Magill.
Ms. Magill. Thank you for the opportunity to address the
question. I am troubled by what you are reporting about the
culture of the institutions that we are leading, very contrary
to the values that I hold as a leader of Pennsylvania--
University of Pennsylvania, as well as the institution where
any form of hate is very contrary to our values.
I would venture and answer, Chairwoman Foxx, that
antisemitism has a role in the broader society, and that is
what we are seeing happening in the society and on our
campuses, and I am committed to combating it in immediate term
and the long-term.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you.
Dr. Kornbluth.
Ms. Kornbluth. Yes. MIT is a majority STEM education and
research institution, and we are devoted to solving the
problems that face society. Our faculty hired for their
brilliance, now we allow them to say what they would like in
the classroom in the name of free expression, but we are
committed to having them know that this is--that our campus
must be a welcoming and inclusive environment.
Although they may say what they like in the classroom
academically, targeting any individual student, harassing, or
discriminating is strictly forbidden in our classrooms and on
campus.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. We will be following up with
asking for specific plans for disciplining student and faculty
who assault or harass students, or prevent them from accessing
undisrupted classes, or campus spaces. We will be asking for
your plan for preventing this rot from perpetuating how you're
going to hire and assess instructors, how will you change and
how you govern students, and what are the practical steps you
will plan to take.
I want to ask you one more question. It seems, as I have
said, and Ms. Magill, I appreciate the fact that you feel
concerned about my feeling about the fundamental culture on the
campuses is foundational to this issue. Denial of the right of
Israel to exist. I want to ask each one of you, President Gay,
do you believe that Israel has a right to exist as a Jewish
nation?
Ms. Gay. I agree that the State of Israel has the right to
exist.
Chairwoman Foxx. Ms. Magill, same question.
Ms. Magill. I agree Chairwoman Foxx the State of Israel has
the right to exist.
Chairwoman Foxx. Dr. Kornbluth.
Ms. Kornbluth. Absolutely, Israel has the right to exist.
Chairwoman Foxx. I want to thank our witnesses again for
being here, and to say we will followup, and to tell you that
while we have talked about a larger culture out there, it is
the universities who should be examples of what this Nation is
all about. I yield back, and I recognize the distinguished
Ranking Member who is wanting me to recognize Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Chairwoman Foxx, and I want to
thank you for the moment of silence for the 137 hostages who
are still being held to this day. We had a hearing a couple
weeks ago on antisemitism where I shared with my colleagues and
the witnesses that a dual US Israeli citizen with family in
Waterford, Connecticut was one of those being held at the time,
along--and we thought her husband--her name was Liat Beinin and
Aviv Beinin. The good news is a week ago Liat was released, and
unfortunately, a day later the Israeli military shared with the
family that human remains which were found at the Kibbutz where
the violent attack took place unfortunately matched up to Aviv.
Again, Hamas never shared the information about whether or
not they had him or not, which is just another example of their
treachery. Dr. Nadell, in your testimony on page 8 you talked
about President Biden's U.S. National Strategy to Counter
Antisemitism, and particularly you talked about the use of
Title VI of the U.S. Civil Rights Act in terms of being an
effective tool on campuses to combat antisemitism. I was
wondering whether you could talk about that a little bit.
Ms. Nadell. Title VI allows for responding to some of the
issues that the Presidents of these universities, but also
frankly, of most universities around the Nation it seems at the
moment have been dealing with in terms of when antisemitism
moves into--moves beyond free speech, moves beyond rhetoric,
and involves harassment or intimidation.
The issue is that the Office of Civil Rights and the
Department of Education needs to be fully funded in order to
implement the U.S. Strategy to Counter Antisemitism. I just
want to comment about the strategy because it is an
extraordinary document. It has actions for the White House to
carry out, or that division.
It has issues for Congress to carry out, which I have a
sense Congress has not been carrying out, and it also has major
charges to hold society to respond to antisemitism, some of
which we are hearing is already happening on the campuses. The
problem is they do not make headlines because they are not a
bunch of protestors.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, and again it is important to note
that document was released back in May 2023. Certainly, before
this committee, and the outrageous events of October 7th. The
Ranking Member mentioned in his opening remarks that you know,
at the same time that we are holding this hearing, we are also
now still trying to get a budget passed for Fiscal Year 2024.
The majority in the House reported out their budget, which
as you mentioned, carried a cut for the Office of Civil Rights,
to be more specific it is a 25 percent cut, 35 million dollars
out of their rather small budget. 72 million dollars lower than
what the President had asked for.
I mean we had a witness here again 2 weeks ago who worked
for almost 20 plus years at ADL, the Anti-Defamation League.
They have been around for 110 years, fighting antisemitism in
this country. Again, she talked about the fact that you know
that type of cut is just going to cripple the ability of the
antisemitism police, if you want to sort of look at it that
way, in terms of trying to stop this type of activity on
campuses.
Again, I was just wondering if you had sort of what your
view is of a cut in terms of the impact of the Office of Civil
Rights to do its job.
Ms. Nadell. I think the cut is absolutely devastating. What
I would also remind everyone is that the Office of Civil Rights
and the Department of Education does not only focus on
antisemitism. It focuses on all forms of hate, and I would
guess, I actually tried to find this information, but was
unable to do so.
I would guess that the majority of complaints are not
coming from Jewish students, although maybe now since what
happened on October 7th. I would guess the majority of the
complaints are actually coming from people of color, and from
others who have faced terrible bias. It is unthinkable,
unconscionable to make that cut.
Mr. Courtney. Talk is cheap. I mean I have been around here
a while. Budgets are what really, I think show the true
willingness to act in situations like this. I would just like
to close by mentioning that in Connecticut a young, transfer
student, international student from the West Bank, Tahseen
Aliahmad, a sophomore at Trinity College, is a math major who
was up visiting friends in Burlington, Vermont. They were
walking from going bowling.
This coward came out of this house with a firearm and at
point blank range shot all three students who were absolutely--
they were going to their relative's house at the time. It shows
again that the civil rights effort of the Department of
Justice, which also is being subjected to a potential cut needs
to get full funding in the Office of Civil Rights. With that, I
would yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Courtney. I now recognize
Congressman Wilson from South Carolina for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you. Thank you, Chairwoman Virginia Foxx.
Chairwoman Virginia Foxx, I believe, appropriately began this
hearing about how serious this is that the Iran puppets of
Hamas have victimized the world, including here in the United
States, and shockingly as we include people that have been
affected, it should be Paul Kessler of California, who was
murdered by a professor.
A professor supporting Hamas as he was demonstrating
peacefully on behalf of the people of Israel. We have victims
right in our country of murder in California. With that in
mind, I would say this respectfully to each of the university
professors here today. Without any inclination, I would like
the answer, and it should be a percentage of conservatives.
That is you each rightfully promote diversity and inclusion
of race and gender with percentages available. That is
available at your universities. What is the percentage of
conservative professors in your institutions? I only want to
know the percent of conservatives. What is the number,
President Gay?
Ms. Gay. Thank you, Congressman. I cannot provide you that
statistic because it is not data that we collect, but I will
say that we--we try to draw our talent to Harvard from----
Mr. Wilson. Okay. We have got to race ahead please. I do
not want more. I just want to know what is the percentage of
conservative professors at Harvard?
Ms. Gay. I do not have that statistic. We do not collect
that data.
Mr. Wilson. That concerns me. President Magill, what is the
percentage of conservative professors allowed to teach at your
institution?
Ms. Magill. Representative, I strongly believe in a wide
variety of perspectives. We do not track that information, so I
cannot give that to you.
Mr. Wilson. Okay, no. None. I got the message. President
Kornbluth, what is the percentage of conservative professors at
MIT?
Ms. Kornbluth. We do not document people's political views,
but conservatives are welcome to teach on our campus.
Mr. Wilson. I think this is so sadly and shamefully
revealing that there is no diversity inclusion of intellectual
thought. The result of that is antisemitism, and you can study
with government money all you want to, Doctor, but it is due to
illiberalism that has taken over the country, and you might
look into that when you get your next government grant.
With that in mind, the barbaric mass murder on October 7th
by Iran puppets, Hamas, invading Israel trained by war criminal
Putin, has shockingly revealed that many college campuses are
sickeningly antisemitic. This is defending the maniacal Hamas
agenda. The Hamas agenda is in their covenant of August 1988.
I hope you read it because it says in Article VII, I will
take you, you do not have to read the whole thing--``Kill the
Jews.'' What that means is death to Israel, death to America.
To have that percentage is disgusting. Sadly, college campuses
have descended from coveted citadels intellectual freedom to
illiberal sewers of intolerance and bigotry.
Diversity and inclusion are a George Orwell 1984
implementation as we see in excluding conservative thought. The
solution for closed minded intolerance on campuses is obvious.
To liberate academia from denial of free speech, respecting the
First Amendment.
There should be diversity inclusion of more conservative
academics overcoming today's blatant discrimination. With that
in mind, Dr. Magill, I have received questions from really
wonderful students at the University of Pennsylvania who were
in a State of shock about the State of the university.
You say the university has introduced a plan to combat
antisemitism, yet we hear of more incitement and intimidation
of Jewish students at Penn. Do you understand that having
policies means nothing if you don't implement them? How many
students or faculty have been removed or discipled under your
policies?
What is the average time for action on student conduct, or
other policies to conclude and you can get this back to me
later. What are you enforcing? At a pro-Hamas Penn protest
President Huda Fakhreddine and faculty member Ahmad Almallah
was seen enthusiastically clapping in support of the speaker as
they shouted, ``Go back to Moscow, Brooklyn, blanking Berlin
where you came from.''
Has any action been taken to address Professor Fakhreddine
and Professor Ahmad Almallah's support of this inciteful and
intimidating speech? How are Jewish students in
Fakhreddine'sclasses supposed to receive fair treatment when
she endorses hatred? I should have said, and also, I am going
to conclude by another question. How in the world can you all
now have a class on resistance literature from pre-Islamic
Arabia featuring a person who is with the terrorist
organization PFLF? We will present this to you. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. We go from Mr. Wilson from South Carolina
to Ms. Wilson from Florida.
Mrs. Wilson. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Foxx, and
Ranking Member Scott. Thank you to the witnesses for your
testimoneys today. As the witnesses have shared, antisemitism
anywhere is abhorrent and unacceptable, and must be condemned.
I am privileged to represent a strong united Jewish
community in South Florida. My next-door neighbor is a Rabbi.
My Jewish constituents have experienced everything from bomb
threats on Jewish centers, schools, to harassment of Jewish
community members.
I stand with them. We talk often. We commiserate and we
pray. We must take a stand against all forms of hate, whether
that be antisemitism, Islamophobia, racism, xenophobia and
terrorism. This must stop. In Congress, for 7 years I led the
fight against Boko Haram, a terrorist group that kidnapped over
300 schoolgirls in Nigeria.
Gang rapes, beheadings, killing whole families, so I am
particularly sensitive to this issue of terrorists and what
they do. Disagreements about the conflict in the Middle East
should never escalate to threats of violence against any
community. We are a civilized society. We must draw a line and
condemn hate. Please know that in May the Biden administration,
Biden Harris administration, introduced the U.S. National
Strategy to Counter Antisemitism. A comprehensive approach
addressing antisemitism in diverse environments, including
college campuses.
With that, I have a few questions. Ms. Nadell, based on
your knowledge from 2016 to 2020, what has been the United
States response to antisemitic events? Specifically thinking
about Charlottesville, Unite the Right, and what the Trump
Pence administration did compared to this administration.
Ms. Nadell.
Ms. Nadell. The Unite the Right Rally at the University of
Virginia and in Charlottesville, Virginia in August 2017 was
for me, and I believe actually for the majority of American
Jews, a major turning point. It signaled that the long history
of antisemitism in the United States that it was about to burst
out again.
For the first time ever that I know of, Jews who were
worshiping in their synagogue on Saturday morning, and they
watched some of those United the Right rally'ers parade past
the synagogue armed, and they had to sneak out of the back of
the synagogue because they were afraid that violence would
break out.
What we are seeing in terms of the antisemitism in this
moment in time is that it has been rising, and rising since
2016, and although President Trump called the people who were
the protestors and counter protestors said there were very good
people on both sides, I disagree. I do not think there were
very good people on both sides in Charlottesville in August
2017.
Mrs. Wilson. Okay. As I reflected, Professor Nadell, on the
horrific events in the Middle east and the subsequent fallout
on college campuses. I have been in contact with my friend and
former congressional colleague Ted Deutch, who now heads the
American Jewish Committee. The committee is the author of the
AJC Action Plan and Toolkit for University Administrators.
One of the recommendations that the university
administrators recenter the conversation about the Middle East
back to a place of fact-based exchange. Could you comment on
why this suggestion is important, and I would like to, Madam
Chair, enter this report into the record.
Chairwoman Foxx. Without objection.
[The information of Mrs. Wilson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Nadell. This action is important because the campuses
where faculty who come from Middle East studies, and faculty
who come from Jewish studies have long been in conversation,
not just since October 7th. Those are the places where the--
what we do in the university has been manifested in the best
way. I am thinking for example of Dartmouth University where
they held a forum, and they had their second forum 300 people
in the room and they had 5,000 people online. Our universities
not only educate our students today, but we can educate the
wider public, and so I very much agree, admire, Ted Deutch, and
I admire the American Jewish community for what they are trying
to do. This is not a magic bullet. It is not going to be fixed
overnight, but we are in the process of working on it, and
hopefully tamping down antisemitism in America once again.
Chairwoman Foxx. Your time has expired.
Mrs. Wilson. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Mr. Thompson, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Madam Chair, for calling this
important hearing. Thanks today to all of our folks that are
testifying. As we have all seen recently there's been a sharp
rise in antisemitic words, actions and attacks online, around
the world, and unfortunately right here at home.
Nowhere in the United States have these hateful and
divisive ideas been more prevalent or have found a safer home
than on college campuses. It is up to all of us to call out
these actions and protect Jewish faculty students, staff at
these institutions. Unfortunately, many of our university
leaders have not met this moment and have allowed antisemitism
to continue to grow and to rear its ugly head.
President Magill, does the University of Pennsylvania have
in place any policies to ensure that each student who has
enrolled at the university, receives information on the history
of antisemitism, how antisemitism presents itself, and actions
students can take to prevent and report antisemitic behavior,
and you know, why or why not?
Ms. Magill. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss that.
We are in the midst of making certain that all anti-bigotry
efforts ensure education about antisemitism. We committed to
that in September, and we are working through that. We have
added education, some parts of our program do, and some parts
of our program need to be enhanced, so we are working on that
right now. I assure you that we will make certain that is
included in all of our anti-bigotry efforts, antisemitism.
Mr. Thompson. That is much appreciated. I wondered if that
type of education would have been in place at all of our
college campuses before this, whether we would have seen the
massive reactions that we have that are just hard to describe
and justify in terms of the demonstrations and just the hate.
As part of the recent protests on and around campus there
have been dozens of arrests made by university police,
including several related terroristic threats. Does university
plan on requiring students, faculty or staff arrested as part
of these protests to receive further education on antisemitic
behavior?
Ms. Magill. Congressman, is that a question for me?
Mr. Thompson. It is. Yes, I am sorry. Please.
Ms. Magill. Well, we are very committed to making sure
everyone understands history and antisemitism for sure. The
description of the arrests I need to learn a little bit more
about.
Mr. Thompson. Well, the requests that have occurred
obviously related to protests involving faculty or staff,
students--the question is, within the consequences when
university police are the ones that are intervening, whether
there are any thoughts to further education for those
individuals on regarding antisemitic behavior and the impacts
of it?
Ms. Magill. It is certainly consistent with my perspective
and my values and the institution's values. I wonder if I can
followup with your team about the specifics of these arrests
because they are--I am not--I do not know exactly what you are
speaking about, but I agree with you that anyone who was
arrested for an activity that was antisemitic, some act or
something else, harassment, intimidation, should certainly
receive education in addition to other consequences in my
opinion.
Mr. Thompson. Sure. Some criminal activity they were
arrested for that was obviously driven by antisemitic beliefs
and expressions. Several faculty members at Penn recently
provided support for the boycott, divestment and sanctions for
the BDS movement. The movement requires boycotting Israeli
universities, and individuals who are complicit in what they
consider Israeli government misconduct.
Therefore, it is impossible for a faculty member to support
BDS and treat Israeli academics fairly. Can you tell this
Committee unequivocally that no such discrimination has taken
place?
Ms. Magill. I appreciate the opportunity to clarify a very
clear position that the University of Pennsylvania has had for
many years, which is we strongly oppose boycotting, divesting
and sanctioning Israel. We have many flourishing academic--it
is contrary to academic freedom among other things. It is
singling out one State and treating it differently than others.
We have many academic collaborations with universities in
Israel. We--they are terrific collaborations. We have
absolutely--we are very clear on BDS. We are opposed to it, and
our practices make that clear.
Mr. Thompson. As a part of that, and I am a strong
supporter of the right to free speech, including on college
campuses. Does University of Pennsylvania have any policies or
procedures in place to ensure that BDS supporters cannot
implement their boycott positions in their official capacities
for not giving such individuals administrative powers to begin
with?
Ms. Magill. Well, it is the position of the institution
that we do not engage in boycotting, sanctioning or divesting,
and I would think that would follow for any member of the
organization who is acting in their official capacity. If you
have specifics that I could followup on after this hearing, I
would very much like to hear them.
Mr. Thompson. We do. We will do that, appreciate. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Bonamici, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to the
witnesses. I appreciate the full Committee's focus on this
issue. I want to reiterate, as I did in the other hearing we
had recently, that antisemitism, as well as Islamophobia, and
other forms of bigotry based on race, ethnicity and national
origin or religion are abhorrent and must not be tolerated.
I am deeply troubled by recent antisemitic incidents at
colleges and universities across the country, including those
whose presidents are here today, and I stand with my colleagues
on both sides of the aisle in calling for proactive steps from
all of these universities and high institutions to root out
discrimination, hatred and bigotry in all of its forms.
I also want to note that the main point of this hearing
should be to identify bipartisan solutions to combat
antisemitism, not an excuse to attack a higher education,
liberal arts education, or important diversity, equity and
inclusion work that's happening at colleges and universities
across the country. There are legitimate concerns about
antisemitism on college campuses, and that's what we should
focus on today. Not doing so is a disservice to the students
across the country who are looking to Congress for support, and
the public for the institutions.
During the previous hearing, I highlighted my support for
additional funding for the Department of Education's Office for
Civil Rights, and I want to join Representative Courtney in
repeating that request today. OCR will be better able to
enforce Title VI violations and protect students' civil rights
with adequate staff and investigatory capacities, so I want to
make that clear. We must do that.
Dr. Nadell, thank you for being here and for your work over
the years. Public colleges and universities as we know must
uphold Constitutional free speech rights, and many private
institutions also recognize the value of free speech and robust
debate, and all of our Presidents recognize that today.
With the understanding that schools cannot allow their
campuses to become places where antisemitic speech makes
students unsafe or feel unsafe. I think that is recognized. Dr.
Nadell, what are some of the best ways that colleges and
universities can work to make their campuses welcome, safe and
inclusive spaces for all students in light of incidents of hate
speech and discrimination, while also adhering to First
Amendment principles?
Ms. Nadell. Thank you for the question. I think there are
different forms and different venues for expanding this
discussion of the very difficult issue that has sparked and
ignited the antisemitism, or the outbursts on college campuses
that we have been seeing since October 7th.
One form obviously is the classroom. Although, I would
remind the members of the Committee that the reality is that
most students during their college career they take a handful
of courses. Many of them are studying STEM and most of them are
actually never in classrooms where they are hearing a
discussion of issues like antisemitism, or the conflict in
Israel and Palestine.
That is the first thing that I would point out. Academics,
we academics can continue to foster those conversations. We
need to take them outside of the classroom. I think the other
place where there can really be a lot of work done where it is
very successful is on the side of student life on campus.
Student organizations are they range broadly and widely on
the campus, everything from a gardening club, to obviously some
of the student organizations that have been involved in the
protests against Israel. These are other places.
Ms. Bonamici. Dr. Nadell, I do not want to cut you off, but
I have to get another question in, and I am running out of
time.
Ms. Nadell. Yes, oh sure.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you for your work, and I also want to
recognize as well the AJC action plan for confronting campus
antisemitism. President Gay, I understand that there is an
ongoing investigation of your institution by OCR because of
antisemitic incidents that occurred on campus.
I know we will be closely monitoring the outcome, but in
the interim, and over the long-term, what can Congress do to
support your institution and other colleges in preventing
discrimination? If you could respond in the brief time. You
mentioned that Harvard will not permit speech that incites
violence or threatens safety, and I would like you also to
address who decides that and how and in what timeframe.
Ms. Gay. Thank you, Congresswoman, for your questions. You
are correct that there is an ongoing investigation and
obviously I cannot comment on an active investigation other
than to say we will work with the office to answer all of their
questions. I will say the work of the office is vitally
important for ensuring students have access to educational
opportunities.
I fully support the work they do and hope that the office
gets the resources that it needs to be effective. With respect
to I believe the question was about student conduct. Again, we
are deeply committed to free expression, but when speech
crosses over into conduct that violates our policies, policies
against bullying, harassment, intimidation, we do take action.
We do have faculty led student disciplinary processes that
are quite robust. Even over the last couple of months as there
have been incidents, we have been leaning into those processes,
and we do have disciplinary actions underway.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Bonamici. I now recognize
Mr. Walberg for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks to the panel
for being here. These are difficult times and difficult
subjects, but they need to be addressed because leadership
matters, and you are leaders in academia at your institutions
as well, and leadership matters.
President Gay, I was taken by some words in your opening
statement where you said the cure for antisemitism is
knowledge. I would go where angels fear to tread and suggest
that it might be better going back to the original motto idea
for Harvard, which was veritas. Truth. That the cure for
antisemitism is not simply knowledge.
It is truth. Knowledge puffs up. Knowledge sometimes is
based upon falsehoods. I think that is what we are facing right
now. In the climate on campuses, is that we are missing the
fact of truth, and allowing under the guise of free speech
knowledge that is not true, to be exhibited in actions as well.
President Gay in the week since October 7th, and again in
your testimony you have said that Harvard's commitment to free
speech extends to views that are objectionable or outrageous.
Are you aware that Harvard is ranked dead last on the 2024
Foundation of Individual Rights and Expressions Scorecard of
Universities on freedom of speech?
Ms. Gay. Thank you, Congressman, for the question.
Respectfully, I disagree with that perspective as represented
in the report that you cited. I do not think it is an accurate
representation of how Harvard treats speech on campus. We are
committed to free expression, and to making space for a wide
range of views and perspectives on our campus. This is--this is
bedrock.
Mr. Thompson. With all due respect, let me move on a bit. I
would expect that you would not agree with that. I understand
that, and I would expect that the University of Penn the same
would be true, that you would not agree that you are second to
last on that same scorecard.
President Gay, did you know that 70 percent of Harvard
students say that shouting down of speakers is acceptable?
Ms. Gay. That is not okay.
Mr. Thompson. I appreciate that. It seems that perhaps
Harvard's commitment to free speech is pretty selective. As you
are no doubt aware, prominent alumnus Bill Ackerman tweeted you
a letter on Sunday, and in that letter and I have that tweet. I
guess that is the beauty of social media, you can get those
things.
In that letter he highlighted two cases of Harvard faculty
members who are canceled because of views deemed too
controversial for your campus. Tyler J. VanderWeele was deemed
guilty for those crimes related to his views on marriage and
abortion.
Then Carole Hooven, an evolutionary biologist was forced to
resign because she stated that a person's sex is biological and
binary. Mr. Ackerman's letter also included quotes from a
number of faculty, highlighting the culture of fear that
pervades Harvard's campus for those with views out of step with
campus orthodoxy.
President Gay, in what world is a call for violence against
Jews protected speech, but a belief that sex is biological, and
binary is it not?
Ms. Gay. Thank you for your question. From the moment that
our students arrive on campus, whether it is to begin their
Harvard journey as an undergraduate, or at one of the
professional schools, the message to them is clear. That we are
an inclusive community, but one deeply committed to free
expression.
That means that we have expectations that that right is
exercised mindfully and with empathy toward others. We
reinforce that during their time at Harvard by helping them
build the skills that allow them to engage in constructive
dialog, even on the most complex and divisive issues. What we
seek is not simply free expression, but the reason dialog that
leads to truth and discovery, and that does the work of moving
us all forward.
We do not always get it right, and our students do not
always get it right.
Mr. Thompson. You are professors.
Ms. Gay. When they transgress, they are held accountable.
Mr. Thompson. Your professors come under that as well do
they not? Your professors come under that as well?
Ms. Gay. Absolutely.
Mr. Thompson. For Professor VanderWeele and Hooven, that
did not work for them. The free expression of views at the very
least, views, whether fact or truth, I guess we will leave that
to understanding. Nonetheless, they were removed from their
positions. I think that sends a message. A message in this case
with Jewish students that they're of less importance. I yield
back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Mr. Takano, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here. I do wish we could meet under
different circumstances. President Gay, many individuals hold
that Harvard did not condemn the attack against Israel swiftly
enough. I would like to give you an opportunity to briefly to
react.
Can you tell us why the university did not react as quickly
as other universities might have, or others might have hoped
Harvard would have?
Ms. Gay. Thank you, Congressman, for the question.
Respectfully, the notion that Harvard did not react is not
correct. From the moment I learned of the attacks on October
7th, I was focused on action to ensure that our students were
supported and safe. On that first day we were focused on
identifying whether we had any students or faculty who were in
Israel and needed our assistance, including in getting out.
On October 8th I joined students and other members of the
community at Harvard Hillel, for a solidarity dinner to be
there in support and also to learn more what their needs were.
In the days after not only did I condemn the attacks, I have
continued to condemn the attacks, and furthermore have
continued to stay in conversation with our Jewish Community on
Campus about their evolving needs, so that to ensure that the
university is providing them with the support that they need
during this very challenging time.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, President Gay. Do you consider
yourself a subject matter expert on antisemitic behavior?
Ms. Gay. Excuse me, could you repeat that question? I did
not hear.
Mr. Takano. Do you consider yourself an expert on
antisemitic behavior, subject matter expert?
Ms. Gay. No. I do not. I know this, that antisemitism is
hate or suspicion of Jews, and that is all I need to know to
take action to address it on our campus.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. Real quickly, other than Professor
Nadell, do the other witnesses consider themselves to be
experts on antisemitism? Just a simple yes, or no?
Ms. Kornbluth. No, I do not.
Ms. Magill. No, I do not, but I learn.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. Well, my point is that this is the
second legislative hearing on this topic in a month, and the
majority has failed to bring forth any witnesses who can speak
on how to address this issue, and how to take concrete steps to
combat antisemitism.
President Gay, it is my understanding that you have
communicated to the Harvard community some of the specific
steps you are implementing to combat antisemitism and continue
to foster student and community engagement. You have already
mentioned a few of the things that you have done since
September 8th, but can you highlight some of these steps?
Ms. Gay. Thank you for the question. I had repeated
communications with the campus community about the steps that
we are taking, both immediate steps and longer-term action
toward combating antisemitism. To begin, we have focused on
enhancing the physical safety of the campus and the campus
community.
That includes an increased police presence, both plain
clothes and uniformed officers, 24/7 threat monitoring, both on
campus and online, coordination on a daily basis with State,
local and Federal law enforcement, and when necessary, we have
taken the steps of closing the gates to Harvard Yard, to limit
the ability of outside actors to use our campus as a platform.
We have also made it easier for students, or any community
member to report concerns and any kind of conduct that is
threatening. We have also enhanced counseling and mental health
services, including trauma informed care. We have created
community spaces so that students and faculty and staff can
gather and to be together to process the tragedy. We are also
working on----
Mr. Takano. Excuse me, President Gay. Thank you. Are these
actions only intended to assist Jewish students?
Ms. Gay. These are resources that we are making broadly
available to our community, but we are being particularly
mindful to make sure that they are responsive to the needs of
our Jewish community, as well as our Muslim, Arab and
Palestinian students who are also experiencing tremendous grief
and are also fearful and distraught during this time.
Mr. Takano. President Gay, universities stand as centers of
thought, and it is of the utmost importance to strike a balance
between First Amendment speech protections and the safety of
students and faculty. When speech crosses into the line of
conduct--crosses the line into conduct, it is essential that
universities act swiftly.
Harvard is a private university and private IHEs have
different parameters to operate under than public IHEs. Does
this give Harvard a pass to avoid protecting free speech?
Ms. Gay. We are deeply committed to protecting free
expression, even of views that we find objectionable and
outrageous and offensive. When that expression crosses into
conduct that violates our policies around bullying, harassment,
intimidation, threats, we take action, and we do not hesitate
to take action.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. My time is up, and I yield back to
the Chair, thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Takano. Mr. Grothman, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. I am going to followup on some of
the things Mr. Wilson had to say. Just playing around here a
little bit on the internet, in 2016 they found about 2 percent
of the faculty of Harvard were viewed--President Trump, I
think, is okay or good.
I think in the 2020 election the Crimson, your local paper
there, found 1 percent of the students voting for Donald Trump,
which given the nationwide is about 50/50 was kind of shocking.
Does it concern you at all that you apparently have a great
deal, a lack of ideological diversity at Harvard, and do you
think that atmosphere is maybe one of the reasons why there
seems to be such an outbreak of antisemitism at your
institution?
Ms. Gay. Is that--is that question for me?
Mr. Grothman. It is a question for you, and I will ask what
are you going to do about it? Do you think it is a concern?
Ms. Gay. We--so, we strive to have as diverse a faculty as
we can because we want to make sure that we are sampling from
the broadest pool of talent available in the world. That is how
we ensure academic excellence. We then----
Mr. Grothman. I--I, from what I have read here, maybe they
are just making stuff up, but I do not think they are making it
up. We said 2 percent of your faculty viewed Donald Trump as
something rather poor in 2016, and after 4 years of working for
diversity, 1 percent voted for him.
Now I know all sorts of good people who do not like
President Trump. I am just saying when you compare the way
people think at your campus compared to America as a whole, if
there is one thing you are, it is not diverse, right? Do you
consider that a problem, or to the numbers I gave you?
Ms. Gay. Congressman, I cannot speak to the specific data
that you are referring to. What I can say is that at Harvard we
try to create as much space as possible for a wide range of
views and perspectives because we believe that allows for a
thriving, academic community.
Mr. Grothman. How in the world is that even possible that
you are trying to do that? Do you really feel that your faculty
are ideologically diverse? You came out of what was it, a
political science background at Stanford?
Ms. Gay. At Standford, as an undergraduate, I was an
economics major, and then for my Ph.D. was a Ph.D. in political
science.
Mr. Grothman. Political science. That is what I thought.
Did you experience what you would say given America's divided
now 50/50 about 50/50 or was it 75/25 or 90/10 regarding to
more Constitutional conservative perspective, or more of a
left-wing perspective? What is your experience both at Harvard
and Stanford?
Ms. Gay. Here is what I can say on the topic that you are
exploring. It is we want the most brilliant, talented faculty
to come to Harvard, and to build their careers there. Then----
Mr. Grothman. Okay. They are only giving me five--you are
not going to answer the question--they are only giving me 5
minutes. Is it common at Harvard to ask faculty to submit a
diversity statement?
Ms. Gay. That is a practice that varies across schools at
Harvard.
Mr. Grothman. Sometimes you do?
Ms. Gay. In some cases, there are schools that ask for
that.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Could a scientist ever get cut from
consideration from a job because they had the wrong view of
diversity?
Ms. Gay. What I would say is that we aim to draw to our
faculty the broadest pool of talent.
Mr. Grothman. Okay, I will put it this way, when you hear
that, and this is not the way I wanted this to go, but when you
hear that 1 percent of your faculty voted for a Presidential
candidate who got about 50 percent of the vote nationwide, does
that concern you, or do you feel you are not as diverse as you
should be?
Ms. Gay. What I am focused on is making sure that we are
bringing the most academically talented faculty to our campus,
and that they are effective in the classroom.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I will give you one more question
because I want to go to the gal from Penn. Has Harvard ever
made a faculty job contingent on a strong diversity statement?
Ms. Gay. We look at everything a faculty member will bring
to our campus. Academic brilliance, and excitement and ability
to teach a campus community and student community as diverse--
--
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Now I want to go Ms. Magill. I have a
friend whose son goes to University of Pennsylvania. Right now,
he is physically afraid to go to the library at night, okay,
just unbelievable. Could you--and I just cannot even conceive
that it is going on in the United States of America, but that
is what she tells me, and she does not make it up.
Could you give us your reasons as to why that is true in
Pennsylvania? Why today a Jewish student is afraid to walk to
the library at night?
Ms. Magill. Congressman, let me start by saying I am
devastated to hear that, and the safety and security of our
campus and our students in particular is my top concern. I
would, if you would be willing, I would like to talk to your
constituent and their Penn student. I am very troubled by what
you are reporting. It is our top priority to keep our students
safe and secure.
Chairwoman Foxx. I am going to have to ask you to followup
on that with Mr. Grothman, and with the rest of the Committee.
Ms. Adams, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and thank you
to the witnesses for coming today and to testify before the
Committee. Before I get started, I want to just thank you for
your service to students and to the university community. Dr.
Nadell, this question is for you.
I am glad, first of all, to see another Buckeye here, Ohio
State, but as a former professor at a small college in North
Carolina, Bennett College for over 40 years I taught there, I
am deeply disappointed by the rise of antisemitism rhetoric
that is happening across the country.
Antisemitism has no place on our college campuses, or
anywhere, and it has been my mission to combat instances of
antisemitism and hate, and racism alike. There are Jewish
students across this country that are afraid to leave their
dorms, afraid to step on campus because of the hateful rhetoric
that's infiltrated our schools.
This question is to actually all the Presidents, but I did
want Dr. Nadell to answer first. Students should be able to
express their views and opinions without fear of retaliation.
How are you balancing the protection of free speech, academic
freedom with the need to also oppose normalizing antisemitism
attitudes that are radical and dangerous? If we could just
briefly answer that I want to hear from the Presidents on this.
Ms. Nadell. Sure. Just briefly, obviously we need to
protect free speech, but we also need to protect the safety of
our students on campus, and you used the word normalizing
antisemitism, and the problem is antisemitism has been
normalized in the Nation, not just on campus.
Ms. Adams. Thank you.
Dr. Gay.
Ms. Gay. Thank you. I would say education is the key here.
Making students, and frankly the entire campus community more
aware of the insidiousness of antisemitism, so that they are in
a position to be able to recognize antisemitic tropes when they
see them, and confront them in the moment.
Ms. Adams. Thank you.
Ms. Magill. I appreciate the question. At Penn our policies
are guided by the U.S. Constitution, so our long-standing open
expression guidelines follow the Constitution. I think in
addition to education, which I agree with, so that students
are, and faculty and staff can identify and combat antisemitic
tropes and speech. I think it is important to call out
antisemitism in a very visible and public way, and a specific
way, in order to make clear how it is contrary to the values of
the institution where we are talking about speech alone.
Ms. Adams. Thank you. Title VI provisions set the standard
for what should be done to address racism, hate crimes and
violence on campuses. Do you think that your DEI departments
are equipped with the tools to combat antisemitism or hate on
your campus, and if not, what changes do you plan to make? This
is for all of the Presidents.
Ms. Kornbluth. I can jump in here.
Ms. Adams. Yes.
Ms. Kornbluth. Yes. Our diversity equity and inclusion
staff are absolutely charged with making the campus welcoming
for all students, and that absolutely includes our Jewish and
Israeli students. We absolutely see antisemitism as an
inclusion issue.
We are making sure that our staff who are dedicated to
diversity equity inclusion are being trained about
antisemitism, but you know it goes well beyond that staff. It
is important that our leadership understands antisemitism, that
our students and faculty understand antisemitism. I will just
say one thing about MIT. We can make as many top-down
initiatives as we want, but the heartening thing is that the
discussion of antisemitism, and indeed Islamophobia is now
proceeding at a grass roots level at MIT.
Ms. Adams. Thank you very much. The next President?
Ms. Magill. Our anti-bigotry efforts are also informed by a
desire to make certain every person at the university feels
welcome and can thrive, and that includes communities of faith
and ethnicity. That is the value we have, and we are making
sure that is from the top of the organization all through the
organization.
I believe over the longer term that is sort of an immediate
action over the longer term, making sure the entire community
is discussing understanding and capable of coming out and
combating antisemitism when they see it.
Ms. Adams. Thank you. Madam President?
Ms. Gay. Our DEI office is a resource for the entire
community, and the professionals in that office are committed
to ensuring that everyone feels a sense of belonging. In
building on an observation that President Kornbluth made, this
is a shared responsibility that does not vest strictly in the
hands of our DEI professionals, but it really is work that
needs to be taken up by the entire community.
The leadership for sure, but also the faculty, and the
students and also doing their work.
Ms. Adams. Thank you very much, and I am out of time. Madam
Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Stefanik, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stefanik. Dr. Gay, a Harvard student calling for the
mass murder of African Americans is not protected free speech
at Harvard, correct?
Ms. Gay. Our commitment to free speech----
Ms. Stefanik. It is a yes or no question. Is that correct?
Is that okay for students to call for the mass murder of
African Americans at Harvard? Is that protected free speech?
Ms. Gay. Our commitment to free speech extends----
Ms. Stefanik. It is a yes or no question. Let me ask you
this. You are President of Harvard, so I assume you are
familiar with the term intifada, correct?
Ms. Gay. I have heard that term, yes.
Ms. Stefanik. You understand that the use of the term
intifada in the context of the Israeli Arab conflict is indeed
a call for violent armed resistance against the State of
Israel, including violence against civilians and the genocide
of Jews. Are you aware of that?
Ms. Gay. That type of hateful speech is personally
abhorrent to me.
Ms. Stefanik. There have been multiple marches at Harvard
with students chanting, ``There is only one solution, intifada
revolution.'' ``Globalize the intifada.'' Is that correct?
Ms. Gay. I have heard that thoughtless, reckless and
hateful language on our campus, yes.
Ms. Stefanik. Based upon your testimony, you understand
that this call for intifada is to commit genocide against the
Jewish people in Israel and globally, correct?
Ms. Gay. I will say again, that type of hateful speech is
personally abhorrent to me.
Ms. Stefanik. Do you believe that type of hateful speech is
contrary to Harvard's Code of Conduct, or is it allowed at
Harvard?
Ms. Gay. It is at odds with the values of Harvard. Our
values also----
Ms. Stefanik. Can you not say here that it is against the
Code of Conduct at Harvard?
Ms. Gay. We embrace a commitment to free expression, even
of views that are objectionable, offensive, hateful. It is when
that speech crosses into conduct that violates our policies
against bullying, harassment, hate crimes.
Ms. Stefanik. Does that speech not cross that barrier? Does
that speech not call for the genocide of Jews, and the
elimination of Israel? You testified that you understand that
is the definition of intifada. Is that speech according to the
Code of Conduct or not?
Ms. Gay. We embrace a commitment to free expression, and
give a wide berth to free expression, even of views that are
objectionable, outrageous and offensive.
Ms. Stefanik. You and I both know that is not the case. You
are aware that Harvard ranked dead last when it came to free
speech, are you not aware of that report?
Ms. Gay. As I observed earlier, I reject that
characterization.
Ms. Stefanik. It is the data shows it is true. Is it true
that Harvard previously rescinded multiple offers of admissions
for applicants, and accepted freshmen for sharing offensive
memes, racist statements, sometimes as young as 16 years old.
Did Harvard not rescind those offers of admission?
Ms. Gay. That long predates my time as President so I
cannot speak to----
Ms. Stefanik. You understand that Harvard made that
decision to rescind those offers of admission?
Ms. Gay. I have no reason to contradict the facts as you
present them here.
Ms. Stefanik. Correct, because it is a fact. You are also
aware that a Winthrop House faculty dean was let go over who he
chose to legally represent, correct? That was while you were
dean.
Ms. Gay. That is an incorrect characterization of what
transpired.
Ms. Stefanik. What is the characterization?
Ms. Gay. I am not going to get into details about a
personnel matter.
Ms. Stefanik. Well, let me ask you this. Will admissions
offers be rescinded, or any disciplinary action be taken
against students or applicants who say from the river to the
sea, or intifada advocating for the murder of Jews?
Ms. Gay. As I have said, that type of hateful, reckless,
offensive speech is personally abhorrent to me.
Ms. Stefanik. Are you testifying today that no action will
be taken? What action will be taken?
Ms. Gay. When speech crosses into conduct that violates our
policies, including policies against bullying, harassment or
intimidation, we take action, and we have robust disciplinary
processes that allow us to hold individuals accountable.
Ms. Stefanik. What action has been taken against students
who are harassing and calling for the genocide of Jews on
Harvard's campus?
Ms. Gay. I can assure you we have robust disciplinary
processes with actions underway.
Ms. Stefanik. What actions have been taken? I am not
asking--I am asking what actions have been taken against those
students?
Ms. Gay. Given students' rights to privacy, and our
obligations under FERPA, I will not say more about any specific
cases, other than to reiterate that processes are ongoing.
Ms. Stefanik. Do you know what the No. 1 hate crime in
America is?
Ms. Gay. I know that over the last couple of months there
has been an alarming rise of antisemitism, which I understand
is the critical topic that we are here to discuss.
Ms. Stefanik. That is correct. It is anti-Jewish hate
crimes. Harvard ranks the lowest when it comes to protecting
Jewish students. This is why I have called for your
resignation, and your testimony today not being able to answer
with moral clarity, speaks volumes. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. The gentlewoman yields back. Mr. Norcross
is not here. Ms. Jayapal, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Madam Chair. The Anti-Defamation
League found that reports of antisemitism have nearly
quadrupled since this point last year, and we are seeing that
reflected on the college campuses with Jewish students
reporting that they feel unsafe.
No student should feel unsafe. I think we all agree
antisemitism and indeed, all forms of hate, have to be rejected
everywhere. While all of you as college administrators have a
responsibility to condemn hate and acts of hate in all its
forms, including antisemitism, I know that you also face the
challenge of, and the responsibility of ensuring that people
can engage in healthy debates of ideas in a way that fosters
safety and inclusion for everyone.
I want to thank you for your commitments to work to ensure
continued diversity of perspectives on your campuses, a
diversity of faculty, with varied lived experiences. I know
that my republican colleagues have been trying to attack DEI
initiatives, including the funding for those initiatives for
some time, and I hope that that is clear in terms of some of
the comments that have been made.
I want to just give Dr. Gay 30 seconds to respond to
anything given the line of questioning that you had right
before, in case you wanted to say anything before I go to my
lines of question.
Ms. Gay. Thank you for the opportunity, but I am satisfied
that I have conveyed our deep commitment to free expression,
recognizing that it is uncomfortable.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Dr. Gay. Dr. Kornbluth, your
institution is one of many that have responded to incidents
between pro-Israel and pro-Palestine groups. Many college
campuses have been grappling with their responses to prevent
antisemitism, to prevent Islamophobia, and other forms of hate,
while also making sure that every student feels safe to express
their thoughts in accordance with the principles of free
speech, and to engage in the idea of critical thought on
college campuses, which I think is what many of us appreciated
about our college experiences.
Can you speak to the challenges that you have faced in
condemning hate and acts of hate, while making sure that
students were heard? Just want to appreciate the distinction
that you made in one of your comments between what we can say
and what we should say. Just say that frankly, I think there
has been an explosion thanks to the previous President in part,
that has shattered the norms of what is acceptable to say, and
we are dealing with some of the effects of that.
What challenges have you faced in condemning hate, and acts
of hate, while making sure students were heard?
Ms. Kornbluth. Thank you so much. You know----
Ms. Jayapal. If you could just pull that microphone right
up to you that would be great.
Ms. Kornbluth. Oh, I am sorry. I am sorry. Thank you. You
know I have to say my absolute goal is to ensure the safety of
students and the continuity of our research and educational
missions. These recent events have troubled me deeply, and we
have mobilized as a campus.
I think the most important thing is first knowledge to
understand that, as I mentioned in a previous answer, that our
leadership, our students and our faculty have to have
knowledge, but way more importantly right now is these students
are thrown together in classrooms and laboratories, and
dormitories every day.
This is where the dialog is taking place. We have to ensure
that the have the tools for constructive communication across
differences. We are bringing these discussions to the
dormitories. We have a center for constructive engagement where
the students are going to be able to have small roundtable
discussions with each other.
We have funded and mobilized, and I cannot tell you how
wonderful our faculty have been. They just issued a statement
from 300 faculty about unity and working together with the
students. There have been lunches, there have been meetings for
our Israeli and Jewish students with Jewish faculty, for our
Arab and Muslim students, with Arab and Muslim faculty, but now
they are working to figure out how to bring them together.
If we are all going to live and work together productively,
we have to move beyond normal training, which we are committed
to, but to actual real dialog and to actually model
constructive and civil dialog for our students. That is what
being in university is all about.
Ms. Jayapal. Very powerful. Professor Nadell, these
challenges of protecting free speech while denouncing
antisemitism, Islamophobia, all forms of hate, that is not
unique to MIT or to the institutions that are here. Can you
speak to the same question of the most effective ways to
facilitate education and dialog to ease tensions at other
colleges and in general?
Ms. Nadell. The most effective ways, and obviously I very
much appreciate your question because this is happening across
the United States on colleges and campuses, small and large.
The most effective ways are to recognize the many different
levels and mechanisms for facilitating these dialogs at the
student level, at the faculty level, at the administrative
level, and bringing--how to unite the campus.
Bringing the campus together. That is what we are all
trying to do, and it does not happen overnight.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you all so much for your work. I yield
back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Allen you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I want to thank each
of you for being here today. First, and you know my colleague
earlier asked the question, what is the truth? Of course, that
question was asked 2000 years ago of Pilate, and of course you
know, obviously knowledge is important, but what about wisdom?
In full disclosure, I am a student. I believe in the God of
the bible and His Word. The House of Representatives, we are
without excuse. We have above the American flag In God We
Trust. Really? Then we have the full face of Moses looking down
on the entire body who gave us the first five books of the
bible.
Let me tell you how serious this issue is. In 1885 B.C.
B.C., not A.D. B.C. The bible says Genesis 12:3, ``I will
bless,'' talking about Israel. ``I will bless those who bless
you, and whoever curses you I will curse. And all peoples of
the earth would be blessed through you.'' That is a serious,
serious promise.
In fact, we heard one of the panelists talk about the Jesus
of the bible, and of course our church was founded by Jesus,
who was a Jew. The American church. In fact the church
throughout the world. You know, this is the Committee of
Education and Workforce.
Illiteracy is the No. 1 problem in our workforce, but I
think from a standpoint of truth, biblical illiteracy is the
No. 1 problem in America. We are a biblically illiterate
society. We have no idea about these promises that are ancient,
and this book that the prophecies, every one of them has come
to fruition. Every single one of them.
With that, Dr. Magill, like so many others I have been
extremely disappointed--I am sorry, Dr. Kornbluth, is that
correct? Okay.
Ms. Kornbluth. Dr. Kornbluth.
Mr. Allen. At MIT Israeli and Jewish students were blocked
from attending class by pro-Palestinian protests at the
school's main entrance. The protest violated campus rules when
the school ordered all protestors to leave the area or face
suspension. The contingent Jewish counter protestors left. The
pro-Palestinians stayed.
Can you explain how that is fair to Jewish American
citizens whose rights are being violated when you said because
we later heard serious concerns about collateral consequences
for students such as visas, and that sort of thing. Can you
explain yourself there?
Ms. Kornbluth. Yes. Thank you very much for the
opportunity. I have to say when we started this protest, when
the protest rather was started, I ordered a police presence to
ensure safety, and we de-escalated when it was prudent, in a
very tense situation amongst students.
We avoided altercations and we kept everyone safe. We are
now entering into a process of ensuring accountability. With
respect to the consequences, we strive for outcomes that are
proportional to the transgression. In this case, a violation of
our time, place and manner rules for demonstration.
I want to make one comment though about people attending
classes. First of all, at no time----
Mr. Allen. Well, I am limited on time here, so could you
submit that to us in writing?
Ms. Kornbluth. Absolutely.
Mr. Allen. I have another question here. In fact, you know
going back to talking about wisdom. Proverbs 9:10 says, ``The
fear of God is the beginning of wisdom.'' With that, President
Gay and President Magill, do either of you plan to suspend
foreign students who violate the law or school policies?
Ms. Gay. Thank you for your question. Our international
students are a vibrant part of our community and contribute
significantly to Harvard's strength and are a real source of
pride. All of our students, irrespective of their citizenship,
are held accountable to following our policies, including our
policies around bullying, harassment and intimidation. We hold
them accountable for that.
Mr. Allen. Okay. Well Dr. Magill, if you will submit those
in writing, and I have a few other questions I would like for
you all to answer. Thank you for being here, and Chair and I
yield.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Allen. Ms. Wild, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Madam Chair. I so wish that this
hearing was one where we were having a robust intellectual
discussion, taking advantage of the brilliant minds that we
have in front of us about free speech, the limits of free
speech and so forth. I fear that we have gotten away from that.
I think the one thing that everybody in this room would
agree on is that not all speech is protected or acceptable. For
example, when elected officials lie, that is unacceptable. That
sometimes means that they have to be removed from academic
institutions where they may serve on boards, or in the case of
Harvard, the senior advisory committee based on false claims of
election fraud.
But moving on to the subject of this hearing, let me just
say as a Jewish mother of two students who are now fully
launched, and I had to send off to college not so many years
ago, I am very, very sympathetic to the concerns of the
students and the parents about their safety, emotionally,
physically, and otherwise.
It is not just about antisemitism, it is about all forms of
hate speech, whether it is anti-LGBT, Islamophobia, whatever it
is, racist language, our students deserve a place of safety.
Again, emotionally and physically. At the same time, I think of
college as the place where we learn to think critically.
To me that is the most important part of going to college.
Here we are in this strange balancing act, and believe me, I
feel for all of you because it is a balancing act that you have
to perform. At what point do we determine, or do you determine,
that speech is such that it incites violence, or it constitutes
hate speech?
I am going to ask President Magill from my home State of
Pennsylvania, you saw a video at the beginning of this. To the
extent that the protests at hand were referenced, did you see
that video as an example of hate speech, or speech that would
incite violence?
Ms. Magill. I appreciate the question from the
Representative from the great Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. I
mean that video just as a human being, was very hard to watch.
The chanting, I think calling for intifada global revolution
very disturbing, and I can imagine many people's reaction to
that would be one of fear.
I believe that at a minimum that is hateful speech that has
been and should be condemned. Whether it rises to the level of
incitement to violence under the policies that Penn and the
city of Philadelphia follow, which are guided by the United
States Constitution, I think is a much more difficult question.
The incitement to violence is a very narrow category.
Ms. Wild. Let me just ask you there. If you became aware
that a similar protest or rally, or whatever you call it, was
going to be occurring on your campus tonight or tomorrow, how
would you respond? What would your approach be?
Ms. Magill. Well, our approach with all rallies, vigils,
and protests is that our public safety officers and something
called the open expression observers are present at all of
them. We have a longstanding expression policy that makes sure
are open expression policies are followed, so I would make sure
that those people were there.
Our public safety officers usually try to speak to the
organizers of the conference and talk to them about what our
rules are about protests, I am sorry, I think I said
conference. About protests.
Ms. Wild. Could I just stop you because yes you know these
are really short hearings. Were any actions taken to shut down
the protest? I think it was Sunday night, Saturday night,
whichever night it was?
Ms. Magill. The Philadelphia Police, they are what is
called their civil action division was the lead on this, and
no, I think they were there to make sure there was no
incitement to violence and no violence. I do not think any
actions were taken.
Ms. Wild. Would you agree that in this case, Jewish
students, undoubtedly felt very uncomfortable following that?
Ms. Magill. I am sure that is true. Yes.
Ms. Wild. I am sure you have heard from many of them and
their parents as well.
Ms. Magill. Yes. Yes. There were acts associated with that
protest, which were defacing some buildings, which clearly
would unquestionably be a criminal action, and the police are
trying to determine who did that.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. Unfortunately, as usual, my time has
expired, but I hope we can continue this conversation in
another format. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. I want to ask our members to be very
careful about the words they use about our colleagues. We do
not want to engage in personalities and so I am going to ask
our members to hold themselves to a higher standard. I now
recognize Mr. Banks.
Mr. Banks. Ms. Magill, just weeks before the October 7
terror attacks against Israel, Penn hosted a Palestine Rights
Literature Festival. The event featured Mark Lamont Hill, who
was fired by CNN for calling for the destruction of Israel. It
also hosted and included a member of the Palestinian youth
movement, which has collaborated with the anti-Israel terrorist
and maybe most notably, Roger Waters, the really whacky former
Pink Floyd vocalist.
The same Roger Waters, by the way, who is publicly used
anti-Jewish slurs, desecrated the memory of Anne Frank, and has
dressed up as a Nazi and floated a pig balloon with the Star of
David at many of his concerts. Why in the world would you host
someone like that on your college campus to speak at the so-
called Palestinian Rights Literature Festival?
Ms. Magill. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss this.
Antisemitism has no place at Penn.
Mr. Banks. Why would you invite--why did you invite Roger
Waters? What did you think you would get out of him?
Ms. Magill. Antisemitism has no place at Penn, and our free
speech policies are guided by the United States Constitution.
Mr. Banks. Why did you invite Roger Waters?
Ms. Magill. Antisemitism does not have a place at Penn,
and----
Mr. Banks. Do you condemn what Roger Waters stands for?
Ms. Magill. Congressman, prior to the event, I issued a
statement calling out these antisemitism of some of the
speakers at that conference.
Mr. Banks. Specifically, Roger Waters? Yes, or no?
Ms. Magill. Roger Waters was among them.
Mr. Banks. You specifically called out a guy who floated
pig balloons with a Star of David at his concerts?
Ms. Magill. I called out the anti----
Mr. Banks. I have not seen the condemnation. I am going to
go look for it after this hearing. I hope I can find that well
recorded condemnation from you.
Ms. Magill. I did call out the antisemitism of some of the
speakers at a conference that had more than 100 people.
Mr. Banks. In the aftermath of the Palestinian Rights
Festival, you and your Board Chairman wrote a memo outlining
Penn's free speech policies. You said, ``Penn does not regulate
the content of speech or symbolic behavior.'' You wrote
including speech, ``Incompatible with the school's values.''
You went on to say that Penn does not have a policy against
hate speech because, ``Defining and policing robust debate,
even with respect to the most disturbing issues is unwise.''
That is what you wrote. In 2013, Penn canceled now Prime
Minister Modi's scheduled keynote address at a Wharton hosted
economic forum in the face of opposition from India and
American professors.
For the past year your administration has sought to punish
Amy Wax, a tenured law professor for her stance on DEI and
identity issues. Then you canceled an event with former ICE
Director Tom Homan due to disruptive student protest simply
because he worked for former President Donald Trump.
Ms. Magill, the fact is that Penn regulates speech that it
does not like. Everyone gets this. No one more than the faculty
and students who know exactly where the lines are that the are
okay to cross. Why did Penn let Professor Ahmad Almallah off
the hook, who led hundreds of students in chanting, ``There is
only one solution intifada revolution.'' Why does that
professor still have a job at your university.
Ms. Magill. Representative, our approach to speech is as I
identified. It follows and is guided by the United States
Constitution, which allows for robust perspectives. I disagree
with the characterization that we treat speech differently, and
I cannot discuss any individual disciplinary proceeding.
Mr. Banks. The same goes for Penn Professor Ann Norton, who
has repeatedly denied Hamas's worst atrocities on October 7.
How about Huda Fakhreddine, who romanticized the murder of over
1,000 Israeli Jews as ``Palestine inventing a new way of
life,'' and clapped as a speaker said Jews should go back to
Berlin and Moscow. Why does that professor still have a job at
your university?
Ms. Magill. I am very troubled by what you are describing,
Congressman, that kind of, that is----
Mr. Banks. You are speaking out of both sides of your
mouth. You are defending it. You allowed these professors to
teach at your college. You create a safe haven for this type of
antisemitic behavior. You said something earlier about
antisemitism being symbolic of the larger society. Your
university is a hot bed of it.
One of the reasons that we are seeing a rise of
antisemitism as an unsafe environment for Jewish college
students all over this country, you are largely responsible for
it. With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Norcross, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Certainly for
holding this hearing. What an incredibly important subject that
has been thrust upon us, or should I say has been re-thrust.
This is an issue that has been before our country and our world
for quite some time.
The one thing I do want to State before I go into my
questioning is the idea of making this a partisan issue. It is
disgusting. This issue has nothing to do with being on a red or
blue team. This is an American issue in terms of what we are
facing on our campuses and should not be taken under the light
of a partisan issue.
That being given, I do have some questions, particularly
for the University of Pennsylvania and its President, who is
within a couple thousand yards of my district. I will start
with back during August Penn announced plans to host a
Palestinian Rights Festival, that was going to be held in
September.
Given that the ADL identified many of the speakers, I
believe the number was 25 as antisemitic, this continued to
happen. The idea of what happened during that event, after the
event, and as much as last night, as I was traveling down here
to see what is still happening in and around the campus is
extremely disturbing given the atrocities that have happened in
the Middle East.
Dr. Magill, did you have the power to stop this event?
Ms. Magill. Under our approach to academics and academic
freedom and free expression, Congressman, we have probably
thousands of speakers to campus every single year. Many of them
I disagree with. I do not cancel or censor them in advance of
their arrival to campus.
Mr. Norcross. Any time you use the word ``censor.'' Any
event on your campus, you would never interfere for the fear of
censoring somebody. Is that what you are suggesting.
Ms. Magill. Well, Congressman, there are--we are of course
always concerned about safety and security, so that could be a
constraint we would be worrying about and thinking about an
event. It is a very rare occasion----
Mr. Norcross. There would be times that you would stop an
event under the terms of censoring if you, under your opinion
or those advising you, say there would be a security issue?
Ms. Magill. Well, our approach is not to censor based on
the content, but to worry about things like safety, security,
and the time, place and manner in which the event would occur.
Mr. Norcross. Given what happened in October, you could not
see ahead that was going to happen. The idea that groups coming
on that are clearly identified as antisemitic would be of grave
concern?
Ms. Magill. I was concerned about the antisemitism of some
of the speakers at that conference, and also the timing of that
conference was particularly painful, because it occurred during
the holiest time of the Jewish year. That is why, in advance of
the conference, while saying that we are committed to academic
freedom and free expression, the conference would go on. I
specifically condemned the antisemitism of some of the
speakers.
Mr. Norcross. Condemning. You would have the power to stop
it if, in your opinion, there was a security issue?
Ms. Magill. Well, Congressman, whether there is a security
issue is something that I leave to our Public Safety
individuals, and I defer to their judgments on those matters.
Mr. Norcross. Did you ask them?
Ms. Magill. We discuss the security and safety of every
large conference that happens on our campus and yes, we did
talk about this one.
Mr. Norcross. They, in their opinion, along with you,
decided that there were no security issues. By the nature, you
would allow this to continue?
Ms. Magill. We did not believe--we believed we were ready
for any security concerns that might arise. Yes, it went ahead.
Mr. Norcross. In hindsight, do you think that was a proper
decision?
Ms. Magill. I think canceling that conference would have
been very inconsistent with academic freedom and free
expression, despite the fact that the views of some of the
people who came to that conference I find very, very
objectionable because of their antisemitism.
Mr. Norcross. Would you permit your academic departments to
sponsor a conference with 25 speakers that the NAACP would
identify as racist?
Ms. Magill. Congressman, we follow our policies always, and
our policies are guided by the United States Constitution and
the commitment to academic freedom and free expression.
Mr. Norcross. Is that a yes or a no answer?
Ms. Magill. The answer is that we follow our policies.
Mr. Norcross. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Mr. Owens, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. Let me just start off by saying being
raised in the 60's, the days of segregation, this is truly deja
vu. One thing that I did learn through my growth over the years
is that hate is not passed on in our genes. It is taught or
untaught.
What we are seeing here is hate being perpetuated. We keep
people segregated, keep them from building bridges of trust,
never allowing them to find commonality. Teach them that
everything that is going wrong in life is because of somebody
else's actions, and teach them to look at our differences, our
color, creed and culture, and then teach them to judge each
other.
It is dehumanizing, it robs people of individuality, but
the end game, if it is hate, it is very effective. We teach one
race, all minorities, that they are oppressed. Through DEI, we
then teach another race, whites and Jews, that they're
oppressors. The result is hatred, segregation, the ability--
inability for our children to see evil when it's present.
One of my Democratic colleagues was asked recently about
the rape, the use of strategy by Hamas, to rape Jewish women
and children, girls and women as terror. Her response was not
to defend these women against these evil men, but to generally
discuss hierarchical oppression.
That is DEI. It is a failure to protect Jewish communities
across our country at your universities. Let me just say this
also. October 7th was a very different day in our lifetime, and
yet every single time we talk about antisemitism, we some kind
of way drift off into every other sense of racism.
We are talking about 1,200 lives, babies being burned,
beheaded, hostages and yet we cannot stay focused on
antisemitism. I just remember a couple of years ago when we
were dealing with Black Lives Matter, try to talk about Blue
Lives Matter, Jew Lives Matter, Arab Lives Matter and you will
be called a racist.
It is time to focus on what is happening on your campuses.
It might sound flowery all the ideas of what your values might
be, but those values are not being translated to our kids. You
have seen them in the streets every single day.
MIT, there was a--we just--we heard from a university
student here that a DEI official liked the most posts on their
media, a post calling President Biden a liar for saying that
Hamas beheaded babies. She also posted saying that Israel does
not have the right to exist, it is an illegitimate, settler
colony like the United States.
I have a question regarding this idea of segregation, Dr.
Gay. Harvard is now having graduations for black-only
graduates, Hispanic-only graduates and gay-only graduates. How
does that bring us together as opposed to dividing us based on
color, creed and all the other things?
By the way, is it okay for a white group to say we do not
want other minorities to be part of our graduation?
Ms. Gay. Thank you for the question. There are few scenes
that are more inspiring than being--
Mr. Owens. I am sorry, I am sorry. I do not--I am going to
ask you in a way that is going to be very quick, because I have
little time. Is it okay to segregate people based on their
color, yes, or no?
Ms. Gay. I oppose segregation.
Mr. Owens. Okay, well I do too, but it is happening on your
campus, okay. Dr. Kornbluth, Kornbluth, I am sorry. We have on
your campus something called Chocolate City for blacks only--
black only dorms, where whites are excluded. Is it okay also
for whites to set up a white-only dorm where minorities are
excluded?
Ms. Kornbluth. Actually, at MIT, our students affiliate
voluntarily with whichever dorm they want to. It is not
exclusionary; it is actually positive selection by students,
which dormitory they want to live in.
Mr. Owens. Okay. It is okay for blacks to note make whites
feel included. Is it okay for whites not to let blacks feel
included on your campus? We are talking about segregation, and
it is obviously happening on your campuses.
Ms. Kornbluth. I think it is really important to say that
there is a distinction between sending an exclusionary message
and looking to other students for common experiences and
support.
Mr. Owens. Okay. Let me just--I am sorry. I am running out
of time. What you are saying is very simply in the 1960's, it
would have been okay for whites and blacks to segregate
themselves, because they felt more like the people they are
with.
I disagree very, very much. Let me just say this. If in
case we discover, and this is for everybody here really quick
in the last few minutes, that there is a direct link from DEI
and CRT to the growth of Marxist centered groups like BLM,
Antifa, and pro-Hamas on campuses, would you then end the DEI
initiatives on your campus, if there is a link between what
that is and what the result of hatred? Would that be a--would
that be finished on your campus? Real quickly. We have--just
yes or no. Dr. Gay let us start with you. Yes or no.
Ms. Gay. Our DEI efforts are about assuring that all of our
community members welcomed----
Mr. Owens. Okay. That is a yes or no. Okay, Doctor, I am
sorry. Ms. Magill, yes or no. If it is found to be link between
Marxist, BLM, Antifa and hate groups, yes or no.
Ms. Magill. Our DEI Office is committed to having everyone
for life.
Mr. Owens. Okay. So no, all right.
Ms. Kornbluth. Real quick. Just yes or no, sorry.
Ms. Kornbluth. I find it hard to understand how equity and
inclusion as a concept, is a hatred inducer--
Mr. Owens. Okay. That is no. Okay. Thank you so much. I
think that says a lot. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Chairwoman Foxx. You can give an answer in writing, and I
have to remind Members not to engage in personalities. Ms.
McBath, you are recognized.
Ms. McBath. Thank you so much, Chairwoman Foxx, Ranking
Member Scott, to our staff, and thank you so much to our
witnesses today. It is not lost on me that the intellect, the
intelligence that we have on this panel today. The most
intelligent minds that are leading our highest institutions are
women. Thank you so very much.
I had the privilege of attending a very similar hearing in
the Higher Education Subcommittee just a few weeks ago, and I'm
glad to see that we are continuing this conversation at a full
Committee level. Active expressions of antisemitism have no
place in our society, and definitely not on any college campus
or institution here in the United States.
What we must all understand is that this is not just the
Jewish community's struggle. This is all of our struggle, and
the Jewish community does not get to bear this burden alone. It
is up to all of us to learn more and stand in solidarity
against hate in our daily lives, to ensure that the violence
and the tragedies that follow unchecked hatred will never be
allowed to repeat themselves.
I lost my son to that very hatred, so I understand it in my
core. Similar to other expressions of racial and religious
hatred, all freedom loving people, all those who truly believe
in the ideals that this country was founded on and continues to
strive toward, must stand together in the face of this
disturbing increase in hate across the country and across the
world.
An outpouring of support for the Jewish community and
public condemnation of this heinous acts by interfaith and
community leaders and elected officials of all backgrounds is
the exact type of action that we need to take to confront this
form of radical evil. Unity in the face of intimidation is how
we are effectively going to resist hate in all of its forms.
These actions seek to divide and intimidate us. We must
show that we will not be intimidated, that we will not falter
when our neighbors need us the most, that we are united against
hate and we choose to love instead, irregardless of our
political ideologies or our ethnic differences.
As Dr. King once said, and I quote ``Returning hate for
hate multiplies hate, adding deeper darkness to a night already
devoid of stars. Darkness cannot drive out darkness. Only light
can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate, only love can do
that.''
My community in metropolitan Atlanta is home to the largest
community in the Deep South, the largest Jewish community in
the Deep South, and it is no stranger to these incidents of
antisemitism. I recall participating in a press conference with
interfaith leaders, our local law enforcement and elected
officials.
The Antidefamation League and the Consul General of Israel
came to the Southeast to condemn the appearance of antisemitic
vandalism and white supremacist symbols that were definitely
expressed in our neighborhoods and our communities. While the
reason for our gathering was very somber, it was uplifting to
see so many different people from so many different faiths and
backgrounds all come together to make it clear that this is
antithetical to what our community and our society stands for.
Dr. Nadell, I have had you before me before, and it is good
to see you again. Can you please discuss some of the schools or
the communities that have built strong interracial and
interreligious connections and relationships in the aftermath
of a racist or antisemitic incident, and what building those
connections looks like, and why they are so critical and
imperative to healing?
Ms. Nadell. What--first of all, thank you. It is wonderful
to see you again. What really stands out is how at the personal
level change can happen. For example, at the University of
California at Berkeley, which is a campus that has been riled,
as these campuses have also been riled, a professor of Israel
Studies and a faculty member from Middle Eastern Studies sent
out a joint letter pleading with the campus to speak in a civil
tone.
These are two faculty members who do not agree politically
on what has been going on, but they got together to write this,
and then it was sent out to the entire community. It is those
kinds of actions that we need to be applauding, and we need to
be elevating and uplifting, and as I said before, they just do
not tend to make headlines.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you.
Ms. McBath. Thank you so very much, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. McBath. Mr. Good, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Good. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Ms. Magill, September
21, a Penn student was taken in custody after bursting into a
Jewish organization's morning prayer service shouting
antisemitic comments, disrupting property and so forth.
On November 10, after the October 7 Hamas attack, Penn
issues an apology for a display of light projected on the
campus buildings with anti-Israel messages, including phrases
such as ``From the river to the sea, Palestine will be free,''
and ``Zionism is racism.''
On November 15, the Department of Ed announces that Penn is
under investigation for possible civil rights violations of
Title VI, and then just 2 days ago, another pro-Palestinian
march happened on the edge of campus with Penn property being
graffitied with offensive messages such as ``F the IDF,
Intifada,'' the Arab word for uprising and so much--and more.
There is a deeply troubling tendency by many on the Left,
as has already been expressed in this hearing, in media,
academia, among elected officials and even some on this
Committee, who try to somehow conflate or equate antisemitism
with so-called Islamophobia.
It is troubling that it seems that it is only Jews or
Israelis who when they are attacked or victimized, somehow
become the oppressors or instigators of those attacks in the
eyes of leftists or some on Penn's campus specifically.
It is wrong to suggest antisemitism and Islamophobia are
equivalent problems in this country, as noted already in this
hearing. Jewish hate crime is the most predominant hate crime
in this country today.
Ms. Magill specifically, again just this past Sunday night,
there was another march on the edge of UPenn campus, an anti-
Israeli march. Has there at any time since October 7, been an
equivalent large scale gathering of crowds in support of the
slaughter of Muslims or the elimination of an Arab or
predominantly State. Has that happened on your campus or
anywhere near your campus that you're aware of since October
7th?
Ms. Magill. Congressman, any act of hate, I find
abhorrent----
Mr. Good. I asked a specific question. Has there been any
large gathering, you know, in support of the slaughter of
Muslims or the elimination of an Arab State on or near your
campus that you're aware of since October 7th?
Ms. Magill. Congressman, not that I am aware of. There have
been----
Mr. Good. Okay, thank you. You would agree that it would be
immoral or dishonest to treat the two as equivalent problems on
campus, meaning antisemitism and Islamophobia, that there is
equivalency there on the scale or the scope of the problem on
campus. Would you agree that would be immoral or dishonest to
equate the two?
Ms. Magill. Congressman, I abhor all acts of hate.
Mr. Good. Would you agree that it is immoral or dishonest
to equate the two, that the problems are equal on your college
campus or other college campuses? Any evidence of that effect?
Ms. Magill. Congressman, I abhor all acts of hate.
Mr. Good. Thank you, thank you. Dr. Gay, on October 8,
nearly three dozen Harvard student groups authored a statement
holding Israel responsible for the Hamas attack. On October 18,
a Jewish Harvard Business School student was surrounded,
accosted, and shoved to the ground while walking near and
filming an anti-Israel protest.
On November 10, when you condemned the use of the phrase
``From river to the sea,'' over 100 faculty signed a letter
criticizing your response to that, criticizing that phrase,
you're condemning the use of that phrase.
A Harvard Crimson survey of the class of 2022 said that--
showed that 93 percent of respondents viewed President Trump as
unfavorable. Six percent of students said that they were
conservative. 34 percent of students viewed favorably the
Palestinian boycott, divestment and sanctions or BDS movement.
Currently, Harvard is being investigated by the Department
of Education for Title VI violations of civil rights. Title VI,
as you know, prohibits recipients of Federal funds from
discriminating on the basis of race, color or national origin.
A Title VI violation would occur when institution has
allowed, permitted or created a hostile environment that
targets someone based on their race, color or national origin.
We know, of course, that Harvard has a history of dividing
people based on race, based on the Supreme Court's decision in
Students for Fair Admission v. Harvard.
Does Harvard actually teach antisemitism in classes?
Ms. Gay. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. No, we
do not, and we condemn antisemitism at Harvard. There is no
place for antisemitism.
Mr. Good. As you know, Harvard received over the last 4
years $3.2 billion in Federal grants and contracts.
During the 2021 school year, Harvard received 104 million
through Title IV. Why should Congress continue to invest money
in Harvard when Harvard clearly violates Title VI and helps
foster a hostile Jewish--a hostile environment for Jewish
students?
Ms. Gay. We are committed at Harvard to ensuring that all
of our students thrive, that they feel safe and secure, and we
are grateful for our----
Mr. Good. Well apparently, 100 professors who--100
professors who sent that letter to you criticizing your
condemnation of antisemitic remarks don't agree with that, and
your students, your institution is clearly producing students
who are sympathetic to a terrorist organization. Do not you
think that is a misuse of taxpayer dollars? My time has
expired. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Good. Ms. Hayes, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Hayes. Thank you. First, I would like to frame my
comments in the basic idea that I condemn all forms of hate. I
do not think there is any splitting hairs there. That does not
make me radical left. It makes me human to think that all
people should feel safe in their environment.
In the wake of the October 7th Hamas terrorist attacks in
Israel, there has been a dramatic nationwide rise in reported
antisemitic incidents, especially on college campuses.
Antisemitism has been on the rise for at least a decade. The
ADL found that the number of antisemitic incidents in the U.S.
increased by more than 35 percent from 2021 to 2022, and we
have seen those numbers skyrocket in the last 2 months.
A few weeks ago, at Central Connecticut State University in
my district, a racial slur and a swastika were written on a
bathroom stall on campus. We should all be working to find
solutions this problem, not doing what we are doing here today
in this Committee.
The Biden administration released the National Strategy to
Counter Antisemitism earlier this year. The strategy seeks to
increase awareness and education in schools, communities and
the workplace about antisemitism. This includes having the
United States Holocaust and Memorial Museum launch the first
ever U.S.-based Holocaust Education Research Center, to promote
effective Holocaust education.
As a history teacher, I know the immense power of
storytelling, and how healthy dialog is--and how healthy dialog
is imperative to finding common ground. I would also like to
make the point that teachers, professors, educators do not
enter this profession to hate any group of people.
I am happy to hear that all of the people on the panelists
responded to the question by my colleague that you do not
collect data under conservative or liberal views of faculty. I
would argue that that would be unconstitutional.
I would also like to note, in the case of Harvard, you had
a very conservative, notable alum who was invited to join your
advisory committee. Diversity of thought is important, and all
those views should be welcome on any college campus.
President Magill, what steps has the University of
Pennsylvania taken in the history--to ensure students have an
understanding of the history of antisemitism, in order to
address the rise of hate on your college campus?
Ms. Magill. I appreciate the question very much. There are
a wide variety of things we do at Penn. We are very proud to be
home to a very strong Jewish Studies Department, with faculty
members who are expert, like Dr. Nadell, on the History and
Manifestation of Antisemitism.
Many students are taking those classes. We are proud to
call Penn home to the Katz Center for Judaic Studies, which is
a world resource in historical materials about Judaica and
antisemitism and many centuries of history actually, and many
of our faculty and staff and students participate in programs
at the Katz Center through their fellowships in education.
We--the third thing I would identify and there is more to
say, are we have many student groups that engage with one
another across lines of disagreement, and they talk together,
usually with the leadership of faculty, to learn from one
another and from the faculty.
Ms. Hayes. Which is exactly what is supposed to happen on a
college campus. I also want to acknowledge the increase in
Islamophobia after the October 7th attack, not so-called
Islamophobia but Islamophobia. Palestinian students on and off
college campuses have been targeted.
President Gay, in your November 9th open letter to members
of the Harvard community, you mentioned specific steps that you
are implementing in connection with your ongoing work with the
Antisemitism Advisory Group.
Specifically, you mentioned work being conducted at the
Office of Equity, Diversity, Inclusion and Belonging. I will
also just say that 18,000 complaints have been received by the
Department of Education Office of Civil Rights, the same office
that my colleagues are trying to defund.
48 percent of those have been sex discrimination, 32
percent disability discrimination and 17 percent based on race
or national origin. We have a problem. We need to welcome and
embrace diversity in this country and teach young people why it
is important to have a full understanding.
My time has expired, and I know I am going to be gaveled
out. If you can just submit that question for the record, I
would appreciate it, and thank you all for the work that you
are doing.
Ms. Magill. I would be happy to. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Hayes. Ms. Steel, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Steel. Thank you, Dr. Foxx, for leading this important
hearing. In October, I introduced H.R. 5933, the Deterrent Act,
to bring greater transparency and accountability for
institutions of higher education, accepting donations from
foreign entities.
This bill will pass the House hopefully tomorrow, and I am
hoping the Senate will take it up. The involvement of hostile
foreign entities in our postsecondary institutions is one of
the biggest threats facing colleges and universities.
Question No. 1 is Ms. Kornbluth. In September 2019, then-
Secretary DeVos opened Section 117. It is avoiding disclosures
section investigation into MIT that has not been closed. What
concrete steps that has MIT taken to address the lack of
Section 117 reporting?
Ms. Kornbluth. Let me say and thank you for the question.
We have cooperated fully. I cannot comment on an open
investigation, but I have to say we have greatly increased our
reporting to be fully compliant.
Ms. Steel. It is not that all done yet, but it is still
under investigation?
Ms. Kornbluth. As I understand it.
Ms. Steel. Okay. A study released just last month by the
Institute for the Global Study of Antisemitism found that from
2015 to 2020, institutions that accepted unreported money from
Middle Eastern donors have been on average 300 more antisemitic
incidents than those institutions that did not.
President Gay, Magill and Kornbluth, any of you can answer
this. Do you believe foreign nations with views hostile to
Israel would desire U.S. students to echo their views? I think
Dr. Gay can start.
Ms. Gay. Thank you for the question. We have alumni all
over the world, and those alumni, through their philanthropy,
support student aid, scholarships, cutting edge research.
One thing that their philanthropy does not do is influence
how we run the university, how we enforce our policies, or how
we keep our students safe.
Ms. Steel. Okay.
Ms. Magill. Thank you for the question. At Penn, we of
course follow every law and regulation about donations from
individuals in other countries. Beyond that, we do not accept
any gift that would compromise our mission or create any sort
of conflict of interest.
We have a very elaborate vetting process, and we have
declined gifts where we have a worry that would be inconsistent
with our mission, and we are very clear about this.
Ms. Kornbluth. Yes, thank you. All funds that come to MIT
in any form are for open, publishable research. We retain full
control over what research is conducted. We also have an
extensive internal review process for reviewing foreign gifts.
We also adhere to all Federal laws, and we see these reviews
through the national security, economic security and
importantly human rights.
Ms. Steel. Thank you for your answers, and I hope that's
really true. President Magill, from 2014 through 2019, Penn
received a total of almost $300 million in Section 117 funding.
Are you aware of the amount that was given by Qatar, where
any of these donations conditioned on the inclusion of a pro-
Palestinian curriculum or pro-Palestinian events? Are you aware
if any of these donations were conditioned only for pro-
Palestinian professors?
Ms. Magill. I appreciate the question. I want to repeat
that we follow all laws, and we accept nothing that is
inconsistent with our mission of teaching, research and
service, and we would never accept conditions on gifts.
My understanding is we have taken no government gifts from
the Government of Qatar. We have a small number of alumni in
Qatar who have given some gifts for annual gifts to schools, a
very small number.
Ms. Steel. Almost $300 million.
Ms. Magill. Congressman, that figure as funds from Qatar is
not one that I am familiar with. That is--I have--that is not
what my information tells me.
Ms. Steel. Do you know exactly how much you received from
Qatar of Section 117 funding?
Ms. Magill. The data I have--yes, I am aware of our 117
filings. I have--maybe I can followup with you afterwards. That
is not consistent with what I understand our 117 filings show,
which is no government, no gifts from the Government of Qatar,
and a very small number of annual gifts from alumni living in
that country.
Ms. Steel. Dr. Foxx, thank you very much and I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. We will look forward to a followup. Ms.
Stevens, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stevens. It is absolutely essential that the Committee
on Education and Workforce have a hearing about rising
antisemitism in the United States of America, and what is
unfolding on our college campuses.
In particular, as we--many of us have the where were you
moment on 9/11, I have the where were you on 10/7 moment, when
I woke up to the news of the horrific and barbaric attack on
Israel and what we learned that unfolded that day and horror.
My thoughts went to our college campuses, and what would
happen on our college campuses, particularly as Jewish students
have felt persecuted and attacked and their families have been
concerned for a multitude of years.
I want to say that it is, it is incumbent on us to let
Jewish students know that they are supported and that they
belong. We know that the rule of university presidents
encompasses a lot of things, and in my home State of Michigan,
and in my home district at Oakland University our university
president, Ora Pescovitz, wrote a very compelling op-ed, and
she said, ``One of my roles is to decipher and distinguish
between protecting free speech and tackling unlawful
harassment.''
I was wondering if our university presidents could chime in
on how you balance that do that distinguishing and also that
enforcing, to make sure that we do not have unlawful harassment
or the incitement of violence on our college campuses? Would
you like to start, Dr. Kornbluth?
Ms. Kornbluth. Oh yes, sorry. Yes. Thank you for raising
that. You know, college campuses are the crucible of ideas,
where students are side by side and it is part of the education
to hear things that they feel are uncomfortable.
To be absolutely clear, speech can become a form of
harassment, and our policies make absolutely clear that
harassment is punishable. Speech that targets individuals, or
again as we have heard, incites violence on our campus or
crosses the line--these cross the line into harassment. This is
taken very, very seriously.
Ms. Stevens. We obviously know that you are subject to the
Clery Act and adhere to its rules and clauses. Look, we have
now data from the ADL. It says that since 10/7, we have now
seen a 388 percent increase in antisemitism. We have to one,
call out antisemitism, but two, make sure that we have the
right anti-hate laws in place.
It is important for us, as a Congress, to be partnering
with all stakeholder groups. Something else along these lines,
and maybe I am sharing--sharing this as a fellow student of the
humanities, someone--I hold a master's in philosophy, and so a
lot of times it is what is the question, not necessarily what
is the answer.
By the way, Dr. Nadell, I hail from American University.
Two people graduated from my class in `06. We need to have the
proper place to exchange ideas and have the space to ask tough
questions. What happens when we remove humanities?
What happens when we, when we allow for government to
dictate what is being taught on our college campuses, similar
to what we are seeing in Florida and in West Virginia? What
risk does that pose, particularly when we talk about the proper
teaching of history?
Ms. Kornbluth. May I take that?
Ms. Stevens. Yes.
Ms. Kornbluth. Yes. You know, it is interesting. Coming
from a majority STEM institution as I said, I cannot even think
of a place where it is more important that our students also
learn humanities, have a humanistic perspective.
We all have to live and work together as people. In order
for us to be successful when I think about the technologies
that are coming down the road, we want our students to
understand the moral implications----
Ms. Stevens. We need to do both.
Ms. Kornbluth. We need to do both.
Ms. Stevens. We need to do both, and we will continue to
call out antisemitism as Members of Congress and push on this
topic. Five minutes is certainly not enough, and I call on our
committee chair. Let us have a hearing about affirmative action
and what the Supreme Court ruling has now done to minority
students and minorities being able to join institutions of
higher education.
Let us have a hearing about Islamophobia and let us talk
about anti-LGBTQ practices that are affecting the mental health
of students on college campuses. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Kiley. The representative from Michigan, Ms. McClain,
is recognized.
Ms. McClain. Thank you. Thank you for being here today. I
listened to your opening statement, and we all talked so
passionately about what was happening on the college campuses
as it pertains to antisemitism is absolutely unacceptable, and
I appreciate that.
However, talk is cheap, and we really need action. What I
would like to talk a little bit about today is what actual
action items, not lip service, but action items have happened?
I will start with you. President Gay, under your leadership,
Harvard has done little to condemn Hamas' brutal murder of
woman and children, promote Israel's right to defend itself or
protect Jewish students from harassment.
For example, I am curious. What action was taken from
Harvard when a Jewish student was mobbed on your campus last
month? Action. Not lip service, action ma'am.
Ms. Gay. This specific incident I have communicated with--I
have communicated about publicly. As you may know, that is an
incident that is currently under investigation by HUPD and the
FBI.
Ms. McClain. Any action. I am looking for the action.
Ms. Gay. When that--and when that investigation is
complete, we will address it through our student disciplinary
process.
Ms. McClain. You cannot answer. I am going to move on to my
next question. Do you have an action item or not as of this
time? Was any action taken? Any action.
Ms. Gay. I cannot share more about a student----
Ms. McClain. Okay. Thank you. Will these students
intimidating Jewish students just because they are Jewish be
expelled from the university?
Ms. Gay. I am sorry, I did not catch your question.
Ms. McClain. Will the students who are intimidating Jewish
students just because they are Jewish be expelled?
Ms. Gay. You are describing conduct that sounds like it
would violate our policies against bullying and intimidation
and harassment, and if that is the case, it will be addressed
through our policies.
Ms. McClain. A simple answer, yes. Thank you. Another
question. Why did you allow protestors to occupy University
Hall for 24 hours, and not only were these students not
punished, but two of your deans provided them with food and
promised no disciplinary action would be taken? That was
reported by the Harvard Crimson.
Ms. Gay. I can assure you that we have very strong
disciplinary processes, and where conduct violates our
policies, we use those policies.
Ms. McClain. Did conduct violate your policies during that
incident?
Ms. Gay. We have disciplinary processes underway.
Ms. McClain. Is there an answer to that or not?
Ms. Gay. We have disciplinary processes underway.
Ms. McClain. Was any discipline action? I love the lip
service. I do, and you academics, I love that. I am looking for
an action item. Yes, no, was anybody expelled, any action item?
If you do not know, that is okay too.
Ms. Gay. We hold our community to account for our policies.
Ms. McClain. All right. I will reclaim my time. Thank you.
President Magill, under your tenure swastikas have been drawn
outside residence halls where Jewish students live. The Hillel
House was broken into. Jewish students urged not to where
symbols of their ethnicity, and those same students harassed
when they go to collect challah for Shabbat.
I will be submitting questions for the record on outbreaks
of antisemitism at UPenn, and I look forward to your response,
because obviously 5 minutes is just way too short of an answer.
I would encourage you to give answers.
We deserve answers. People deserve answers, not rhetoric.
Action items. It is clear that the Jewish students on all of
your campuses are afraid to be themselves, because you have
refused to take real action. There is that word, action against
antisemitism, right?
A lot of rhetoric, no action. I strongly encourage all of
you to look at the Holocaust Learning Experience set up by
MorseLife Health System in Florida, to teach lessons from the
actual Holocaust to students in 5th through 12th grade. This
program has trained hundreds of teachers in two short years and
has gone a long way to teaching students about the harm
antisemitism has in our communities.
Harvard, UPenn and MIT, I think you could learn a little
bit about this. With the remainder of my time, I will yield to
Ms. Stefanik.
Ms. Stefanik. Thanks for yielding. Harvard receives funding
from foreign entities and governments which support its Middle
East Studies Department; correct?
Ms. Gay. We receive funding from variety of sources,
because we have alumni from all over the world.
Ms. Stefanik. That is correct, right? The Middle Eastern
Studies Department?
Ms. Gay. We receive funding from various sources.
Ms. Stefanik. It is a yes or a no. Are you not aware when
Middle Eastern Studies Department receives funding?
Ms. Gay. We are receiving funding from various sources.
Ms. Stefanik. I am asking you a yes or no question. You are
under oath in front of the U.S. Congress. You are giving lip
service provided by your attorneys. It is a yes or no question.
Harvard receives from foreign entities and governments which
support its Middle Eastern Studies Department; correct?
Ms. Gay. We have alumni all over the world, and we
benefit----
Ms. Stefanik. The answer is correct, yes? Yes? The answer
is correct.
Ms. Gay. We receive support from our alumni from all over
the world, from individuals.
Ms. Stefanik. What amount of support is that reported to
the Federal Government?
Ms. Gay. I would have to actually look at our filings.
Ms. Stefanik. You do not know? As the president of the
University, you do not know?
Ms. Gay. Not that particular number, no.
Ms. Stefanik. It is $1.5 billion over the past 3 years. Are
you aware of that?
Ms. Gay. I do not know if that is the correct number, but
that is the number you shared.
Ms. Stefanik. Has Harvard reported all of the Federal--oh,
my time.
Chairwoman Foxx. Ms. Manning, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Madam Chair. For years, virulent
antisemitism has been on the rise on college campuses, and
sadly since October 7th, the October 7 Hamas terrorist attack,
campus antisemitism has skyrocketed on your campuses and all
across the country.
It is shocking, it is pervasive, it is threatening, and it
is stunningly visible. The fear Jewish students are facing is
real, and it is justified. Jewish students are trying to get an
education while entrance to their classes is blocked by
protests outside and inside classroom buildings.
They sit in classes disrupted by protestors with bullhorns,
accusing Israel of genocide, with students chanting ``Long live
the Intifada.'' By the way, as we all know, the Intifadas in
Israel included years of terrorist bus bombings and restaurant
bombings that resulted in countless deaths of Jewish and Arab
civilians.
Jewish students in college dining rooms are confronted with
banners that say, ``From the river to the sea,'' a phrase that
calls for the end to the Jewish State and the killing of Jews.
Do not take my word for it. You can listen to the leader of
Hamas, who has been quite vocal about what that phrase means.
A Jewish student at Harvard was asked by the professor to
leave his class, because the other students were not
comfortable having their discussion in front of that Jewish
Israeli student. Jewish students have been pushed, spat upon,
punched and told not to leave their dorms for their own safety
during protests.
A Jewish student in my home State was told to rewrite a
paper he wrote that supported an Israeli view of the conflict,
or he risked failing the course. Jewish students had their
class interrupted when a professor told the students that they
were going to take a break, so that all the students could go
with him to attend the anti-Israel protest on campus.
This intimidation, humiliation and exclusion of Jewish
students is simply unacceptable. It would not be tolerated
against any other minority group, and we need university
presidents to do more to protect Jewish students.
President Gay, you and I have talked about antisemitism.
You have told me your goal is to eradicate antisemitism at
Harvard. That is a lofty goal, but will you commit to doing
everything necessary to keep Jewish students and faculty safe,
and be able to participate in the full range of Harvard's
learning experiences?
Ms. Gay. The short answer is yes.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, and will you enforce all the codes
of conduct against students and faculty who violate those
codes, and will you communicate those codes and your intention
to hold students and faculty accountable?
Ms. Gay. Absolutely.
Ms. Manning. Will you endeavor to recenter the conversation
about the Middle East back to a place of fact-based exchange,
and evaluate your course offerings and your faculty to ensure
that you have intellectual diversity and multiple perspectives
about Israel and Zionism, including professors who support the
right of Israel to exist, and support the right of Jewish
people to self-determination in the Middle East Studies
Department?
Ms. Gay. Absolutely committed.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, and will you commit to work with
Jewish and Israeli scholars, to make sure Harvard has a full
range of lectures and scholarship described, as described in
Dr. Nadell's testimony?
Ms. Gay. Education is the path forward here.
Ms. Manning. I understand that you have condemned the
phrase ``From the river to the sea.'' I also know that the
Harvard School of Public Health has a course called the
``Settler Colonial Determinants of Health,'' that introduces
students to the concept of settler colonialism and its health
equity implication. It uses case studies in the United States
and Palestine and talks about poor health outcomes for
indigenous and other non-settler communities.
President Gray, are you aware that Jews were indeed
indigenous to the land of Israel and have lived there for 2,000
years?
Ms. Gay. I do know about the long history in Israel.
Ms. Manning. What is Harvard doing to educate members of
the community about these phrases and other false accusations
that Israel is a racist, settler, colonialist, apartheid State,
even that Harvard is actually teaching courses with the
underlying premise that Israel is a settler, colonial state?
Ms. Gay. We have faculty. We have outside speakers who come
and over the last couple of months in particular, have been
providing more insight into the nature of the conflict and the
way forward. Obviously, we have more work to do and that is
part of how we are going to eradicate antisemitism on our
campus.
Ms. Manning. Sadly, my time is expiring, but I would like
to followup on that and other courses at Harvard, and I would
also like to followup with Ms. Magill about how her students
felt, her Jewish students felt after the Palestinians Writers
meeting, whether they in fact felt threatened and intimidated.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Foxx. Ms. Miller, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Miller. Thank you. Dr. Gay, when Harvard allows foreign
students to enter the U.S. on a student visa, you are
responsible for ensuring that they uphold our American values
of free speech and free exercise of religion.
Harvard can expel students who are here on a visa if they
commit acts of violence or threaten violence against American
citizens, which would terminate their student visas. Dr. Gay,
has Harvard expelled any foreign students who are here on
student visas for threatening violence against American
students?
Ms. Gay. Our international students are an enormous source
of pride for Harvard, and part of our strength as an
institution. We hold those students accountable--we hold those
students----
Ms. Miller. Absolutely. I just want to know if you--have
you expelled anybody?
Ms. Gay. We hold those students accountable to the same set
of disciplinary processes that we hold all of our students
accountable to.
Ms. Miller. You have not expelled anybody? I am assuming
your non-answer is an answer to the students. They now know you
have not expelled any foreign student for threatening the
Jewish students.
Dr. Gay, if Harvard found out that a student organization
was taking money or taking money from or coordinating with a
foreign terrorist organization, would you immediately suspend
that student organization?
Ms. Gay. Our student organizations are recognized on the
condition that they comply with Harvard policies. When they
violate those policies, there are repercussions.
Ms. Miller. Thank you. Doctor or Ms. Magill, today you said
that you defend free speech at UPenn and follow the U.S.
Constitution to determine your speech guidelines. Would you
allow President Trump, who is a graduate of UPenn, to speak at
UPenn if a student group invited him?
Ms. Magill. Yes.
Ms. Miller. That is excellent. I am sure President Trump
will be happy to hear that you would welcome him on the UPenn
campus. Ms. Magill, earlier this year, a former UPenn student
told the House Judiciary Committee that she was forced to
undress and change next to a grown man with male genitalia 18
times a week in the locker room.
Ms. Magill, do you think it is appropriate for UPenn to
force young women to change in a locker room with biological
men against their will?
Ms. Magill. I appreciate the question. At Penn, we follow
the rules of competition, and if a student complies with the
NCAA rules, they can compete for Penn.
Ms. Miller. Yes. This is a clear violation of Title IX. You
are violating the civil rights of your female students, and you
will be held to account for it. Ms. Magill, as president of
UPenn, can you give us some insight into why Joe Biden was paid
almost a million dollars by UPenn? What were his
responsibilities when he is at UPenn? Did he teach a class?
Ms. Magill. I appreciate the question. President Biden was
a professor of Practice at the University of Pennsylvania for a
little over 2 years. My understanding is that his salary was
$400,000 a year. We also had Mr. Jeb Bush as a professor of
Practice at the University of Pennsylvania. Professor--
President Biden had a wide variety of obligations. He was in
many different classes----
Ms. Miller. What obligations exactly did he have?
Ms. Magill. He was--he held seminars. He was in many
different classes. He interacted with thousands of students
over the time he was there. He invited speakers. The goal of
the Center was to enhance----
Ms. Miller. For $400,000? Anonymous student--anonymous
Chinese donations poured into UPenn after your university hired
Joe Biden, and he appeared to have a no-show job. The House
Oversight Committee is going to get to the bottom of this, and
I yield the remainder of my time to Dr. Foxx.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you very much. President Magill, on
Sunday I received a letter from the Wharton Club of Israel,
outlining their efforts to secure a briefing for you and other
leaders of your campus by a representative of the Israeli
Defense Forces.
We have seen significant efforts to deny the seriousness of
Hamas's attacks of terror on October 7th. I assume providing
your campus leadership information about what actually happened
would be helpful, as you address the explosion of antisemitism.
Unfortunately, they said they were informed by your office
that briefing will not happen this calendar year. That leaves
the impression that you do not want the information, President
Magill. Will you commit to getting a briefing scheduled before
the end of the year from the IDF?
Ms. Magill. Madam Chairwoman, I do not in any way deny the
brutality and barbaric nature of the Hamas attack on October
7th.
Chairwoman Foxx. Will you get a briefing? We in Congress
have had a briefing and seen the films.
Ms. Magill. I receive many invitations. I do have to attend
to my calendar.
Chairwoman Foxx. Dr. Kornbluth, will you hear what these
people have to say?
Ms. Kornbluth. I will hear what anyone who wants to give me
information wants to say.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, thank you. I yield back. Mr.
Bowman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much, Madam Chair, and thank you
to our witnesses for being here. I really appreciate you taking
the time and sharing your experiences and expertise during this
very difficult time.
A quick yes or no question. Do you all feel that education
globally is very important in addressing the issue of
antisemitism? You can just shake your head or say yes, yes.
Ms. Kornbluth. Absolutely.
Mr. Bowman. Education is key, okay. Thank you for saying
that. I am asking that question because a lot of this
conversation has been framed around holding students
accountable for their threats of violence toward Jewish
students, as they should be held accountable, absolutely, and
some of it has been framed around, you know, additional
punishments, of course.
There has been a lot of political pandering discussed here,
without the action that goes with the accountability and the
condemnation that must happen when we see antisemitism as it
raises its head. What I mean by that is I introduced something
called the Great Replacement Theory Resolution, and I wanted us
as Congress to condemn the Great Replacement theory.
The Great Replacement Theory is a white supremacist theory
that says Jews, blacks and immigrants are looking to replace
white people in America. I introduced that theory last
Congress. It passed along Democratic lines. I do not believe
any Republicans voted for that particular resolution.
In addition, my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
continue to look to cut funding to the Department of Education,
which will be critical to helping us fight antisemitism. In
addition, we have discussed already cuts to the Office of Civil
Rights that my Republican colleagues support, that also is
critical to fighting antisemitism. I would also add cuts to the
Department of Health and Human Services as part of this
conversation.
Absolutely we must condemn. Absolutely we must hold people
and students accountable. How do we get into the mud and do the
real work of fighting antisemitism, without investing in
education in the way that we need to invest? Not just at the
higher education level, but in our K to 12 schools as well.
I am a former K to 12 educator for 20 years. I taught
elementary school. I was a dean in a high school, and I was a
middle school principal for 10-1/2 years. Our kids read The
Diary of Anne Frank. I have had students who have gone to the
Holocaust Museum. I still have students in my district from the
Bronx, black or brown, visiting the Holocaust Museum, becoming
educated and wanting to learn more.
Talk to me about the need, not just for you all as leaders
in higher education, but every single person in this room's
responsibility to fight antisemitism and anti-hate in all its
forms. I just want to add, we have an Original Sin in our
Nation of slavery and discrimination.
That sin continued to evolve as segregation, separation and
a lack of understanding and empathy of knowledge of each other.
Can you just speak briefly to all of that? We will start here
and go down the line.
Ms. Kornbluth. Yes. Thank you, Congressman Bowman. This
actually echoes what I had said earlier, which is it is every
single one of our responsibilities, and this is why I am
heartened by the full MIT community taking up this problem. It
is a human problem.
Mr. Bowman. Yes.
Ms. Kornbluth. Person to person. I appreciate what you had
to say about this.
Ms. Nadell. I want to add that I am so glad that you have
raised K through 12, because everybody here is talking as if
what has happened on the college campus happened de novo, and
those kids came to campus, and they never had an education
before. We need to be teaching about antisemitism, not just the
Holocaust antisemitism, and racism in America.
Mr. Bowman. Our kids live in segregated communities. You
have white kids living with white kids, black kids living with
black. They never interact with each other. They do not go to
school together. They do not know each other. Of course hate is
going to be a major part of our society if we continue our
segregation in our communities, in our homes. I am sorry,
please.
Ms. Magill. Congressman, I so appreciate what you asked,
and I think one of the thoughts I have is that immediate action
is very important, and the calling out of the hateful action
and for the longer term. It is an all-societal education
obligation, as well as every one of our responsibilities to be
fighting antisemitism.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you. Dr. Gay.
Ms. Gay. Thank you so much for your question. We have spent
a lot of time here talking about the importance of
accountability for behavior that crosses the line. We talked
about how important it is to denounce language that offends our
values.
Mr. Bowman. As we should.
Ms. Gay. It is as we should. Ultimately the path forward is
education. It is education about the history of this hate and
this bigotry. It is also education about how it manifests in
the present and what modern antisemitism tropes look like, and
it is also education about how do you actually engage in civil
dialog on really complex and divisive issues.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Ms. Letlow, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you, Dr. Foxx. To our university
presidents, yes or no. Have you established rigorous programs
and rules to address and prevent sexual harassment and violence
against women on your campuses, yes or no, Dr. Gay.
Ms. Gay. Yes.
Ms. Letlow. Yes. Ms. Magill.
Ms. Magill. Yes.
Ms. Letlow. Yes.
Ms. Kornbluth. Yes.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you. Please bear with me because as a
mom, a daughter and a woman, what I am about to share is hard.
An article from CNN which examines the Israeli investigation
into acts of sexual violence by Hamas during the events of
October 7th includes a testimony from a female witness of the
Nova Festival attack.
``They bent someone over, and I understood he was raping
her, and then he was passing her on to someone else.'' The
woman who was not identified said of what she saw, ``She was
alive. She stood on her feet, and she was bleeding from her
back. I saw what he--I saw that he was pulling her hair. She
had long, brown hair. I saw him chop off her breast, and then
he was throwing it toward the road, tossed it to someone else
and they started playing with it.''
The witness added ``I remembered seeing another person
raping her, and while he was within her, he shot her in the
head.'' This is just one of hundreds of accounts of sexual
assault that happened on October 7th. Dr. Gay, an article in
the Harvard Crimson dated October 10th includes a statement
from the Harvard Undergraduate Palestine Solidarity Committee,
co-signed by 33 other student organizations at Harvard. I would
like to read the statement to you.
``We, the undersigned student organizations, hold the
Israeli regime entirely responsible for all unfolding
violence.'' How, Dr. Gay, do you reconcile the blatant
hypocrisy of allowing your students a forum to promote and
celebrate terrorist groups that make the rape and mutilation of
women and children a core function of their operations, while
at the same time working for years to combat sexual violence
toward women?
By allowing a month to pass before addressing with a real
plan the demonstrations and intimidations on your campuses?
What message is this and this delay conveying to your women on
your campuses? I can only imagine how terrifying it is to be a
Jewish woman on any of your campuses.
Just last night, a Jewish student from MIT wrote to me that
she felt fearful and was forced to leave her study group during
her doctoral exams because someone in her group told her that
the women at the Nova Festival deserved to die because they
were partying on stolen land.
Now while I am grateful for your condemning of antisemitism
in statements to your students and to this Committee, it is not
enough. There has been no real action to hold antisemitic
students accountable for their behavior. They should be
expelled.
The bottom line is that the buck stops with university
presidents and all students should feel safe on a college
campus, especially in this case Jewish women, as it would be
terrifying to know that my administration is not doing more
than simply condemning student groups perpetuating terrorist
messaging, and as a former administrator myself in higher
education, this is a major step backward in all that we have
done to stand up against sexual violence toward women.
I have always defended higher education and this
institution. Quite frankly, today, I am embarrassed. I yield
back the remainder of my time to Ms. Stefanik.
Ms. Stefanik. Dr. Gay, did anyone contact you about flying
the Israeli flag over Harvard Yard?
Ms. Gay. Yes.
Ms. Stefanik. The decision was made not to allow the flag
to be flown over Harvard Yard.
Ms. Gay. It has been standard protocol at the university
for years to only fly the American flag unless we have a
visiting dignitary.
Ms. Stefanik. The decision was made to allow the Ukraine
flag to be flown over Harvard Yard?
Ms. Gay. That was a decision that was made by my
predecessor as an exception to a long-standing rule.
Ms. Stefanik. It was an exception. You made an exception
for the Ukrainian flag, but not the--the university made an
exception for the Ukrainian flag, but not the Israeli flag?
Ms. Gay. That was a choice made by my predecessor.
Ms. Stefanik. Are you aware that there are stickers that
are placed on Harvard University Dining Services food calling
for Israeli apartheid? It says ``Warning. Sabra funds Israeli
apartheid and the murder of Palestinians.'' Is that acceptable?
Ms. Gay. I can assure you that we have strong disciplinary
processes when there are violations of our rules.
Ms. Stefanik. This is a violation of the rules?
Ms. Gay. I cannot see that very clearly but I--
Ms. Stefanik. Are you not aware of the stickers being
placed on the food items provided to Harvard students?
Ms. Gay. I do recall an episode like that.
Ms. Stefanik. There are disciplinary actions ongoing?
Ms. Gay. Given students' privacy and FERPA, which I am sure
you know well, I will not say more about these particular
cases, other than to say that disciplinary processes are
underway.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Leger Fernandez, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much and thank you to
the witnesses for being here. I am struck by the passion which
we all are bringing, because we know that the issue we are
talking about today, antisemitism, white supremacy, you know,
the issues that give rise to this, the issues of hate need to
be addressed.
What saddens me is that my colleagues on the other side of
the aisle recently passed an appropriations bill out of the
Committee that would cut funding to the Office of Civil Rights
by 25 percent. We know that we must investigate these and hold
universities, including your universities, or the universities
in my home State of New Mexico accountable if they do not
protect students from antisemitism.
They do not protect students from Islamophobia. They do not
protect students from the many versions of hate that we too
often see in our communities. I would urge and encourage and
ask and plead with my colleagues to fully fund the Department
of Education and the Office of Civil Rights, so we could go
after those instances where universities fail to do what they
are required to do.
Recently, I sat with students from New Mexico, from the
University of New Mexico, to ask them to share with me so I
could bring their stories here about what are you facing on our
campus back home? Sadly, the stories I heard would make your
heart cry. They made my heart cry. We heard from Sephardi
students who are proud of the heritage they bring with them,
having suffered through for their minds, the inquisition.
We heard from Ashkenazis who have parents and grandparents,
sorry, their, grandparents and great grandparents suffered
through the Holocaust, and how there is a normalization--they
are worried about the fact that antisemitism is now being
normalized, and we all have a duty to fight back against that.
One of the things that I pointed out is that there seems to
be a lack of understanding of the history of antisemitism.
There seems to be a lack of understanding of the attacks on
Jews over the centuries. As we mentioned from the Inquisition
and before that too, the Holocaust to the latest that we are
now seeing.
They said how come there is not general curricula that
requires that we talk about the importance of K through 12
understanding that? We know at Harvard, for example, that you
have I believe a course on the Holocaust. Well, what do you
have for before you get that specialized course? Like how are
we making sure that all students understand that. You, Madam
President, if you could answer that. I know you looked like you
wanted to respond.
Ms. Gay. You make an excellent point. Already in our
curriculum, there are so many opportunities for students to
learn more about the relevant history.
I think one of the things that has become apparent over the
last couple of months is that we have to find ways of making
that education more broadly available to our campus community,
to all of our students and also to our faculty and to our
staff, and we have work to do on that for sure.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Because this idea that they are--that
Jewish students and that Jews are not indigenous to these
lands, I think is something that needs to be pushed back
against, right, and that some of these false narratives, I
think, are really important.
I think one of the questions then is what do we do when
there has been that loss of faith when students at UNM say we
are being told we are not from that land, right? Students who
have, who are indigenous, you know, who share both, you know,
heritage of the Sephardi, heritage of the Zuni Pueblo, heritage
of being Latino, who want to deserve to be able to claim it
all.
Like I would ask, and maybe Dr. Nadell, or I think you
wanted to say something, how do we regain that trust?
Ms. Kornbluth. What you are saying is really, really
important. We are making a real effort to educate our students
on the history of the Middle East. Our Center for International
Studies has organized an online course, and really
understanding the facts.
The other thing I do want to say though about your comments
on the Holocaust, as the last survivors of the Holocaust are
passing away, it really behooves us to make sure our students
at all levels understand the history of the Holocaust.
As you say, this starts at K to 12, not just once they get
to a State university.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Dr. Nadell, did you want--
Ms. Nadell. I would just add that the magical word, online.
We can really reach millions and millions of people with online
programs about this history.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, and with that, my time has
expired, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Leger Fernandez. Mr. Kiley,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kiley. President Gay, a few months ago the Foundation
for Individual Rights in Education released its rankings of how
good colleges are at protecting free speech, and out of 248
schools ranked, Harvard ranked dead last, number 248.
In fact, it was the worse score in the history of the
rankings, zero out of 100. Now you have quibbled with the
study, the methodology, but you do not get to be dead last
without there being some truth there. In the aftermath of
October 7th including several times today, you have repeatedly
stressed Harvard's commitment to free speech.
You have certainly been more outspoken about free speech
after October 7th than you were before. I do not think there is
any doubt about that. Anyone looking at this objectively will
see that you had literally the worst record in the country on
free speech, and it was once' chance of globalizing the
Intifada started disrupting classes and harassing students,
that you suddenly became a stalwart for free speech. Do you
understand why that is troubling to people?
Ms. Gay. Respectfully I disagree with that perspective, and
I do not think it is an accurate representation of how Harvard
treats speech on campus. We are committed to free expression
and making space for a wide range of views and voices and
opinions, it is bedrock value to our institution----
Mr. Kiley. Well thank you Dr. Gay, but I asked if you
understand why people are troubled, and you proceeded to try to
defend yourself, which suggests to me that you would not really
understand and have not adequately tried to.
I am going to ask you a few questions, and I would really
appreciate a yes or no answer if you could. Do you believe
Hamas is a terrorist organization?
Ms. Gay. Hamas is a terrorist organization.
Mr. Kiley. Senator Schumer in a speech a few days
characterized October 7th as a vicious, blood-curdling
premeditated massacre of innocent men, women and children and
elderly. Do you agree with that characterization?
Ms. Gay. That characterization is accurate, and I have
condemned the heinous and barbaric terrorist attacks.
Mr. Kiley. Thank you. Senator Schumer also said that when
students on college campuses across the country who wear
yarmulke or display a Jewish star are harassed, verbally
vilified, pushed and even spat upon and punched, that is
antisemitism. Do you agree with him that that's antisemitism?
Ms. Gay. I agree.
Mr. Kiley. Do you acknowledge that some incidents of that
nature have been occurring on Harvard's campus?
Ms. Gay. I have been talking with students over the last
couple of months, and they have shared searing testimony about
some of the things that they have experienced.
Mr. Kiley. I am glad you have made that outreach. If you
were talking to a prospective student's family, a Jewish
student's family right now, could you look them in the eye and
tell them that their son or daughter would be safe and feel
safe and welcome on your campus?
Ms. Gay. We are absolutely committed to student
safety and to making sure that every----
Mr. Kiley. Yes, but I did not ask that question about your
commitment. I said could you look them in the eye right now,
the family of a prospective Jewish student, and assure them
that their son or daughter would feel safe and welcome on your
campus?
Ms. Gay. We are taking every step to ensure their physical
and their psychological safety, and I stand by that.
Mr. Kiley. Yes or no to my question though. Did you want to
answer it?
Ms. Gay. I answered your question.
Mr. Kiley. I guess not. If--would you say that a person who
is an avowed neo-Nazi is someone that you would want to be part
of the Harvard community?
Ms. Gay. Those are not consistent with Harvard's values,
but at the same time, we allowed a wide berth for free
expression and a variety of views.
Mr. Kiley. The question was would you want such a person
who was an avowed neo-Nazi to be part of the Harvard community,
yes or no?
Ms. Gay. Those are not consistent with Harvard values.
Mr. Kiley. You would not want such a person to be part of
the community?
Ms. Gay. Those are not consistent with Harvard values.
Mr. Kiley. Would you want someone who has called for the
eradication of the Jewish people to be part of the Harvard
community?
Ms. Gay. Again, those are not consistent with Harvard
values, where we are committed to making no space on our campus
for antisemitism----
Mr. Kiley. Would you want someone who has called for the
elimination of the State of Israel to be part of the Harvard
community?
Ms. Gay. There is no place at Harvard for antisemitism.
Mr. Kiley. The elimination of the State of Israel, someone
who advocates for that, is that someone you would want to be
part of the Harvard community?
Ms. Gay. There is no place for antisemitism at Harvard.
Mr. Kiley. You have not answered my questions very well,
Dr. Gay, so I will move on. You said today that you are proud
of Harvard's initial response, the initial steps Harvard has
taken in the immediate aftermath of October 7th. One of your
predecessors, Dr. Larry Summers, was anything but proud.
He said in his 50 years of Harvard affiliation, I have
never been as disillusioned and alienated as I am today. The
silence of Harvard's leadership has allowed Harvard to appear
at best neutral toward acts of terror against the Jewish State
of Israel.
Looking back, is there anything you would have done
differently in the aftermath of October 7th?
Ms. Gay. To be clear about what I was doing on October 7th,
it was identifying whether or not we had any faculty or
students who are in Israel----
Mr. Kiley. Is there anything you would have done
differently?
Ms. Gay. Had I known that the statement issued by the
students would have been wrongly attributed to the university,
I would have spoken sooner about it. I was focused on action
that weekend, not statements.
Mr. Kiley. Well, I appreciate you saying that, but it is
clear for me from your testimony, President Gay, I don't think
you are a person of any kind of prejudice yourself. You clearly
seem to believe that you need to--that the forces of
antisemitism are a constituency that needs to be catered to.
I think that is clear from your silence, from the carefully
parsed statements from the Orwellian passive voice, and
unfortunately that message was heard loud and clear by the
forces of antisemitism on your campus and has reverberated
across American higher education and seeped into our broader
culture.
We need fundamental cultural change on university campuses.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Kiley.
Mr. Kiley. Thank you.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Kiley. Mr. DeSaulnier, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to thank the
witnesses and just comment. I guess this is the best and worst
of times from my perspective for this Committee, that looking
at the panel and the positions you hold are not something that
I could have imagined when I went to college many years ago.
Thank you for your vocations. I mean that with all sincerity,
not your careers.
Dr. Gay, I want to just mention last night I had a
wonderful conversation with a dear friend who I started my
friendship with at your institution. Gabby Giffords and I were
both in State and local government. We went through that
program, and it was a wonderful experience.
It was one of those examples of where academia interacted
with the real world and the world of action. I want to thank
you for that.
Dr. Nadell, I wanted to talk to you as somebody from the
Bay area and very involved with technology for many years,
about its impact on our public discourse, on hatred, on
antisemitism, on racism. I am reflecting on a Berkeley
professor, Michael Goldhaber, I think.
Let me check, yes. Yes. He is the Cassandra of the
Internet, according to the New York Times, where 30 years ago
he predicted that once people started to connect with
technology, that the sociology of reality and knowledge would
change. I would say this hearing is a comment to that.
Could you comment on social media's impact on antisemitism
and hatred, both in academia and as you see it in your
research.
Ms. Nadell. Thank you for the question. Social media has
been probably the most destructive force for spreading
antisemitism ever imaginable, certainly in my own lifetime.
When a pop star like Kanye West can put out a few messages that
are antisemitic and he has millions and millions of followers,
and in the wake of that, Jewish students were also feeling
terribly unsafe and insecure.
We have seen this over and over, and we have seen it
harnessed not only from the left, but we have also seen it
harnessed from the right. Social media in various chat forums,
various different platforms were used to create the Unite the
Right Rally in 2017, and of course the man who has been
convicted of murdering 11 people at the Tree of Life Synagogue
also posted on social media that he was not waiting any longer
and he was going in. It has been terrible.
Mr. DeSaulnier. There has been so much really good research
and writing on the subject matter in the last 10 years, where I
am thinking about The Shallows from Nicholas Carr in 2005,
where his research shows that globally our cells are actually
decreasing because of how we retain and absorb information.
All of this on the educational side. Now I will ask, maybe
starting with Dr. Gay, this is about the short-term political
moment that we are in.
I am equally concerned with, and I have had this
conversation with the Chair and the Ranking Member, about what
you see in education and how our brains are changing, because
how neuroscience, everything we have learned because of
research about how this works in the last 50 years.
Until the Congress figures out how we role in this in this
Committee, what is it doing to our--to young people. In
Nicholas Carr's book, in The Chaos Machine. Susan Lynn, a
distinguished member of your faculty, I just had a lovely
conversation about her book, about who is minding our kids.
I cannot help but ask this question, because it is part of
a larger long-term problem that this Committee really should be
dealing with in a nonpartisan, thoughtful way. What do you see
when it comes to cognitive development and your students?
Ms. Gay. Recognizing that I am not an expert, particularly
on adolescent development on social media, but will share an
observation, which is that one of the things that's been laid
bare over the last couple of months is how ill equipped the
community is and has been to deal with dialog in moments of
crisis.
Instead, what is substituted for that is the social
modification of dialog. It is intemperate, it is a historical
and just mean, and it's a way of engaging that has been deeply
socialized through social media, and is reflexive for a lot of
the students on our campus.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Dr. Kornbluth, just because I just finished
a book, Reestablishing Conversation, by one of your faculty,
who talks about this.
Ms. Kornbluth. Yes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Maybe you can just briefly--
Ms. Kornbluth. No. I agree completely with President Gay
and I would say that social media is like a drug, right. It is
addictive and it reinforces over and over again messages
regardless of their truth.
As educational communities, we need to strive for making
sure our students know truth and speak to each other as human
beings.
Mr. DeSaulnier. That is beautiful. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Hopefully we can have a further discussion about that
particular issue in this Committee. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. DeSaulnier. Mr. Bean, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bean. Thank you, very much and good afternoon to you
and good afternoon panelists. Thank you so much for being here
and your testimony today. There is a problem in your testimony,
and I do not know if you know it. You testified that you value
free speech so much that it does not harm
[off mic].
Very good, thank you. It came off, Madam Chair. Your
testimony today. You have all testified that you value free
speech, so long as it does not interfere with students. You
have said that you have created a very safe haven, and you
value safety for your students.
The problem is the evidence does not support your
testimony. Just as we started our meeting, the videotape showed
what is really happening on your campuses. America sees what is
happening, not only on your campuses but on campuses across
America.
Then just today, we had some courageous students, some of
which are still in this room today, courageous students that
testified on your campuses, contradicting, contradicting your
testimony that it is a safe space. It is not a safe space.
Imagine trying to be a Jewish student on campus, and just
going to the library, going to class, going to wherever on--
just being scared to death. That is real, that is real. These
videos and the testimony just does not add up.
Here are some things that are--that we have seen, America
has seen. There are these anti-Jewish campus organizations
called Students for Justice in Palestine. They have been
suspended and kicked off many campuses, but none of yours--
since October 7th. Their purpose is just to harass and
intimidate Jewish students into retreating from campus life.
President Gay, there are numerous videos of Students for
Justice in Palestine. At Harvard, they are known as Palestine
Solidarity Committee, assaulting and intimidating Jewish
students on your campus. When Palestine Solidarity Committee
took over University Hall, instead of removing them, your
administration gave them burritos.
President Kornbluth, in one of the most absurd, crazy
campus incidents over the past 2 months, a viral video went of
a math professor at MIT handing his lecture over to MIT's
version of Students for Justice in Palestine, the MIT for
Palestine Coalition, who invoked lies and just called for
hatred and harm against Jewish students, and he sat and watched
this.
Here is your chance to tell America who has gotten fired,
what organizations you have kicked off your campuses. Anybody
want to jump in and say we have kicked them off or we have
expelled students? Anybody want to jump in?
[No response.]
Mr. Bean. You have all also said that you value academic
diversity, but you have no idea how many of your professors are
liberal or how many of your professors are conservative. How do
you know--if you do not know that, that is a pretty important
piece of information.
If you do not know that, how do you know that you are
academically diverse? Anybody jump in. Just go for it.
[No response.]
Mr. Bean. I just happen to have the Harvard Crimson, which
did a study of their professors on a--on Harvard campuses. This
is dated last year. 80 percent of professors either identified
as liberal or very liberal. 80 percent of the, of the faculty
there versus 1 percent identified as conservative, zero percent
identified as very conservative.
80 percent versus 1 percent. President Gay, is that the
type of academic diversity that you brag about at America's
leading institution, Harvard?
Ms. Gay. We seek to have a very diverse campus on every
dimension----
Mr. Bean. 80 percent versus 1 percent. You would say that
is diverse. Madam Chair, I would like to yield the remaining
time to the gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Stefanik.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you. Dr. Gay, according to Hillel
College Guide, the Crimson Freshman Survey and even Harvard's
own Education Next journal, the population of Jewish undergrads
at Harvard has plummeted from roughly 25 percent in the 1980's
to between five and 10 percent now. Why is that?
Ms. Gay. That is not data that we collect as part of the
admissions process. I cannot speak to those numbers or to the
trajectory.
Ms. Stefanik. What is the percentage of students who are
Jewish at Harvard in undergraduate now?
Ms. Gay. We do not collect religious affiliation as part of
the admissions process.
Ms. Stefanik. Do you not rely on data collected by Harvard
Hillel, which you visited for the first time after October 7th?
I will just be honest with you. When I was a freshman, I
enjoyed going to Harvard Hillel and have the opportunity to
celebrate Shabbat dinners with my fellow undergrads.
The fact that it took you until after October 7th to go to
Harvard Hillel is unacceptable. Yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Mr. Moran, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Madam Chair. Dr. Gay, I would like to
direct my questions to you, if that is okay. In an open letter
to members of the Harvard community that is posted on Harvard's
website, you stated the following:
``Antisemitism has no place at Harvard.'' You also said
``We are committed to doing the hard work to address the
scourge.'' Just a moment, just moments ago when Representative
Kiley asked you questions, you reaffirmed one of those
statements and said ``There is no place at Harvard for
antisemitism.'' Will you now reaffirm those statements today
with me?
Ms. Gay. Yes.
Mr. Moran. Good. Are these mere words, or is Harvard
willing to put action behind these words?
Ms. Gay. We are acting on that commitment.
Mr. Moran. Tell me how you are acting on that commitment in
a very specific manner.
Ms. Gay. Well to begin with, the immediate actions that are
focused on, the physical security of our students and our
campus. There is enhanced police presence, 24-7 threat
monitoring, coordination with local, State and Federal law
enforcement, and when necessary, we close the gates of Harvard
Yard, so that outside actors are limited in their ability to
use our campus as a platform. We have also----
Mr. Moran. When you talk about--when you talk about
``outside actors,'' let us talk about the inside actors. You
have had a number of students and student organizations that
have made many, many antisemitic statements in the past few
months and past years frankly, and it has gone, in my opinion,
without any response from the university.
President Gay, a report by AMCHA Initiative for the 2021-
2022 academic year found that Harvard saw the most antisemitic
incidents, that is 25 of any university surveyed. You were dean
at the time; correct?
Ms. Gay. I am sorry, what was the date?
Mr. Moran. 2021-2022.
Ms. Gay. Yes, I was. I was dean of the Faculty of Arts and
Sciences, yes.
Mr. Moran. In 2022, after the editors of the Harvard
Crimson endorsed the antisemitic BDS movement, which seeks the
destruction of Israel, a group of 49 faculty penned a letter
defending the Crimson editors. Did you ever speak out against
BDS during that time?
Ms. Gay. The university and I am clear on our positions
about BDS. We do not support that position. It is counter to
academic freedom and at odds with the openness which is part of
our strength as an institution.
Mr. Moran. Well, when you say--you said earlier, and you
reaffirmed to me the statement ``There is no place at Harvard
for antisemitism.'' Well, those words really ring meaningless
if those folks remain at Harvard that promote antisemitism.
Would you agree?
Ms. Gay. We do not sanction individuals for their political
views or their speech. When that speech crosses into conduct
that violates our behavior-based policies, bullying, harassment
and intimidation, we take action.
Mr. Moran. Have any students been expelled or disciplined
for bullying, harassment or these actions that you are listing?
Ms. Gay. I can assure you we have robust student
disciplinary processes, and we use them.
Mr. Moran. No, no, no, no. I am not--I did not ask about--I
did not ask about your process. I asked if any students have
been disciplined or removed from Harvard as a result of the
bullying and the harassment that is taking place based on their
antisemitic views in the past months since the October 7th
attack?
Ms. Gay. We consistently apply our policies.
Mr. Moran. Have any students--can you give me a number? Has
it been two, ten, 20 or have there been zero students that have
been actually disciplined for their activity? Not their speech,
their activity.
Ms. Gay. Students have been held to account for any episode
in which they violated our behavior-based policies.
Mr. Moran. Do you know approximately how many of those
students have been held to account in your mind, or is that
something you are going to keep from public view? I am not
asking for identification of students. I just want to know how
many people; how many students actually have been held to a
disciplinary standard?
Ms. Gay. I am happy to have my office followup with some
specific numbers, if that would be helpful to you.
Mr. Moran. That would be very helpful. I am frankly
surprised that you cannot appear before this body, having going
to talk about this issue, and not be prepared to tell us
whether or not any students, or to the extent or how many have
actually been disciplined for their antisemitic behavior in the
past months? You cannot tell me that?
Ms. Gay. I can assure--what I can assure you is that we use
our policies. We use our processes, and we hold students to
account for their behavior.
Mr. Moran. Recently a coalition of student groups on your
campus posted an open letter that placed the sole blame of the
Hamas attack on Israel. In fact, in that letter, they said that
they----
Mr. James. Thank you, sir. The gentleman's time has
expired.
Mr. Moran. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. James. I would like now to acknowledge myself for 5
minutes of questions. I came across an opinion article in the
Michigan Daily, of U of M student paper written by an anonymous
source with Michigan in Color.
The article stated in the opening paragraph the following:
``On October 7th, Palestinians in Gaza launched a surprise
attack on the colonizing force of Israel, one of the largest-
ever Palestinian liberation operations in modern history.
``They invaded colonial settlements, bulldozed territorial
walls and captured Israeli soldiers. Although any violence is
unconscionable, the rebellion was unavoidable.'' This makes me
think of a recent book written by Bari Weiss, that seeks to
define antisemitism.
``Antisemitism successfully turns Jews into the symbol of
whatever a given civilization defines as its most sinister and
threatening qualities. When you look through the dark lens, you
can understand how under Communism, the Jews were capitalists.
How under Nazism, the Jews were the race contaminators.
``And today, when the greatest sins are racism and
colonialism Israel, the Jew among nations, is being demonized
as the last bastion of white racist colonialism, a unique
source of evil not just in the region but the world. Whatever
the role the Jews are needed for, well that's the part they are
forced to play.''
That is the part they are forced to play on your campuses,
which is why you are here today. Now I know this article did
not come out on your campuses, but this rhetoric is in lock
step with much that we see on campuses today, and much of the
heinous attacks against Jews we have seen throughout the 19th
and 20th centuries.
I want to ask for the record, because many of us here on
Capitol Hill hear from our public and our constituents that you
are failing to create space where issues of the day are debated
without fear of cancellation or ostracization.
Are you all concerned about the antisemitic rhetoric that
we are seeing on these college campuses around the Nation, at
each of your own? I do not think we can State enough
individually, if you can give me maybe 15 to 10 seconds, what
each of you are doing. Just remind us of what you are doing on
your college campuses, 10-15 seconds each if you please.
[No response.]
Mr. James. Nothing. Okay, great. Some of your peers have
turned a blind eye or even permitted antisemitic speech by
faculty, students and outsiders on campus. The question today
is again, what you're doing about it. I got silent a couple of
seconds ago.
Maybe you have been giving a couple of seconds to think
about it. I will--I will make this easier. Will each of you
commit to conducting a review or what is taught and promptly
report back to this Committee with recommendations on how to
address these topics?
[No response.]
Mr. James. Okay. I will take silence as a no. I want to
just say that I am greatly concerned that students are being
taught to view certain groups as oppressors, and now apparently
that includes Jewish people. The silence on my two direct
questions, I think, serves as a glaring answer for your lack of
commitment for standing, standing in opposition.
I fear our future and the future of our Nation when
oppression is used so generally to green light reverse
discrimination by people that hide behind your institutions,
and this institutional leaders themselves. With that, I am just
going to go ahead and move on, because I do not think you have
any satisfactory answers for me.
The House is currently in a series of votes, and members
need to be on the House floor. As such, the Committee shall
stand in recess until immediately following this last vote.
I urge my colleagues to return quickly to the hearing
following votes, and I appreciate the patience of our witnesses
and the audience. I would ask that you all remain in your
seats, so our witnesses are able to leave.
[Recess.]
Chairwoman Foxx. The Committee will be in order. I thank
everyone for your patience while we recessed to go vote. I now
recognize Ms. Chavez-DeRemer for 5 minutes.
Ms. Chavez-DeRemer. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding
this unfortunately necessary hearing. President Gay, Magill,
Kornbluth while I appreciate your testimony, I am a bit
confused. In each of your testimoneys, you address antisemitism
on your campuses in the present and future tense, as if there
is no underlying cause predating October 7th, which explains
why many of your students were at the ready to harass, threaten
and attack Jewish students.
Are we really to believe that antisemitism did not exist on
your campuses before the Hamas attack? As presidents of the
universities, your jobs do not stop at fundraising and
promoting academic success. The cultures of your campuses have
no greater influence than you and what you choose to
prioritize.
At an educational institution, the most powerful mover of
culture is the education itself. The opportunities to learn
about people's history provide students the best chance to
challenge pre-conceptions, biases and inspire curiosity to
understand rather than villainize.
At each of your schools, there are numerous classes focused
on Latino, black, indigenous and AAPI history. The existence of
such classes is necessary, speaks to your commitment to these
communities. The commitment to the amplification of those
voices.
Minority groups need their voices at the table. The Jewish
people make up 2.4 percent of America's population and are only
.2 of the global population. For the past 5,000 years, they
have been enslaved, lynched and systematically murdered. During
the same time, they have relentlessly improved the course of
humanity, selflessly contributing to societies which eventually
betrayed them.
President Gay, your university Harvard teaches only two
courses on the history and culture of the Jewish people at the
undergrad level. One of those classes is focused on portraying
all Jews who support Israel's existence as colonialist and
racist.
Compared to the roughly 125 classes Harvard offers on
Latino, black, indigenous and AAPI history, the discrepancy
feels odd. You are not alone. President Magill, the University
of Pennsylvania offers three classes on Jewish history to
undergrads, and President Kornbluth, MIT only offers two
classes on Jewish history to your undergrad students.
This gives the impression that your deans and professors
view Jews as an exception, that their voice as a minority group
is not worth amplifying. This mere erasure of Jewish history
from offered courses is chilling to me. Harvard, MIT and the
University of Pennsylvania offer its students an incredibly
limited opportunity to learn about the 5,000 years of Jewish
history. It is no wonder so many of your students see Jews as
having less humanity than the rest of us.
In denying the Jewish voice a seat at the table, in denying
your student body equitable access to Jewish history, you have
created a hostile environment for Jewish students. If you
provide your students real opportunities to learn about Jewish
history at the same rate as you teach the history of groups,
there would be wait lists for those classes.
That would provide students the appropriate venue to
discuss, debate and learn. It will inspire your students to
have meaningful discussions amongst themselves about the full
history of Jewish people. President Gay, Magill, and Kornbluth,
you can assemble all the task forces you want, and organize
countless students' discussions on the issue.
I can assure you that your students, especially your Jewish
students, those options come across as lazy and disingenuous.
None of you have presented solutions which would address the
causes of antisemitism at your schools. In your testimony, I
have heard no self-reflection or acknowledge of failure.
President Gay, in your testimony you said that you are
guided by the simple mantra asking why not. To the three of
you, I urge you to think of one simple question. Why not teach
Jewish history? Madam Chair, I will yield the rest of my time.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Thank you Ms. Chavez-DeRemer. A
study, a study from--a 2021 study from Jay Green and James Paul
of the Heritage Foundation examined the social media feeds of
741 DEI personnel at 65 universities.
Those DEI staff interacted with almost three times as many
posts about Israel as about China. Of those interactions about
Israel, 96 percent were critical, while 62 percent of the
interactions about China were favorable.
What is your reaction to the fact that the DEI staff on
your campuses appear more favorably disposed to one of the most
depressive regimes in the world than they are to Israel, Dr.
Gay?
Ms. Gay. Thank you, Congresswoman. Our DEI Office and all
the professionals in that office are committed to being a
resource for the entire campus community, all of our students,
all of our faculty, all of our staff. Their priority is
ensuring that everyone feels a sense of belonging and they do
that work motivated by a commitment to safety, security, to
well-being and not within an ideological framework.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. The time is up. Mr. Comer, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Madam Chair. Many of our country's
top universities and colleges are for sale. That is a fact, and
our biggest foreign adversaries know it. Take for instance
China and the Chinese Communist Party.
They have used so-called Confucious Institutes on college
campuses to spread CCP propaganda. Now we are learning about
billions of dollars flooding into our universities and colleges
from countries supporting terrorists, terrorists that hate what
our country stands for.
For example, the U.S. Department of Education data shows
that Qatar, a key backer and ally of Hamas, is one of the
largest investors in U.S. universities. It has given more than
$5 billion to U.S. institutions of higher education since 2001.
Ms. Magill, data from Department of Education shows UPenn
has received more than 1 and a1/2 billion dollars from foreign
sources. Earlier, you shared with Representative Steel that
Penn does not accept gifts from the Government of Qatar but has
received gifts from alumni who reside in Qatar. Do you know the
total amount of those gifts from alumni in Qatar?
Ms. Gay. Thank you for the question, Congressman Comer. We
of course follow all of the laws, and we accept no gifts that
are inconsistent with our academic mission, that would create
any interference with doing what we do at Penn.
What I know about Qatar is what I mentioned earlier, is
that I am not aware of any government gifts, and we have a few
alumni in Qatar. The number I have in front of me is about
$2,000 a year from the donors that we have, the private
individuals in Qatar.
Mr. Comer. Does Penn have a policy to not accept donations
or gifts from countries that harbor and support terrorists.
Ms. Gay. Congressman Comer our--we are guided by the
Federal Government on this matter, and we follow all of the
rules.
Mr. Comer. Dr. Kornbluth, this report from the National
Contagion Research Institute and the Institute for the Study of
Global Antisemitism and Policy shows MIT received a total of
$859 million from foreign sources between 2014 and 2019. Has
MIT accepted money from Qatar?
Ms. Kornbluth. All of our--as I said previously, all of our
funds are for open, publishable research. We maintain full
control over the research being conducted. I would have to get
you the specific funding on Qatar via the staff after this
session. It is publicly available information in the public
record.
Mr. Comer. Well, does MIT have a policy of not accepting
money from countries that harbor or support terrorists?
Ms. Kornbluth. Our review of all foreign money is seen
through the lens of national security, economic security and
human rights.
Mr. Comer. I take it is no then? Do you--do you and your
university think it is a good policy to accept donations from
countries that support and/or harbor terrorists.
Ms. Kornbluth. I told you what our policy is. Thank you.
Mr. Comer. I ask unanimous consent to submit this report,
Madam Chair, titled ``The Corruption of the American Mind''
into the record.
Chairwoman Foxx. Without objection.
[The information of Mr. Comer follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Comer. Dr. Gay, how much money does Harvard receive
from foreign sources that support Hamas or have links to
terrorist organizations, like Qatar, Lebanon and the
Palestinian Authority?
Ms. Gay. Excuse me, sorry Congressman. Harvard has policies
that govern the acceptance of gifts and contracts, beginning
with respecting Federal law, which means that we don't accept
gifts or contracts from entities that are on restricted lists.
Then we go further and only accept gifts that align with
our mission and that provide autonomy for our research and our
faculty. We have alumni all over the world, and their
philanthropy supports student aid and scholarships and cutting-
edge research.
Mr. Comer. Okay. The Department of Education reports that
Harvard has received more than $19 million from Qatar, 2 and 1/
2 million from Lebanon and more than 1 and 1/2 million from the
Palestinian Authority as of October 2023. As university
president, do you think Harvard should be accepting money from
countries that support terrorists?
Ms. Gay. Again, we have strict policies that govern the
gifts and contracts that we accept. We comply fully with
Federal law.
Mr. Comer. Do you have a personal opinion?
Ms. Gay. We will not accept gifts that do not align with
our mission and retain autonomy----
Mr. Comer. Will you make a commitment to not accept money
from countries that we know support terrorists?
Ms. Gay. We follow Federal law.
Mr. Comer. The antisemitism on college campuses across the
country, including your campus, has been shocking to witness,
and that goes to all the witnesses I have asked questions to.
We have seen the celebration of terrorism on all of your
campuses, including from faculty.
When we see how much foreign money, including from our most
dangerous adversaries, is going into our colleges and
universities, maybe we should not be that surprised. You need
to immediately reevaluate the sources of foreign donations and
recognize the poisonous effect that this is happening on your
campuses.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Comer. Mr. Burlison, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for the
witnesses that are here today. In response to the ongoing
harassment of Jewish students, including supporting a National
Day of Resistance, the Antidefamation League and the--sent a
letter to colleges and universities around the country, urging
them to investigate the activities of their local campus
chapter of Students for Justice in Palestine.
Several universities followed through with that, and as a
result some universities kicked those chapters off their
campuses. In some instances, Columbia University suspended the
SJP and the Jewish Voice for Peace. What steps have your
universities taken to address the Students for Justice in
Palestine? Dr. Gray, Dr. Gay.
Ms. Gay. Thank you for the question. As I indicated
earlier, I reject so much of the hateful and reckless speech--
Mr. Burlison. I do not want a long answer--I just want to
know what--have you taken any steps like--have you followed
suit with these other universities to remove this hateful
organization from your campus?
Ms. Gay. We do not punish students for their views, but we
hold them accountable for their conduct and behavior, and any
conduct that violates our rules against bullying, harassment or
intimidation, we take action.
Mr. Burlison. Your answer is no. Does it not--does it
concern you that your policies say that intimidation is factor
for removal, and yet this group clearly, their very presence is
an intimidating factor to Israeli students. Do you have any
concerns?
Ms. Gay. I am concerned about students who do not feel safe
and welcome on our campus and wanting to make sure--and I want
to make sure that they receive all the support that they need.
When other students transgress and violate our policies, they
will be held accountable.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you. Ms. Magill, can you tell me at
your university, have you taken actions to remove the Students
for Justice in Palestine?
Ms. Magill. Thanks for the question, Representative
Burlison. We have similar policies, which is that any organized
student group must comply with the rules of the university, and
if they have violated those rules, they can be non-recognized.
Mr. Burlison. Okay, and then Mrs. Kornbluth, same question.
Ms. Kornbluth. As far as I know, we do not have an SJP
chapter. We do have students who are allied with you know, are
interested in advocating for the Palestinian cause. We are not
aware of any national links of that group.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you. My next line of inquiry has to do
with your lack of reporting standards when it comes to these
foreign contributions, as was mentioned by my colleague. I
understand that Harvard and MIT are under Section 117
investigations. A New York Post article just recently revealed
that MIT received over $859 million in foreign funding.
I think Harvard received similar numbers, nearly, nearly
$900 million. As was stated, some of this money is coming from
countries in the Middle East that have a history of large
contributions to fund these academic centers called the Middle
East Study Centers. Are you--has Harvard taken any money to
fund the Middle East Study Centers?
Ms. Gay. We receive support from a variety of sources, and
our alumni are all over the world, including in the Middle
East, who support our activities on campus.
Mr. Burlison. Well, an analysis has indicated that there is
a direct correlation between the universities that have
received money for these Middle East Study Centers and the
activity of the SJP. I would highly encourage you to examine,
and I will ask, I will just ask it directly.
Is it because of the money that you are receiving from
these foreign countries that you're not kicking these, this,
these hate groups off campus?
Ms. Gay. Our donors do not influence how we run the
university, how we enforce our policies or how we keep our
students safe.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you. I yield the rest of my time to my
colleague from New York.
Ms. Stefanik. Dr. Gay, does calling for the genocide of
Jews violate Harvard's rules of bullying and harassment?
Ms. Gay. The rules around bullying and harassment are quite
specific, and if the context in which that language is used
amounts to bullying and harassment, then we take--we take
action against it.
Ms. Stefanik. Can you say yes to that question, of does
calling for the genocide of Jews violate Harvard's rules on
bullying and harassment?
Ms. Gay. Calling for the genocide of Jews is antisemitic.
Ms. Stefanik. Yes?
Ms. Gay. That is antisemitic speech, and as I have said----
Ms. Stefanik. It is a yes?
Ms. Gay. When speech crosses into conduct----
Ms. Stefanik. It is a yes? I have asked the witnesses
each----
Ms. Gay. Once when speech crosses--when speech crosses into
conduct, we take action.
Ms. Stefanik. Is that a yes? Is that a yes? The witness has
not answered. Madam Chair, is that a yes? You cannot answer the
question----
Ms. Gay. When speech crosses into conduct, we take action.
Chairwoman Foxx. I am sorry. I am sorry, Dr. Gay. I have to
cut you off.
Ms. Gay. Of course.
Chairwoman Foxx. Mr. Williams, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I have the
unfortunate distinction of being a graduate of the University
of Pennsylvania, as well as a visiting student at Harvard
University for a year. The purpose of this hearing is to assess
the health of our most elite, and until recently esteemed
educational institutions in this country.
We raised the question, whether your institution and others
like them deserve to enjoy the benefits of partnerships with
our government. Research investments, student loan guarantees,
tax-free status for your endowments. Funding for veterans to
receive education is tied to their prior service, like myself,
or their ongoing service.
It has been stated several times that this runs in the tens
of billions of dollars across higher education, perhaps even
into $100 billion.
Dr. Gay, you have repeatedly in your testimony today
claimed that you believe in accountability, that acts of hate
are personally abhorrent to you, that you follow Federal law,
that you believe all parts of your community must feel safe and
secure, and that education is the solution for antisemitism.
Does this accurately reflect your views?
Ms. Gay. I have expressed those views, yes.
Mr. Williams. Those are your testimony today. How long have
you been president of Harvard?
Ms. Gay. Five months.
Mr. Williams. Sorry?
Ms. Gay. Five months.
Mr. Williams. Uh-huh. What is your annual budget?
Ms. Gay. For the entire university?
Mr. Williams. Yes.
Ms. Gay. About $6 billion, pretty close to that.
Mr. Williams. Six billion. How many employees?
Ms. Gay. We have 19,000 faculty and staff.
Mr. Williams. How long is the--how large is the university
endowment?
Ms. Gay. It is just over $50 billion.
Mr. Williams. How long has Harvard been in existence?
Ms. Gay. 387 years.
Mr. Williams. 337 years.
Ms. Gay. 87.
Mr. Williams. 87, sorry. Cut you by 50 there. You said that
education is the solution. All of you agreed actually, that
education is the solution for antisemitism, yet your
educational institution under your leadership and previous
leaders, is seething with hateful and threatening antisemitic
demonstrations.
These are only--as I mentioned, these are only against the
Jewish students. No one else, just Jews at your school. You say
you believe in accountability. Should the Federal Government
keep shoveling money and privilege to institutions like yours
that fail so profoundly in their mission?
Your mission is to educate. Education's the solution. You
have 387 years and you have arrived at this place of virulent
antisemitism and hate. Why should the Federal Government
continue to partner with you on such a failed accomplishment or
lack of accomplishment?
Ms. Gay. The Federal-university partnership is not only a
critical source of the success of all American higher
education, but also its----
Mr. Williams. Well, maybe we should redirect it to the ones
that are, because there are other universities that are
succeeding. I am trying to get at the heart of if education is
the solution. You do not seem to be accomplishing that
solution, even though you have had a 387-year run up to stamp
out antisemitism. What happened? Is it leadership?
Ms. Gay. We have work to do to build the community that our
students and our faculty deserve----
Mr. Williams. Ha! Well, it is--I am looking backward. I am
saying how did you arrive here, if education is your mission
and antisemitism is your result? How did you arrive here?
Let me--let me help. 100 years ago, Harvard, University of
Pennsylvania, other Ivy League schools actually publicly and
actively began restricting Jewish enrollment. Now I am proud to
say that Syracuse University in my district resisted this trend
and did not implement those kinds of policies.
Today, we actually see the fruit of those decisions, and it
seems to me that the leadership that we need needs moral
clarity to understand the moment that we are in, and I am not
really hearing that frankly from anyone. Ms. Magill, how long
have you been the president of the University of Pennsylvania?
Ms. Magill. Just under a year and a half.
Mr. Williams. The budget and employees there?
Ms. Magill. About $12 billion because we have a large
health system. We have about 45,000 employees.
Mr. Williams. The endowment please.
Ms. Magill. About 20 billion.
Mr. Williams. Do you not have enough resources to complete
your mission, your stated goal of education?
Ms. Magill. We have many resources that we invest in the
education of our 30,000 students.
Mr. Williams. If education is the mission and education is
the solution, how did you Penn arrive at this horrible place,
that actually I am ashamed to be an alumni of your university?
Ms. Magill. I am very sorry to hear that Congressman.
Mr. Williams. I am not alone.
Ms. Magill. We have--we have work to do, I agree.
Mr. Williams. Well, I keep hearing that. I think you have a
need for leadership or a need of Federal intervention to cutoff
the resources that allow this continued failed--this mission
that is failed to continue. I yield back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you. Ms. Houchin, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to the
witnesses for testifying today. I want to just say how
frustrated I am that this hearing is even necessary. I would be
naive to recognize--not to recognize though, antisemitism on
our university campuses, including my home State.
As you may know, this fall two members of the Indiana
University Student Government published a resignation letter
due to the blatant antisemitism of the student body president.
According to their firsthand testimony, this student body
president was intentionally neglecting the experience of Jewish
students on campus, by not only refusing to meet or work with
Jewish students, but by actively ignoring the voices of those
who tried to bring attention to their issues, and the concerns
for the well-being of their Jewish students.
It is especially appalling when we recognize that 10
percent of Indiana University student body is Jewish. Campus
life in the United States has become a daily trial of
intimidation and insult for our Jewish students, a hostile
environment that began with statements from pro-Palestinian
student organizations justifying terrorism has now rapidly
spiraled into death threats and physical attacks, leaving
Jewish students alarmed and vulnerable.
At least 124 antisemitic incidents have been reported on
campuses since October 7th, and that's likely a severe
undercount. The response to this has been empty rhetoric. Words
have been weak; action has been slow. No action has resulted in
Jewish students feeling safe or welcome.
This is an example as why I'm an original co-sponsor of a
congressional resolution condemning the support of Hamas,
Hezbollah and other terrorist organizations at our institutions
of higher education. We will not tolerate the creation of a
hostile environment for our Jewish students.
Faculty and staff on college campuses, if you will not do
it, then we will take action ourselves. Madam Chair, I would
like to yield the balance of my time to the gentlewoman from
New York.
Ms. Stefanik. Dr. Kornbluth does--at MIT, does calling for
the genocide of Jews violate MIT's code of conduct or rules
regarding bullying and harassment, yes, or no?
Ms. Kornbluth. If targeted at individuals not making public
statements.
Ms. Stefanik. Yes or no, calling for the genocide of Jews
does not constitute bullying and harassment?
Ms. Kornbluth. I have not heard calling for the genocide of
Jews on our campus.
Ms. Stefanik. You have heard chants for Intifada?
Ms. Kornbluth. I have heard chants, which can be
antisemitic depending on the context, when calling for the
elimination of the Jewish people.
Ms. Stefanik. Those would not be according to the MIT's
code of conduct or rules?
Ms. Kornbluth. That would be investigated as harassment if
pervasive and severe.
Ms. Stefanik. Ms. Magill, at Penn, does calling for the
genocide of Jews violate Penn's rules or code of conduct, yes,
or no?
Ms. Magill. If the speech turns into conduct, it can be
harassment, yes.
Ms. Stefanik. I am asking specifically calling for the
genocide of Jews, does that constitute bullying or harassment?
Ms. Magill. If it is directed and severe or pervasive, it
is harassment.
Ms. Stefanik. The answer is yes?
Ms. Magill. It is a context-dependent decision,
Congresswoman.
Ms. Stefanik. It is a context-dependent decision? That is
your testimony today? Calling for the genocide of Jews is
dependent upon the context? That is not bullying or harassment?
This is the easiest question to answer, yes, Ms. Magill. So is
your testimony that you will not answer yes.
Ms. Magill. If it--if it is--if the speech becomes----
Ms. Stefanik. Yes or no.
Ms. Magill. If the speech becomes conduct, it can be
harassment, yes.
Ms. Stefanik. Conduct meaning committing the act of
genocide? The speech is not harassment? This is unacceptable,
Ms. Magill. I am going to give you one more opportunity for the
world to see your answer. Does calling for the genocide of Jews
violate Penn's code of conduct when it comes to bullying and
harassment, yes or no?
Ms. Magill. It can be harassment.
Ms. Stefanik. The answer is yes, and Dr. Gay, at Harvard,
does calling for the genocide of Jews violate Harvard's rules
of bullying and harassment, yes or no?
Ms. Gay. It can be, depending on the context.
Ms. Stefanik. What is the context?
Ms. Gay. Targeted as an individual, targeted at an
individual.
Ms. Stefanik. It is targeted at Jewish students, Jewish
individuals. Do you understand your testimony is dehumanizing
them? Do you understand that dehumanization is part of
antisemitism?
I will ask you one more time. Does calling for the genocide
of Jews violate Harvard's rules of bullying and harassment,
yes, or no?
Ms. Gay. Antisemitic rhetoric when it crosses over into
conduct----
Ms. Stefanik. Is it antisemitic rhetoric----
Ms. Gay. Antisemitic rhetoric, when it crosses into
conduct, it amounts to bullying, harassment, intimidation, that
is actionable conduct and we do take action.
Ms. Stefanik. The answer is yes, that calling for the
genocide of Jews violates Harvard code of conduct; correct?
Ms. Gay. Again, it depends on the context.
Ms. Stefanik. It does not depend on the context. The answer
is yes, and this is why you should resign. These are
unacceptable answers across the board.
Chairwoman Foxx. Mr. Scott, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Freedom of speech protects not just
popular speech. I have heard many of you refer to that. Can you
comment on what speech is protected and what speech is not
protected? Starting with Dr. Gay.
Ms. Gay. Speech is protected, and that protection extends
even to speech we find objectionable and offensive and even
outrageous. It is when speech crosses into conduct that
violates our very clear policies around bullying, harassment,
intimidation, that it becomes actionable.
Mr. Scott. When it is targeted and creates imminent threats
of violence, that can actually be criminal?
Ms. Gay. Yes.
Mr. Scott. The Title VI standard is not that--it does not
require all that. You can just have a--you have much less of a
standard to create a violation of Title VI. When do you know--
what is the Title VI standard for when speech violates Title VI
and creates a hostile environment?
Ms. Gay. I cannot recite that from memory.
Mr. Scott. Anybody know of the kinds of things that would
constitute a Title VI?
Ms. Kornbluth. Yes, a hostile environment that prevents the
students from attaining their educational acquisition.
Mr. Scott. Students have a right to feel safe on campus.
Would the standard of a hostile environment apply to all
students, or just Jewish students?
Ms. Kornbluth. All students.
Mr. Scott. Dr. Magill, a lot has been said about some of
the speakers that have been invited. Who invites the speakers?
Ms. Magill. Congressman, it varies. It might be a student
organization, it might be a faculty member, it might be a staff
member. It might be my office.
Mr. Scott. Does your office always control who the speakers
are, what speakers are invited?
Ms. Magill. No. There is no preapproval process for the
speakers who are invited. It's quite decentralized.
Mr. Scott. If some group, student group invited somebody
that the university found offensive, what happens?
Ms. Magill. Well, we do not prevent a speaker from coming
to campus, following the guidance of the United States
Constitutions, based on the views that we think they are going
to express.
We sometimes condemn those views if they are deeply
inconsistent with our values. We do not censor or prevent
speakers from coming based on their views, even if they are
offensive.
Mr. Scott. Dr. Gay, you said several students are
participating--subject to disciplinary actions. Typically, how
long does that disciplinary action take to be completed?
Ms. Gay. The process, we try to move with all deliberate
speed. It varies depending on the complexity of the incident.
It could be a matter of days or weeks, or it could be a bit
longer than that. The range of consequences vary, but up to and
including expulsion from Harvard.
Mr. Scott. Several comments have been made that the
campuses are full of antisemitism and that is the only problem
on campus. Can the university presidents comment on that?
Ms. Gay. It is not the only problem on campus. It is
particularly acute at this moment, and as I have mentioned
before, students have offered searing testimony about what
they've been experiencing. It is not just antisemitism. It is
also Islamophobia and frankly just hostility to individuals who
are visibly Muslim or Arab or Palestinian.
Then we also have other student communities that feel
marginalized, not just in this moment but have been struggling
to feel a sense of belonging at Harvard for some years,
including students of color.
Mr. Scott. Ms. Magill.
Ms. Magill. I would describe very much the same experience
at the University of Pennsylvania, as Dr. Gay described.
Mr. Scott. Dr. Kornbluth.
Ms. Kornbluth. Racism, Islamophobia, anti-LGBTQ sentiment.
One thing I might add about free speech on campus with these
issues is that the best way to fight negative speech is more
speech, to have speakers and individuals who fight antisemitism
and can speak to our students on campus.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Yield back. Thank you, Dr. Foxx, and
I want to thank our witnesses for participating in today's
hearing. Protecting students from discrimination and harassment
are central to fostering safe and welcoming campuses.
Regrettably following the October 7th attacks, college
campuses have experienced a disturbing rise in incidents of
antisemitism and Islamophobia. It is great to have the
opportunity to hear directly from campus leaders on what they
are doing to be more proactive and prevent incidences of
violence and harassment on campus.
I applaud President Biden's leadership and the
administration for actively helping institutions protect
students as part of the White House's National Strategy to
Combat Antisemitism.
Under the President's direction, the Department of
Education has provided additional guidance to colleges and
universities on how to uphold their obligation under Title VI
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and better address
antisemitism, Islamophobia and other forms of discrimination on
campus.
We have already opened about 15 Title VI investigations in
the recent incidences on campus since October 7th. Finally, as
Members of Congress, we also have the responsibility to condemn
discrimination as we see it, and we should fully fund the
Office of Civil Rights, so that they will have the resources to
investigate these cases. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield
back.
Chairwoman Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman--Mr. Ranking
Member. Postsecondary education has never been held in such low
esteem in our country as it is today. Indeed, I do not refer to
colleges and universities any longer as higher education,
because it is my opinion that higher order skills are not being
taught and learned.
I think today's hearing indicates that. I think Mr.
Williams was on to something in his line of questioning about
why are we here--at this stage when you all talk about
education being the answer to the problems.
Now I want to remind everyone why we are here. I started
the hearing by recognizing the students we have in the audience
today. You are the ones bearing the brunt of the hate that is
festering on our campuses. You are the reason we are calling
attention to these issues, and we will continue holding college
leaders accountable for failing to protect you.
You are heroes, and I thank you for your courage. One of
the students here today is Talia Khan. She is an undergraduate
alumna of MIT, and currently a graduate student there. She
wrote a letter to the Committee. I request unanimous consent to
submit her full letter for the record. Without objection.
[The letter of Mrs. Foxx follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. I encourage all the members to read it.
Unfortunately, I do not have time to read the whole thing, but
I want to give you a sample.
``I'm a Jewish student, the daughter of a Jewish mother and
an Afghan-Muslim father. I'd like to bring to your attention my
perspective as a Jewish student currently immersed in an
extremely toxic atmosphere at MIT.''
She goes on to describe a litany of violence, harassment
and bullying against Jewish students on MIT's campus, and
inaction by the MIT administration. She then concludes with a
plea for help from the MIT administration. ``Unfortunately, I
have been put in charge of working to keep MIT students feeling
safe. I have been put in charge of advocating for hundreds of
frightened students, afraid of retribution.
``I want to stop being told about the most recent
antisemitic incident and feeling like I have to push and--push
and push to report it, even though nothing ever gets done. This
should not be my job. Sally Kornbluth, please let be a student
again. It is your job to keep Jewish students safe, not mine.''
Talia, thank you for sharing your ordeal with this
Committee. Talia happens to be a student at MIT. Unfortunately,
her story is not unique to that campus. Horrific acts of hate,
violence and intimidation are happening at the University of
Pennsylvania, Harvard and institutions all over the country,
and institutional leaders are failing to meet the movement with
courage, clarity or decisive action.
I also ask unanimous consent to submit for the record a
Wall Street Journal op-ed from this past Sunday by Lance
Morrow. The op-ed is called ``The New Antisemitism is the
Oldest Kind.'' Without objection.
[The information of Mrs. Foxx follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Foxx. This op-ed is clear-eyed about the threat
we face. Talking about the antisemitism of the post-war era,
Morrow said ``America's antisemites in those days were more
fools than monsters.'' Then he says ``The antisemitism that is
poured forth onto the country's streets and campuses in the
autumn of 2023 is a different thing. A reversion to a politics
of aggressive, unapologetic hate.
``Of course, the new Jew haters, especially young people on
campuses, think of themselves as perfectly virtuous. What is a
thousand times worse, they think of their Jew hatred as
righteous. It is morally fashionable among them.''
This brings me back to the beginning. Presidents Gay,
Magill and Kornbluth, you have real and important practical
challenges. These are real students sitting here, and they need
to be protected. You also have a moral challenge. It is
fashionable among too many members of your campus communities
to hate Jews. It is ideologically acceptable.
As you do the practical work of protecting your campus, you
must also do the rhetorical work of changing hearts and minds.
That is your job as a campus president. That means being
willing to risk your job to speak truth clearly, consistently
and unapologetically, even when the Jew haters turn their hate
to you.
We will now be watching, and I genuinely hope for the sake
of our Nation you will rise to meet the challenge. Without
objection, there being no further business, the Committee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:40 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
