- DIVERSITY OF THOUGHT: PROTECTING FREE SPEECH ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DIVERSITY OF THOUGHT: PROTECTING
FREE SPEECH ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES

=======================================================================

HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION
AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

of the

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE
WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, MARCH 29, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-4

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

51-659 PDF            WASHINGTON : 2014

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE
DEVELOPMENT

BURGESS, OWENS, UTAH, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         FREDERICA WILSON, Florida,
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin              Ranking Member
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          MARK TAKANO, California
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   PRAMILA,JAYAPAL, Washington
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               LUCY McBATH, Georgia
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York               Northern Mariana Islands
VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina        SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on March 29, 2023...................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Owens, Hon. Burgess, Chairman, Subcommittee on Higher
Education and the Workforce Development....................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', Ranking Member, Committee on
Education and the Workforce................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6

WITNESSES

Trump, Cherise, Executive Director, Speech First, Washington,
DC.........................................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Joner, Josiah, Executive Editor, The Stanford Review,
Stanford, California.......................................    17
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Nossel, Suzanne, Chief Executive Officer, Pen America........    28
Prepared statement of....................................    30
Shapiro, Ilya, Director of Constitutional Studies, Manhattan
Institute, New York, New York..............................    40
Prepared statement of....................................    42

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Banks, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Indiana:
Report dated December 8, 2021 from The Heritage
Foundation.............................................    73
Bonamici, Hon. Suzanne, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon:
Statement for the record dated February 7, 2023, from the
American Psychological Association.....................    70
Takano, Hon. Mark, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California:
Memo dated March 22, 2023, from Jenny S. Martinez........    58
Walberg, Hon. Tim, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Michigan:
Support letter for the record dated March 13, 2023.......    95

DIVERSITY OF THOUGHT: PROTECTING
FREE SPEECH ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES

----------

Wednesday, March 29, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Higher Education and Workforce
Development,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:18 a.m., in
Room 2175, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Burgess Owens
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Foxx, Thompson, Walberg, Grothman,
Banks, Owens, Good, Kiley, Chavez-DeRemer, Houchin, Scott,
Bonamici, Takano, and Manning.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Nick Barley,
Deputy Communications Director; Jackson Berryman, Speechwriter;
Hans Bjontegard, Legislative Assistant; Solomon Chen,
Professional Staff Member; Christina Delmont-Small, Oversight
Investigator; Tyler Dufrene, Research Assistant; Cate Dillon,
Director of Operations; Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant;
Sheila Havenner, Director of Information Technology; Amy Raaf
Jones, Director of Education and Human Services Policy; Alex
Knorr, Staff Assistant; Andrew Kuzy, Press Assistant; John
Martin, Deputy Director of Workforce Policy/Counsel; Hannah
Matesic, Deputy Staff Director; Audra McGeorge, Communications
Director; Eli Mitchell, Legislative Assistant; Gabriella
Pistone, Legislative Assistant Oversight; Ian Prince,
Professional Staff Member; Mary Christina Riley, Professional
Staff Member; Chance Russell, Professional Staff Member; Kent
Talbert, Investigative Counsel; Brad Thomas, Senior Education
Policy Advisor; Rashage Green, Minority Director of Education
Policy; Christian Haines, Minority General Counsel; Amaris
Benavidez, Professional Staff Member; Emanual Kimble, Minority
Education and the Workforce CBCF Fellow; Stephanie Lalle,
Minority Communications Director; Kota Mizutani, Minority
Deputy Communication Director; Karina Bravo, Minority Intern;
Sam Varie, Minority Press Secretary.
Chairman Owens. The Subcommittee on Higher Education and
Workforce Development will come to order. I note that a quorum
is present. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to call
a recess at any time. The subcommittee is meeting today to hear
testimony on Free Speech on College Campuses.
Good morning, everyone. Welcome to today's hearing. The
hearing is titled Diversity of Thought: Protecting Free Speech
on College Campuses. What our young men and women practice and
learn in colleges and universities will impact our Nation for
generations to come, far beyond their careers.
How today's students are taught, or not taught, to listen
to ideas and debate with those they disagree with will
ultimately carry into their interactions and practice in
Fortune 500 companies, in academia, the FBI, the arts,
families, and even in the halls of Congress.
Freedom of speech is a constitutionally protected God given
right ensconced in our founding documents. Far too many higher
ed institutions claim to uphold this right, accept funding from
American taxpayers, and then quickly turn their backs and
betray us. Witnesses today will have extensive personal
experience defending the rights for all viewpoints to be heard.
The experiences of our witnesses and growing mountains of
evidence regularly appearing in the news paint a dark picture
of the State of free expression in postsecondary education. The
American people watched in shock at video after video emerge of
mobs of radicalized students attacking anyone with an opinion
not in line with theirs.
These students are trained in college classrooms that
bullying of others is totally acceptable. That attacking others
while hiding anonymously in the midst of a group, or behind a
mask, is virtuous. This is not virtue, but instead the height
of cowardice. These cowardly attacks extend to their fellow
colleagues who feel they also have the right to express and
debate their own beliefs.
To think to voice their own ideas beyond the confines of
critical race theory, and most recently, and shockingly, the
heckling of a Federal appellate judge who was invited to speak
at a law school. Those who do not conform to the mob's thoughts
and words are quickly taught you are not welcome here.
The ability to speak freely, to build one's knowledge is
the cornerstone of the American system, and postsecondary
education. When our universities do nothing to safeguard free
speech from radicalized students, our future as a nation is at
stake. I will leave the many appalling details of recent
attacks on speech to our witnesses, but I would like to make
one point.
Movements to threaten speech have occurred before. If those
with certain views are allowed to shut down competing views,
the battle to sustain freedom, upon which our country is
founded, free speech, free thought, and free expression will be
lost. In today's era, universities have latched on to an
advancement of diversity, inequity and inclusion, DEI, as an
ideal for campuses, which is plainly stamped on college
websites, it is spelled out in college codes. While colleges
and universities may choose to focus on DEI, I will caution
them that the line is crossed when they obligate or demand
faculty and students to sign on to these beliefs.
In fact, many universities require signed diversity
statements, which often are a determining factor in student
admission, faculty hiring, and tenure promotion. These
statements act as political litmus tests. They insist on
commitment to certain views, and imply the prospective
applicant will not be considered if they do not sufficiently
advocate for the same beliefs.
Let me remind everyone listening that we live in the free
land of America, not Communist China, Cuba, North Korea or
Russia. While all the pressures to conform, or avoid saying the
wrong thing, it is also no wonder over half the students now
self-censor. Universities are increasingly minimizing the
viewpoints of those beliefs deemed acceptable.
The entire generation of young academics must tailor their
work to a prescribed agenda or face professional purgatory.
Even professors with tenure are no longer safe in these elite
leftist running universities as they continue to fire and
threatened long-standing scholars over wrong thinking.
American postsecondary education thrives when people from
different backgrounds are encouraged to express themselves to
foster a healthy environment of intellectual diversity. The
American university system needs to focus on the purpose of
education. The purpose and pursuit of truth. This committee
should explore legislative avenues to create the right
incentives to remind universities of trust that we give them as
we fund them through our taxpayer tax dollars.
This trust is not to be an adversary to our sacred free
rights of speech, but to protect it. My colleagues and I have a
delicate job of considering how to ensure compliance through
enforcement mechanisms that our law currently lacks.
The role of American government has always been to defend
the freedom of the students. This committee will not, and our
fellow Americans should not look the other way as millions of
students and great minds are silenced and disinvited, or forced
to adopt beliefs antithetical to the Constitution because of a
vocal minority of bullies.
With work, we can return to the days when students were
taught to say with confidence let us respectfully agree to
disagree, and let us continue this debate another day. With
that, I look forward to the hearing today, and I yield to the
Ranking Member, Mr. Scott.
[The statement of Chairman Owens follows:]

Statement of Hon. Burgess Owens, Chairman, Committee on Education and
the Workforce

What our young men and women practice and learn at colleges and
universities will impact our nations for generations to come, far
beyond their own careers. How today's students are taught or not taught
to listen to new ideas and debate with those who they disagree with,
will ultimately carry into their interactions and practices in Fortune
500 companies, academia, the arts, their families, and even into the
halls of Congress. Freedom of speech is a constitutionally protected
God-given Right ensconced in our founding documents. Far too many
higher education institutions claim to uphold this right, accept
funding from the American taxpayer, and then purposefully turn their
backs and betray us.
Our witnesses today have extensive personal experience defending
the right for all viewpoints to be heard.
The experiences of our witnesses and growing mountains of evidence
regularly appearing in the news, paint a dire picture of the state of
free expression in postsecondary education. The American people watch
with shock as video after video emerge of mobs of radicalized students
attacking anyone with an ``opinion'' not aligned with theirs. These
students are trained in college classrooms that bullying of others is
totally acceptable. That attacking others while hiding anonymously in
the midst of a group or behind a mask is virtuous. This is not virtue,
but instead the height of cowardice.
These cowardly attacks extend to their fellow colleagues who feel
they have a right to express and debate their earnest beliefs, to
faculty attempting to voice their own ideas beyond the confines of
critical race theory, and most recently and shockingly, the heckling of
a federal appellate judge who was invited to speak at a law school.
Those who do not conform to the mob's thoughts and words are
quickly taught: ``you are not welcome here.''
The ability to speak freely to build one's knowledge is a
cornerstone of the American system of postsecondary education. When our
universities do nothing to safeguard free speech from classroom
radicalized students, our future as a free Nation is at stake.
I will leave the many appalling details of recent attacks on speech
to our witnesses, but I would like to make one more point.
Movements to threaten speech have occurred before. If those with
certain views are allowed to shut down competing views, the battle to
sustain freedoms upon which our county was founded--free speech, free
thought, and free expression--will be lost.
In today's era, universities have latched onto the advancement of
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) as an ideal for campuses, which
is plainly stamped on college websites and spelled out in university
codes.
While colleges and universities may choose to focus on DEI, I would
caution that the line is crossed when they obligate and demand faculty
and students to sign on to their belief in these principles.
In fact, many universities require signed ``Diversity Statements,''
which are often a determining factor in student admissions, faculty
hiring, and tenure promotion.
These statements act as a political litmus test. They insist on a
commitment to certain views and imply that prospective applicants will
not be considered if they do not sufficiently advocate for the same
beliefs. Let me remind everyone listening. We live in the Free Land of
America, not Communist China, Cuba, North Korea or Russia.
With all the pressure to conform or avoid saying the wrong thing,
it is also no wonder that over half of students self-censor.
Universities are increasingly minimizing the viewpoints of those with
beliefs deemed unacceptable.
An entire generation of young academics must tailor their work to a
prescribed agenda or face professional purgatory. Even professors with
tenure are no longer safe as elite Leftist-run universities continue to
fire and threaten long standing scholars over ``wrong-think.''
American postsecondary education thrives when people from different
backgrounds and perspectives are encouraged to express themselves. To
foster a healthy environment for intellectual diversity, the American
university system needs to focus on the purpose of education: The
pursuit of truth.
This committee should explore possible legislative avenues to
create the right incentives to remind universities of the trust we give
them when we fund them through our tax dollars. That trust is to not be
an adversary to our sacred free speech rights but to protect it. My
colleagues and I have the delicate job of considering how to ensure
compliance through enforcement mechanisms that our law currently lacks.
The role of the American government has always been to defend the
freedom of its citizens. This committee will not and our fellow
Americans should not look the other way as millions of students and
great minds are silenced, disinvited, or forced to adopt beliefs
antithetical to the Constitution because of a vocal minority of
bullies. We are working to return to the good ole days when our
students were taught to say with confidence ``Let's Respectfully Agree
to Disagree'' and continue to debate another day.
With that, I look forward to the hearing today and yield to the
Ranking Member.
______

Mr. Scott. Thank you, Chairman Owens. Good morning. We can
all agree that free speech is a constitutional right, and the
bedrock of our democracy. For decades, colleges and
universities have been on the front lines of protecting and
advancing that right.
The majority is not apparently interested in protecting all
speech. Instead, today's hearing is an example of MAGA
republicans hijacking our shared values of free speech, and
waging a one-sided campaign to protect conservative speech.
MAGA republicans and the far right news media are peddling
empty catch phrases like cancel culture, and woke, to fuel mass
hysteria around an alleged conspiracy by institutions to
degrade conservative free speech.
This deliberately hides the real current threat to free
speech on college campuses today, and that is republican
politician's censorship of curriculum. For example, new laws in
Mississippi, South Dakota, and Florida censor how public
colleges can teach about racial justice. A new law in Tennessee
bans public colleges from including ideas about race and sex in
any seminar, training or workshop.
A new law in Florida proposed a ban on majors and minors
related to race and gender, and intersectionality studies at
public colleges. It also bans any initiative, such as bringing
a speaker to a campus related to diversity, equity, and
inclusion. It is particularly rich that today the committee
republicans say they are concerned about diversity of thought
and free speech, when just last week, House republicans passed
legislation to ban books and sensor curriculum in K through 12
schools, actions that are contrary to our core democratic
principles.
I will say it again, the real threat to the First Amendment
is MAGA republicans extreme education agenda. Regrettably, as
republican leaders in red states increasingly sensor your free
speech and learning, the incidents of harassment toward
marginalized student groups have also increased. In 2019, the
Anti-Defamation League recorded 630 incidents of white
supremist activities on college campuses.
In other words, republican politicians are weaponizing the
First Amendment to turn the clock back when our higher
education system defends only conservative speech, and
undermine support for students most in need.
When marginalized students, those who are reasonably
fearful about their safety and security, when these
marginalized students petition their college administrators for
help, they are often met with inaction. The First Amendment is
not an excuse for inaction. Our schools have duties under Title
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits
discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national origin
in any ``program or activity receiving Federal financial
assistance.''
In fact, the Department of Education has illustrated how a
college or university can live up to both its requirements
under the First Amendment and under Title VI, saying and I
quote, ``The fact that discriminatory harassment involves
speech, however, does not relieve the school of its obligation
to respond if speech contributes to a hostile environment.
Schools can protect students from such harassment without
running afoul of students and staff First Amendment rights.
Simply put, we can uphold the Constitution while also
protecting the safety of our students. While republican
politicians waste valuable time in political theater and
culture wars, democrats are continuing to build on the
victories we have achieved alongside the Biden Harris
administration to meaningfully support students and families.
For example, last Congress democrats passed, without a
single republican vote, House or Senate, the American Rescue
Plan Act, which provided institutions of higher education with
dedicated funding to help students avoid hunger and
homelessness and other hardships during the COVID-19 pandemic.
This Congress, the committee democrats have reintroduced
the Lowering Obstacles to Achievement Now, the LOAN Act, which
would help address gaps in our student loan system to reduce
the need for students to take out crushing student loans, and
support current and future borrowers.
I hope my colleagues will join democrats in addressing the
real challenges facing students and families, and reject the
republicans dangerous crusade against academic freedom. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.[The statement of Ranking
Member Scott follows:]

Statement of Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott, Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Higher Education and Workforce Development

Thank you, Chairman Owens, and good morning.
We can all agree that free speech is a constitutional right and
bedrock of our democracy. For decades, colleges and universities have
been on the front lines of protecting and advancing that right.
The Majority is not interested in protecting all speech. Instead,
today's hearing is an example of MAGA Republicans hijacking our shared
value of free speech and waging a one-sided campaign to protect
conservative speech.
MAGA Republicans and the far-right news media are peddling empty
catchphrases like ``cancel culture'' and ``woke'' to fuel mass hysteria
around an alleged conspiracy by institutions to degrade conservative
free speech.
This deliberately hides the real, current threat to free speech on
campuses today-that is Republican politicians' censorship of college
curriculum.
For example, new laws in Mississippi, South Dakota, and Florida
censor how public colleges can teach about racial injustice.
A new law in Tennessee bans public colleges from including ideas
about race and sex in any seminar, training, or workshop.
A new Florida proposal would ban majors and minors related to race,
gender, and intersectionality studies at public colleges. It also bans
any initiatives-such as brining a speaker to campus-related to
diversity, equity, or inclusion.
It is particularly rich that, today, Committee Republicans say they
are concerned about ``diversity of thought'' and ``free speech'' when,
just last week, House Republicans passed legislation to ban books and
censor curriculum in K-12 schools-actions that are contrary to our core
democratic principles.
I will say it again: the real threat to the First Amendment is MAGA
Republicans' extreme education agenda.
Regrettably, as Republican leaders in red states increasingly
censor speech and learning, incidents of harassment towards
marginalized student groups have also increased. In 2019, the Anti-
Defamation League recorded 630 incidents of white supremacist activity
on college campuses.
In other words, Republican politicians are weaponizing the First
Amendment to turn back the clock on our higher education system, defend
only conservative speech, and undermine support for the students who
are most in need.
When these marginalized students--who are rightfully fearful about
their safety and security--petition their college administrators for
help, they are often met with inaction. The First Amendment is not an
excuse for inaction.
Our schools have duties under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, or
national origin in ``any program or activity receiving Federal
financial assistance.''
In fact, the Department of Education has illustrated how a college
or university can live up to both its requirements under the First
Amendment and under Title VI, saying-and I quote: ``The fact that
discriminatory harassment involves speech, however, does not relieve
the school of its obligation to respond if the speech contributes to a
hostile environment. Schools can protect students from such harassment
without running afoul of students' and staff First Amendment right.''
Simply put, we can uphold the Constitution while also protecting
the safety of our students.
While Republican politicians waste valuable time on political
theatre and culture wars, Democrats are continuing to build on the
victories we have achieved alongside the Biden-Harris administration to
meaningfully support students and families.
For example, last Congress, Democrats passed--without a single
Republican vote in the House or Senate--the American Rescue Plan Act,
which provided institutions of higher education with dedicated funding
to help students avoid hunger and homelessness, and other hardships
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
This Congress, Committee Democrats reintroduced the Lowering
Obstacles to Achievement Now (LOAN) Act, which would help address the
gaps in our flawed student loan system to reduce the need for students
to take out crushing student loans and support current and future
borrowers.
I hope my colleagues will join Democrats in addressing the real
challenges facing students and families and rejecting Republicans'
dangerous crusade against academic freedom.
______

Chairman Owens. Thank you so much for that. Pursuant to
Committee Rule 8(c), all members who wish to insert written
statements into the record may do so by submitting them to the
committee clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5
p.m. 14 days after the date of this hearing, which is April 12,
2023.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days to allow such statements and other extraneous material
referenced during the hearing to be submitted with the official
record. I ask unanimous consent that the committee members who
are not assigned to this subcommittee be permitted to
participate in this hearing consistent with the committee rules
and practice.
I will now turn to the introduction of our distinguished
witnesses. Ms. Cherise Trump is Executive Director to Speech
First, and is in the role as the host of Speech First podcast,
Well Said. She brings extensive experience working directly
with college students thanks to Speech First.
Mr. Josiah Joner is a sophomore studying economics at
Stanford University. He is Executive Editor for the Stanford
Review and has written on the various issues, including free
speech on college campus.
Suzanne Nossel has been the Chief Executive Officer of PEN
America since 2013, and is the author of Dare to Speak:
Defending Free Speech for All.
Ilya Shapiro is currently servicing as Director of
Constitutional Studies at the Manhattan Institute. He has
served in previous roles of Vice President of Cato Institute,
Director of Cato's Robert A. Levy Center for the Constitution
Studies, and publisher of the Cato Supreme Court Review.
Thank you again for your time for coming to meet before us.
We thank all the witnesses for being here, and look forward to
your testimony. Pursuant to committee rules, I would ask that
you each limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute summary of
your written statement. I would also like to remind the
witnesses to be aware of their responsibilities to provide
accurate information to the subcommittee. I wouldd like first
to recognize Cherise Trump.

STATEMENT OF CHERISE TRUMP, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
SPEECH FIRST, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Ms. Trump. Thank you, Chairman Owens and Ranking Member
Scott, and thank you members of the subcommittee for the
opportunity to testify today. My name is Cherise Trump. I am
the Executive Director of Speech First, a free speech advocacy
organization that has successfully sued colleges over their
anti-speech policies and won.
Over the past year alone, I have visited dozens of campuses
and spoken with thousands of students. Those students face an
ever-growing, ever-present threat on campuses. That is
administrators working to chill and silence their speech.
Our universities are failing miserably at the one thing
they are being paid exorbitant amounts to do. They are failing
to educate students. Last week, I was on one of North
Carolina's university campuses, and there was a room of about
50 students, and I asked them to raise their hand if they read
the Constitution, and only five raised their hands.
This is something that is evident, that the universities
are failing our students. I will quickly mention two policies
that are being used to target and squash unpopular speech on
campuses. First are harassment policies. We all know that Title
9 regulates discrimination on the basis of sex and education,
but you may not realize that there is no limit to how many
harassment policies and discrimination policies can actually
exist on campus.
Often times universities have multiple. They take it upon
themselves to adopt even broader definitions of harassment and
discrimination. These policies completely disregard the Federal
guidelines that are meant to strike a balance between
protecting student's First Amendment rights, while also
protecting students.
For example, we have seen universities define in harassment
offensive speech, something that threatens someone's mental
health. Statements that might be humiliating or micro
aggressions.
These are all Constitutionally protected forms of speech. I
ask you, can you define what threatens someone's mental health?
Can you provide an objective standard for evaluating whether a
statement is humiliating? Can you actually define a micro
aggression? Students can not either. How can one expect to
enforce a policy that uses such subjective and overbroad terms?
Second, and perhaps even more nefarious are biased
reporting systems. Bias reporting systems are anonymous
reporting systems that solicit reports from students on one
another for incidents of bias. Bias can be defined as anything
the university wants. Often times they define a bias incident
as statements that are unfair or prejudicial.
Jokes, stereotyping, micro aggressions, not using gender
inclusive language. In some cases, even offending someone's
political affiliation is a reportable offense. Once a student
is reported, they often do not get to face their accuser. They
are asked to meet with a member of the administration, which
can often lead to writing a letter of apology and sensitivity
training.
Government agencies soliciting anonymous reports from
citizens that lead to re-education. What does this sound like?
In 2022, Speech First surveyed 821 public and private
universities, and it found that 56 percent had biased reporting
systems in place. This is a 200 percent increase over the last
5 years.
Our lawsuits at Speech First challenge the university
policies that target and discipline students for their
constitutionally protected speech. The First Amendment should
be the guide that universities use when deciding whether and
how to regulate student speech.
It is not. Universities, instead try to find ways to target
and suppress uncomfortable speech. Their stated goals are
diversity and inclusion, safety, and other euphemisms for
discrimination. It seems the term diversity applies to
everything except for diversity of thought.
Currently, diversity, equity and inclusion permeates every
aspect of a college experience. In 2022, Speech First obtained
freshman orientation materials from almost every major State
university. Only one-third of the universities even mentioned
free speech or viewpoint diversity in their orientation
materials. This emphasis on DEI and freshman orientations is
not an oversight. It is intentional, and it is clearly designed
to create insecurities where there were none before.
Take for example, the definition of racism that
administrators at UNLV gave the students. Racism, they say, is,
``A socially constructed racial hierarchy that privileges white
people.'' This is something that is very clear to what the
universities are prioritizing. In short, students are operating
in a surveillance-like state. They are actively censoring
themselves, out of fear of espousing the ``wrong'' opinions.
They do not know what could be reported for, so they choose
to stay silent. Thankfully the law is on our side. Speech First
has one in the Fifth, Sixth and 11th Circuits on issue of
biased reporting systems, and in the Fifth and 11th Circuits on
harassment policies. All of the policies I have mentioned today
are designed to create an environment of control, not safety.
I can give you plenty of examples of students who currently
feel unsafe on college campuses because of these anti-speech
and discriminatory environments that are encouraged by the
policies that I outlined today. Keep in mind these are the same
students who will be future leaders, litigators, judges,
national security advisers, and tech CEOs and bankers.
What outlooks and habits are they developing on college
campuses that they will bring with them in the professional
world. Will we end up with leaders who are either
disconcertingly compliant, and avoid confrontation, or leaders
who have totalitarian penchants, encouraged by all those who
agree with them?
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Cherise Trump follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Owens. Thank you so much, Ms. Trump. I would like
to next recognize Josiah Joner.

STATEMENT OF MR. JOSIAH JONER, EXECUTIVE EDITOR, THE
STANFORD REVIEW, STANFORD, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Joner. Chairman Owens, Ranking Member Scott, and
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me here
today to share my perspective as a college student on free
speech in our universities.
My name is Josiah Joner. I am a sophomore at Stanford
University, and I am an editor at the Stanford Review. There
are countless examples from college campuses across the country
where students and administrators have suppressed free speech
on campuses. Recently, protestors and a high-ranking
administrator at Stanford Law School prevented Judge Kyle
Duncan from speaking.
I covered this incident with my colleagues in the Stanford
Review. These are the institutions currently educating the next
generation of world leaders, and without a basic respect for
free speech on college campuses, the integrity of both these
institutions and the future leaders will slowly degrade.
Unfortunately, these incidents that suppress free speech
have become an all too common occurrence on college campuses.
On Thursday, March 9, Judge Kyle Duncan of the Fifth Circuit
Court of Appeals was invited to speak at Stanford Law School by
the Stanford Federalist Society. Days before the event,
however, the protesting students asked the Federalist Society
to cancel the event, or move it to an online format because of
their concerns with Judge Duncan's previous statements and
actions.
These students posted fliers that condemned Judge Duncan
and called out the individual members of the Federalist
Society's Board, saying that they should be ashamed. Then, on
the day of Judge Duncan's Stanford speech, close to 100
students protested Judge Duncan, proceeding to enter the event
and shout at him during his remarks.
The student protestors heckled Judge Duncan profusely,
preventing the judge from speaking in what was one of the
latest examples of the heckler's veto, used to suppress free
speech on our campus. They held obscene signs, and shouted
obscene remarks, and Judge Duncan was not able to deliver his
lecture.
While the protests were led by dozens of students, at the
center of the incident was a university administrator. Stanford
Law School's Associate Dean for Diversity, Equity and
Inclusion. Frustrated with the disruptive students, Judge
Duncan asked for an administrator to hopefully restore normalcy
to the room and allow him to speak.
After his request for an administrator, Dean Tirien
Steinbach stepped up to the podium and pulled out her prepared
remarks. In a 6-minute speech, Dean Steinbach spoke freely,
without students heckling her speech. Dean Steinbach began by
condemning Judge Duncan's harmful viewpoints. Calling him out
for his stances that she disagrees with.
In her speech, the Dean affirmed her supposed commitment to
free speech, but she then continued to contradict her own
words, looking out to the crowd of protestors, those who were
holding obscene signs and heckling the judge. Dean Steinbach
said, ``I look out and I do not ask what is going on here. I
look out and I say I am glad this is going on here.''
Dean Steinbach condoned and encouraged the protests that
silenced Judge Duncan, and her speech was met with applause
from the protestors at the end. Federal Marshals had to step in
and escort Judge Duncan from the event, and he was effectively
prevented from exercising his freedom of speech under both the
First Amendment and Stanford's own policies.
The incident at Stanford Law School is a very concerning
example of students destroying a speaker's right to share their
beliefs on campus. However, most concerning from this incident
was the active role of a university administrator in violating
Judge Duncan's free speech. The incident demonstrates a
concerning trend in colleges, the hiring of administrators who
are not committed to the principles of free speech, or even the
university's own policies regarding free speech.
Many of these university administrators, like Dean
Steinbach, a diversity, equity and inclusion administrator,
have taken a role in universities that places a greater
emphasis on restricting what is and what is not acceptable,
rather than promoting diversity of thought and free speech,
which spurs a functioning society, and rigorous intellectual
debate.
It is because of incidents like this, and administrators
like Dean Steinbach, that students, both conservative and
liberal at Stanford and college campuses around the country,
are too scared to speak up in the classroom and share their
viewpoints. It has instilled angst into each student for fear
of sharing their opinions.
Anything they say might also be viciously condemned by
these same university administrators. The best option is to
merely stay silent and keep one's opinions to themselves. While
these administrators claim to create more open and inclusive
environments, they are in fact contributing to just the
opposite. A culture which signals conformity and destroys
academic debate because of fear of sharing one's opinions.
Debate has been expelled from the classroom and forced to
die altogether, or take refuge in a few remaining groups that
still offer forums for open and free discussion. We at the
Stanford Review are one of those few groups on campus still
dedicated to the principle of free speech, and rigorous
intellectual debate. We are concerned over the precedent this
sets for Stanford and other colleges across the country.
This environment has exiled free expression and debate
outside of the classroom. The very spot where it is most needed
and essential. It is my hope that future students, that our
colleges do not continue to experience the degradation of free
speech, and face the threats that may come with sharing their
opinions. This is not a conservative issue, and this is not a
liberal issue.
This issue of free speech is at the core of what defines
our society in the United States, and without it,,these
institutions will fail. Congress now has an opportunity to
ensure our institutions preserve First Amendment rights and
protect free speech on college campuses. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Joner follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Owens. Thank you so much for that. I would like to
now recognize Suzanne Nossel.

STATEMENT OF SUZANNE NOSSEL, CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, PEN AMERICA

Ms. Nossel. Chairman Owens, Ranking Member Scott, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. I am the daughter of immigrants,
a mother of a college freshman and high school sophomore, an
attorney by training, and a proud American who served in two
Presidential administrations.
PEN America, which I have led for a decade, stands at the
intersection of literature and human rights to protect free
expression worldwide. We are a non-profit, non-partisan
organization with an unwavering commitment to free speech, a
principle that underpins democracy, at a cause above politics.
We at PEN America worked on issues related to campus speech
since 2016. University campus is the incubator of democratic
citizenship, and the breeding ground for leaders in every
sector of society. If we do not get free speech and open
discourse right on campus, we will not get it right in the
media, the courts, or out on the streets.
Our work in this area grew from concerns that a rising
generation was turning its back on the principles of free
speech. We learned of lectures canceled, or shouted down,
faculty targeted by threats and harassments for things they
said, and receiving tepid support, and sometimes none at all
from their institutions.
Students often lack awareness of the First Amendment, or
the precepts of academic freedom, sometimes believing that the
best answer to noxious ideas is to drown them out, or to call
on university authorities to shut them down.
At PEN America, we argue that the essential drive to render
American campuses more diverse, equitable, and inclusive need
not, and must not come at the expense of robust, uncompromising
protections for free speech and academic freedom.
I have written a book, Dare to Speak: Defending Free Speech
for All, which centers on 20 principles for how we can live
together in our diverse, digitized, and divided society without
curbing free speech. Essential insight of our work in this area
is the idea that an open campus must uphold the ability of all
students to participate freely and fully.
If some students, by virtue of their background, gender,
race, nationality, religion, or political views, feel hindered
from speaking up in class or voicing their opinions, the
marketplace of ideas suffers. Sometimes calls to curtain or
punish speech are born out of a frustration that campuses, or
society at large, have not done enough to address the lingering
vestiges of racial, gender and other forms of exclusion.
While such efforts to suppress speech are misguided, I
believe they cannot be effectively addressed without looking at
what motivates them. Since 2021, alongside these challenges, we
have confronted a new threat to open discourse on campus. We
have documented proposed and enacted State legislation,
curtailing what can be taught and studied in college and
university classrooms.
There are seven laws across seven states that we classify
as educational gag orders, affecting higher education. We
define educational gag orders as laws that explicitly limit
what can be taught and studied on campus. As of March 16, there
were an additional 24 higher education bills pending in 15
states across the country.
The wording of these gag orders is deliberately vague. It
casts a willful chill on a wide swath of speech as faculty and
administrators struggle to understand where the lines are
drawn. Collectively, these bills are liberal in their attempt
to legislate, but certain ideas and concepts are out of bounds.
They are intended not to keep speech open, but to put
universities on notice that they are being watched, and will
face the consequences if their decisions fall afoul of the
politics.
Indeed, in pushing back against orthodoxies, the proponents
of these measures have embraced and even surpassed the very
tactics they claim to decry, putting the weight not only of
social pressure, but of government power behind efforts to
repress certain viewpoints. This year we are also seeing a
State of alarming new tactics being introduced to curtain open
discourse on campus. These include the takeover of the public
New College of Florida by a group of out of State trustees, and
the advancement of HB 999 in Florida, which would abolish
certain courses of study.
Those who believe in the First Amendment understand that
its essence lies in restricting the power of government to
mettle in the realm of ideas, not inserting the heavy hand of
the State to dictate what can and cannot be taught. Escaping
this escalating tit for tat battle of assaults on free speech
on U.S. campuses will demand leadership.
University presidents need to insist and ensure that all
viewpoints, left and right alike, get a fair hearing on campus.
They need to speak up and resist intrusive legislation that
micromanages curriculum, and undercuts academic freedom.
Efforts to foster diversity, equity, inclusion on campus,
should span the gamut of individual differences--racial,
socioeconomic, religious, ethnic, ideological, gender based,
political and more.
We also need to introduce the norms and ideals of free
speech to all students and teach them how to uphold it, whether
in the lecture hall, or while mounting a protest.
The intensifying battle for control over free expression in
education should worry us all. The greatest casualty of this
battle may be neither progressive nor conservative ideas, but
the principal of free speech itself. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify, and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Nossel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Owens. Thank you, also. I would like to last
recognize Ilya Shapiro.

STATEMENT OF MR. ILYA SHAPIRO, DIRECTOR OF CONSTITUTIONAL
STUDIES, MANHATTAN INSTITUTE, NEW YORK, NEW YORK

Mr. Shapiro. Thanks, Chairman Owens and distinguished
members. I actually agreed without 90 percent of what Suzanne
just said, but thanks for this chance to share my thoughts
about the State of campus free speech.
I have long been a First Amendment advocate but more
recently had a lived experience in this area. Just over a year
ago, I had my most direct and acute exposure to higher ed
culture that is hostile to civil discourse. Indeed, shut up was
the response in more obscene terms, that I got from students at
UC Hastings when I tried to speak there just over a year ago
about my last book, Supreme Disorder.
They prevented the event from taking place, chanting and
banging as if it was to occupy Wall Street. Applying the bad
faith lens to a poorly phrased tweet, activists had judged me a
racist misogynist, and my expertise illegitimate. I was
suspended from my new position at Georgetown, pending an
investigation into whether I violated university policies on
harassment and discrimination.
Now those who shut down my event wanted to hear neither my
reasoning about the President's Supreme Court criteria, nor my
broader analysis of the confirmation battle to come. The
protestors also castigated their own law school for even
allowing me to speak, never mind that Hastings would be
violating the First Amendment if it disapproved speakers based
on the content of their speech.
You would think that law students should have a greater
appreciation for open engagement with provocative ideas than
undergrads. After all, lawyers face much harder situations than
bad tweets. My experience was no isolated incident, not even
for March 2022. The following week, a similar thing happened at
Yale, at a panel bringing together lawyers from the left and
the right that agreed on little other than the importance of
free speech.
Dean Heather Gerken basically buried her head in the sand.
Then it happened again at Michigan, when students obstructed a
debate on Texas's Heartbeat bill. The only thing these events
had in common was that speakers presented ideas that some did
not like. The trend of canceling speakers instead of
challenging them, represents the loss of grace in our culture
more broadly.
The desire to ascribe maligned motives to one's political
enemies, to think of them as evil, not merely wrong. As
American society is secularized, politics has replaced religion
to fill our spiritual needs. In that context, it is easy to see
one's political opponents as heretics. Then of course their
sacrilege is not worth hearing.
It will take real courage from political leaders and
cultural influencers to get us back to a place where we can
disagree without wanting to ruin the lives of the people with
whom we disagree. As for me, after a 4-month investigation,
Dean Bill Trainer cleared me on the technicality that I was not
an employee when I tweeted. The report from the Diversity
Office set me up for discipline the next time that I
transgressed progressive orthodoxy.
Any comment that anyone found offensive would have gotten
me in trouble, such as a opining that racial preferences in
admissions were unconstitutional. The freedom to speak is no
freedom at all, if it makes an exception for speech someone
doesn't like.
Georgetown applies even these so-called principals
inconsistently. Contrast my case with many examples of
professors tweeting much worse things from the left, castrating
white men who supported Kavanaugh for example. It is free
speech for thee, not for me.
Strong policies are not enough if university leaders are
not willing to stand up to those who demand censorship.
Proliferating DEI offices, and orthodoxies that stifles
intellectual diversity, undermines equal opportunity and
excludes dissenting voices. It is quite overwhelming.
Even the deans of elite law schools buck these political
commissars at their peril. What Georgetown subjected me to--
would have subjected me to had I stayed, is a heckler's veto
that leads to a star chamber. I made a noisy exit, and I am
using this platform to shine a light on the rot in academia. I
am generally long on America, but we may have passed the point
of no return in terms of the illiberal takeover of higher
education.
DEI offices have broadened terms like harassment and
discrimination not to promote welcoming environments, but to
enforce progressive ideology. This is not the decades old
complaint about from conservatives about liberals taking over
the faculty lounge.
Wherever college president's stand up for free speech, the
mob disburses, but most officials are careerist bureaucrats.
Deans like Trainer and Gerken are not woke radicals. They are
spineless cowards, unwilling to confront the illiberal inmates
who have taken over their institutions. Schools must instill a
culture of respect for opposing views and end compelled speech
in the form of diversity statements.
It can not all be done from within, so we need external
controls from State legislators and attorneys general, as well
as congressional oversight tied to Federal funding. We also
need exogenous shocks, like the boycott of hiring judicial
clerks from Yale, led by Judge Jim Ho, which I think he should
now extend to Stanford.
There is still a long way to go before universities return
to their mission of seeking truth and knowledge, and law
schools should return to their goal of teaching future lawyers
to uphold the rule of law. The battle has been joined, thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shapiro follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Owens. Thank you so much. Under Committee Rule 9,
we will now question the witnesses under the 5-minute rule. I
will begin this process. Ms. Trump, the title of this hearing
is Diversity of Thought, Protecting Free Speech on College
Campuses. As we have heard today, universities and their
administrators are increasingly focused on diversity, but only
diversity in a narrowly defined way.
We have seen a startling lack of philosophical diversity,
in some ways college administrators should promote more aspects
of diversity such as viewpoint diversity with the students. Do
you agree with that premise?
Mrs. Trump. That universities should promote more viewpoint
diversity? Absolutely. Yes.
Chairman Owens. Yes.
Mrs. Trump. There are ways to do it you know, the
universities could actually teach students about viewpoint
diversity, which is something they often leave out of their
freshman orientation materials, or often do not require
students to discuss in the classroom.
A lot of universities actually mandate that students take
DEI classes, diversity, equity, inclusion classes in order to
graduate, which often will talk about anti-racism, trigger
warnings, social movements, but they usually will leave out any
kind of viewpoint diversity or free speech conversation.
That is usually not a mandated requirement in order to
graduate. The first step would be for universities to actually
start trying to enforce this, because administrators really do
paint the environment and paint the picture on the campus. You
can see a lot of examples for what the administrators believe,
and what their political agendas are affecting and influencing
students.
Often times you will see something like what we saw at
Colorado State University, where they demonized the concept of
free speech by having a sign that says if you, or someone you
know, has experienced a free speech event, then here are 17
counseling services we can provide you for.
This is clearly when students, when universities are not
prioritizing these concepts, students are not going to
prioritize them either.
Chairman Owens. Very good. Thank you so much. Mr. Shapiro,
in an instance such as the school--I am sorry, instances such
as what happened at Stanford University, animosity among young
people to what our country's founding principles. You described
the actions of DEI staff as enforcing orthodoxy that stifles
intellectual diversity, and denies equal opportunity, and
excludes dissenting voices.
From your perspective, how is the increasing prevalence of
these DEI beliefs impact student's likelihood that they will
fully embrace the principles of free speech?
Mr. Shapiro. The way that these DEI bureaucracies
indoctrinate false values, a sense of those magic words DEI,
puts them in tension with speech, which they need not be, as
Suzanne explained, or as the letter from Stanford Law Dean
Jenny Martinez explained, how free expression, civil discourse
is essential if we actually want appreciation for diversity and
inclusion and all of those good things.
The problem is these post-modern theories about
restructuring society along different social hierarchies,
dismantling structures, oppressor and oppress classes, all of
these weird things that have migrated back all of a sudden,
subvert the classical values of speech, civil discourse, due
process and everything else that we are supposed to believe in,
not just in higher ed, but in America more broadly.
Chairman Owens. Okay. How has the university setting
tending to influence our culture at large?
Mr. Shapiro. Yes. We used to think that what happens on
campuses, well that is just those crazy kids. Once they grow up
they will be exposed to the real world, things are going to
change. Well, as I discussed in the Wall Street Journal weekend
interview that dropped last night, all of a sudden these
students are growing up and occupying positions in society all
over the place.
You know, I focus most on law schools, and that is really
alarming because those are the gatekeepers of our political and
legal institutions of the future, the Federal judges, the
corporate suites, and legal offices. If they do not believe the
ideas that they do not like are worthy of hearing, then our
society, our whole constitutional order is lost.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I appreciate that. I now
recognize Ranking Member Scott for his questions for the
witnesses.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Joner,
who--you mentioned the situation that happened at a law school.
What was the official response from the law school to the
Dean's behavior?
Mr. Joner. Thank you, Congressman. President Tessier-
Lavigne and Stanford, President of Stanford University, and
Stanford Law School Dean Jenny Martinez issued an apology to
Judge Duncan a few days after the incident occurred. I commend
the apology, and I think it was a well written response.
Then just a few days ago, about a week ago, Dean Martinez
released a ten page letter to the Law School and the greater
public at large that apologized for the incident, and talked
about how they were going to--committed herself to free speech,
and I commend her letter. I thought it was excellent.
Mr. Scott. Was she suspended?
Mr. Joner. Yes. The Dean is currently on leave.
Mr. Scott. That was the official response from the
university. Ms. Nossel, is there a difference between unruly
students and State policy?
Ms. Nossel. Thank you, Congressman. Yes there is, and that
is what we are--excuse me, there is a major difference, and
that is what concerns me so much. You know, we can agree on
this panel on many of the same concerns about lack of grounding
among students and principles of the First Amendment and
freedom of speech, the need to educate them, the need to
reinforce the idea that diversity, equity, inclusion need not,
and most not be at odds with robust protections for free
speech.
The minute you insert the heavy hand of the State that you
resort to statist solutions, and that legislation into the
realm of the university, a realm that I think we all agree
should be the zone of scholarship of free inquiry, where we
want faculty. We are talking about the importance of tenure
that faculty be protected from reprisal.
To enact legislation that cordons off certain concepts that
says this may not be taught, if you venture into this, you may
get into trouble, you maybe face discipline. That, to me, as an
American, honestly, is very dangerous. That is the kind of
tactic that we see in repressive countries around the world
where there is no buffer zone between the hand of the State,
and what happens on a university campus.
In our system we have faculty, we have university
leadership that creates that zone of protection for the free
flow of ideas. We are not under the thumb of government at
American universities. Look, I think we agree to a large degree
on the diagnosis of the problem, and the question really
becomes what is the solution? Is the solution, you know, here
in the United States of America, with our First Amendment where
we stay the hand of government when it comes to the realm of
ideas, are we really going to break with that, and endorse
legislation to try to adjudicate what can and can't be said on
campus?
I think that is a very dangerous route to go down, and we
have already talked about better solutions including training
and the reinforcement of policies that can uphold the value of
free speech on campus without departing from the First
Amendment.
Mr. Scott. Now, do these laws that have passed limiting
what can be taught, and that kind of thing, does that have a
partisan tinge to it? Does it have a partisan tinge to it?
Ms. Nossel. It does. You know that is a serious concern, a
principle is not a principle if it is not applied to all
equally. To pick out and cherry pick certain ideas, certain
course materials, certain theories and say these are out of
bounds, that is the core of what the First Amendment protects
and gets. Viewpoint based discrimination, the notion that the
government would be listing out particular topics, subjects of
discussion, aspects of a curriculum, and saying that these are
out of bounds.
You may--some here in this room may endorse what is on
those lists today, but what is going to be on those lists
tomorrow?
Mr. Scott. Does that have a partisan tinge to it,
republican or democrat?
Ms. Nossel. It is republican legislatures across the
country that have enacted these laws and tabled these
proposals. I am not aware of any proposal emanating from
democratic legislators.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Is it possible for unchecked freedom
of speech to create a hostile environment in violation of Title
VI?
Ms. Nossel. Can unchecked freedom of speech create a
hostile environment? No. What creates a hostile environment is
discriminatory harassment, yes, that can be the origin of
hostile environment. It typically requires action, not just
speech.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
the Congresswoman from Indiana.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses for being here today. I am a mom of a college
freshman with two teenagers getting ready to prepare for
college. I am certainly glad that this committee is considering
this important topic. Free speech on college campuses where
students should have the opportunity to think out loud, voice
opinions, that is very important.
Indiana has nearly 60 colleges and universities across the
State, including Indiana University in my district. I am
certainly very interested in this conversation. One thing I
have heard from some students, they are fearing speaking out
about their true opinions in the papers that they write for
professors. In the things that they say in class.
One conservative student who attends a university in
Indiana, not IU, a school in Indiana, commented that he was not
about to expose himself as a conservative to his professors for
fear that his grades would suffer, and that would somehow
impact his future, so that is something I am really concerned
about.
Another concern is when we were touring colleges, we
visited a school that had 200 student groups, and not a single
conservative group among them. That leaves no opportunity for
conservative students to organize. Some of the issue may be
that there is not a professor willing to sponsor a conservative
group on campus.
We hosted a series of roundtables earlier this month. We
discussed this faculty sponsor requirement for students to form
new groups on campus. I would hate to think that there are
these barriers for students to convene and organize. Do you
think Ms. Trump, is this an issue that would rise to the level
of discrimination of these student groups if they are unable to
organize for lack of a sponsor?
Mrs. Trump. On some of the stuff that you said earlier with
regards to the fear that students are feeling, being able to
express their political viewpoints, that is why these clubs,
these conservative clubs are actually so vital and important to
students when they do want to speak out about some of their
viewpoints and ideas.
I think it is really important to recognize that the fear
is pretty widespread on campuses. Faculty members have told me
that they intentionally do not include open discussion in their
classrooms anymore because they are afraid they might have to
step in and make a comment. Students have told me on the same
vein of what you mentioned earlier, a Texas student told me
that he does not wear cowboy boots to class because that is
associated with conservatives.
He knows that if his professor found out he was a
conservative, he fears that he would have retaliation, via his
grades. There is a serious concern, and I can keep going on
various examples, but to answer your question more directly
about whether this is viewpoint discrimination.
The policies that are in place on campuses that are
creating these environments are in the vein of viewpoint
discrimination. Most students and professors are afraid to
associate themselves with conservative organizations, so they
often times will go to these meetings in secret, and professors
are usually unwilling to be faculty advisers for clubs, which
is usually a requirement.
That is something that once a university starts to be more
open toward various viewpoints, and stop discriminating, then
maybe you are going to get more conservative professors who are
willing to represent these clubs.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you. To Mr. Shapiro, one of the things
that we have also discussed is whether this committee should
consider a student's bill of rights. We have just passed the
Parent's Bill of Rights, where we would reaffirm a student's
freedom of speech rights on campus. I want to thank you for
your work at the Manhattan Institute.
You said something in your written testimony that I want to
highlight here. The problem goes far beyond speech on campus,
worrying as developments here are for the next generation. It
is even more important to have a national reckoning about our
inability to discuss controversial issues without canceling
those with whom we disagree.
I certainly could not agree more. I think it has been a
common theme that many on the right have been willing to go and
have those debates where you do not have the same engagement
from our counterparts on the left. You mentioned jokingly,
maybe engaging with Whoopi Goldberg on Joe Rogan.
I am wondering has she taken you up on that yet?
Mr. Shapiro. She has not, alas. The offer is still open, or
maybe Bill Maher, if you are listening, I would be happy to go
on your show to talk about this stuff. Look, there is
absolutely a role for Congress here, and especially for State
legislatures, particularly with respect to public institutions.
It is not that any legislation in this area is a slippery slope
to authoritarianism.
You can absolutely require recipients of higher ed funds to
certify they will not violate the Constitution. They will
preserve the already codified sense of Congress to protect
student speech and freedom of association.
Ms. Houchin. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
Congressman Takano.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Nossel, I read in
your statement that you said, ``We've decried student protests
that went too far, such as at Yale, Stanford, and Georgetown.''
I am assuming the Stanford reference is the same incident that
happened at Stanford that Mr. Joner was speaking of?
Ms. Nossel. Yes. That is right.
Mr. Takano. You regard that as an incident, as a protest
that went too far.
Ms. Nossel. Yes. I think it was an attempt at exercise of a
heckler's veto, and I think the administration did not perform
its proper responsibility to ensure that this invited speaker
was given the opportunity to express his views, and that those
who came to hear him had a chance to do so.
You know, that for us is a free speech organization's
concern.
Mr. Takano. Based on Mr. Joner's testimony I would agree
with you, and I would agree that universities must be protected
zones with buffers all around them, so that they are true
places of inquiry, where freedom of thought and a diversity of
opinion can exist.
Let me switch, let me kind of go to a related topic, I
noticed that you have an expertise in human rights, Amnesty
International, Human Rights Watch, that you have done a lot of
research specific to Hong Kong and China, free speech issues.
Is it fair to say that the political authorities, or the
politicians, or the political authorities in China have the
ability to impose a curriculum in institutions of higher ed?
Ms. Nossel. Absolutely. The State controlled institutions.
In Hong Kong, traditionally, there was a long tradition of
academic freedom, and those universities were globally
respected, and there were exchanges of scholars from around the
world. That really has changed. It is kind of a free setting in
with the passage of the National Security Law and the
imposition of a much stronger hand from Beijing.
That kind of leeway in Hong Kong to talk about issues like
press freedom, human rights, and dissent has diminished.
Mr. Takano. There was a before the basic law, when the
basic law was in effect, the democratic institutions were
strong, more robust freedom of inquiry at universities, basic
law has been undermined. The CCP of China asserts its dominance
in Hong Kong and you just described what happened at the
universities.
What kind of affect did this have on the students and the
professors at Chinese universities in Hong Kong?
Ms. Nossel. Yes. It is chilling. Some professors have left.
They do not want to teach in that kind of environment. Others
have had to change their curriculum. Courses have been
decommissioned, because it is risky to take a stance, publish
an article, talk about something in class that might fall afoul
of the Beijing authorities.
We know where this leads. I will never forget just very
briefly, meeting a young, very well educated Chinese student
who had said he had never heard of the Tiananmen Square
massacre until he was in his 20's because that information was
so sharply repressed. That is not what we want here.
Mr. Takano. Okay. Well great. Are you able to draw any
comparisons between what you witnessed in Hong Kong and
globally, to what you are seeing now transpire under Governor
DeSantis in Florida, and the republican legislature.
Ms. Nossel. I do not want to overstate it, I think it is
really important to recognize that there are clear
distinctions, and we remain a free country. We are having this
hearing. We can discuss these issues, but I do--I am concerned
about this legitimization of the intervention of the State, and
the idea that legislation, even if it is sort of loyalty oaths
to the Constitution.
That is not a tactic that we are comfortable with in this
country.
Mr. Takano. Well more specifically, I am a former community
college trustee. I was elected as trustee. I do not recall ever
inserting myself, or the board asserting itself into the
curriculum that was being taught, but that was the province of
the academic Senate, and the subject matter experts. Is that
kind of a fair description of how things work in higher
education?
Ms. Nossel. Absolutely. I mean we have the idea that
academic freedom requires universities to be able to, you know,
it is described as the Supreme Court as you know, the four
freedoms of being able to choose what is taught, who taught,
who teaches it, how it is taught, and who the students are. The
minute we intrude on that, we lose the independence and the
strength of the university.
Mr. Takano. Well, you know, Governor DeSantis himself, and
they have inserted themselves into a public university
replacing all the trustees, and encouraging the adoption of a
conservative curriculum based on the Hillsdale College of
Florida. Is this something that you find disturbing?
Ms. Nossel. I find it chilling that in this country they
would dismantle the autonomy of public university, and take it
over in that way;
Mr. Takano. Thank you and I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to now recognize
the Chair, the Chairwoman of the full committee, Ms. Foxx.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
witnesses for being here today. Mr. Shapiro, one of the most
important lessons I learned as a college President, was the
importance of institutional neutrality. Institutions should
maintain a welcoming environment for all speech. What happens
to our students and faculty when colleges selectively pick and
choose speech to support? Is your mic on? Pull your mic up to
you if you do not mind.
Mr. Shapiro. Yes. I appreciate that question, Chairwoman
Foxx. It is an important one because when universities, or any
unit of the university takes a position on a controversy, that
chills speech of students or faculty who might disagree on that
position. That is why the gold standard for this sort of thing,
the University of Chicago's Calvin report recommends, and
Chicago adopted, not taking any sorts of institutional
positions.
When something arises, they do not have to decide oh, are
we going to weigh in on this, or we are being pressured by both
sides, how should we massage it? They can just say we are not
in the business, we are in the business of education, we are
not in the business of political punditry.
Mrs. Foxx. As a followup, how does this harm the role
universities should play in society when they pick and choose?
Mr. Shapiro. Yes. It transforms the university into an
advocacy group on political controversy, not about its own
interests, rather than detracting it--distracting it from its
mission of seeking truth, educating students, creating
knowledge.
Mrs. Foxx. Well, thank you very much, and thank you very
much for the work that you are doing every day. I really
appreciate it. Mrs. Trump, the legal advocacy work at Speech
First shows how necessary it still is to combat violations of
free speech. I believe it is important to hold institutions
accountable.
This committee has thought long and hard on how to
appropriately balance Federal policy. Do you believe Congress
has a role to play in ensuring colleges maintain free speech
environments?
Mrs. Trump. Yes. Congress does have a role to play because
a lot of these universities receive Federal funding, and so it
is--the onus is on Congress a lot of times to actually make
sure that these institutions are protecting the rights of the
students that are going to these schools, especially Federal
and publicly funded schools.
Additionally, if the Department of Education is enforcing
policies, and putting policies into place that are violating
students first amendment rights, then Congress has a role to
investigate what is going on at the Department of Education,
and why they feel the need to do that.
There is a lot of definitions under Title 9 and Title 6 of
harassment and discrimination that are ever changing with every
administration. It would be wonderful if Congress could codify
some of these definitions.
Mrs. Foxx. I love the Constitution, and it seems to me it
is pretty firm on what it says. Yes, I believe you are right.
We have a role to play here although it is a very delicate role
to play. Mr. Joner, I passionately believe that colleges and
universities should prepare students to be lifelong learners.
It is important to graciously engage with ideas and people with
whom you disagree.
As we have seen from today's testimoneys, institutions are
not promoting this key part of learning. Based on your
perspective as a current student, how can colleges better equip
the next generation to value free speech?
Mr. Joner. Congresswoman, thank you for the question. What
I have seen on campus is that after incidents like this at
Stanford Law School, and other incidents across the country, is
that stifling free speech in our classrooms, that both
conservatives and liberal students do not feel comfortable to
speak out.
It is an exiled debate into those other rooms, and in order
to enforce this, we need to have university administrators who
are in place, force the basic principles of free speech, and
make sure that students are respecting these. What we have seen
is that administrators at Stanford Law School, just a couple
weeks ago, were not doing their job to enforce the principles
of free speech, and the university's own policies on free
speech.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much, again to our witnesses for
being here today. This is an extremely important topic on the
minds of Americans, on the minds of college students. I think
it is important that we have held this hearing. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like to recognize Mr.
Takano to enter some materials into the record.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I would like to enter
into the record this memo by Jenny S. Martinez of the Richard
E. Lang Professor of Law and Dean of Stanford Law School that
the issue that she issued in response to the incident.
Chairman Owens. No objection.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
[The information of Mr. Takano follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Owens. I would like now to recognize Ms.--
Bonamici, I am sorry. Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much to the Chair and Ranking
Member. I agree with my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle that it is important to protect free speech at public and
private colleges around the country. Public colleges have a
constitutional obligations, as we have heard, to uphold free
speech on campus, and public and private colleges have a
responsibility to provide each student with a higher education
that is intellectually stimulating, challenges their world
view, and exposes them to perspectives different from their
own.
To my knowledge, the vast majority of colleges are
upholding this obligation, this responsibility. I am deeply
concerned about the academic censorship at all levels, and
including in higher education that is being advanced by several
republican leaders, especially at the State level.
Most recently, as our colleagues described, Florida
republicans took steps to prohibit public colleges in the State
from mentioning or working on anything related to diversity,
equity, inclusion, and Mr. Chair, this is actual censorship.
Silencing voices you do not agree with. I urge you and your
colleagues to do some much needed introspection before
distracting the American people from the real issues at hand,
which is a systematic assault on democratic values, and
increasing unaffordability of college.
I want to note that I agree with Berkeley Law School Dean
Chemerinsky, his statement that freedom of speech does not
protect a right to shut down others, and I thank you, Mr.
Shapiro, for citing Dean Chemerinsky. I also, although I agree
that you absolutely, Mr. Shapiro, have a right to call Dean's
Trainer and Gerken ``spineless coward who are unwilling to
confront the illiberal inmates who have taken over their
institutions.'' I find statements like that to be unnecessarily
inflammatory, and not helpful to finding solutions to the
challenges we are discussing today.
My question is for Ms. Nossel, and I thank you for your
testimony. I am acutely aware of the fine line between free
speech and hate speech, or harassment on college campuses. I
appreciate the work you do for free expression for all. Thank
you to PEN America.
Ms. Nossel, where does the line of freedom of expression
start and end on a college campus, and are there situations
where there should be parameters placed on such expression?
Ms. Nossel. Yes. We have well established First Amendment
law that defines things like true threats, harassment, that are
not protected speech, that can be banned and punished. That
should be our lotus star. I do not think we should be passing
new legislation that puts new categories of information and
expression out of bounds. That we do not have under the First
Amendment laws that dictate what can and can not be in the
curricula.
To us, that evokes the McCarthy era.
Ms. Bonamici. I find that very problematic. Could we talk
about private colleges for a minute. Should they consider the
distinction between free speech allowed under their respective
codes of conduct because it is not a First Amendment issue, and
speech that would otherwise be considered prohibited by the
First Amendment, threatening violence for example?
Ms. Nossel. I think most private colleges have staunch free
speech obligations of their own that they voluntarily have
undertaken. As part of a mission statement, or a university
policy, many of the universities like Stanford that we are
talking about, have adopted those policies, and I think that is
extremely important because again, they are incubators of
democratic citizenship.
We want students on those campuses to be exposed to all
ideas, and I think that is why it is so important that the
leadership of Stanford University did step in, and say this was
not handled appropriately, and here is what our principles are.
Ms. Bonamici. I absolutely agree with that. Yes, I agree,
it is important for students to be exposed to different, and
sometimes uncomfortable perspectives in college. As you
mentioned, that is how they get prepared to be in the real
world. Do you agree that it is also important for colleges,
public and private, to consider the mental and physical health
and safety of students, and is it important for them to have
policies in place before a controversial speaker, or a large
protest is expected on campus?
If so, how can they strengthen existing policies and better
educate faculty and students on the parameters of their free
speech rights and on campus policies?
Ms. Nossel. Yes, sure. Of course, a university has to
ensure physical safety. That is paramount. There is a lot that
they can do to lay the groundwork to protect free speech
without impinging upon physical safety. They can have policies
that allow people to protest outside, and allow them to protest
in ways that do not disrupt.
That can be a very powerful, potent protests that get the
message across without interfering with people's ability to
listen to a speaker. I think pushing those policies, educating
students, educating faculty, ensuring this is part of the
curriculum, part of a freshman orientation, would instill those
values, and get people to come to grips with those values and--
--
Ms. Bonamici. Are there some institutions, and I do not
mean to cut you off.
Ms. Nossel. No, no.
Ms. Bonamici. The clock is ticking. Are there some
institutions that are doing that well?
Ms. Nossel. Some are. We are doing free speech institutes
at PEN America that are very well received. We are working with
universities across the country, but it needs to be much more
widespread.
Ms. Bonamici. I appreciate that. As I yield back, Mr.
Chairman, I request unanimous consent to enter into the record
a statement from the American Psychological Association in
support of the right of educators to do their jobs without
political interference.
Chairman Owens. No objections.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
[The information of Ms. Bonamici follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would like now to recognize
Mr. Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to include
for the record a study from the Heritage Foundation Titled
Inclusion Delusion, the Anti-Semitism of Diversity, Equity and
Inclusion Staff at Universities dated December 8, 2021, by Dr.
Jay Green and James Paul.
Chairman Owens. No objection.
Mr. Banks. Thank you.
[The information of Mr. Banks follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Banks. Dr. Shapiro, is wokeism, or more specifically
DEI programs a gateway to anti-Semitism, and even hatred or
violence toward people of faith?
Mr. Shapiro. Absolutely. It seems that Jews are not part of
the latest hierarchy of intersectionality, and they are too
privileged in various ways, and certainly the growth of the
bureaucracies and programs has been correlated with the growth
of anti-Semitism.
Mr. Banks. Can you talk about how they--how DEI programs
foster hatred toward people of faith?
Mr. Shapiro. Well, they foster illiberal attitudes of all
kinds, and again, this is not as Suzanne said, the words
diversity, equity, inclusion, nobody could disagree with their
facial meaning. Intellectual diversity, people wanting to feel
welcome, treated fairly, equitably, that is great, but the way
that they have been perverted--you ask about religious groups.
There are plenty of ripe examples of religious groups that are
not treated the same as secular groups of various kinds, even
though the Supreme Court ruled more than 25 years ago in
Rosenberger vs. UVA, that if you provide certain types of
resources, you should provide them equally equitably to
religious organizations as well.
Mr. Banks. The study that I just mentioned from the
Heritage Foundation, 2021, found that DEI related staff on
American college campuses were overwhelmingly anti-Israel, and
a majority were indifferent, or even agreeable to the Chinese
Communist party.
Based on a search of over 700 Twitter accounts of DEI staff
on campuses across the country, just 28 tweets were found to be
favorable toward Israel, while 605 tweets were negative. 133
tweets were pro-China, while just 83 of the overall tweets were
negative.
Does it seem like these DEI staff are in themselves not
very diverse in their viewpoints?
Mr. Shapiro. That is true. I mean they have their
individual constitutional rights as well to speak on however
they like, but those kinds of views definitely are imbued in
the trainings that we have seen, and the materials of the
various kinds of programming that they promulgate. Since you
are citing studies, I have another Heritage Study, I can not
enter it, but I suggest I recommend that you look at Heritage
Backgrounder 3641, by the same authors, Jay Green and James
Paul titled Diversity University DEI Bloat in the Academy.
That addresses a host of these issues, including one of
your colleagues mentioned the increasing cost, and the growth
in bureaucracy certainly contributes to that as well.
Mr. Banks. 190 billion dollars a year that the Federal
Government gives to colleges and universities. What can we do
to stop universities from hiring these DEI or woke programs
that directly attack people of faith?
Mr. Shapiro. Well, I think the Federal Government spends
too much money on almost everything, and this is certainly an
area where cutbacks are, I think, appropriate, but at least
attach heavier strings, constitutionally based values based of
classical liberalism that we are all supposed to agree on in
the broad quality.
Mr. Banks. It seems like quite a problem that we have, and
I am deeply concerned that the leadership, the administrations
of our universities are hiring these woke officials, DEI
programs that attack people of whatever faith. I appreciate you
bringing light to that. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Shapiro. Could I say one more thing, Mr. Banks?
Mr. Banks. I have 48 seconds left.
Mr. Shapiro. Yes. I just want to clarify, and I think you
probably would agree with this distinction between the DEI
bureaucracies and staffs, and the sorts of folks working on
civil rights compliance, Title 9, ADA, all of these things that
we would have recognized from our time in college and graduate
school 20-25, 30 years ago. It is a fairly recent phenomenon,
so it is not about shutting down student groups that want to
care about their ethnic backgrounds, or anything like that.
It is about institutional promulgation of illiberal post-
modern theories.
Mr. Banks. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. Now I would like to recognize
Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
witnesses for being here today. We have seen a rise of anti-
Semitism on college campuses across the country, and according
to ADL's most recent audit of anti-Semitic incidents, anti-
Semitic activity on college and university campuses has
increased by 41 percent in 2022, compared to the previous year.
College and university leaders play a key role in
responding to these types of situations. They must ensure that
no one is punished for their protected speech. Just because it
discomforts some, and simultaneously, they must use their moral
authority to counter hateful and anti-Semitic speech with
timely, specific and direct responses.
How can administrators, staff, faculty, and all community
members more effectively respond to hateful speech, including
anti-Semitic speech, while fulfilling the promise of creating
educational institutions that both safeguard free expression,
and ensure that all members of the community feel safe and
welcome?
Ms. Nossel.
Ms. Nossel. Thank you so much, Congresswoman. There is a
lot the university can do to address bigotry and hatred whether
it is anti-Semitism, or anti-LGBT, or racist speech on campus.
It happens through education. It happens through nurturing and
supporting student groups that mobilize, and that unify and
bring people together to draw attention to these issues.
It happens through ensuring open discourse, that there are
not topics that are off limits that, you know, even if it is
robust debate on say issues of Israel Palestine, which can be
very contentious, which can lead to claims of harm on both
sides, that there is space to those even very challenging, and
sometimes uncomfortable conversations that that is something
that the university stands for, and makes possible.
There is no contradiction between creating a hospitable,
welcoming environment for students from all backgrounds, be it
racial, religious, or otherwise, and robust protections for
free speech. In fact, they are mutually reinforcing.
Ms. Manning. What is the best way to help administrators,
and professors, and faculties understand that this is not an
either/or. It is a yes. How can we provide the information, the
tactics, and techniques they need to be effective in both of
these areas.
Ms. Nossel. Yes. I think it is a matter of fostering
greater emphasis, greater training, greater discussion. That is
what we have been doing as PEN America across the country,
convening faculty, students, and university leaders from across
the political spectrum. People have been on opposing sides of
some of these inflammatory incidents to get them around the
table, and talk about why did they invite that speaker?
What was going on? How did other people react to that? What
was unanticipated? Training people in the precepts of the First
Amendment and free speech, and the role of the university. We
find when you do that, people understand it. It clicks, they
recognize, this is not a contradiction that even if you are a
DEI official you can do your job without impinging on freedom
of speech.
Unfortunately, I think that training is not always in
place, and we have just got to reach more widely and broadly to
get to those who are in those roles.
Ms. Manning. Do you believe we can use DEI to encompass
discrimination against Jewish students, and other kinds, other
minority groups?
Ms. Nossel. Yes. I think DEI should look at all forms of
diversity on a campus.
Ms. Manning. Are there other proactive things that
universities should do to educate not just their faculty and
administrators, but their students about the importance of free
speech and accepting the fact that people come from different
backgrounds, and have different cultural religious beliefs?
Ms. Nossel. I think so. Look, I think it is extremely
important, overwhelmingly college students in this country are
progressive. We hear that in this panel the conservative
students are in the minority on these campuses. We need to
present the ideas of free speech in the First Amendment in ways
that make sense to progressive students, that resonate with the
struggles that they want to wage.
They need these rights to be protected in order to advocate
for climate justice, or gender justice. It is a matter of if it
becomes a partisan cause, if they are set by laws and
restrictions that constrain their ability to study, theories
and topics in American history that touch on race or religion,
they are going to be alienated from the principle of free
speech.
I think that is a real risk with the tactics that are being
pursued right now, this heavy hand of the State being inserted
in the form of legislation to dictate what can and can not be
taught and studied on campus.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. I wish we had time for a longer
discussion, but my time has expired, and I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I now would like to recognize
Mr. Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Joner, I am glad you are
here today. I do think personally that we need a little more
diversity on campuses. I would like to ask you what you know
about Stanford's DEI program. You hear, at least in
universities in Wisconsin, great concerns about the lack of
diversity among faculty, whether you measure that be religious
background, or religious belief.
Whether you measure it by political belief, students feel
that frequently they have to lie because of a hatred toward
more conservative view of the world. Do you feel that the DEI
offices in Stanford are diverse like our, whatever, 45 percent
of the people, you guess, pro-life, or you know, maybe 45 to 50
percent voted for President Trump, that sort of thing.
What is your opinion of the diversity of the DEI offices at
Stanford?
Mr. Joner. What I have seen at Stanford is that the DEI
office is very one sided. There is not much neutrality, and
what we have seen in incidents like--I do not personally
interact much with these DEI officials, and I do not know many
students who do, despite Stanford having one of the highest--
the highest rate of DEI officials per capita.
What we do see from the DEI officials are these videos,
like the 6-minute speech from the Dean at Stanford Law School a
couple weeks ago. The harmful language initiative released from
Stanford that really tends to censor free speech. These DEI
officials are not really promoting this diversity of thought.
They are actually squashing it in the classroom, and the
university.
Mr. Grothman. I am familiar with the Stanford video. It
seems there was a lot of hate going on at Stanford that day. Do
you feel there is a lot of hate disseminated by the DEI
bureaucracy?
Mr. Joner. I am not sure that I would say there is a lot of
hate disseminated by the bureaucracy, but what we have seen in
like just that video from a few weeks ago at Stanford Law
School is that these university administrators who are supposed
to be the ones enforcing these principles, which are in the
university's policies, are not doing just that.
They are condemning in this case, Judge Kyle Duncan's right
to speak, condemning his actions, and they are not taking the
place of a neutral university administrator, and not doing
their jobs.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Mr. Shapiro, could you comment in
general on the cost of these DEI programs, and do they add
anything to the academic atmosphere that you have in
universities?
Mr. Shapiro. Well, the cost of tuition and university
budgets has certainly exploded in the last five, 10, 15 years,
concomitant with the growth of initially bureaucracies are more
broadly and non-teaching staff. I think about 2010 non-teaching
staff started to exceed the number of teaching full-time
instructors at most institutions.
Of late, most of that bureaucratic growth has been in the
DEI sector. I do not have a number off the top of my head, or
an average or anything like that.
Mr. Grothman. Well, wait a minute. Did you just say that in
the universities today we have among white collared jobs more
people who are non-teaching positions than teaching positions?
Mr. Shapiro. In some places there are more non-teaching
staff than students, indeed. You could have--somebody wrote a
cute op-ed saying maybe each student at Yale should get their
own personal butler.
Mr. Grothman. That is shocking, but perhaps no wonder why
there are so many kids in debt out there. Could you elaborate a
little bit more on are they making progress, the DEI in hiring
more conservative professors, or making the professors more
like America in general? Are they making any progress there?
Are they really going the opposite direction, kind of the
opposite of diversity. We want to stamp out diversity.
Mr. Shapiro. Faculty hiring is generally separate from DEI,
although the DEI offices do impose diversity statements,
loyalty oaths to progressive orthodoxy that have proliferated
upwards of a quarter of faculty, I think these days nationwide
can not be hired if they do not pass that ideological litmus
test.
Similarly, on the other side of whether they are succeeding
on their own terms, there have been campus surveys, a very good
report by Scott Yenner about Texas A&M specifically, Jonathan
Height, a social psychologist has done good work on this. As
the DEI offices have grown, students comfort and sense of
belonging at school has decreased, and that is especially among
members of racial minority.
Even on their own terms, DEI offices are failing
spectacularly.
Mr. Grothman. Do you think because the Congress, the State
legislatures contribute so much money to academia that we have
to step in, as we have in the private sector, and should not
have quite frankly, but we have to step in and force more
diversity like, say like 40 percent of the English professors
should be conservative, religious in thought, or that sort of
thing?
Mr. Shapiro. Mr. Chairman, I see the red light on. May I
answer? Well again, I am hesitate to recommend State
legislatures, let alone Congress get involved in the minutia of
faculty hiring, or impose some sort of quotas or preferences,
affirmative action based on ideologies, so I would not
recommend that. I would, as I said, recommend strings attached
to Federal funding to make sure that everyone is treated
equally, nobody is discriminated against, free speech rights
are observed, and there is not this huge chilling effect for
faculty and student alike, feel like they have to walk on
eggshells, lest they be investigated by these diversity
inquisitors.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
Chairman Owens. Thank you, Chairman from Oregon. Please,
you are recognized.
Mrs. DeRemer. Well, thank you. Thank you for being here. I
appreciate it. Ms. Trump, it seems there are biased
administrators that are empowered by their school's ability to
define harassment past what Title 9 provides. Resulting in
weaponized and fluid definitions of serious terms, would it be
responsible for Congress to provide schools with clarity on
what is and what is not harassment?
Mrs. Trump. Yes. Currently there is something called the
Davis Standard in place on Title 9, and this is something that,
through our lawsuits, we have also had universities implement
in their other harassment and anti-discrimination policies.
This Davis standard has a very high bar for what kind of speech
can be considered harassing conduct.
Because of that, it balances--the best example we have seen
today that balances First Amendment Rights and protections with
protecting students through these policies. The Davis standards
says that in order for speech to be considered harassing
conduct, it has to be so severe, pervasive, and objectively
offensive, that to the point where students do not have equal
access to education, and that is the best example we have seen.
It would be great if Congress was interested in codifying
something like that.
Mrs. DeRemer. Well, that kind of answers my next question.
I will go ahead and leave it at that. Ms. Nossel, I think it is
important to remember that my democratic colleagues also value
the First Amendment. As the democrat witness, who is fully
invested in protecting free speech on college campuses, in
which specific areas should democrats and republicans on this
committee work together to address this specific issue?
Ms. Nossel. I think shining a spotlight on those shared
concerns, reinforcing those shared concerns, and the basic
precepts of the First Amendment. I think the kinds of
legislation that we have seen. Mr. Shapiro just said he would
be hesitant to see legislation trying to dictate who can and
can not be hired on college campuses.
I wonder why that same concern is not raised in relation to
what can and can not be taught on a college campus, or whether
a college campus can have something called a DEI office that
may deal with things like veterans affairs, and disability
rights issues, along with other topics.
I think reinforcing that basic precept of the First
Amendment that says, this is not the realm of legislation that
academic freedom on campus needs to be protected, that we need
a buffer zone so that it is not direct intervention and
political dictates in what can and cannot be taught. I think
that is a place where I would hope we could come together.
Mrs. DeRemer. Thank you. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. I would now recognize Mr.
Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Chairman, thank you so much. Chairman,
Ranking Member, thank you for this important hearing, very
timely obviously. We see this in the news almost every day, you
know. I appreciate it. My first question is for Mr. Joner. Mr.
Joner, across the country we have seen student groups on the
campus, particular religious and conservative groups, face
challenges with recognition and hosting events.
When you discriminate against any group for whatever
reason, that is discrimination right? It is--how can we make
sure all student groups are treated equally when expressing
their views?
Mr. Joner. Congressman, thank you for the question. I will
point to two examples that I witnessed on campus besides the
incident at the Law School. Vice President Mike Pence came to
speak at Stanford about a year ago, and initially his request
for funding was denied by the student government. Matt Walsh
recently came to campus a few weeks ago, and his fliers, and
posters were burned down around campus.
We see this often. It is a common occurrence. What we need,
we need individuals on campuses, and students like myself to
respect this principle of free speech. Then we do need
university administrators who are there to enforce these
principles.
What we have seen just a few weeks ago throughout the
country is that these universities are hiring administrators
who are not committed to this principle of free speech, which
is embedded in their policies already. While we need this to be
an integral part of each student's education, we also need to
have these university administrators who are able to enforce
these policies, and make sure that they are doing so.
Mr. Thompson. Absolutely. I mean I think that so much of
what we are seeing is based on the administrators, the
supervisors, the folks who are hired, who are not doing their
due diligence, and showing in a responsible way a commitment to
freedom of speech. Our universities are supposed to be
laboratories of ideas, ideals, and should not be, that scale
should not be--their thumb should not be on the scale one way
or the other.
Clearly, with what we see is across most universities
today. I do not want to paint with a complete broad brush, but
we have seen the individuals who are responsible for that free
speech. Quite frankly, the faculty. Their biases come through.
My belief is universities are there to teach you how to think
in terms of applying critical analysis, all right.
They are not there to teach you what to think, outside the
scope of perhaps specific details of a particular profession
that someone may be preparing for, the technical details of
that. Ms. Trump, you talk about the rise in bias reporting
systems on college campuses.
Can I expect these types of 1984 esque environments
occurring on campus in say Communist China. It is hard to
imagine that on American college campuses we are encouraging
adults, and that is who these folks are, they are young people,
some of them just becoming adults, and quite frankly with what
we used to call atypical students, they are clearly in their
adult years, to report on their peers for something as little
as hurting someone's feelings.
Do you believe that bias reporting, Ms. Trump, creates an
environment of pressing students in the specific ideologies,
and even to survey a State, and how does this type of
environment impact the long-term mental health of students when
they enter the real world?
Mrs. Trump. Yes. Students are absolutely walking on
eggshells on college campuses. Most of the students that I
speak to are quietly telling me what their political opinions
are, and oftentimes will refuse to even talk to me about their
political ideas on campus, or on the phone while they are on
campus, out of fear that someone will overhear their
conversation, and a target will be painted on their back.
Because there are these reporting systems, as you
mentioned, the biased reporting systems, where the universities
have put mechanisms in place, and constantly send emails and
encourage students to report on each other, and on faculty
members.
We have seen examples that range from the ridiculous ones,
where someone reported Saudi Arabia that was written on a white
board, and there was no evidence of who wrote the word Saudi
Arabia, or why, but they reported because they thought oh, my
initial instinct, my immediate reaction to seeing something
that might potentially be offensive is to report it to an
administrator, rather than to actually ask a question about it.
We have seen plenty of examples like this, and it goes--you
really start to ask the question what is going to happen when
they graduate because they will take these mindsets with them
into the professional world, like we have already seen with
cancel cultures.
These are going to be tech CEOs, these are going to be
people who are going to run organizations, and run businesses,
and they are going to take these ideas of shutting down other
ideas that they do not agree with into the professional world.
Mr. Thompson. Well, thank you so much, Chairman. Thank you
once again for this hearing, and I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you so much. I would like to now
recognize Mr. Good.
Mr. Good. Thank you Chairman Owens, again thank you to our
witnesses for being here today. This challenge of the
suppression of the free exchange of ideas on campuses, the
toleration, that is an interesting word, for freedom of speech
on campuses, is a relatively new phenomena.
It is about maybe 30 years old. It does seem to come almost
exclusively from the left and the suppression of free speech on
the right of the more conservative side. It is ironic because
it used to be that it was the left, it was the liberals that
they used to call themselves, who were the ones who had a
terribly strong and in a positive way, commitment to free
speech, free expression of ideas.
The old saying of you know I may disagree with what you
have to say, but I will fight to the death for your right to
say it. That is sadly long gone on our college campuses. Mr.
Joner, a study from the Foundation of Individual Rights and
Expression found that over 16 percent of students on college
campuses think that shouting down a speaker is an acceptable
tactic, to stop a campus speech.
20 percent in the study said they consider it acceptable
for people to use violence to stop certain speech. I personally
experienced resistance to my right to free speech when invited
to speak to a group of law school students at the most
prominent law school in my district recently.
Mr. Joner, based on your experience, would you say that
most of the students on campus that you interact with, whether
it is at Stanford or other places, do they truly understand
what it means to have the right to free speech?
Mr. Joner. I do not think that the average student majority
of the students really understand what this, you know,
principle of free speech means, and we are not seeing it
clearly communicated at the university, or taught.
Stanford's orientation, which is a week before for all
freshman, you have 2000 students, a week long of seminars,
there is no discussion on free speech. I cannot recall anything
I learned in there, and so we are not seeing that, but we are
seeing discussion on many of these other topics, like
diversity, equity, inclusion.
Mr. Good. At universities, and obviously Stanford is a
highly esteemed university, that what we are supposed to be
teaching students how to think, how to reason, how to persuade
ideas and thought, and viewpoints, should hold up to the
challenges of scrutiny and debate and so forth, and that is so
absent on many of our campuses. How would you think we could
address this?
How do you think this can be addressed, free speech, or the
lack therefore on college campuses?
Mr. Joner. Yes. Well, first off it is these incidents that
we have seen across the country that are destroying this debate
in the classroom, because students are too scared to speak up,
and they know that if they say something the university
administration is going to come after them.
What we need are these university officials to truly uphold
these principles, and in the future, demonstrate that we are
not going to be in a cyclical cycle of this fallout, this
incident where a speaker is shouted down, and then they
apologize.
Then months later, or years later, the same thing is going
to happen again. That is only contributing to the cycle in this
culture that is destroying free speech, and we need these
university administrators who stand up for this, and stand up
for it once and for all and firmly.
Mr. Good. Yes. It is not just happening on a micro level
with university policies that are retaliatory toward free
speech, but also we get reports on a micro level where students
will tell us that they have to change what they--how they--
their academic content, what they write on papers and so forth,
because they are told by professors if you express a
conservative worldview, you are going to get a bad grade.
Numerous students have told me that personally. Mr.
Shapiro, Stanford, not to pick on Mr. Joner, but published a
list of words recently deemed harmful language that is racist,
violent or biased, and some of those words in what Stanford
published were American, freshman, she and so forth. Even the
term trigger warning was deemed to be too triggering. Free
speech zones have been implemented at universities across the
country, which effectively, as you know, prohibit free speech
anywhere outside that zone, and often come with requirements
that you have to register to use the space.
Could you comment on the impact that that has, these kinds
of things have on the ability to learn when commonplace terms,
common terms that we all would use are deemed politically
incorrect, or prohibited on a college campus?
Mr. Shapiro. Yes. I have also seen, whether on that
Stanford list or elsewhere, that merit, excellence, academic
rigor--these are forbidden things--logic, reason, it is
bizarre. You cannot have an institution of higher education if
those things are forbidden. With respect to free speech zones,
I actually encountered this when people were protesting me. At
least I later learned they were protesting me a few weeks ago
at the University of Denver, which is a private institution out
there.
The Dean, I think they just did not want to make national
headlines like Stanford has made, and that is a good goal for
them to do, but they went overboard by shunting anybody who
wanted to protest into these zones where I did not even see
them, and then not allowing signs that were disruptive at all.
Look, I believe strongly in the right to protest, but there
is a difference between protest and disruption, time, place,
and manner regulations, so you do not violate the fire code,
all of these things like this. I think maximal speech is great,
whether I agree with it, or anybody else.
Mr. Good. We are sorry that you were victimized for
expressing your viewpoint. It is interesting on a college
campus you are unqualified to be on a college campus. If you
were to define a woman, but you are qualified apparently to go
to the Supreme Court if you can not define what a woman is.
Mr. Shapiro. My event in Denver was on the importance of
free speech on college campuses.
Mr. Good. Amazing. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you.
Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
allowing me to wave on to this very important committee, and
very important discussion today. On campus organizations exist
to help students find community and support in a very new and
demanding chapter of their lives. Countless studies have shown
that religious organizations, especially improve feelings of
belonging, cultural awareness and academic success.
We often see universities restricting these beneficial
groups from organizing, with examples from 37 states involving
93 colleges and universities, and these are just the ones that
were actually reported. In 2020, the Trump administration put
in place--somebody needs to protect that button there,
protections for on campus religious organizations.
Last month, the Biden Department of Education announced
proceedings to rescind those protections. That is why this week
I reintroduced H.R. 1816, the Equal Campus Access Act. The
legislation would revoke funding for any institution of higher
education that denies religious student organization's
recognition, funding, or any other rights that secular groups
have.
I asked for nothing more than just the saneness for all the
organizations. I ask for unanimous consent to include a support
letter from 34 organizations for the record.
Chairman Owens. No objection.
[The information of Mr. Walberg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walberg. We should strive to reaffirm diverse
theological beliefs, and solidify religious freedom rather than
encouraging discrimination. Mr. Joner, across the country we
have seen student groups on campus, particularly religious and
conservative groups, face challenges with recognition and
hosting events.
How can we make sure all student groups are treated equally
when expressing their views?
Mr. Joner. Mr. Walberg, thank you so much for the question.
I am also the President of an evangelical Christian group on
campus, and I appreciate your concerns there. Again, what I
have said earlier is that I mean we need these individuals who
are committed to this principle of free speech, but we have to
have these university administrators who are hired by the
university, to uphold these principles.
What we have seen is that those who are being hired, like
Dean Karen Steinbeck at Stanford, we are never really committed
to those principles, and if those are the people that the
university is hiring, then it is a very concerning trend, and
putting Dean Steinbeck on leave is a good start, but are there
other administrators who are not committed to the principle of
free speech?
Are there other administrators that they are going to hire
in the future who are not committed to this principle of free
speech? We need these universities to ensure that those who are
enforcing this are going to uphold free speech neutrally for
all students. What we have seen is that is currently not the
case.
Mr. Walberg. A negative thumb is not on the scale for
anyone in any organization. Mr. Shapiro, in your testimony you
mentioned using Federal dollars as leverage when it comes to
shutting down bureaucracies that completely contradict
institutional policies and our Nation's values.
How far should Congress be willing to go?
Mr. Shapiro. I am not an expert on contracting law, and
appropriations law, so I can not get into the nitty gritty, but
I think requiring adherence to the Constitution and Federal law
is important, and you mentioned the importance of treating
religious student organizations the same as secular ones. I
would have thought that you do not even need a regulation for
that. I am frankly appalled that this regulation is being
rescinded.
As I mentioned to your colleague Mr. Banks a little while
ago, there is a 1995 Supreme Court case called the United
States--sorry, Rosenberger vs. UVA, which was precisely about a
religious newspaper at University of Virginia that was being
denied funds that were otherwise being provided to other
publications.
I do not think that you even need this regulation, or
frankly, further legislation to make the point. You can just
say as long as you are complying with existing Supreme Court
precedent, and the sense of Congress about not even religious
freedom, but equal treatment of different student
organizations. I think those kinds of strings are not--you do
not even approach any sort of line about going too far.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. We should not have a situation where
average length of time of a civil case is 29 and a half months
to complete, and that is a concern. Ms. Trump, how could
leaving free speech violations up to the decisions of the
courts dissuade students from coming forward with complaints,
and how do we address this issue?
Ms. Trump. Well as I mentioned earlier, a lot of students
are actually very afraid to speak up and complain about the
policies on campus because they do fear retaliation. We are a
membership organization at Speech First, which means we
actually are able to keep their names out of the lawsuits,
which is part of the reason they are able to come to us.
I think you are right in pointing out the fact that for a
student to have to try to sue their school in order to have
free speech protections on campus is definitely a step too far.
We should not have to let it go that far, so it really comes
down to what Mr. Jones was saying earlier, in that universities
need to do a check and an audit of all their policies, and see
which ones they are targeting student speech with, and consider
maybe rescinding those, so that they are not going to be held
legally accountable in the court of law.
Additionally, they could start hiring folks, as was
mentioned earlier, that actually respective the First Amendment
and the free speech culture in this country.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. Mr. Kiley, you are recognized.
Mr. Kiley. Thank you, Mr. Chair for organizing today's
hearing on protecting freedom of speech at the place where it
is most vital, our institutions of higher learning. This really
should not be a partisan issue in any way, shape or form. If
there is one thing that should not be a partisan issue it
should be this. We should fight about everything else,
exercising our First Amendment rights, but freedom of speech
itself is foundational to the character of our country.
Indeed, just a few years ago, 2017, in the California
legislature, I authored a resolution affirming freedom of
speech as a foundational campus value. The resolution
encouraged universities across the State to adopt the gold
standard, free speech statement, which is the University of
Chicago, statement of free expression.
Now, this is a democrat super majority in California, and
it passed our legislature unanimously. This was just in 2017.
In 2016, President Barack Obama had this to say. He said there
is been a trend around the country of trying to get colleges to
disinvite speakers with a different point of view, or disrupt a
politicians rally. Do not do that, Obama said. No matter how
ridiculous or offensive you might find the things that come out
of their mouths.
There will be times when you should not compromise your
core values, your integrity, and you have the responsibility to
speak up in the face of injustice. Listen, engage. If the other
side has a point learn from them. If they are wrong, rebut
them. Teach them. Beat them on the battlefield of ideas.
A few years later, we continue to see incidents like we saw
just recently in California, at UC Davis, and at your
university, Mr. Joner, Stanford. I understand you are the
Executive Editor of the Stanford Review, is that right?
Mr. Joner. Yes, I am.
Mr. Kiley. I understand your publication has done some
great work, covering the attacks on free speech that have
happened on campus.
Mr. Joner. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Mr. Kiley. What I want to ask you is about what the
mentality you think is of the students who created these
disruptions, because these are Stanford law students
presumably, very bright, and yet we saw them so flagrantly
defying the admonition from former President Obama.
Not even letting someone of an opposing viewpoint speak.
They seemed to think that stopping the words from being
expressed was the proper response to their disagreement. How do
you think it is that some of the brightest students we have in
this country do not seem to understand this basic American
value?
Mr. Joner. Absolutely, it is quite concerning, so thank you
for the question Congressman. Stanford Law School, I believe,
is currently the second ranked law school in the country. We
know that these students will go on to be the next business
leaders, sitting in these very chairs one day, and even at the
Supreme Court, I mean these are the students that Stanford Law
is graduating.
These students, and this was over 100 student protestors
here, completely disrupted Judge Duncan's speech, and if you
watched the video and read the details in my article, or other
articles, they are holding obscene signs, heckling obscene
remarks, that I would not even state here in this setting.
I do not know what has brought these students to take on
this worldview that means they can just shut down someone
else's speech because they disagree with them, or have said
something controversial. I have said we need university
administrators in place to enforce it, and we absolutely do.
We need them to educate these students on these principles,
and we need these students to uphold these principles of free
speech themselves, and maybe that starts early on. It should
happen in college, but maybe it needs to be something that is
done and is not being well done in early education.
Mr. Kiley. I think you are exactly right. I think that it
starts at the primary and secondary school. Well, we need to
get back to teaching civics in a real way. One thing I did find
encouraging in the Dean of your university's response, Jenny
Martinez, is she said that they are going to--one step the law
school will take will be on the mandatory half day session for
all students on the topic of freedom of speech, and the norms
of the legal profession.
I think that this is a good idea. Now, it is not going to
compensate for the shortcomings we see at our--at the secondary
and primary level around the country, but I think that the more
universities that can do something like this, not necessarily
in response to you know, incidents that occur on campus, but
just as a matter of your basic training, your basic orientation
where you come to school, I think that that would be something
of great value.
Mr. Chair, I think that would be perhaps something that we
could look at as a committee, as to how we can encourage that
sort of education about the importance of the First Amendment
and free speech at our universities. Thank you, and I yield
back.
Chairman Owens. Thank you. As we begin to close this out, I
want to thank again our witnesses for taking the time to
testify before the subcommittee today. Let me just give you a
quick observation. First of all thank you, for each and every
one of you, for being engaged in this particular topic.
Really showing our country a way that the all American way
used to be. We can respect to agree to disagree. We talk
together, and eventually we figure out a way to come to that
space where free speech is what we want to get to. I want to
thank you for that.
Also, Mr. Joner, what I want to say is I am so impressed
with someone of your age. I would have never done what you are
doing right now at my age, believe me, never. It says--gives me
hope that we do have remarkable young people that know how to
articulate themselves, how to be courageous where you stand.
This is one of the most important things we can do. I just
want to say that as we close this out. Without objection, there
will be no further business, and the subcommittee now stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon the subcommittee adjourned at 12:03 p.m.]

[all]
