- SAFEGUARDING STUDENT-ATHLETES FROM NLRB MISCLASSIFICATION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SAFEGUARDING STUDENT-ATHLETES
FROM NLRB MISCLASSIFICATION

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

Before The

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EMPLOYMENT, LABOR,
AND PENSIONS

WITH

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

OF THE
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, MARCH 12, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-41

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and the Workforce

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via: edworkforce.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-769 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE

VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina, Chairwoman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania             Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
JIM BANKS, Indiana                     Northern Mariana Islands
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
BURGESS OWENS, Utah                  MARK TAKANO, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
LISA McCLAIN, Michigan               MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MARY MILLER, Illinois                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
RON ESTES, Kansas                    SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana              LUCY McBATH, Georgia
KEVIN KILEY, California              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
AARON BEAN, Florida                  ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              HALEY M. STEVENS, Michigan
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

Cyrus Artz, Staff Director
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EMPLOYMENT, LABOR, AND PENSIONS

BOB GOOD, Virginia, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           MARK DeSAULNIER, California
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                  Ranking Member
RICK ALLEN, Georgia                  JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
JAMES COMER, Kentucky                SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          FRANK J. MRVAN, Indiana
MICHELLE STEEL, California           PRAMILA, JAYAPAL, Washington
AARON BEAN, Florida                  LUCY McBATH, Georgia
ERIC BURLISON, Missouri              JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

BURGESS, OWENS, UTAH, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         FREDERICA WILSON, Florida,
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin              Ranking Member
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          MARK TAKANO, California
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   PRAMILA, JAYAPAL, Washington
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, New Mexico
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   KATHY E. MANNING, North Carolina
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               LUCY McBATH, Georgia
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 RAUL M. GRIJALVA, Arizona
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Northern Mariana Islands
VIRGINIA FOXX, North Carolina        SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Hearing held on March 12, 2024...................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Good, Hon. Bob, Chairman, Subcommittee on Health, Employment,
Labor, and Pensions........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
DeSaulnier, Hon. Mark, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions....................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     6
Owens, Hon. Burgess, Chairman, Subcommittee on Higher
Education and Workforce Development........................     8
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Wilson, Hon. Frederica, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Higher Education and Workforce Development.................    10
Prepared statement of....................................    11

WITNESSES

Bodensteiner, Jill, Vice President and Director of Athletics,
Saint Joseph's University..................................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    15
Sims, Tyler A., Shareholder, Littler Mendelson...............    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Pearce, Mark Gaston, Executive Director and Visiting
Professor, Workers' Rights Institute, Georgetown Law Center    65
Prepared statement of....................................    67
Mitten, Matthew, Professor of Law and Executive Director,
National Sports Institute at Marquette University Law
School.....................................................    78
Prepared statement of....................................    80

ADDITIONAL SUBMISSIONS

Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Connecticut:
Article published September 18, 2023, from The Dartmouth.   100

SAFEGUARDING STUDENT-ATHLETES
FROM NLRB MISCLASSIFICATION

----------

Tuesday, March 12, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health, Employment,
Labor, and Pensions,
Subcommittee on Higher Education and
Workforce Development,
Committee on Education and the Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittees met, pursuant to call at 10:17 a.m., 2175
Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Good [Chairman of the
HELP Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Owens, Good, Thompson, Walberg,
Grothman, Allen, Banks, Bean, Burlison, Moran, Foxx,
DeSaulnier, Wilson, Courtney, Bonamici, Takano, Adams,
Norcross, Wild, Mrvan, McBath, Hayes, Manning, and Scott.
Staff present: Cyrus Artz, Staff Director; Nick Barley,
Deputy Communications Director; Mindy Barry, General Counsel;
Jackson Berryman, Speechwriter; Isabel Foster, Press Assistant;
Daniel Fuenzalida, Staff Assistant; Sheila Havenner, Director
of Information Technology; Amy Raaf Jones, Director of
Education and Human Services Policy; Alex Knorr, Legislative
Assistant; Trey Kovacs, Professional Staff Member; Georgie
Littlefair, Clerk; John Martin, Deputy Director of Workforce
Policy/Counsel; Hannah Matesic, Deputy Staff Director Audra
McGeorge, Communications Director; Eli Mitchell, Legislative
Assistant; Rebecca Powell, Staff Assistant; Brad Thomas, Deputy
Director of Education and Human Services Policy; Kelly Tyroler,
Professional Staff Member; Seth Waugh, Director of Workforce
Policy; Maura Williams, Director of Operations; Nekea Brown,
Minority Director of Operations; Rashage Green, Minority
Director of Education Policy & Counsel; Stephanie Lalle,
Minority Communications Director; Raiyana Malone, Minority
Press Secretary; Kevin McDermott, Minority Director of Labor
Policy; Brittany Alston, Minority Operations Assistant;
Veronique Pluviose, Minority Staff Director; Dhrtvan Sherman,
Minority Committee Research Assistant; Bob Shull, Minority
Senior Labor Policy Counsel; Melanie Kee, Minority Intern;
Maile Sit, Minority Intern; Jamar Tolbert, Minority Intern;
Adrianna Toma, Minority Intern; Banyon Vassar, Minority Deputy
Director of Information Technology; Samantha Wilkerson,
Minority CBCF Fellow.
Chairman Good. The Joint Hearing on the Subcommittee on
Health, Employment, Labor and Pensions and the Subcommittee on
Higher Education and Workforce Development will come to order.
I note that a quorum is present. Without objection, the Chair
is authorized to call a recess at any time.
Like most Americans, I love college athletics. I enjoy
supporting my alma mater, Liberty University, where I worked in
athletics administration for 15 years, and who I might add, had
an undefeated regular season in football and played in the
Fiesta Bowl recently.
As is typical in the Biden administration, the National
Labor Relations Board wants to take something we all love,
hyper regulate it, and make it more expensive. Today's hearing
will examine the consequences of the NLRB's misguided effort to
classify student-athletes as employees of the university they
attend.
Already, an unelected bureaucrat at the NLRB deemed the
men's basketball team at Dartmouth College to be employees. In
another case, NLRB's General Counsel is pushing a theory that
the NCAA and the Pac-12 Conference are joint employers of
student-athletes. This is ridiculous and will expose
institutions to massive new liabilities and much higher costs.
Employee status will hurt student-athletes too as they will
have less freedom, lower educational standards and revoked, or
even taxed scholarships if they become employees. I was
fortunate to wrestle during my time at Liberty, so I know some
of the benefits and challenges of being an NCAA student-
athlete. Like 98 percent of student-athletes at the end of my 5
years, I went pro in something other than my sport.
I retired from the wrestling mat and embarked on a 17-year
professional career in finance using the degree that I worked
to obtain. Years later, I returned to Liberty University and
served as the Senior Athletics Director. Given my--the Senior
Associate Athletic Director. Given my experience on both sides
of this issue, I know that the majority of student-athletes and
the schools will be harmed by this proposed change.
Student-athletes do not want to deal with union dues and
employment contracts. The last thing colleges need is to have
to hire more administrators to deal with more Federal
regulations. I believe we can find ways to protect the
interests of student-athletes and their universities without
distorting their relationship and changing the nature of
college athletics.
I look forward to today's discussion. I now yield to the
Ranking Member of the Health Employment Labor and Pensions
Subcommittee for his opening statement.
[The statement of Chairman Good follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
the witnesses for being here today. The labor movement
delivered our Nation's most necessary protections for workers,
including minimum wage, workplace safety laws, and the 5-day
work week. This shifted power from unscrupulous employers, not
all employers, who profit off the backs of workers to giving
employees an opportunity to join together for higher wages,
better benefits, safer workplaces, and protect themselves and
their families.
As much as I enjoy reminiscing about my days in college,
and college athletics, I cannot remember that much about it. I
vaguely remember leather helmets without facemasks by the way.
The world of college sports is vastly different now than it was
then. Today, the collegiate sports industry rakes in billions
of dollars, yet it is college athletes, who are the reason the
industry is so popular, do not fully share in this profitable
industry.
At the same time many college athletes who are exploited
and lack basic health and safety protections. Some have even
experienced food insecurity and homelessness. Against this
backdrop, college athletes are understandably looking for ways
to level the playing field and gain a more equal voice.
That is what this is about, and we should keep that front
and center during today's hearing. The world has changed in
many ways, it has certainly changed for myself and the
Chairman, although he was more recent than I, for participating
in college athletics. We have to understand that reality, and I
think that is what all of us are grappling with here today.
The Dartmouth men's basketball team recently came together
and voted to form a union. They were found to be eligible to do
that by the National Labor Relations Board. They are trying to
ensure that they can advocate for safer playing conditions
among other priorities. Contrary to what we hear today, their
efforts do not mean the end of college athletics, and the sky
is not falling.
Even conservative Trump-appointed Supreme Court Justice
Brett Kavanaugh agrees. Two years ago he said, ``the NCAA
business model would be flatly illegal in almost any other
industry in the United States.''
He continued, ``College and student-athletes could
potentially engage in collective bargaining, or seek some other
negotiated agreement, to provide student-athletes a fair share
of the revenues that they generate for their colleges.''
Justice Kavanaugh.
Similar to athletes at other NCAA ivy league schools,
Dartmouth players only receive need-based scholarships. While
the team generates a considerable amount of revenue for their
university, players have no say in their practice schedules,
and manage part-time jobs to pay their bills and pay high out
of pocket costs for serious injuries from practice and games.
Athletes should be treated like people, not just sources of
revenue for their colleges and universities. We should stand
with them and help them get the support they need in this new
world of college athletics. I hope we can have a real and
meaningful conversation today, and not have this hearing turn
into an attack on labor unions.
I now yield to Mr. Owens for an opening statement.
[The statement of Ranking Member DeSaulnier follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Owens. Thank you. The world of college sports is in a
transformative period. In 2021, the Supreme Court decided NCAA
verses Alston and ushered in college sports into a new era of
name, image and likeness compensation, or NIL for short.
Student-athletes have also gained newfound freedom to
transfer to schools freely, but at its core college sports is
about enhancing the student-athletes' academic experience, and
molding our young people into productive citizens.
All of this could be lost if the radical Biden NLRB has its
way. The Biden NLRB is the most activism, pro-union, government
agency in history. They have taken this opportunity to declare
student-athletes to be employees. At Dartmouth, an
unprecedented NLRB ruling classifies student-athletes as
employees, has paved the way for basketball teams to unionize.
In no world should a scholarship athlete be considered an
employee for playing basketball. Even more ridiculous the
Darthmouth basketball players do not even receive athletic
scholarships, only financial aid based on need. Receiving
clothes and shoes to play a sport you love does not make a
student-athlete an employee.
Classifying student-athletes as employees is an existential
threat to the future of college sports on many campuses,
increased costs in unionization, and administrative headaches
which threaten to make low-funded programs economic and viable,
including many women's sports and small school athletic
programs result in few teams, few scholarships, and fewer
opportunities for young people.
I ran across a quote, real quick, I am going to leave with
you, and I think it kind of states to really what is at risk
here. This is from Al Shanker, an early union president, ``When
school children start paying union dues, that is when I start
representing the interests of school children.'' This is not
about the kids; it is about union dues and their potential of
making a lot of money from the union.
With that being said, I am looking forward to having this
conversation, and make sure we land on the right side of these
college kids. With that, I yield to the Ranking Member for an
opening statement.
[The statement of Chairman Owens follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Ms. Wilson.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Owens, and thank you to the
witnesses for your testimoneys today. As members of this
Committee, our No. 1 priority should be, always, the student's
well-being.
Students' well-being was top of mind 3 years ago when
congressional Democrats singlehandedly passed the American
Rescue Plan Act and delivered emergency financial aid to 18
million college students during the height of the pandemic.
During the turbulent period, we focused on ensuring that
students were set up for success, and I hope that today's
hearing does not deviate from that approach. Since its
inception, the NCAA has prohibited collegiate athletes from
being compensated for their labor. According to the NCAA,
athletes can take scholarships up to the full cost of
attendance in their current educational programs, but they may
not get funds for graduate programs, meals stipends, living
accommodations, or variable educational expenditures.
This puts college athletes who are entirely dependent on
financial aid in an impossible position. Furthermore, the most
essential voice in the room should be that of the college
athletes because without them there would be no collegiate
sports industry. Hear them, see them, and do what is best for
them.
As our witness, Mr. Gaston Pearce notes in his testimony,
the route forward after unionization is undetermined, but we do
know that athletes deserve a seat at the table. Allowing
students to organize unions is an important step toward making
college athletics a safer and more equal place for athletes to
thrive. With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back, and I look forward
to a productive discussion. Thank you.
[The statement of Ranking Member Wilson follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Pursuant to Committee Rule 8-C, all members
who wish to insert written statements into the record may do so
by submitting them to the Committee Clerk electronically in
Microsoft Word format by 5 p.m., 14 days after the date of this
hearing, which is March 26, 2024.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
14 days to allow such statements, and other extraneous
materials referenced in the hearing to be submitted to the
official hearing record.
We will now turn to the introduction of our distinguished
witnesses. Our first witness is Ms. Jill Bodensteiner, I am
sorry, who is the Vice President and Director of Athletics of
Saint Joseph's University, which is located in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
Our second witness is Mr. Tyler Sims, who is a Shareholder
at Littler Mendelson in Tampa, Florida, and who before
attending law school played NCAA Division I Hockey for
Providence College, and then played professionally for 3 years.
Our third witness is Mr. Mark Gaston Pearce, who is the
Executive Director of the Workers' Rights Institute at
Georgetown Law, which is located in Washington, DC.
Our fourth witness is Professor Matthew Mitten, Professor
of Law and Executive Director of the National Sports Institute
at Marquette University Law School, which is located in
Milwaukie, Wisconsin. We thank all of the witnesses for being
here today, and we look forward to your testimony.
Pursuant to Committee rules, we would ask that you would
each limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute summary of your
written statement, and I would also like to remind the
witnesses to be aware of the responsibility to provide accurate
information to the Subcommittee. Now I will recognize Ms.
Bodensteiner, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. JILL BODENSTEINER, VICE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR
OF ATHLETICS, SAINT JOSEPH'S UNIVERSITY, PHILADELPHIA,
PENNSYLVANIA

Ms. Bodensteiner. Good morning, Chairman and Ranking
Members. Thank you so much for the opportunity to testify here
today. My name is Jill Bodensteiner, and I serve as the
Athletic Director at Saint Joseph's University, Philadelphia.
We are a Division I non-football institution, and a member of
the Atlantic Ten Conference.
In my previous career I practiced employment law for 15
years. Before I talk about unions, I want to acknowledge that
the NCAA and its members have to continue to reimagine college
athletics, including the provision of additional resources to
some student-athletes. President Baker's recent proposal
signals the need and the willingness to do exactly that.
I also want to acknowledge that I come from a labor
background, and I am excited about the resurgence of the labor
movement in the United States. That being said, I am convinced
that the unionization of a handful of college student-athletes
is not the answer to the significant issues facing college
sports.
As a threshold matter, I believe that the NLRB Regional
Director's decision in Dartmouth was so broad that NCAA
Division II and III student-athletes, college students who
participate in non-athletic clubs, and actually high school
students could be deemed employees. Furthermore, I believe that
the unionization of some college athletes could actually be
detrimental, both to those student-athletes, and to college
athletics as a whole for four primary reasons.
First, as noted by the NLRB in the Northwestern case, the
core of college athletics is about competition. It is extremely
difficult to exist in a competitive environment when teams are
playing by different rules. It is clear that schools would be
playing by different rules for the following reasons.
First, the NLRA does not apply to public institutions.
Second, the NLRB's Bethany College decision in 2020 would allow
religiously affiliated institutions of higher education to
assert that they are not subject to the jurisdiction of the
NLRA. As has become evident since the 2016 Columbia decision,
just because students can unionize does not mean that they
will.
Second, several legal considerations could lead to
confusing results for student-athletes and college athletics as
a whole. For example, the influence of politics on the NLRB
means that the classification of student-athletes as employees
literally could flip back and forth every 4 years.
Also, because each law has its own definition of employee,
and is adjudicated in different ways, we also have the real
possibility that student-athletes at some institutions could be
deemed employees under the NLRA, not employees under the Fair
Labor Standards Act, and may or may not be employees under the
state's work comp law.
Finally different bargain units, say for example men's
basketball and the woman's basketball bargaining unit could
negotiate different benefits which an institution might be
unable to provide due to Title IX.
Third, there are several issues that could limit the
benefits of a union at best, and at worst may be even
detrimental to student-athletes. For example, the limited
ability to negotiate compensation because such negotiated
outcome would have to comply with current NCAA and potentially
Conference rules.
Next, right now student-athletes receive extensive
financial aid that is not currently taxed. Shifting to wages
would subject them to Federal, State and even local taxes.
Also, a transition from the current comprehensive medical
treatment and insurance model to a State work comp, I believe
would be detrimental to the student-athletes.
Finally, the likely inability of international student-
athletes to fully compete as employees would be detrimental to
that group. Fourth, college athletics as it currently exists is
not structured with the expectation that student-athletes would
be employees. The transition to a student-athlete workforce
could reduce the number of NCAA sports sponsored by
institutions.
NCAA rules require institutions to sponsor a minimum number
of sports to compete at the Division I level. Many of us,
including Saint Joe's, exceed that number so that we can offer
all of the benefits of college athletics to more student-
athletes. These additional sports generally do not generate
revenue. If Division I schools are required to deploy the
resources necessary to support an athlete workforce, for
example, at Saint Joe's we have 480 student-athletes, there
could be many fewer opportunities for student-athletes to
participate in college athletics at all.
In sum, I believe that the limited benefits that unions
could potentially gain for a small group of student-athletes
throughout the United States would not outweigh the
considerable negative impact it could have on student-athletes
and college athletics as a whole. On behalf of my peer
institutions and all of our student-athletes, I want to offer
my appreciation to the members of this Committee for your
consideration of these important issues. Thank you.
[The Statement of Ms. Bodensteiner follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Sims for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. TYLER SIMS, SHAREHOLDER, LITTLER MENDELSON,
TAMPA, FLORIDA

Mr. Sims. Chairman Good and Owens, Ranking Members
DeSaulnier and Wilson, and members of the Subcommittees, I am
so honored and thankful for the opportunity to speak with you
today about a topic that is very important and personal to me.
I am especially humbled to be sitting here with former NLRB
Chairman Mark Pearce, who in the Northwestern decision declined
to exercise jurisdiction over student-athletes, which I
actually wrote about in law school.
I am grateful to be here, to be able to tell you my story.
My wife Casey and I are former Division I athletes. She was a
field hockey player at Towson University, and I played goalie
for the men's ice hockey team at Providence College. Frankly, I
would not be sitting here today without that experience as a
student-athlete.
That experience was just as impactful and critical to my
personal growth, my success in law school, and in my career as
a lawyer, as was the rigorous academic course load I took at
Providence. Some of the many lessons I learned as a student-
athlete include the value of hard work, discipline, teamwork,
multitasking, performing under pressure, and taking
constructive feedback from coaches, even when I did not want to
hear it.
Before going to law school, I tried to follow in my
father's footsteps to the NHL. I played professional hockey for
3 years in the minor leagues for nine different teams in three
different leagues, and was a member of the union called the
Professional Hockey Players Association.
I appreciated the PHPA as professional, and I saw value in
union representation at the professional sports level. The
student-athlete learning experiences over 4 years are
fundamentally different, though, than the experiences I had as
a professional athlete. In fact, it is those experiences that
helped me become a professional athlete, and deal with the
pressures and realities of professional sports.
I think the educational piece of playing a college sport is
often lost in the discussion about whether student-athletes
should be considered employees. I believe Chairman Pearce, and
the rest of the unanimous board members got it right in the
Northwestern case. These are some of the reasons why I do not
believe that student-athletes should be classified as employees
under the National Labor Relations Act.
Any wages and other compensation paid to student-athletes
would be taxed. What about our scholarships that are currently
tax free? The tax code exempts athletic scholarships but does
not exempt scholarships when paid in exchange for services,
like teaching for example. Will student-athletes also have to
pay taxes on scholarships?
In a typical workplace, or in professional sports,
employees must perform well, or they risk losing their jobs,
which is what happened to me a number of times playing
professional hockey. Could my tenure with the school be
terminated at any time if I was not playing well? Would I have
time to work through it and try to improve?
What if the school did not agree to our demands, and the
union called us out on strike? An employer is not required to
play employees on strike. Could I still go to class? Would I
have to pay out of pocket for my tuition? How would that affect
both my academic and athletic career? At Providence I wanted to
become a better hockey player, not only to help my team win,
but to try to make it to the NHL, so I voluntarily put in extra
time on the ice and in the weight room.
Under a collective bargaining agreement, would that be
considered overtime? Would the school let me work overtime?
What about time spent on academics? While we had to maintain a
certain GPA, I wanted to excel in school. Would academics be a
term of employment, and a mandatory subject of bargaining? I
also valued talking directly with my coaches. They taught me
about life, not just hockey.
If I had a problem with my coach taking me out of a game,
could I work it out with my coach directly, or would I have to
go to the union show steward and file a grievance? What if the
cost of fielding an NCAA sport became more expensive for our
school? Would my sport be cut? What about others? What if I
want to transfer? How do I do that under a CBA?
Do I have to be bound by a CBA if I do not want it, or if I
never voted for it? It is not that unions are good or bad, it
is the setting here that is the problem. I needed to learn and
grow as a student-athlete. I did not need to worry about things
like bargaining with the school, or any of the other issues I
mentioned.
I have been thrilled to see the positive changes that
student-athletes have received over the last 10 years, and I
encourage student-athletes to continue to speak up for
themselves and their teammates. However, I also value the
educational purpose behind college athletics. For all the
reasons I mentioned, and those in my written testimony, I do
not believe that classifying student-athletes as employees
under the National Labor Relations Act will be a positive
change for student-athletes.
Again, I really appreciate the opportunity to discuss this
important issue with you. I am happy to respond to any
questions.
[The Statement of Mr. Sims follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Mr. Pearce
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. MARK GASTON PEARCE, PROFESSOR OF LAW AND
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, WORKERS' RIGHTS INSTITUTE, GEORGETOWN LAW,
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Pearce. Chairman Good, Ranking Members DeSaulnier and
Wilson, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today. I was Chair of the
National Labor Relations Board as you know, and it makes me
feel kind of old to hear about somebody in law school reading
my decisions.
In 2023, NCAA recorded nearly 1.3 billion in revenues.
Since its creation in 1906, the NCAA has barred collegiate
athletes from receiving compensation for their labor. Until
recently, athletes were even barred from monetizing their
names, image, and likeness.
Despite the NCAA's record of legal success, trends seem to
be increasingly turned toward defining college athletes in a
different way. Last year, legendary Alabama football coach Nick
Saban endorsed the college football players unionizing. This is
a rapid changing area of the law, and while I am happy to share
my opinion today, I want to clarify that though people still
call me Chairman, I do not speak for the NLRB, or the Biden
administration.
The term ``student-athlete'' was coined by the NCAA's
President and legal team in 1950, as part of a legal strategy
designed to avoid paying a worker's compensation claim to the
widow of a football player who died after an injury sustained
in a game.
The term persists in NCAA and university legal strategies
to perpetuate the myth of purity of amateurism. The reality is
that most college athletes struggle to make ends meet. They
never make it to the professional level and are left with
little or no benefits from those playing days. Many are
academically deprived.
Graduation rates are lower among student-athletes of color
than their white counterparts. Just over 55 percent of black
male college athletes graduated within 6 years compared with 60
percent of all black undergraduates. 69 percent of all college
athletes graduate within 6 years compared to 76 percent of all
undergraduate students.
Racism drives public opposition to paying college athletes.
For decades, the NCAA and collegiate sports have ignored a
perception in the industry prevalent in many communities of
color, a plantation dynamic, in which predominant white
institutions, the NCAA and universities, extract value from
black athletes to pad their own pockets.
On June 21, 2021, the Supreme Court decided NCAA v. Alston,
holding that the NCAA's rules restrict certain educational
related benefits from college athletes. Those restrictions
violate Federal antitrust laws. Now schools may offer these
types of benefits to their athletes, though they are still not
allowed to compensate athletes directly.
On February 5th, the NLRB Regional Director held that
Dartmouth men's basketball players are employees under the
National Labor Relations Act, and 1 month later those
basketball players overwhelmingly voted to unionize, and join
many other student workers at Dartmouth, already unionized, and
represented by the same union.
Although the path forward is unclear, the status quo simply
cannot persist, and it will not. The NCAA is reading the
writing on the wall, so much so that in December of last year,
its President, Charlie Baker, sent a letter to Division I
members proposing the creation of a new subdivision whose
schools would be required to provide significantly greater
compensation for their athletes than current associations
allow.
Current conditions are unsustainable and unjust. It is
worth considering the ideal process through which--to address
the challenges facing college athletes. A collective bargaining
relationship could be the most effective means of doing so, as
opposed to the adversarial approach, collective bargaining
ensures athletes have a seat at the table.
As Justice Kavanaugh alluded, this approach has promise in
creating more just and workable outcomes. I welcome your
questions.
[The Statement of Mr. Pearce follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now hear from Mr. Mitten,
Professor Mitten, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. MATTHEW MITTEN, PROFESSOR OF LAW AND EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, NATIONAL SPORTS LAW INSTITUTE, MARQUETTE UNIVERSITY
LAW SCHOOL, MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN

Mr. Mitten. Thank you. Good morning, Chairmen and Ranking
Members and other Subcommittee members. It is an honor and a
pleasure to testify before you today. For 35 years as a law
professor, I have been studying and writing books and articles
about a wide variety of college sports legal issues.
Since 1906, based on a uniquely American amateur education
model embodying President Theodore Roosevelt's philosophy that
intercollegiate sports should be first-class, healthful play, a
means in life, and organized to permit the largest possible
number of students the chance to take part.
NCAA educational institutions have provided over 5 million
educational and athletic participation opportunities to female
and male students from all socioeconomic backgrounds in a
variety of sports.
From 1906 until the present, intercollegiate athletes have
been full-time students participating in a variety of sports as
extracurricular activities at NCAA colleges and universities.
They currently have higher graduation rates than their non-
athlete student peers. The NCAA's almost 1,100-member
nonprofit, public and private colleges and universities, are
organized into three divisions based on the philosophy and
competitiveness of their respective athletic programs.
In 2023, NCAA member institutions sponsored more than
20,000 intercollegiate men's and women's teams and 36
championship and emerging sports. Most do not generate
sufficient revenues to pay their costs. Student-athletes who
voluntarily choose to play college sports have a contract with
their schools establishing both sides' legal rights and
obligations.
Applicable NCAA divisional and athletic conference rules
are incorporated into and are terms and conditions of the
intercollegiate sports participation contract between a
student-athlete and their college and university. All NCAA
intercollegiate athletes are required to be full-time students,
in good academic standing, and maintain satisfactory progress
toward earning a bachelor's degree.
A 2022 NCAA Constitution retains the Association's
historical, amateur educational model of college sports by
prohibiting pay for play, while permitting student-athletes to
receive educational and other benefits in accordance with
guidelines established by their NCAA division.
State legislatures and courts have refused to characterize
the contract between either a private or public educational
institution as an employment contract for purposes of worker's
comp insurance coverage. Federal appellate courts have rejected
assertions that college athletes are university employees, or
that athletic conferences, or the NCAA, or their joint
employers under the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act.
In 2015, the National Labor Relations Board rejected a
petition to unionize Northwestern University football
scholarship players because it would not further stable
relations. The Board has no jurisdiction over intercollegiate
sports at public universities, which must comply with State
labor laws, and may not allow student-athletes to unionize.
Since 2015, NCAA rules changes have been beneficial, not
detrimental to intercollegiate athletes. The 2022 NCAA
Constitution permits fair market value pay for publicity from
the commercialization of college athletes NIL rates. Student-
athletes currently have greater rights and protections,
including Constitutional commitments by the Association
Division's Athletic Conferences, and member institutions to
protect, support and enhance student-athlete physical and
mental health and safety, and to conduct their activities
without gender discrimination.
Student-athletes also have voting representatives from the
NCAA Board of Governors and highest divisional governing
bodies. Recharacterizing college athletes as employees in 2024,
118 years after the NCAA's founding, threatens to destroy the
historically very successful model of intercollegiate sports,
and raises numerous complex and unprecedented Federal labor law
issues, as well as potential and actual conflicts with other
Federal laws, such as the Fair Labor Standards Act, and Title
IX.
It could result in less favorable treatment of student-
athletes, including their being fired for unsatisfactory sports
performance, more restrictive limits on their earning capacity,
or ability to transfer schools. My concern is that permitting
college athletes to unionize will significantly increase their
cost, and an undesirable consequence will be elimination of
numerous intercollegiate sports teams, particularly non-revenue
generating Olympic and women's teams, or their downgrading to
club sports.
Thank you for considering my testimony, and I welcome your
questions.
[The Statement of Mr. Mitten follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Good. Thank you, Professor Mitten. Under Committee
Rule 9, we will now question witnesses under the 5-minute rule.
I will wait to ask my questions, and therefore I recognize the
Chairman of the Higher Educational Workforce Development
Subcommittee, Mr. Owens from Utah, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. Thank you so much. Ms. Bodensteiner,
most of the student-athletes will never compete professionally
in their sport. In fact, only 1.6 percent of NCAA football
players ever play in NFL. What impact would employee status
have ensuring these college student-athletes can continue to
focus first and foremost on being students, and on their
academic success?
Ms. Bodensteiner. Thank you for your question. I first want
to say that I think it is important to understand the diversity
within college athletics, and a lot of the statements we have
heard pertain primarily to football. I am a non-football
institution. Contrary to bringing in, making a profit, we are
80 percent subsidized by the University in our athletic
department.
This is not a money-making enterprise at most institutions
without football certainly, including Saint Joe's. At Saint
Joe's, our student-athletes graduate at a higher rate than our
regular students, and our student-athletes of color graduate at
a higher rate than our non-student-athletes of color.
I am really proud, as with Dartmouth, in how we do put
academics first. There are a myriad of ways in which we do so.
I think one, in response to your question, one fundamental
issue is would academic matters be subject to bargaining? Some
of the academic support offered, and you know eligibility
rules, those sort of things.
What would, you know, what is the play between collective
bargaining and mandatory subjects of bargaining, versus
academic matters like study hall and extra tutoring, and all
those sort of things. Frankly, I think the answer to the
question of what would change has a lot of to do with the
current engagement of both the institution and the student-
athlete.
At Dartmouth, it is academic first in every sense of the
word, and I think we would try and remain for it to be that way
at Dartmouth and at Saint Joe's, but being employees
fundamentally changes the nature of that relationship.
Mr. Owens. I think somebody mentioned earlier every college
would have to address this differently. Am I correct?
Ms. Bodensteiner. Absolutely.
Mr. Owens. Okay.
Ms. Bodensteiner. We all have different academic
structures.
Mr. Owens. Mr. Sims, like other college student-athletes,
must satisfy certain academic standards to gain admission to
the universities and participate in extracurricular activities,
including sports, there are no academic or educational
requirements for professional athletes.
If student-athletes are deemed to be employees by the NLRB,
would university administrators, and can they be obligated to
negotiate such academic standards with labor unions?
Mr. Sims. Yes. I think that is an--Chairman, I really
appreciate your question. Thank you so much. I really think
that is an unanswered question at this point. As my colleague
stated here whether academics would be a mandatory subject of
bargaining is something that we do not really know at this
point.
Would student-athletes, for example, want to have less
class time, so they could focus more on sports? We do not know
those answers, and frankly, it would fundamentally change the
thought process of the student-athlete, because they would be
focused more, in my opinion, on compensation, and how much
money they are going to make, as opposed to making sure they
get to class, having class requirements.
I remember when I was at Providence, I would get--we would
have check-ins, our coaches would come to class and make sure
that we were there. Would that all change? The answer is we do
not know.
Mr. Owens. Okay. Very good. Professor Mitten, your
testimony provides a historical perspective on American college
athletics. It recounts that college athletes are designed to be
a vital part of the educational system with athletes as an
integral part of the student body. This is unique to America.
Can you discuss the educational athletic opportunities this
system has provided for our young Americans?
Mr. Mitten. Yes. As I mentioned, there has been, I think it
is 5.15 million student-athletes that have had an opportunity
to participate in the sport that they love to get either, you
know, debt free or low-cost college education, depending upon
the divisional level.
Those educational benefits extend beyond just playing a
sport. For example, I have been on the Law School Admissions
Committee at a couple different law schools, including my
current one at Marquette. I can tell you when I see
applications from former intercollegiate athletes, that is a
very big plus factor for me because of the, you know, learning,
teamwork, cooperation.
Not every day is going to go great. The discipline, time
management skills I think is absolutely critical on that. For
me, I have seen it, even though I did not have the good fortune
to be an intercollegiate athlete, the benefits, educational
benefits that extend after the student-athlete has stopped
playing their sport.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Ranking
Member--I will now recognize Mr. Courtney from Connecticut for
5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
the witnesses for your very thoughtful comments. I think this
is really a helpful exercise to sort of tease out, again a lot
of the issues. Mr. Pearce, you know when you were Chairman of
the NLRB, you were there when the Columbia University decision
was handed down that recognized the right of teaching
assistants to organize and unionize.
I have been around in Congress for a little while, and this
certainly has echoes of the same sort of arguments, or the
echoes of the arguments against it, sound familiar today in
terms of just that, you know, these are people who are getting
all kinds of other benefits in their life journey, and that
they really do not belong to be in a category recognized by the
NLRB.
I was wondering if you could just sort of tease out a
little bit more about the fact that the world did not come to
an end when NLRB recognized a right to organize, and that
universities benefited to them probably more than it cost
universities.
That sort of seems very analogous to the situation we are
discussing today.
Mr. Pearce. You are absolutely right. Thank you for that
question. The Columbia decision demonstrated most emphatically
that the quest for a degree as a student is distinguished from
the obligations and the benefits to the school that are gained
through the employment of these students as employees.
Employees have to do work. In this situation, the work of
the college athletes will be playing the sport. The questions
related to whether or not the academics will be imposed upon is
not exactly on point given the fact that the athlete's job will
be playing the sport, and the athlete's activity relative to
his or her degree is being a student. What we learned in
Columbia was that the functioning of students as employees
works very well, and what was instructive in that regard was
the public sector where students had been employees for decades
before the Columbia decision had started, and they have
functioned very well.
In fact, their abilities have been enhanced as a result of
the security that they get.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Thank you for that answer. One thing
that I think is important for everyone to also consider is that
recognizing the right to unionize does not mean that everybody
is going to unionize. I mean we know that only about 10 percent
of the private sector in this country, probably less is
unionized, even though people have the right to unionize.
Public support for unions, by the way, is at a near record
high. That just demonstrates that you know, that does not
necessarily translate into automatic union formation that is
there. In the case of Dartmouth, where they do not get
scholarships. The kids--they do not get scholarships, so for
them the issue of whether they are going to get taxed or just
whatever, was a nonissue.
They had other issues, which were I think very legitimate
in terms of the fact that they were paying out-of-pocket health
costs for injuries which, you know, they incurred as athletes.
Again, these--I represent University of Connecticut. We have a
lot of ACL injuries for our basketball players which are in
some cases, permanent disabilities. That is not an
insignificant concern that the students at Dartmouth have.
By the way, Mr. Chairman, I would like to add to the record
a letter from two of the athletes explaining why we are
unionizing, which I think is a very thoughtful piece. I mean
they are big boys and big girls, they can kind of think through
these issues about whether a union worked for them.
Chairman Good. Without objection.
[The information of Mr. Courtney follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Courtney. Again, particularly in the area of just you
know, health and safety that may be enough for people to decide
they want a union, maybe in other instances it will not, and
that is the way the NLRB works. It is not automatic. You have
got to still go out and hold an election. Is that correct?
Mr. Pearce. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. Courtney. Well, thank you. The one consensus item was
we heard from Ms. Bodensteiner that we need to reimagine
college athletics. Mr. Pearce says the status quo is not
sustainable. I mean we have got to come up with a better plan.
I think the right to unionize would provide some external
pressure to force colleges and universities to think and
reimagine how we treat student-athletes, and with that I yield
back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Mr. Walberg
from Michigan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
panel for being here. This is an important subject. Just last
week, I read the comments of great coach Nick Saban, shortly
after his loss to national champion undefeated University of
Michigan Wolverines. I do not know if I have ever mentioned
that before, go Blue.
It was interesting as he talked about the reason he had
decided to retire. It was not because he lost to Michigan. It
was because some of these athletes were coming in immediately
after that looking to next season and asking him what was in it
for them. Basically, what contracts they would have? What
earning capabilities they would have?
Nick Saban, I think rightly, said to himself this is a new
world. It is not for me. This is not what athletics is all
about. As an athlete, a wrestler, it prepared me for life, but
it was not life. It prepared discipline and character qualities
and all of the rest. Now, to talk about NIL and unionization
and all of the rest, I think unionization is a responsible
thing for their adult lives.
The learning process could be a great hindrance, and I
think Nick Saban saw much of that. When we think about the
impact that athletics has on students, the number of
international athletes that are now competing for the same spot
on teams sharply increased. College athletics serve many
purposes, highlight women's sports, support local communities,
and is an important pillar to the Olympics, very important.
The consequences that we are talking about today are
troubling the impact it could have. Mr. Sims, the NLRB regional
director's decision in the Dartmouth case has consequences to
come, and you have expressed some of them. My district in
Michigan is home to Adrian College, Albion College, Spring
Arbor University, and it could go on with several others, who
compete as private Division III schools with athletic programs.
Significant--Adrian College's significant hockey program.
If the Dartmouth decision is upheld, what do you believe will
happen to other private colleges in Division I, II, III, with
their intercollegiate sports?
Mr. Sims. Thank you for your question. I appreciate it. I
do believe that if student-athletes are classified as employees
and the Dartmouth decision is upheld, I think it could really
change the competitive balance in college sports. You are
dealing with about a third of universities that are private in
the NCAA, so you have about two-thirds that are public
universities.
There are many states around the country that do not allow
public employees to collective bargain. There is also states
like yours in Michigan who have specifically carved out
student-athletes as not employees, public employees, so I think
about the competitive imbalance that could result from it when
you look at all the sports leagues, for example.
Those are league wide bargaining units. The NLRB's history
in issuing decisions around sports leagues have been about
league wide bargaining units. It is something that was even
mentioned in the Northwestern decision that a single team
bargaining unit is something that would be difficult to
imagine, and it would not stabilize labor relations around the
country.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. Ms. Bodensteiner, most universities
do not generate a profit from their athletic programs, as you
have indicated. In fact, we have seen schools over the past
several years drop programs. A few years ago, Michigan State
University, of all places, dropped its men's and women's
swimming program. Lindenwood University in Missouri recently
announced it would cut ten programs.
If the Dartmouth case is upheld, what would the financial
impact be on college athletics programs and their long-term
viability for the majority of schools?
Ms. Bodensteiner. Thank you for the question. I do believe
that the infrastructure required to have, for example, 480
Saint Joe's student-athletes treated as employees, and
depending on the scope of that, we could be talking tracking
hours, timecards, hiring, firing, posting positions,
negotiating potentially with 21 different bargaining units.
The infrastructure alone to support a student-athlete
workforce would be incredibly expensive, and I believe schools
would have very difficult decisions to make.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Thank you, my time has expired. I yield
back.
Chairman Good. We will now recognize Ms. Bonamici from
Oregon for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses. I represent a district in a very labor and worker
friendly State. I am a strong supporter of collective
bargaining for fair and just compensation, benefits, and
working conditions. I do want to note that my State, just a
couple weeks ago, passed legislation prohibiting the NCAA
athletic conferences, or other athletic governing bodies, from
punishing schools and student-athletes for violating the name,
image, likeness rules, although they also added athletic
reputation.
I think these conversations are happening across the
country. College and university athletics, as we know, generate
billions of dollars for the NCAA, but most students do not see
much beyond scholarships that may or may not cover the cost of
their education.
As directed by athletic departments, student-athletes
invest substantial time in practices, workouts, travel, games,
some of which come at the expense of--I see you are shaking
your head, Mr. Sims, and bringing back memories, right--may
come at the expense of attending classes.
Despite this, student-athletes are supposed to be
considered student-athletes, or students first, athletes
second. Thank you, Mr. Pearce, for giving us a little history
about where that came from. Even as the NCAA and the schools
they attend continue to profit. Studies in recent years have
found that anywhere from 25 to 60 percent of Division I
student-athletes have experienced food insecurity.
Even greater numbers of these students have lived below the
Federal poverty line, or continue to do so, so it is no wonder
that some student-athletes are choosing to unionize to get the
rights and benefits they deserve, and I say choosing, because
as Mr. Courtney pointed out, this is a choice. There is an
election.
Mr. Pearce, the NCAA and its respective divisions have
shown that they are not capable of addressing every issue of
concern regarding college athletes in a timely manner. They are
also unable to produce an individualized solution in every
case. What are the advantages of an athlete's union over the
NCAA and division committees trying to resolve particular
issues?
Mr. Pearce. Thank you so much for that question. The
ability for students to unionize gives the students a seat at
the table in real time. A union who knows the concerns of the
particular athletes, and the priorities that the athletes have
with respect to equities and injustices, can bring that forward
in a collaborative way with the university, so that the best
solutions can be hashed out mutually, rather than some kind of
top down approach to say well, we are going to try this, we are
going to try that, and it may not necessarily work.
The importance is that the students need a sense of better
work-life balance. They know how it is imbalanced, and they can
address it most effectively in collective bargaining.
Ms. Bonamici. In other words, the student-athletes' voices
are very important no doubt.
Mr. Pearce. Very much.
Ms. Bonamici. We have heard a lot of talk about that, and
again, as Mr. Courtney pointed out, that happened at Dartmouth.
The students stepped up and made that decision. How would
joining a union, or forming a union be one of the most direct
and effective ways for students to have their voices heard, Mr.
Pearce?
Mr. Pearce. Well, there is an obligation to collectively
bargain. The employee status of athletes gives them the
opportunity to have that seat at the table that I addressed
before. A collective bargaining agreement would have particular
provisions that deal with safeguards like safety, how much it
would affect your study to have to go through the rigors of
sports training and so forth.
Negotiate whether or not they have to fly around across
continents in order to play within the leagues for their games,
and then have to come back with jet lag and try to study. Those
are kind of items that they would be able to negotiate.
Ms. Bonamici. No. I appreciate that. Mr. Pearce, one final
question, some are suggesting that allowing students to --
student-athletes to unionize, not requiring, allowing them to
make that decision and have an election, would be the end of
college athletics as we know it. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Pearce. I do not. Absolutely not because, as we can
see, all of the professional sports teams have been able to
function and make certain adjustments. Each school has its own
unique set of circumstance. Each athlete who decides to
unionize can only unionize if the factors exist based on the
NLRB's assessments. It is not going to be one size fits all at
all.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, and I yield back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Mr. Allen
from Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased that we
are holding a hearing today on this important topic. I believe
the American people deserve choice, and that includes someone
who is looking beyond high school. We talked about higher
education quite a bit here in this Committee over the last few
months. A lot of things going on in college that--and some
folks might want to go directly into the workplace, or go get a
skill, those kinds of things.
There are all kinds of options available today beyond high
school. When it comes--we are talking about athletics here
today, but there are lots of other ways to go to college. You
know, academic scholarships, there are--certain corporations
give scholarships because people have certain abilities.
I played football and all the sports in high school, but my
great talent was a long snapper, and I probably could have
walked on as a long snapper, but not as a scholarship player. I
had a trade I learned how to weld in high school, and I used
that trade to pretty much work my way through college.
That was kind of my choice. There are all kinds of choices
out there and as far as trying to unionize, I do not think--if
you unionize you have got one choice, and everybody makes the
same amount of money. I do not know how you do that because you
take the NIL. The quarterbacks are making a million, and I do
not know the linemen are not making that kind of money. I
worked in a union company, and if you had this level of skill
everybody made the same amount of money.
Talking about name, image and likeness, this is what has
captivated this whole conversation, and now Biden's National
Labor Relations Board has gotten onboard, and said hey, this is
an opportunity to expand its authority, and force student-
athletes into employee status and unionization, which really
will only serve to restrict student freedom, and their ability
to choose exactly what's the right course for them.
Frankly, the very purpose they are there could lower their
educational standards. Because as my friend Burgess Owens said,
only 1 percent, 1 point something percent of these folks go to
the next level, so that education then becomes very valuable.
That is why I am interested in legislation that would ensure
that both football and basketball players in this country are
eligible for the draft directly out of high school.
The athletes coming out of high school today are not the
athletes that came out of high school when I was there. A lot
of those folks are ready. I mean they are ready to play in the
big leagues, and ready to go make--to really be rewarded for
their hard work.
Currently, some athletes are playing college sports for
financial reasons, as illustrated by Coach Saban. As pro sports
collective bargaining agreements though restrict their entering
into the free market, and so nullifying these rules would
empower athletes to make their own decisions about their--
(microphone cut out).
Ms. Bodensteiner. The most popular question I am asked at
cocktail parties is why does the NCAA have a one and done rule
in basketball, and a 3-year rule? People do not understand
those are not NCAA rules, they are collectively bargained. It
is great for the owners because they get to see how athletes
perform at the college level before they invest money and draft
them.
Those collective bargaining agreements, particularly in the
NFL--basketball is getting better with G league and other
options--they have collectively bargained football, high school
student-athletes into one choice only, and that is to attend
college, whether they have any interest in getting an education
or not.
The fact that college athletics is a free minor league for
the National Football League, I mean kudos to the NFL for
pulling it off, but it is put college athletics in a very, very
difficult position.
Mr. Allen. The question here, and I am out of time, but the
question here is do you go to college to get an education, or
do you go to college to further your athletic career?
Ms. Bodensteiner. I think most student-athletes go to
college to get an education, but there is no choice. If you
want to be a pro football player, you have to go to college,
whether you want the education or not.
Mr. Allen. I believe those students should have the
opportunity to go directly to football, and if they want to go
back to college later on they can do that.
Ms. Bodensteiner. Absolutely. Just as baseball and hockey
players do.
Mr. Allen. Exactly. Thank you.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Mr. Takano
from California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. Is it Ms. Bodensteiner? You would be open to
the idea of separating the idea of collegiate education from
public spectacle, the responsibility to provide public
spectacle to the money that accrues from high stakes athletics
where we have created this nexus between universities, and you
know high stakes athletic competition.
In your view there is not necessarily a nexus, or does
there need to be one?
Ms. Bodensteiner. I think that there is an unfortunate
decision that high school football athletes have to make if
they want to go to the NFL, just as many individuals can leave
high school and enter a trade, and do so freely, I think high
school football players are put in a very difficult situation
that they have to go to college as their opportunity to get to
the NFL.
Mr. Takano. Of course, there are risks that accrue to the
collegiate athlete who misses out on an education. That is a
whole other discussion about whether they should be unionized
or not, but could we not draw a distinction between schools
like yours which subsidize all of the athletic programs, versus
those schools where athletics, basketball or football is a high
revenue maker. I mean it subsidizes not only athletics, but one
could even say it subsidizes many other parts of the university
operation.
Ms. Bodensteiner. There are significant differences, and
that is yes, there are significant differences.
Mr. Takano. We ought to be talking on two different planes
here. Mr. Pearce, much of what you have written about I think
applies to the idea that collegiate athletes, many of them
minorities, racial minorities, provide a great amount of value,
value as you said is extracted from them.
They do not necessarily benefit from the value extracted.
In fact, is it not the case in many schools' coaches make more
money than the university President?
Mr. Pearce. That is very true. Yes.
Mr. Takano. Can you give us an idea what those salaries
are? Do you have that off the top of your head?
Mr. Pearce. Oh. Not off the top of my head, but if I were
to say 5 million dollars for a coach's salary, I would not be
off base.
Mr. Takano. I think the American people, if they were to
look squarely at the amount of revenue they generate for the
coach's salary, the amount of revenue they generate for maybe
subsidizing the other athletic programs, but not just that, but
the dependency of many universities on the athletic program to
subsidize many of their other operations, maybe even the
research that goes on there.
That there is something out of whack there that the
students, the athletes themselves generate this revenue, but
what can we say they get in return? Can you comment more on
this sort of imbalance?
Mr. Pearce. Well, the imbalance is substantial. Athletes
are not getting their returns, and the athletes of color who
are playing football and basketball in the powerhouse schools
are through their services, producing so much revenue for the
school that the school is being benefited in other areas that
are not profit making.
The basketball team is in many cases supporting the hockey
team, or the tennis team, or the swimming team. A lot of the
activities that is being subsidized, is subsidized on the backs
of these players.
Mr. Takano. It could even be said that the educational
scholarships allow those other athletes to get an education,
are actually being, it is being won off the backs on the hard
work, the daily training that the athletes in the high revenue
sports provide?
Mr. Pearce. That is correct.
Mr. Takano. This whole idea that a seat at the table in
real time. The NCAA has rules about how many hours an athlete
can work during the term time, and off term time. Are those
rules often not adhered to and violated do you think?
Mr. Pearce. They are substantially not adhered to, and
significantly violated. Testimony by USC players and former
players talk about 40 to 60 hours a week of----
Mr. Takano. I only have 30 seconds left, but the high
stakes nature, the high paid salaries would give incentives to
kind of not observe those rules--the NCAA rules. Would not
collective bargaining give the players the wherewithal, and the
leverage to have those NCAA rules enforced?
Mr. Pearce. That is correct.
Mr. Takano. I would further submit that rather than
speculate whether collective bargaining would violate NCAA
standards, I would say that collective bargaining has a chance,
an opportunity to make sure that those standards are actually
adhered to and enforced, the exact opposite?
Mr. Pearce. Oh, that is correct.
Mr. Takano. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Mr.
Grothman from Wisconsin for 5 minutes.
Mr. Grothman. I have a question for Mr. Mitten. When we
think of college sports, we think I guess of Division I
football, Division I basketball, because that is what is on TV,
and that is what comes to mind. Just looking at one of the non-
Division I colleges in my district, they have baseball,
basketball, football, cross-country, swimming, wrestling,
track, tennis, volleyball, gymnastics, soccer and golf.
You at Marquette have a big-time basketball program,
Division I super stuff. How many other sports do they play at
Marquette other than just Division I basketball?
Mr. Mitten. I think there is roughly a dozen other sports
besides men's and women's basketball.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Marquette is a big deal on Division I
basketball. You have got other colleges like Concordia, or U
Wisconsin-Oshkosh in my district who have no, as far as I know,
income producing sports. Percentage wise, and if you cannot
take a stab at this, someone else can.
What percent of athletes around the country are playing in
income producing sports?
Mr. Mitten. Well, we start with there is roughly I think
it's 525,000 NCAA athletes across all three divisions. The only
sports that typically generate revenues would be some Division
I FBS teams. That would be the ones, the autonomy conferences,
Big Ten, SEC.
Mr. Grothman. Right. Probably not Central Michigan.
Mr. Mitten. That is certainly true. Then you have Division
I men's basketball teams. You do not--of that number, I think
it is probably less than 20,000 if you add up the number of
Division I basketball, men's and women's.
Mr. Grothman. Certainly, well under 5 percent, right?
Mr. Mitten. Yes.
Mr. Grothman. Yes. Therefore, if we said student-athletes
were considered employees, the reason the university world
fights that is because that would make, well both income, but
not income producing sports more expensive to operate, right?
Mr. Mitten. Yes.
Mr. Grothman. Say at Marquette, the cost of operating, I do
not know what all sports you have there, but these other
sports. If you drive up the costs there, and drive up the cost
for your Division I basketball program, what is the way you
deal with increased costs? What are universities obviously
going to do?
Mr. Mitten. Well, then you are going to look to reduce
costs, and I think what is likely to happen is the sports--we
do not want to see a model for example, be just the sports----
Mr. Grothman. You are going to get rid of sports, are you
not?
Mr. Mitten. Yes.
Mr. Grothman. You are going to get rid of a lot, and that
is even in Marquette where you have got the big basketball
team. At Wisconsin at Oshkosh, at Concordia, to name two of the
universities in my district, who are losing money off the top,
can you guess wildly--I suppose it is unfair to do this to you,
guess wildly what sports would disappear? What athletes are
going to lose the chance to play in sports because either they
are classified as employees, or even worse, become unionized?
Mr. Mitten. Well, I would say largely Olympic sport
athletes, some women's sports, of course Title IX requires that
there be gender equity in terms of number of sports
participation opportunities, equal treatment benefit. I think a
number of sports that are now intercollegiate will be
downgraded to club sports.
Mr. Grothman. Tennis, golf, wresting, swimming, that sort
of thing will become club sports, right?
Mr. Mitten. I think that is what is most likely to happen.
Mr. Grothman. Right. The big impact of this on people is a
lot of athletes in what we call non-income producing sports. I
hate to use the phrase minor sports, but they just lose that
opportunity, right?
Mr. Mitten. I think that is what is most likely.
Mr. Grothman. Yes. One other comment, and I want one of you
guys to comment on it. It is my belief right now in smaller
universities, NEIA or Division III, or whatever, that sometimes
the universities use these sports--I know they do, and small
universities, to bring in more tuition revenue.
In other words, in a way they are taking advantage of the
kids because they are saying you are going to have this great
experience here, but they are feeding off of their desire to
continue their high school career. As the result, maybe they do
not wind up with something of value because they have been used
just to get more tuition, get more butts in the seats. Could
one of you guys comment on that?
Ms. Bodensteiner. I will take a stab at that. I think first
of all, you are right to in your questioning, when you think
about our rowers, our tennis athletes, they are benefiting
substantially from their opportunity to participate as
athletes, and I think that is unquestioned.
The amount of enrollment and money being brought in by
athletes is changing significantly, as you look at discount
rates on the rise, and putting athletics aid on top of that. I
think gone are the days that many schools where their revenue
or enrollment driver.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Ms. Adams
from North Carolina for 5 minutes. Apologies. Ms. Manning from
North Carolina for 5 minutes.
Ms. Manning. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our witnesses today. Mr. Pearce, let me start with
you. I think it is clear that we have differing opinions on
this Committee, and there are some who believe that the NLRB
got it right in the Northwestern case when it comes to the
question of college students unionizing, and that the current
Dartmouth case is heading in the wrong direction.
There are others who believe the opposite. Could you talk
to us a little bit about what has changed since the
Northwestern case was decided in 2015?
Mr. Pearce. Thank you so much for that question. I have
been waiting for that one to be asked. Yes. I was Chair when
Northwestern was decided. The phrase ``the Board got it right
with Northwestern,'' is not exactly accurate because the Board
never addressed the question of whether or not these football
players at Northwestern were in fact employees.
What they did was decide the case based on jurisdiction.
The uniqueness of that circumstance was that Northwestern, a
Big Ten school, was the only private school within a sea of
public sector schools in that division.
It is about having an atmosphere where you can have
reasonable cooperative and sensible collective bargaining to
exist. To insert collective bargaining in that atmosphere,
where the Board, and this was prior to the joint employer
decisions, and even prior to the Columbia decision where
students were recognized as employees, was not ready to be able
to insert themselves into a situation where it may be chaotic
given the dynamics of a private sector school within the sea of
public sector schools.
Things have changed substantially since that time. Those
decisions that I just mentioned have been decided. The Supreme
Court has spoken relative to the amount of control that the
NCAA has over the universities, as well as the students, so a
question of a joint employer relationship is very real.
With the Supreme Court saying that the impositions that are
being made by the NCAA creates antitrust violations, it has
caused a clearer view of the relationship that student-athletes
have to their universities vis-a-vis the employer/employee
relationship.
Ms. Manning. That decision made in a different context has
opened up the opportunity for the courts to claim jurisdiction
in this particular case. I want to move to the issue of
injuries because we know that college athletes are inherently
at risk of injury through their participation in sports in
college.
The CDC has estimated that over 210,000 injuries occur
every year with student-athletes with sports like football,
gymnastics, soccer, wrestling having the highest injury rates.
My concern is protecting the health and the safety of these
students. Can you talk to us about what college athletes could
accomplish collectively in a bargaining agreement, not only to
help them when they are injured, but to help them if these
injuries prohibit them from participating in athletics in the
future.
Mr. Pearce. You look to football and basketball contracts
in the professional level where injuries are a significant
factor in that sport. There are provisions in those collective
bargaining agreements that protect athletes so that they do not
lose their ability to continue with their life in a decent way.
Remember, at the outset of the NCAA's determination that
students were student-athletes, it was about denying a worker's
compensation claim to a widow. There had been cases that were
litigated for years relative to college athletes trying to get
compensation for the injury that they sustained while servicing
that school.
Collective bargaining would provide that kind of security,
and it would be mutually beneficial to both the university and
the athletes in the process.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. My time is about to expire, but I
am going to get back to you with a question in writing about
how collective bargaining could prevent students, particularly
female athletes, from issues involving sexual abuse and rape.
We have seen it from, not just from coaches, but from
university doctors.
There have been some pretty horrific cases, so I will get
back to with a question in writing. Thank you, and I yield
back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. I have been a little generous
because I started accidentally going over with one of this
side. We have done it twice on each side. Please remember to
remind you to keep your remarks and the question time to the 5-
minutes because we have several members to still go with the
questions. We will now recognize Mr. Burlison from Missouri for
5 minutes.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is a strange
world. I do not know how we got to this point where we are
considering unionizing college athletes. There is obviously a
lot of--it creates a lot of problems. Ms. Bodensteiner, is that
right, it is likely that the terms of a collective bargaining
agreement between a school and a union representing students,
student-athletes would be inconsistent with the NCAA rules.
For example, players could bargain for higher stipends, or
fewer classes, to remain eligible to participate in collegiate
sports. The university would be put in a bind whether to
bargain over subjects that could result in exclusion from the
NCAA competition. What do you think that the schools should do
in such a situation?
Ms. Bodensteiner. I think for some subjects of bargaining,
absolutely. They could be in conflict. Let us say the topic is
Sunday's off, and your conference has an NCAA tournament has
Sunday games, so I think there could be situations where there
may have to be a collective decision made between the employees
and the employer to say we could do that, but we would not be
able to participate, and let us come to some compromise.
I think there would be many conflicts. Not all. Some things
would be more gloves, as my softball pitcher, who I brought
with me today, provision of equipment and those sorts of things
would not, but certainly many topics would be also the subject
of conference and NCAA rules.
Mr. Burlison. I also understand that most of the programs
at most universities do not generate profits for their athletic
programs, which is in keeping with what it was intended to be,
you know, from the beginning. That it is about academic
performance, academic achievement, athletic achievement, not
necessarily selling ads and selling tickets.
Can you discuss how the universities, how this might
financially impact universities?
Ms. Bodensteiner. Yes. I mean none of our 21 sports
generates a profit. A few generate revenue. We do not sell
tickets to anything other than two sports, and so as I
mentioned earlier, I think just the costs of having a student-
athlete workforce. We currently have 480 student-athletes at
Saint Joe's, and just the infrastructure of human resources,
the bargaining personnel, to manage potentially 21 bargaining
units and 480 employees would be extensive.
Costs that I think decision No. 1 would be OK, if there are
wages now involved, again at institutions like mine, what does
that do to the financial aid? I think that is where the money
would have to come from.
Mr. Burlison. Right.
Ms. Bodensteiner. I worry that the access to collegiate
athletics, or to college would be decreased at some
institutions.
Mr. Burlison. The vast majority of universities that
participate in collegiate sports are not private universities.
These are public institutions, or parochial religiously
affiliated institutions. As I understand it, they would not be
covered, does that create a competitive disadvantage?
Ms. Bodensteiner. That is the difference with Columbia and
teaching assistants, is they are not competing. Then, when you
look at the pros, it is one giant bargaining. It is one group
of players, so yes. Just take the Atlantic Ten Conference.
There are 15 members, 4 publics, and several religiously
affiliated, so that is who we are competing against. When you
try and compete for coaches, and athletic trainers, and
student-athletes, some who would be intrigued by the unions,
some who would not want a piece of it.
The competition is really what makes this different, and
the fact that inherently only a portion of the Atlantic Ten
could be unionized. It makes it very difficult.
Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Ms. Bodensteiner. Professor
Mitten, in professional sports, baseball, you know, MLB, the
NBA, these athletes are judged by their performance on the
field, and they can be cut for poor performance. In contrast,
many student-athletes, including those who receive
scholarships, cannot lose their scholarships, or be kicked out
of school if they do not play well.
As employees, would this change the dynamic? Would student-
athletes be subject to the same job performance standards as
professional athletes?
Mr. Mitten. Well, I think it is very likely that they
could. You are exactly right in that scholarships can be
awarded multi years, four or 5 years at the Division I level.
You cannot take a--a coach cannot take away someone's
scholarship.
Mr. Burlison. Then I quickly have just a little bit of
time, and I want to get this question in because I think it is
important to our country. That is, what is the impact that this
is going to have on our Olympic teams? Many of the athletes in
our Olympic games--who are not paid, they are amateur
athletes--many of them are college athletes. How would this
impact America's ability to have unpaid athletes?
Chairman Good. The gentleman's time is expired. You can
submit a written answer to that question or use your time in
the next if someone calls on you. We will recognize now, Ms.
Adams from North Carolina for 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and
thank you to the witnesses for testifying today before the
Committee. I do understand what it is like to work without
being classified as an employee, as I recall pursuing my Ph.D.
I was a full-time teacher of the class that I had.
I was classified as a teaching assistant, but I did the
work of a professor, and I probably did not get the pay of a
professor. I am certainly happy to see that college athletics
attempt to in the footsteps of the National Labor Relations
Board of Columbia University's decision.
Mr. Pearce, let me ask you, there is a bipartisan interest
in reforming collegiate sports and protecting student-athletes,
preventing student-athletes from being classified as employees.
It would seem to me to be counterproductive toward such
reforms. The NCAA is technically a billion-dollar industry if
you look at the revenue levels year after year.
What would be the rationale or significance in banning
these athletes from collective bargaining, or even organizing
if they technically meet the standard of what is considered an
employee?
Mr. Pearce. Well, the only advantage I can see is that it
keeps the money in the pockets of those who are gaining the
substantial revenues. As you have stated, the NCAA is a multi-
billion-dollar organization. These schools profit significantly
through their partnership with the NCAA.
The whole question of athletes being able to unionize
provides an opportunity for the athletes to get some of that
revenue that they have earned through their labor. We are
talking about sports being a job here. It is a job because of
the benefit that it provides these institutions as well as the
NCAA, and the ability to be able to reap those benefits
equally, or at least significantly by an athlete is necessary,
otherwise we have slavery.
Ms. Adams. Okay. Thank you for that. You know, I have 4H's
that I work on primarily here, hunger, higher education,
housing, and healthcare. I do focus on hunger. I was a little
bit dismayed to see that a 2019 survey revealed that 24 percent
of Division I college athletes experienced food insecurity in
the previous month.
Mr. Pearce, would you explain how unionization of college
athletes can help address widespread hunger faced by the
athletes?
Mr. Pearce. Well, athletes would be able to negotiate their
terms and conditions of employment. The revenues that are
denied them would be able to be negotiated, so that they could
sustain themselves through the resources that the school would
be able to provide. It would also give them the security that
they could continue to have the protections necessary if they
have injuries and the like and cannot play.
Ms. Adams. OK. Let me move on quickly. The NCAA has
internal regulations which seek to protect athletes, such as
the Association's cap on weekly hours toward athletic
activities, which according to NCAA surveys is often violated.
Now will a union help enforce NCAA regulations which seek to
protect athletes? Would it further the cause of creating a
competitive league?
Mr. Pearce. Oh, no question. Just like in any other
industrial contract, if the employer tries to impose more
working conditions than the contract provides, a grievance can
be filed, and that would have to be resolved through a
grievance arbitration process.
Ms. Adams. Okay, great. Well, thank you, and I have 20
seconds left. I am going to yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Good. Thank you very much. We will now recognize
Mr. Bean from Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bean. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good morning
to you. Good morning, Committee, and the witnesses, welcome. I
am glad to have you here, and it is a scary picture we are
looking at, I guess. The road we are going down is just a weird
place to be. I was just talking to Representative Moran where
we are.
Madam Bodensteiner, you said it is a dark road, and there
are some very scary implications should all student-athletes be
employees. What are some of those at the top of your list to
make it scary?
Ms. Bodensteiner. I think maybe even beyond the scariness
is just I am not sure it solves the problems. I acknowledged at
the beginning we have issues to resolve, but I am not sure a
handful of unions representing one sport at one school, or ten
schools around the entire country gets to those issues in an
impactful way.
When you do a cost benefit analysis, and you do look at
that, I think student-athletes, you know, there is no money to
give at Saint Joe's, right? Now they are being taxed instead of
their financial aid, now they are perhaps going through work
comp instead of what I think is one of the most misperceived
issues in college athletics is the very rich treatment and
insurance benefits that we provide.
Happy to go into those in more detail, but I think having
student-athletes file a work comp claim that a university could
deny, and then they go to a work comp judge, I do not see that
helping the athletes at Saint Joe's, so I think they are----
Mr. Bean. It detracts from the purpose of college, which is
preparing young people for the world of which they are about to
embark. Your written testimony is very--it is a lot, so thank
you so much. Professor Mitten, employees can lose their job.
Employees--if student-athletes are employees, let alone whether
they are professional play on the field, but they could get
fired for just not living up to expectations. Is that true?
I mean, we could fire a student employee they could get
fired for not playing well.
Mr. Mitten. Yes. I would not have wanted to have been one
of Rick Patino's basketball players about a month or so ago
when he went off on his rant. Now, there could be some
protections in the collective bargaining agreement, which would
provide for a grievance being filed, but that is a rather
cumbersome procedure, of course.
Mr. Bean. Got you, and I guess it would just depend on what
the contract says?
Mr. Mitten. That is correct.
Mr. Bean. I could play mediocre and still make sure that I
am an employee, I guess. Let is go to Mr. Sims. Mr. Sims, and
you have got a unique perspective because you played in
college, you played professionally, but is it true--I mean I am
just thinking is it true that schools are making their own
decisions, but it is really not fair if one school has
professional paid athletes, and another school does not.
I mean, would not we have to solve this at a conference, or
an overall country level to make sure it is a fair playing
field for all student-athletes.
Mr. Sims. Thank you for the question. I think that is what
I mentioned earlier in one of my answers is it is the
competitive imbalance--it is one of the things that I really--I
think about. I think about the potential for increased costs to
the school that is engaged in collective bargaining, but I
don't think it stops there.
When you think about the Fair Labor Standards Act for
example. If student-athletes are employees under the National
Labor Relations Act, why are not they employees under other
Federal statutes, or State statutes? What increased costs would
that have on a university?
Would they have to be paid minimum wage? Do they have to
track the hours to make sure they are not getting overtime, or
if they are working overtime like I probably did at Providence,
trying to work on my game voluntarily a lot of times, but you
know, would that be additional compensation going out the door
at those specific universities?
It is not only the competitive imbalance, but it is the
other ramifications that come with this decision.
Mr. Bean. Yes. Just from what you are saying too, how it
would change if this were in place when you were playing, can
you comment on how you think it would have affected you when
you were playing? I was a cheerleader back in the day, and I
cannot imagine if I did not stick that pyramid, then I could be
fired if I was an employee. Tell us about yours in just the
brief moment that we have left.
Mr. Sims. Well, thanks for the question. I think it would
have significantly impacted my experience because I would have
been worried about things like bargaining, is the contract that
usually lasts between two and 4 years. Was that good for me
when it was put in place? Does that continue to be good for
student-athletes going forward?
Did the NCAA change any rules, or the Hockey East for
example, change any rules in the off season that now may
violate that contract? There is a lot of different things that
I think about. Worrying about those issues, like bargaining, or
if we are going to go out on strike if we do not come to an
agreement. That is something I was not really interested in
learning about when I was in school.
Mr. Bean. 10-4, thank you so much. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman Good. I think we all just learned why Mr. Bean is
so passionate and spirited about everything here just a moment
ago. Thank you. We will now recognize my good friend from
Virginia, Mr. Scott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Pearce, you
indicated the factors the NLRB will consider when deciding
whether or not a team can unionize. What factors would they
consider?
Mr. Pearce. Well, thank you for that question, and how are
you doing, Mr. Scott? It is good to see you again. The
important fact to consider is the degree of control that the
university has over the students with respect to their
responsibilities and their obligations in training and
performing the sport.
How it affects their life, their student life throughout.
There has been testimony where students have to work 40 to 60
hours. They have to comply with particular regulations. They
have to get approval to even get haircuts. Some students have
been required to get scanned, and they hire a gestapo of
students to follow them around to make sure that they are going
to class.
Those kind of elements of control are key elements in
determining whether or not the relationship is an employer
relationship. The other factor is the compensation that they
receive. They receive scholarships as a result of being able to
play. The Dartmouth students received early admissions after
being recruited, and got gear, paraphernalia, being flown all
over the country, as well as sports tickets, all of these
things that have value.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. What are the potential bargaining
units? Is it just the team? Could it be all student-athletes at
a school, or the whole Conference? What would the bargaining
unit be?
Mr. Pearce. Well, the bargaining unit would be only the
team. It is only the team that has petitioned to be unionized
in the Dartmouth circumstance. Any petitions that get filed by
different teams will have to be weighed by the standards that
they NLRB uses and determines who constitutes an employee, and
whether or not that group of employees constitute a bargaining
unit for collective bargaining.
The only affected students in this scenario are the 13
students that voted to unionize in this situation.
Mr. Scott. Dartmouth is an interesting case because they do
not have athletic scholarships. They only have need-based
scholarships. Does it make a difference whether or not your
scholarship is based on your commitment to play sports?
Mr. Pearce. It does not--it did not make a difference in
the Dartmouth situation because the compensation was not
determined based on the athletic scholarships. It was based on
what I had described before. These students were recruited, got
early admission, they get all of this paraphernalia, their
equipment, they are sent all over, and paid for their lodging
and so forth.
Those are the kind of criteria in making determinations in
this case, of the compensation received.
Mr. Scott. Mr. Sims, did I understand that if you get an
athletic scholarship, you cannot be cut from the team?
Mr. Sims. The NCAA recently passed rules that are in place
now, not just at the Power Five Conference level, the FBS
Autonomy Conference, but across all Division I schools that if
you receive a 4-year scholarship going into school, you
cannot--that scholarship cannot be revoked for athletic
purposes. Before that, it was a 1-year renewable scholarship.
Mr. Scott. Can you be cut from the team?
Mr. Sims. I did not have anybody that was cut from a team
when I played. I do not know anybody that was for athletic
performance reasons. There were people that left because they
were not getting the playing time they hoped for, so maybe they
left or transferred, but I did not have anybody that was cut
from the team.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Mr. Pearce, how is playing sports as a
requirement to achieve your financial aid package different
from working say in the library as a condition of being able to
afford college?
Mr. Pearce. There is not much difference because there is a
quid pro quo. If you want the scholarship through the financial
aid package, you have to do the performance. You fail to do the
performance, then it would jeopardize your financial aid. There
is a distinct similarity. Now, I would like to also say that if
an athlete does not perform--
Chairman Good. The gentleman's time has expired. We will
now recognize Ms. McBath from Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you so much, Chairs Good and Owens, and
Ranking Members DeSaulnier and Wilson, of the HELP and Higher
Education Subcommittee for hosting today's timely discussion.
Mr. Pearce, if there is anything else that you would like to go
ahead and complete, please do.
Mr. Pearce. Oh. I was just going to say that the difference
between being a student and having a job playing sports in the
school is that if you do not perform in the sports, you do get
cut. You do get benched. The USC former students testified to
having had their same players' lockers get cleaned out because
the player left practice early.
Sure. They were still students, but their job of playing
the sports was gone.
Mrs. McBath. Thank you for that. This is a really
complicated situation, and I am glad to see that you are here
today to begin to discuss this in earnest at the Committee
level. Student-athletes must be treated with dignity and
respect, and I think that is what we are here to all talk about
today.
They need to be fairly compensated for their efforts, while
we also ensure that schools, both large and small, can continue
to provide the high quality educational and athletic
opportunities for students that we have come to expect of them.
I think we can all agree that no student in this country
should be in the situation where they attend class, or practice
while not knowing where their next nutritious meal is going to
come from, or whether they are going to be able to find
someplace to sleep at night.
While this is not the reality for most of our collegiate
athletes, it happens to too many of them, and we need to do
everything that we can to ensure that all students' needs are
being met, especially while they are under the increased
pressure and responsibility of being on a collegiate sports
team.
Students are rightfully concerned about their futures and
are looking to their leaders for solutions, not for politics.
Now is not the time to scare our students with highly unlikely,
worst-case scenarios and bad faith exaggerations of the impacts
that this recent NLRB decision will have on collegiate sports,
and even high school sports as claimed by some.
We must remember that this applies to just one team at just
one private university in a very specific situation. A one size
fits all solution does not work here, as exemplified by the
complexity and the uniqueness of this topic, and I look forward
to continuing this conversation with my colleagues on this
Committee, and our universities in Georgia, which I represent,
to ensure that any action that we take is going to always put
the education of our students first, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Ms. Hayes
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. Thank you to our witnesses for being
here today. I am from Connecticut and for a long time we did
not have a professional sports team. Now we have the WNBA
Connecticut Sun, so college basketball is our sport. Although
the NLRB does not cover State schools, I know the benefit of
UCONN basketball for the State of Connecticut and our economy.
It is worth noting that for years the two highest paid
State employees in Connecticut are the men and women's
basketball coaches, respectively. College athletics has become
a multi-billion dollar industry. This past fiscal year, the
National Collegiate Athletic Association, or NCAA, brought in
1.3 billion dollars in revenue.
In Fiscal Year 2022, the most prominent athletic
conferences of the NCAA reported more than 3.3 billion dollars
in revenue, thanks to the hard work of their collegiate
athletes. Not only are these athletes not fairly compensated
for the value they provide, or skills they possess, but their
basic needs are often not being met. A 2019 Hope Center for
College Community and Justice survey found that almost 24
percent of Division I athletes experienced food insecurity in
the month before the reporting period.
Further, a 2022 study published by the National Institutes
of Health found food insecurity more prevalent among college
athletes, compared to the general university population. Ms.
Bodensteiner, do college athletic scholarships at Saint Joseph
University include a meal stipend? Additionally, are the
athletes on partial or no scholarships provided with food
assistance?
Mr. Bodensteiner. Thank you for your question. The amount
of scholarship depends on how much athletic aid the coaches
have, and how much they can give. Some are on full room and
board, some are not. When they are participating in athletics,
meals incidental to that participation are covered by the
university.
Mrs. Hayes. Last month--thank you. Last month, I introduced
the Closing the College Hunger Gap, legislation that would
direct the U.S. Secretary of Education to notify college
students of their eligibility for SNAP based on information
reported through the FAFSA form. Ms. Bodensteiner, do you
believe that legislative efforts could help to make sure that
college students are receiving meals while they are on the
university campus?
Ms. Bodensteiner. I think all students need to and deserve
to have meals when they are on campus. I have been, you know,
horrified at the concept of reducing or doing away with Pell
Grants. That has been spoken about, and athletes can receive
Pell Grants, and many do, although at our institutions it is
less than 10 percent who are Pell Grant eligible, but I am in
favor of any legislation that helps give college students in
general access to food.
Mrs. Hayes. I did not expect for you to be my favorite
witness today but thank you for that because I too agree with
those things wholeheartedly, all students. Hungry kids do not
learn, and for a student to be expected to play sports, and not
have food just exacerbates that issue.
In 2015, athletes in football, baseball, men's basketball,
and women's basketball, individual and sports, reportedly spent
about 40 hours a week on athletic activities in addition to the
hours spent on academics. Dartmouth basketball players cited
their struggle to pay bills as one reason, they decided, behind
their decision to unionize.
Mr. Sims, in your opening you raise questions about tax
status, overtime, and what the definition of an employee is.
Are all these things issues that could be negotiated at the
bargaining table, and agreed to by both sides, the students and
the employers, or the universities?
Mr. Sims. Thank you so much for your question. Yes, those
issues certainly would be issues that would be collectively
bargained. The question is whether the university or the union
on the other side would agree, and that is a lot of the
uncertainty that I spoke about in my opening statement was
about the uncertainty in collective bargaining, and how that
would play out.
Mrs. Hayes. Again, is that the point of collective
bargaining, to bring those questions to the table and get both
sides to come to a compromise? I mean every time a union goes
to the table there is uncertainty about what is going to happen
on both sides that actually is the basic premise behind
collective bargaining.
Mr. Sims. Correct. That is the premise behind it, but
collective bargaining only requires you to bargain in good
faith. It does not require you to agree to the other side's
proposals. Again, the question is the uncertainty of whether
that would actually benefit the student-athletes, or not
benefit the student-athletes. That is really part of where my
concern was.
Mrs. Hayes. If it does not benefit, the athletes have the
opportunity to walk away. My time is expired. Thank you all for
your testimony today. I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you, and I now recognize Chairman Foxx
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Bodensteiner, an
NLRB regional director recently found that the men's basketball
players at Dartmouth College are employees. The student-athlete
subsequently voted to join a union. Can you discuss what impact
this decision could have on competition in college athletics?
Ms. Bodensteiner. Thank you for the question. We will start
with the decision itself, which I thought was interesting in
terms of the fact that Dartmouth student-athletes receive no
athletics aid. Their financial aid is purely need based, so
this is a very unusual, I think, application. It is also ironic
in that the exact factors that are deemed to be ``control,''
are also, you know, how student-athletes travel, where they
stay on the road, are also to protect them.
If we sent them out in their own cars and had them find
their own Airbnb, we would be here in a different direction. I
thought those were a very interesting application of the facts.
As I mentioned here before, I am not anti-union at all. I just
am worried about the fact that there would only be a handful of
unions in a competitive environment that would create even my
own conference, the Atlantic Ten, where only a few of the
schools would be subject to unionization, would make it very
difficult, as Chairman Gaston Pearce recognized in
Northwestern, to complete on a level playing field.
Recruiting athletes, recruiting coaches, recruiting
athletic trainers when one is operating under a student-athlete
workforce, and the others are not, I think would be incredibly
difficult.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much. Professor Mitten,
collegiate sports have undergone transformational change in
recent years. Student-athletes may monetize their name, image
and likeness, and more freely transfer schools without losing
eligibility. Given these significant changes, do requirements
still exist to maintain the educational privacy of
intercollegiate sports?
Mr. Mitten. Yes, very much so, Chairwoman Foxx. If you look
at the 2022 NCAA Constitution, student-athletes are much better
off than they were in 2015. In fact, I would say there is no
better time in the history of the NCAA, going all the way back
to 1906, student-athletes have it very well. I mean there is
scholarship protections at the Division I level.
They can get multi-year scholarships. Full cost of
attendance scholarships, and individual schools if they want
can provide academic bonuses. Above that, just simply for
meeting grades you can get up to almost $6,000.00 if a school
chooses to do it, and then certainly NIL rights. There are some
athletes that are getting six and seven figure deals.
Mrs. Foxx. Well, I think it has always been significant
that we do say student-athletes. Mr. Sims, in your written
testimony you note that you do not believe--you believe it is
not in a student-athlete's best interest to be classified as
employees under the National Labor Relations Act.
Can you discuss why you believe that, and explain some of
the potential consequences of unionization on student-athletes?
Mr. Sims. Thank you for the question, Chairwoman. As I
spoke about earlier in my opening testimony, I have many
concerns about unionization, and whether it would result in
positive outcomes or not. The first issue being compensation
and taxes.
Right now, the IRS exempts, currently exempts, athletic
scholarships, but the IRS does not exempt scholarships that are
based on providing services like teaching, for example. Would
that exemption status change, and would you know, student-
athletes have to pay significant tax bills at the end of the
year on their athletic scholarships?
The uncertainty of scheduling and overtime, would there be
a provision in the collective bargaining agreement that would
not allow me to voluntarily continue to work on my craft, or go
to tutoring or extra classes? Those are some of the examples
that I gave and have in my written testimony.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you all very much for being here. This is
a big topic these days, and I think you have shed a lot of
light on the issue for us, and given us information that is
useful, very useful, to the Committee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you, Dr. Foxx. We will now recognize
Ms. Wild from Pennsylvania for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Excuse my froggy voice.
Mr. Pearce, thank you so much for your testimony and your
written materials. They were helpful. I have heard a lot of sky
is falling rhetoric this morning regarding what will happen
because of the Dartmouth case. I would like your help in
contextualizing that case.
Am I correct that the Dartmouth case only affects their
men's basketball team, not their women's team, or their
volleyball teams, or other teams at Dartmouth?
Mr. Pearce. That is correct.
Mrs. Wild. Thank you. It does not automatically affect
other schools. Am I right about that? Or will it only affect
other schools if athletes pursue employment recognition through
the law and insist that they are similarly situated?
Mr. Pearce. That is correct.
Mrs. Wild. OK. The other concern I have is about smaller
colleges and universities that have fewer resources, without
huge endowments and so forth. I am concerned about the
potential impact of a universal student-athlete employee
classification, and whether it would affect the ability of the
smaller schools to support their athletic programs. Do you have
any thoughts on that?
Mr. Pearce. Yes. My thought is that the university as an
employer has to make decisions as to what they can afford and
what they cannot. They do it all the time. They subsidize
things that they need. They make a cost benefit analysis as to
whether or not that which they subsidized brings value to the
school and has a contingent.
The Dartmouth students in the cafeteria are unionized. That
cafeteria has run at a deficit forever. They were able to
negotiate a collective bargaining agreement where their pay was
three times that of the New Hampshire minimum wage because the
university saw the value in providing this benefit for these
students.
Likewise, this will be the case in other circumstances with
other universities on a case-by-case basis because the value
that they see translates to goodwill, to increased enrollment,
to alumni contributions and the like. That is the value that is
brought by the services that have been provided.
Whether or not an institution runs at a loss or a profit,
does not have anything to do with whether or not these are
employees. Amazon had billions of dollars lost last year. Their
employees were not converted to some other status. They were
still employees.
Mrs. Wild. I also wanted to discuss with you the fact that
private institutions like Northwestern are governed by the
NLRA, and public institutions are generally governed by State
law. How does that affect the students and their ability to
organize?
Mr. Pearce. Well, that is a question that still remains.
The General Counsel has a theory. She says that the NCAA, which
is a partner with these universities, so much so that it is a
joint employer with the universities, and should be at the
bargaining table, is a private entity that the NLRB has
jurisdiction over.
The partnership between the NCAA, and even a public sector
university, under certain theories of the case law could bring
that public sector institution under the jurisdiction of the
National Labor Relations Board. That is something that the
Board itself has not weighed in on, but that could be asserted.
Mrs. Wild. Okay, great. I find myself with the enviable
position of having a few seconds left. Much of this
conversation is centered around men's teams. What is being done
by the NLRB to consider the protection of academic and athletic
opportunities for women student-athletes?
Mr. Pearce. Well, if women's teams are in a position to
file a petition to be unionized, and they have met the employee
criteria that has been established in cases like the Dartmouth
case, they can well be found to be employees and can unionize.
Mrs. Wild. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Mr.
Thompson from Pennsylvania for 5 minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Chairman, thank you so much, and thank you to
all of our witnesses for being here today. Just since my time
arriving in Congress, the landscape of college athletics really
has shifted significantly. We all know the system is at an
inflection point as we deal with ramifications of name, image,
likeness, or NIL.
While NIL is not the focus of the discussion here today,
and largely not within the jurisdiction of this Committee, it
is absolutely critical that Congress come together and provide
a clear set of rules for states, institutions, supporters, and
most important, student-athletes.
I remain concerned that without key safeguards, oversight
and a proper regulatory framework, the current NIL market is
unstable, and it leaves student-athletes vulnerable. As for the
focus of today's hearing, I am proud to represent colleges and
universities of all sizes and athletic affiliation in
Pennsylvania's 15th congressional District, ranging from large
Division I programs like Penn State, to Division III
institutions like the University of Pittsburgh at Bradford, and
quite frankly everything in between.
While these institutions have many differences, one thing I
consistently hear from faculty, staff, administrators, and
student-athletes are profound concerns over reclassifying
student-athletes as employees. The cornerstone of college
athletics has always been the ability of individuals to earn a
college degree, while participating in their sport of choice.
In fact, even as the NCAA sees record participation in
collegiate athletic programs, only a small fraction of student-
athletes will go professional. The college degree offers
students the skills and knowledge to succeed in their careers
beyond athletics, yet the National Labor Relations Board
threatens these opportunities for young men and women around
the country.
Ms. Bodensteiner, I am proud to see a fellow Pennsylvanian
here today and thank you for being with us. What most people do
not understand, as you noted in your testimony, is that most
universities, including many large institutions that have
successful Division I programs, do not generate a profit from
their athletic programs.
My first question for you is if the NLRB's decision in the
Dartmouth case is upheld, and student-athletes are classified
as employees, what would the financial impact be on college
athletic programs?
Ms. Bodensteiner. Thank you for your question, and for your
service to our State. The college athletics is not currently
set up to manage a student-athlete workforce. We have 480
student-athletes. The administrative and infrastructure that
would be required, and as Chairman Gaston Pearce noted, there
could be 21 different bargaining units among 21 sports.
That would be an incredible expense to the institution to
try and manage that. Not to mention if there were negotiated
benefits as part of that, so I think the cost to institutions
would be great and thank you also for acknowledging.
At Saint Joseph's University, where we do not make a net
profit by any means, our coaches are teachers. We are here
because you know, 95 percent of women who have reached the C
suite in Fortune 500 were athletes. That is why we are doing
what we do.
To change this from the teaching, the mentoring and the
developing into a student-athlete workforce would be
incredibly--go against everything, every reason we support it,
but more importantly would cost a lot of money.
Mr. Thompson. Can you discuss how universities would react
to the increased costs of operating athletic programs, the
overhead costs would be significant, including any potential
cuts you see being made?
Ms. Bodensteiner. I cannot speak on behalf of my
university, but I think just in talking to athletic directors,
I think difficult decisions could have to be made in terms of
how many student-athletes is the right number, and how many
sports you can continue to sponsor to support a student-athlete
workforce.
Mr. Thompson. It seems to me that increased overhead costs
will once again become a cost item by which tuition will be
reflected in increased tuition. This is a Committee that has
been obviously committed to making higher education more
affordable, and this is counter intuitive to affordability and
higher education.
If the NLRB is permitted to treat student-athletes who do
not even receive athletic scholarships as employees, would that
impact other students participating in extracurricular
activities, such as music, theater, marching band?
Ms. Bodensteiner. If you apply the original director's
decision in Dartmouth, and we now have some band and cheer
getting scholarships to participate in activities. We have a
theory that financial aid is one thing, but financial aid and
an invitation to belong is more powerful.
Could really look at a lot of extracurricular activities
under the breadth and scope of the Dartmouth and say that
absolutely the band members could be employees. They receive
gear. They receive lodging when they support our team, and so I
believe that they could be considered employees.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize Mr. Banks
from Indiana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to each of you
for being here, and I know you have already answered many
questions, but Mr. Sims, you have a unique perspective as a
labor lawyer, and a former college athlete. From your
perspective, I think you have already answered this, but would
college athletics be able to sustain itself if student-athletes
became employees?
Mr. Sims. Thank you for the question. One of the stats that
I included in my written testimony that I think is very
powerful is we have already seen how increased costs or less
revenue has affected college sports. You have to look no
further than the COVID-19 pandemic issues that colleges dealt
with, and in total--excuse me, 112 Division I sports were cut
by 35 schools and 77 still have not been reinstated.
Between March 11 and November 6 of 2020, a total of 352
NCAA sports programs were cut, and the vast majority of those
programs were Olympic sports. Given your question, given the
administrative costs that could come down the line and
potential increased costs if you know, a single unit, or a
couple units were able to bargain for, you know, increased
compensation, or increased benefits.
I am concerned that these numbers will start showing
themselves again.
Mr. Banks. If student-athletes did become employees, could
universities implement non-compete clauses restricting them
from transferring, technically?
Mr. Sims. Thank you for the question. I certainly think
that is possible as I discussed with you previously, collective
bargaining brings a lot of uncertainty, so whether employees
can transfer, whether they are not allowed to transfer, we do
not know how that is going to play out in a collective
bargaining environment.
Mr. Banks. Could student-athlete employees be subject to
performance reviews?
Mr. Sims. Well, based on my experience negotiating
collective bargaining agreements, and dealing directly with
labor unions, certainly performance reviews are possible.
Again, it depends on what is negotiated into the collective
bargaining agreement. As I have previously stated when I played
professional hockey for 3 years, I played on nine different
teams.
I got cut. I got called up. I got sent down, and certainly
some of those were performance reasons, and those are the type
of things that I would expect to see if a university was
compensating student-athletes for their performance and their
playing proficiency. I could certainly see those type of issues
coming up.
Mr. Banks. Could student-athlete employees be terminated
for poor play, or laid off for poor performance?
Mr. Sims. That is certainly a possibility, and something
that universities would want to include in a collective
bargaining agreement, especially if they do agree to certain
additional benefits.
Mr. Banks. Could student-athletes who are allowed to
transfer, could they immediately play for a new school under
current rules? They could now?
Mr. Sims. Yes.
Mr. Banks. That could be changed if they become student-
athlete employees.
Mr. Sims. Sure. Under a collective bargaining agreement the
transfer portal, there would be questions about what that would
be. Right now, they can transfer and immediately play for
another school. If you have a collective bargaining agreement
with your school, there may be a provision in there that
prevents the student-athletes from doing that.
Mr. Banks. I imagine the same answer would apply to this,
if they became employees could there be a financial penalty for
athletes that transferred to another school?
Mr. Sims. Again, that is possible, depending on what is in
the collective bargaining agreement.
Mr. Banks. If a student-athlete, employee was unionized,
how would that impact the process of transferring to another
school?
Mr. Sims. I think it would impact it in the sense that we
talked about that you know the NCAA currently has the transfer
portal where students can transfer freely, and play
immediately, as opposed to sitting out a year, which was the
previous rule. An individual collective bargaining agreement
may render that transfer portal ineffective for those students.
Mr. Banks. How many years of eligibility will athletes have
as employees? You and I are making the same point.
Mr. Sims. That is a really good question. I do not know
what the years of eligibility would be. Would they try to
negotiate more than 4 years of eligibility in a contract? That
is possible.
Mr. Banks. They get paid, so they might want to stick
around longer. I think you and I are making the same point.
Today's student-athletes have a lot of flexibility, and if they
become unionized, or collective bargaining under this situation
we are taking away it seems to me, you can disagree, we are
taking away a lot of flexibility from student-athletes.
Mr. Sims. It is not only the flexibility, it is the
student-athletes coming into the school and being potentially
subject to that collective bargaining agreement that they never
agreed to, right? Choosing not to go to that school because
they have a collective bargaining agreement, and that school
potentially is suffering.
Mr. Banks. It seems like we are opening Pandora's box.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. We will now recognize our Ranking
Member for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Pearce, you
mentioned the case in 1950 where the NCAA defined student-
athlete, and we have argued with this, about this to a certain
degree in Olympics and college athletics as well, what is, are
they really amateurs or not?
In that case, I found that fascinating. I did not realize
that what you said in your testimony was student-athlete was
put in place to protect the institution, the NCAA, from
potential lawsuit from somebody. Could you elaborate on that?
Just as from the NLRB's position, if it walks like a duck and
quacks like a duck, it does not seem like it was ever really
amateur at some level.
Mr. Pearce. Well, it was a defensive strategy on the part
of the NCAA in the 1950's to preserve it from lawsuits. There
was a lawsuit that was filed because of the wrongful death of
an athlete who was playing football and died during the course
of that. Consequently, this term of art, ``student-athlete,''
which stressed the amateurism in order to be able to argue that
this student was not an employee, but a student, and therefore
they would be escaping liability.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Right.
Mr. Pearce. It was the concern about liability, not the
whole notion of the purity of amateurism, that was the
motivating factor in that determination. That persists in the
subsequent litigations where athletes have sued their
universities because of the injuries that they sustained.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Was not that part of the Alston decision,
which was a unanimous decision. The opinion was written by a
Trump appointee, Justice Gorsuch. I have already used a quote
from Kavanaugh. Was that acknowledging what we have been living
under? I mean from a legal standpoint, the Supreme Court said
these are not amateurs.
Mr. Pearce. That is right. The Supreme Court further said
that collective bargaining is warranted because of the
imposition on the lives and livelihoods of these athletes that
the NCAA creates.
Mr. DeSaulnier. There are a lot of decisions I do not agree
with, with the current Supreme Court, so Congress would have to
correct it. This is separate from name, image, and likeness,
would it not, or could it.
Mr. Pearce. Yes. That is right.
Mr. DeSaulnier. It would only--we would have to really make
it a strict defining line as to what is amateur and what is
compensation?
Mr. Pearce. I think so, yes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Explain to me a little bit about how you
would perceive the NLRB dealing with this situation as has been
expressed having gone to a private catholic college and playing
minor sports. How do you deal with the competition aspect? To
some degree I could see for instance, in the case of Dartmouth,
SEIU representing them, but collectively bargaining in a
pattern base for all of the student-athletes in the school.
How would the NLRB approach that? How would they discern
who is outstanding or not.
Mr. Pearce. Well, with respect--I am hearing two questions
here because--and I will answer one, or I will answer what I
understand in case I am misunderstanding you. If we are
concerned about a proliferation of bargaining units within a
university because each----
Mr. DeSaulnier. Excuse me, I am not. I am concerned about
protecting the students.
Mr. Pearce. Right.
Mr. DeSaulnier. As employees. You could have SEIU come in
and represent all of them with the students agreeing to that.
Mr. Pearce. Exactly. That would be something that the union
could--unions could do after they get certified as the
exclusive representative.
Mr. DeSaulnier. My question is how would the NLRB approach
that?
Mr. Pearce. What the NLRB would do is if the unions each
have established themselves as the representatives of each of
the teams, and they decide to join together as an amalgamation
to bargain as a group with the university, the NLRB would
certainly permit that and recognize that, just like a multi-
employer bargaining is permissible.
Mr. DeSaulnier. They would just wait to see what the
prospective bargaining units would bring to them?
Mr. Pearce. That is right.
Mr. DeSaulnier. OK. Thank you all. Thank you very much. I
yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes. There has been a lot of misrepresentations or
misunderstandings presented today on the true reality of
college athletics today, what happens on college campuses,
particularly as it relates to our student-athletes. Most
underprivileged student-athletes are on full scholarship, as
football and basketball players, predominantly, and they get
many financial benefits beyond tuition, room and board, books
and fees in the range of $1,000.00 a month for full cost of
attendance, academic incentives, a Pell Grant and so forth, as
has already been noted.
Most of the Olympic sports are very expensive to compete
in, and to get to the level, the travel club level that
requires a lot of parental investment in order to get to the
collegiate skill level, and most college student-athletes are
in fact not on scholarship. Let me say that again. Most college
student-athletes are not on scholarship, and they are willing
participants, and they are the envy of the rest of campus, and
the envy of their high school teammates who did not have the
ability to continue in college.
That is the reality of the student-athletes that we are
talking about on a typical college campus. I appreciate all of
our witnesses today. Ms. Bodensteiner, other than football and
basketball, we have talked about many times how the other
sports do not typically always generate revenue with very rare
exceptions, unique situations.
Would you venture to estimate what the cost of employment
status might be for the typical D-1 university? What would that
cost be maybe on a monthly, weekly, annual basis?
Ms. Bodensteiner. I have not thought through it from that
perspective, but I can say that adding 480 student-athlete
employees would be about the same number of employees we have
currently, so you can assume you would double your human
resources department. I think the infrastructure would be
considerable.
Chairman Good. Well, I will just give some estimated raw
numbers. Let us just say you have got typically 500 student-
athletes at a D-1 school. Let us say you are going to pay them
$20.00 an hour. I do not know if they would negotiate if Mr.
Pearce, and others have their way for $20.00 an hour, but let
us say it was $20.00 an hour for 20 hours a week, and they do
not work more than 20 hours a week.
That is just not--that is a misrepresentation also, by the
way. Let us say you had to pay them 400 bucks a week times 500
student-athletes, that is $200,000.00 a week. If you annualize
that, and I realize they do not--they are not the full 20 hours
a week during the so-called off season. There is no off season,
but that is some 10 million dollars a year for the typical D-1
institution.
What would happen, if you want to talk about what happened
to women's sports if that were the case. Schools might decide
well I do not want to pay this amount of money to provide this
student-athlete experience for non-scholarship athletes.
Even women's sports, men's Olympic sports would be most
impacted. We might decide we do not want golf. We do not want
track, we do not know you know, wrestling. We do not want these
other events. I know you have talked about something, talk
about the impact that it might have on women's sports, but also
men's sports that are on Title IX protection?
Ms. Bodensteiner. Yes. I think the first unfortunate thing
would be a transforming or transitioning financial aid into the
wages, and so I think again financial aid provides college
access to so many student-athletes throughout the country.
Women's sports are largely protected by Title IX, not that
everyone follows Title IX, and adheres to it.
I think--I do worry about men's and women's sports
altogether, as you mentioned, that do not generate any revenue,
which at most schools is several of the sports. You think about
it, it has been mentioned here today about the Olympic
development program, which is really colleges and universities
are non-governing boards, are U.S.A. swimming and fencing, and
so it really utilized the colleges and universities heavily to
prepare Olympians.
I do think some difficult decisions would have to be made.
Chairman Good. Thank you very much. Mr. Sims, I think about
how most student-athletes, or many at least, choose a school
because of their teacher, you called it, their coach, their
teacher, and how might the impact of employment and
unionization harm, like it does every place else where there is
a union shop, but management becomes the enemy.
Management becomes the other. This ``us versus them''
mentality. How might it change the relationship between
student-athletes and their coach if it was a union situation,
and union employment situation in fact.
Mr. Sims. Thank you for the question. I valued my
relationship with my coaches at Providence, and one of the
concerns I have is how will that relationship change? If
something goes wrong, could I go to them for help, or would I
have to go to a union shop steward and potentially file a
grievance that may undermine my coach's authority.
That is one of the things I really am concerned about, and
I think the relationship between coaches and players is similar
to a teacher and a student, and I keep in touch with one of my
coaches, even up to today.
Chairman Good. Yes. While Ms. Bodensteiner, I appreciate
what you said a couple times today. Hey, you are pro union, I
do not share those pro union views, but I appreciate that you
were still able to articulate how what a really dangerous thing
this would be to employ our student-athletes as employees, and
therefore to give the ability to unionize.
With that, we will move to our closing remarks. Oh, OK.
Thank you very much. First, I will recognize Mr. Owens, our
Chairman from the Higher Ed Committee, Subcommittee, for his
closing remarks.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. I want to thank all the witnesses.
The last 2 hours I think we can all agree on one thing, and I
can describe that in two words, this is pure chaos. How do you
destroy a college student-athlete model has worked for all
these years? Chaos. Why is it that after 118 years, now all of
a sudden, we have the NLRB so concerned about protection and
health safety and respect for the college athletes? Because of
NIL.
There is a lot of money on the table. It has nothing to do
with the athlete. It has to do with the fact that it is a
very--it is a place we can get a lot of income just by
unionizing. Now, I am going to--kind of put it as straight as I
can. There is an old saying that says if it is not broke, do
not fix it.
NLRB and union bosses say very simply, it is working, break
it. As long as we get paid, keep breaking it. That's what we
are looking at right here. I am a product of this process. I
went to the University of Miami. I got a scholarship there,
graduated biology and chemistry, and could not have afforded to
done that.
Did not go there to think I was going to go to the NFL. I
just went there to get an education. The benefit was all the
other serendipities, character, tenacity, grit, understanding
the ups and downs, multitasking, somebody mentioned that.
It is also that plus factor. A plus factor is if I needed
another athlete, I would already have a certain amount of
respect particularly seeing the ups and downs. As a plus--plus
factor, I found that they were wrestlers. These are things,
because we understand that character being in the building in
that process, guess who does not care about that? NLRB and
union bosses.
They do not care about--they are not stakeholders, they are
not coaches, they are not there to see how this program falls
and works out for the athlete down the road. They care about
the bottom line--how much money can we make off of union dues?
We have seen this before. We have seen it in the Pro Act.
When the market does not push us in the direction what
these do is force it through legislation. The Pro Act very
simply was to make sure that all independent contractors are
now employees. Why? Employees now get paid union dues. It
actually--it was a mess in California when they tried to do it.
They had to pull some of it back.
Now we are looking at 18-and 19-year-old kids being asked
to be employees, and to navigate this process of getting
education at the same time trying to figure out how I can make
the most out of the time I am here, how much money we can make.
This is a way to truly destroy an industry.
I will say this to the rank and file union members. Just
know that there will be a lot of profit in the coffers of the
union, but your kids, your son, your daughter, your niece, your
nephews, they will be impacted by this when their programs
disappear. This is an American conversation.
Okay. I do not care what side of the aisle you are sitting
on. We want our kids to have the greatest opportunity to build
the character we need to have the kind of preventing Americans
we need down the road. Let us not destroy our athletic programs
we have across the country. Every child should have it, whether
they are making profits or not. Colleges will figure this out
because they are innovative.
They know the value. Do not let the union NLRB come in and
destroy this because there is so much money now made by the 1
percent that is coming through this process with NIL. We are on
the right track, actually I think from what I have heard from
everyone here, that we can all agree, that chaos is not the way
to go, so let us just be very careful about that. With, that I
yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. I now recognize the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Health, Employment, Labor and
Pensions for his closing remarks.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank the Chair,
Mr. Owens as well, and thank you to the witnesses. This has
been very thought provoking. We clearly have challenges. I
would disagree with my two friends on a couple of things.
Collective bargaining does not always end up in chaos. The vast
majority of collective bargaining works out well.
These are human guidelines for human institutions. If you
have a bad employer. I would say the other thing about this is
a lot of students can choose, or the workers can choose. They
can choose to vote by a majority of whether they want to form a
union or not. The vast majority of businesses, particularly
small businesses, like the ones I manage, they do not unionize,
even in states like California where we make it as easy as
possible.
I think this would actually help that. If you have a good
athletic director, a good coach, and you going to work with
your students as they come in, and it is going to be challenge.
I think there is a role for these committees to play to try to
figure out what the guidelines are given the Supreme Court's
decision in so much so we can come to agreement.
Now, the only thing I worry about is just the collective
benefit to the university, to larger community. Mr. Sims, you
have alluded to this in your multiple capacities. Great
admiration for Providence, the Friars, our staff here and I
used to, we went to Holy Cross, so we used to go down the road
to Providence.
The collective benefit too is something we did not talk
about. I wanted to just reassert because we did not talk about
this. This is a choice. If this continues the way it is, the
students, like at Dartmouth and other schools, will choose
whether they want to organize or not under the direction, and
that is something we have not spent a lot of time on.
However, I do think the reality is, I think I tried to
illustrate in our conversation about where ``student-athlete''
came from, is that there has always been a tension here about
what was amateur and what was professional, what generated
income, and yes, Mr. Owen's follow the money. There is a lot of
money involved, more and more as our institutions appear to
become more monetized than ever.
The NCAA institutions place a great deal of pressure on
college athletes to succeed, both academically and
athletically. Even with the pressure, college athletes are
still not entitled to the most basic safeguards of health and
safety, and that is what we are talking about. If a student-
athlete gets hurt, should they and their family go into their
pocket to pay for that damage, and the lost income because they
will not be able to pursue their athletic career
professionally, or other careers.
That is what we are talking about. A collective bargaining
relationship could help ensure students, in my view, to have a
seat at the table when it pertains to their well-being and
compensation. Even for students that choose not to collectively
bargaining, it puts more pressure on the institutions to work
with people honestly and openly.
Simply put, despite the assertions we hear today, allowing
college athletes to form, or have the ability to form, based on
their own choice, a union, to negotiate for better working
conditions would help hold collegiate athletics accountable for
putting athletes first.
Unionization, or the threat of unionization, or the
opportunity is the word I would use for unionization, is not
the end, but rather the beginning of an equitable system and
treatment for people who frequently get the short end of the
stick, especially in a multi-billion-dollar industry like
sports. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Good. Thank you. I now recognize myself for my
closing remarks. Today we have heard a lot about how harmful it
would be in college athletics if NLRB succeeds in classifying
student-athletes as employees. It is abundantly clear the NLRB
would rather pander to unions than prioritize the well-being of
student-athletes.
As has been noted, only 2 percent of student-athletes will
go pro in their sport. The majority are on campus to get their
education, while participating in the sport that they love.
Athletics is a wonderful thing for student-athletes, and for
universities, and I do not understand why we would try to
destroy that.
I do not think the unlimited NIL, or the transfer portal,
the recent developments that are so consequential, have
improved college athletics, as we move further into the world
of rewarding the highest bidder, and we now encourage and
reward disloyalty, and jumping ship, or sending greener pasture
for student-athletes.
Today's subject of employment status and unionization
presents much more damaging consequences, I would submit. The
fact is the majority of student-athletes, especially on the
men's side, are not on scholarship. They simply compete for the
pure joy and love of their sport, the privilege of representing
their university, and the intrinsic value of athletic
competition.
Maybe as Ms. Bodensteiner said, they want to be part of
that 95 percent of C suite occupants in the corporate world who
were former athletes. Just for example, in the sport of
baseball, there are some 35 athletes typically, and you have
got 11.7 scholarships in sports like wrestling and soccer,
again 30 or 35 athletes, 9.9 scholarships on the men's side.
Track, cross country 12.6 scholarships for huge rosters for
track and cross country usually are limited because of Title IX
on the men's side unfortunately. Nothing draws students,
alumni, the community or campus like college athletics. Nothing
does. Nothing unites a campus on a common cause, or a common
spirit like athletic events on campus.
That is why you have homecoming, parents' weekend, alumni
reunions, college for a weekend, all your other recruitment
events around athletic contests, typically football and
basketball. Nothing markets the school better, brings more
pride for those in an institution like their athletics program.
Nothing enriches the college experience like enjoying the
privilege of being a student-athlete. Again, nothing builds
those character qualities most desired, and most key to success
in life like getting the privilege of being a student-athlete.
That said, as I referenced a little earlier this exploited
student-athlete is a myth. That is a myth, the exploited
student-athlete.
Typical student-athletes who are on scholarship can receive
in the range of $1,000.00 to $1,500.00 a month in cash
benefits, again beyond tuition, room and board, books and fees,
for the cost of attendance, academic incentives, Pell Grants
and so forth.
It is also, I would like to note that it is a disgrace that
one of our witnesses today injected race, typical to the left's
presentation of almost every issue, into this discussion today,
claiming that white college administrators are exploiting black
athletes on our college campuses. I think that was a disgrace
that was said today.
If you carry this mindset to its logical conclusion, if
somehow we were to step back in time, and we are not going to
permit college--excuse me, black athletes to compete on college
campuses, we would then therefore be sparing them from
exploitation, or would we be discriminating again? Which one
would it be?
I think it is just terrible that race was injected into
that in the way that it was presented by one of our witnesses.
As has been said today, the NLRB's decision is a threat to
women's sports, and even more so to men's Olympic sports. Like
forcing an increase in the minimum wage, and some in California
are actually proposing a $50.00 minimum wage there.
This would cost jobs. This would cost opportunities for
student-athletes. Making employment deals with benefit packages
would bankrupt and shrink athletic programs since most college
sports, again, do not generate revenue. Unionization could
force colleges to pay salaries and provide insurance for every
student-athlete on campus, walk on's and scholarship athletes
alike, not to mention the cost of expanding the administrative
positions at the university to oversee all of this.
I think most student-athletes, once they learn about the
implications of employment status, strict contracts, filing
taxes, more paperwork, and especially limited opportunities,
will realize that they should focus efforts on improving the
current system, not destroying it.
I hope Congress can take action to protect the freedom of
college student-athletes and preserve their unique status as
both student and competitor. There would be, without objection,
there being no further business, the Committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:47 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

[all]
