- DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2018

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2018

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

_____________________________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION,
AND HOUSING AND  URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES

MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida, Chairman

CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania          DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio                   MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas            KATHERINE CLARK, Massachusetts
DAVID YOUNG, Iowa                      PETE AGUILAR, California
DAVID G. VALADAO, California
TOM GRAVES, Georgia

NOTE: Under committee rules, Mr. Frelinghuysen, as chairman of the
full committee, and Mrs. Lowey, as ranking minority member of the full
committee, are authorized to sit as members of all subcommittees.

Doug Disrud, Cheryle Tucker,
Carl Barrick, Jennifer Hollrah, and  Matthew Anderson
Subcommittee Staff

______________________________

PART 5

Page

Members' Day.................................................       1

Oversight and Management.....................................     101

Emerging Transportation Technologies........................      237

Department of Housing and Urban Development ................      299

Department of Transportation................................      415

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

___________________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-790                    WASHINGTON : 2017

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

----------
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey, Chairman

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky \1\                   NITA M. LOWEY, New York
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama                   MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
KAY GRANGER, Texas                            PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho                     JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas                   ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                         DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
KEN CALVERT, California                       LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                            SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida                    BARBARA LEE, California
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania                 BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
TOM GRAVES, Georgia                           TIM RYAN, Ohio
KEVIN YODER, Kansas                           C. A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER, Maryland
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas                        DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska                    HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
THOMAS J. ROONEY, Florida                     CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
CHARLES J. FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee             MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington             DEREK KILMER, Washington
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio                          MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
DAVID G. VALADAO, California                  GRACE MENG, New York
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                         MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama                          KATHERINE M. CLARK, Massachusetts
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada                        PETE AGUILAR, California
CHRIS STEWART, Utah
DAVID YOUNG, Iowa
EVAN H. JENKINS, West Virginia
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan
SCOTT TAYLOR, Virginia
----------

\1\}
Chairman Emeritus

Nancy Fox, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, HUD, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS
FOR 2018

----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

MEMBERS' DAY

Mr. Diaz-Balart. The subcommittee will come to order. Good
morning and welcome to this year's first subcommittee hearing.
Today we welcome our distinguished colleagues to testify on
their priorities for the Departments of Transportation, and
Housing and Urban Development for both fiscal years 2017 and
2018.
Now, under our full committee chairman, Mr. Frelinghuysen,
we have brought back Member hearing days in order to give every
Member the opportunity to express their priorities and concerns
to this committee. We want every Member involved in the
appropriations process. So I sincerely thank you for
participating. Your views are crucial. They are important for
us to begin this new appropriations season, and we look forward
to hearing your testimony. It will help us put together a
better bill.
Mr. Chairman, I am glad that you are here. I know you are
chairing your committee probably in the next few hours, Mr.
Joyce has been recently named vice chairman of this
subcommittee, and so we want to congratulate him.
Now, with that, let me recognize the ranking member of this
subcommittee, the gentleman from North Carolina, who I have
enjoyed working with. And as ranking member, he has become an
integral part of the team to make sure that we come up with a
good bill, and that is obviously Mr. Price.
You are recognized, Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate those
words and want to reciprocate them. We have a good cooperative
pattern of work established here, and I anticipate that we are
going to have some challenges this year with some of the budget
numbers we are hearing about, but we have to do our best, as
always, on behalf of our institution and our power of the purse
and the kind of priorities, a lot of which we are going the
hear about today. We have got to do our very, very best to
write an inclusive and robust bill.
So I agree with you that it is a good way to start, to hear
from our Members, and I commend Chairman Frelinghuysen for
initiating this across all the subcommittees and look forward
to today's testimony. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Price.
And so we will begin with the gentlelady from American
Samoa, Mrs. Radewagen. I will remind all of our colleagues who
come in front of us that we have a very tight schedule. So we
are going to have to stick to the 5-minute rule for testifying.
Obviously, your written remarks will be included in the record.
And so please do not forget to turn on your microphone, if you
would.
And, with that, ma'am, you are recognized. Thank you for
being here.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, A DELEGATE IN CONGRESS FROM THE
TERRITORY OF AMERICAN SAMOA
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Chairman Diaz-Balart and Ranking
Member Price and members of the subcommittee. I very much
appreciate the opportunity to speak to the subcommittee
regarding some of the infrastructure needs in American Samoa.
As you know, American Samoa lies in the middle of the Pacific
Ocean south of the Equator. We the most remote U.S. Territory
or State, and our infrastructure needs reflect that gulf of
distance.
Currently, any air traffic that flies into or out of
American Samoa or even between the islands in my home district
must do so under the air traffic authority of Independent Samoa
due to the lack of an air traffic control tower in the
territory. This includes the codel that was just there the week
before last.
A proposed solution that would also be budget-neutral would
be to allow the money that FAA is requiring the American Samoa
government to pay them, $15 million over the next 10 years,
$2.5 million annually. It seems the 2014 FAA land-use audit
report found that of approximately 865 acres of land approved
by the FAA in 1973 for airport use, 325 acres had been removed
from the airport and used for other government--local
government--purposes.
To rectify this issue, the ASG has agreed to pay FAA $2.5
million a year for a 10-year period in exchange for FAA
approval of a land-use change authorizing an interdepartmental
change in jurisdiction for the 325 acres rather than a release
for the disposal of airport property.
My proposal would be to allow the FAA to repatriate these
funds back to the ASG for the specific purpose of building an
airport tower at Pago Pago International Airport, as well as
other improvements to the airport that are desperately needed.
American Samoa is also suffering from dangerous roads and
other traffic infrastructure safety issues that must be
addressed soon. Because our small islands, which are roughly
the same size as Washington, D.C., are hit with extremely
powerful hurricanes every year, the infrastructure is in
constant need of repair. A lack of sufficient funding in the
past has caused many of the much needed repairs to go undone.
To rectify this issue and improve the safety of the roads
in American Samoa and the other territories, I am requesting
that the subcommittee please consider a significant increase to
the territorial highways account authorized through the FAST
Act. As it stands, there is no formula for which these funds
are distributed and are left in the hands of administration
officials. This policy has not benefitted American Samoa, and I
also request there be a study of how the funds in this account
might be more fairly spread out among the territories.
While I have only begun to touch on the many infrastructure
needs in my home district, I wanted to take this limited time
to highlight some of the most significant, and I look forward
to working with the subcommittee in any way that I can to make
sure that the people of American Samoa are being afforded the
same resources as their counterparts in the States and other
territories.
So thank you again, Chairman Diaz-Balart and Ranking Member
Price, for your time and consideration of these requests.
Should you have any questions, my staff is happy to work with
your staff, my LD, and get you any information you may need.
Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me thank the gentlewoman for again
always being on top of the issues that are important to
American Samoa, and I look forward to continuing to work with
you. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Bridenstine, thank you for being here,
sir. You have the floor.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. JIM BRIDENSTINE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
OKLAHOMA
Mr. Bridenstine. It is my honor.
Thank you, Chairman Diaz-Balart, Ranking Member Price, Mr.
Culberson, and Mr. Valadao. It is an honor to be here. I wanted
to bring up something regarding infrastructure that a lot of
people don't think about. We think about infrastructure. We
think about roads and bridges, highways. We think about
hospitals and schools. One piece of infrastructure that I think
a lot of people don't consider is launch.
Space has transformed our way of life, the way we
communicate, the way we navigate, the way we produce food, the
way we produce energy, the way we provide security, do disaster
relief, the way we do banking depends on GPS, for example. All
of these capabilities require infrastructure, and as you look
at how things are moving forward now, what used to be the
domain of government, space, is now the domain of private
operators and commercial operators, and when you think about
things like remote sensing and imagery, the National Geospatial
Intelligence Agency now uses a commercial space program in
order to buy data from commercial providers for intelligence.
When you think about communications, the Department of
Defense, for its routine communications, uses about 80 percent
commercial satellites, satellites that are launched to provide
broadband from space, DIRECTV, the internet, are now being
leased by the Department of Defense to provide communication
capabilities for the warfighter.
When you talk about all different sorts of activities
happening in space, commercial providers are now carrying a
heavy load. What we need to do within the FAA Office of
Commercial Space Transportation is make sure they are
adequately funded for all of the upcoming launches. Everything
I just described is historical.
When you think about the future, we are talking about
hundreds, if not thousands, of satellites in low Earth orbit
for remote sensing and imagery. When you think about
communications, we are talking about actually many, many
thousands of satellites. Boeing has a program. OneWeb has a
program. SpaceX has a program. Each one of these low Earth
orbit communication constellations constitutes multiple
thousands of satellites in low Earth orbit. All are going to
require launch, and these companies are contracting overseas.
In fact, last week, an American company building imagery
satellites for purposes that the Department of Defense will
use, they launched 96 American satellites on a foreign rocket,
an Indian rocket, to be precise. OneWeb has contracts worth
billions of dollars with the Russians because we don't have the
capability here in the United States to deliver what they need.
So the Office of Commercial Space Transportation, which is
within the FAA, in my estimation, needs to be fully and
adequately funded just so that we can go forward with these new
programs that are going to change the way we think about space.
And, of course, where does that begin?
The Office of Commercial Space Transportation within the
FAA is the regulatory body. That is true. But they are also the
body that is necessary to promote and facilitate commercial
space industry. Right now, they are funded under a continuing
resolution at a level that I believe is inadequate.
Last year, I came to this committee, and I requested $19.8
million, which doesn't seem like a big number, but that was
what was in the President's budget request, and what the
appropriations process came to was an amount less, and you guys
delivered, and I thank you for that.
The challenge is, operating under a continuing resolution,
that $19.8 million never materialized. So I would ask this
year, in order to take care of all of these needs that are
transforming the way we think about space and assert the way it
is transforming the human condition on Earth, I am requesting
that the Office of Commercial Space Transportation within the
FAA, sometimes called FAA AST, be funded to the tune of $23
million. With that, I will be open to any questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yes, Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Let me just ask--I thank the gentleman for his
testimony. It is very convincing. Am I to conclude also that
you will strongly back picking up the remaining 5 months of the
current fiscal year so as to take advantage of the
appropriations bill that would be included in an omnibus, as
opposed to a yearlong CR?
Mr. Bridenstine. I will tell you, I don't like doing CRs. I
will also tell you that what we need to do is go through the
appropriations process because, as I just described, the world
has changed, and we need to make sure that what we are funding
as a government reflects that change. I don't want to do a CR.
If we do an omnibus and the priorities in there are
appropriate, I am certainly willing to consider it.
Mr. Price. You are giving us a very good example of why a
serious appropriations bill with the detailed work that goes
into it is preferable to automatic pilot.
Mr. Bridenstine. Absolutely, yes, sir, and I fully
appreciate you making that comment.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Price.
And also, just for the gentleman, I will tell you: you have
been very effective working with this subcommittee.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And we appreciate your involvement. We
appreciate your hard work and look forward to continue doing
so. And we agree with you: a CR a lot of folks don't understand
how devastating a CR is in so many ways. But, again, I would be
remiss if I didn't thank you for your hard work, particularly
with your involvement with this subcommittee, and it is greatly
appreciated.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you for your support.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yes.
Mr. Culberson. If I may, I also want to thank you, Jim, for
your support for NASA for the space program and your
understanding of the changing times in which we live. The
commercial sector is going to be getting us into low Earth
orbit. Like stepping out in front of the Rayburn Building and
catching a cab, you will be able to catch a commercial ride
into low Earth orbit.
And you are exactly right: this agency needs to be--this
portion of the FAA needs to be fully funded. And I really
appreciate your support for getting our detailed appropriations
bills on the floor, not only this one but the Commerce,
Justice, Science bill as well that has NASA.
Mr. Bridenstine. Would the gentleman yield for 15 seconds?
Mr. Culberson. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Bridenstine. When you think about NASA, this agency is
critical for NASA to accomplish its mission because NASA is
using commercial to get back and forth to the International
Space Station. This agency could make that problematic if it is
not adequately funded.
It is not just NASA, though. It is also the Department of
Defense. It is the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. This agency touches all of those and more,
which is why it is so important.
Mr. Culberson. I deeply appreciate your support for it, and
I want to also wish Jim good luck. He has been--and I strongly
support his application to become the new NASA Administrator.
Jim would do a superb job with that position, and I want to
strongly express my endorsement and support for your work, and
I hope to see you become a new NASA Administrator and look
forward to helping you----
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you.
Mr. Culberson [continuing]. In that role. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. With Mr. Culberson's strong endorsement, I
think the gentleman who was testifying in front of us has had a
good day. Thank you. Thank you very up much.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Price, while we wait for some other
folks to come and testify, why don't we just take a little
break, and let's all stick around and see who wants to come and
join us shortly. And, again, thank you all for being here.
There is nothing more important than listening to our
colleagues, and that is how we get a much better bill.
So why don't we just take a few minutes' break, and we will
gavel in as soon as our next witness approaches. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me call the subcommittee to order once
again. We are now joined by Mr. DeFazio, who, obviously, has a
wealth of experience particular on infrastructure and
transportation issues. And we thank you for being here and you
are recognized, sir.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. PETER A. DEFAZIO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
OREGON
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
this committee's interest in transportation and related issues.
The one, I think, really important point to make at the
beginning, I mean, I will talk about the larger needs, but
because we are under a continuing resolution we are realizing
$1.5 billion less in transportation spending this year, below
the FAST Act levels which were already pretty anemic given our
needs.
If we fully fund the FAST Act we will barely tread water.
We will not significantly defray any of our accumulated balance
of, you know, backlog for maintenance, repair, and replacement.
So I would urge the committee to do all they can as we move
through whatever continuing resolution or actual appropriations
to get us fully up to the FAST Act levels. That would benefit
the Nation as a whole.
I would like also to share, I know there has been some
members of this committee who have expressed skepticism, but I
would like to share some of my concerns about the privatization
of the air traffic organization, the ATC. First and foremost,
when they started this discussion I said, well, you know, you
have a constitutional issue, and they blew me off and said, no,
there is no problem. And subsequent analysis showed, yes,
indeed, there is a constitutional issue recently upheld by the
Supreme Court, which is you cannot delegate regulatory or rate-
making or taxation authority to a private entity which affects
competitiveness without government involvement.
So I did not bring my flow chart, but I developed a
flowchart of how this new streamlined organization after we cut
the FAA in half and move ATO over there, leave safety
certification, everything else over here subject to annual
appropriations, sequestration, government shutdowns. Over here
we will have the new private entity which is supposed to self-
fund somehow, we are not sure.
And anything they propose, any route change, approach
change, anything they approve, or certainly when they begin to
want to assess fees against business aviation or general
aviation or something else to pay for the system would have to
then to go the Secretary's office, and the Secretary would then
have an expanded office to review these proposals, you know,
which seems to me not exactly a tremendous improvement. And if
the Secretary disagrees, then they go to court. Great way to
run a critical government function. So that's one major
concern.
I already mentioned the concern about us, you know,
severing the agency in half. And, you know, there is a couple
of other issues here. They are very critical and I have been
critical over the years of procurement at the FAA, and some
targeting reforms could benefit us there. Congress, in 1996,
actually mandated procurement personnel reforms. Unfortunately,
we did not exempt them from OMB and other political
interference, and the reforms proposed by the administrator
ended up being essentially the same system that we have.
So, yes, we could benefit from reforms there, and we could
certainly authorize the FAA administrator to do those things
without OMB review and other review and get some needed
reforms. But if you talk to Dr. Dillingham of the GAO, who has
been very critical of their past acquisitions, he says now they
are on a good track. They are implementing NextGen at a good
pace. It is benefiting the industry tremendously with new fuel-
efficient approaches, and they are rolling them out quite
quickly now. So really, the whole complaint is about problems
in the past.
Administrator Huerta has been doing a good job. And should
we move over to a private corporation one can imagine the
interruptions that might happen. In Canada, it was a very rocky
8-year transition process. In England, actually, the government
had to come back in and bail out the organization. Again, a
rather rocky transition process.
And another point which should be of concern is that in
both Great Britain and in Canada, the only two privatized ATC
operations in the world. All the other countries have gone to
government corporations, which could work here, also. They had
to pay for the assets. Under this plan we would give away tens
of billions of dollars of assets to this new private
corporation. Should the private corporation fail, as it did in
England, and we wanted to take it back, we would have to pay
for it.
So not only are we going to give away assets taxpayers have
paid for, should this new experiment fail we are going to have
to buy back the assets that we already paid for that we gave
away. You know? An absolute absurdity. You know, and then there
is a number of other issues regarding the magnitude of our
system in comparison to others.
One other quick point. We are downstairs holding a hearing
in Water about how we can deal with, you know, the backlog of
maintenance in our ports which is causing lines of ships far,
far out into the Pacific in L.A. and other parts of the
country, raising the costs of imported goods. One way to deal
with it is to actually spend the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund
tax collections on harbor maintenance.
On a daily basis our 59 major harbors in the United States
have 35 percent availability of authorized depths, 35 percent.
We could deal with that if we merely appropriated every year
the full amount of the tax that is collected. About $1.8
billion a year is collected. We are spending, generally, half
of that, and the rest of it goes into a theoretical account.
So not only could we begin by just fully appropriating the
tax that comes in to deal with our maintenance backlog, we
could also, hopefully, access and spend down the $9 billion
that is in a theoretical account. But anyway, they talked about
that downstairs a little bit.
But the other major focus downstairs is regulatory delays.
Well, there is a new report. And I agree that there are
sometimes over onerous regulations. But the principle cause of
delays in projects, like the 140,000 bridges that need repair/
replacement of the Federal system, National Highway System,
none of those are going to have to go through NEPA, or
virtually none of them, if they are just replacements. But the
money is not there. Plain and simple, the money is not there.
A major study done by AECOM, an independent firm, ordered
by Treasury, has just come out and they looked at 40 major
pending projects. And of the 40, 39 are challenged by
inadequate funding; out of 40, 19 by increased capital costs,
20 by local opposition, and 9 by regulatory issues. So, you
know, money is at the heart of many of our infrastructure needs
and problems in this country.
I know that you realize that on this committee and I
recommend to you to do whatever you can to help increase needed
funds. With that, I----
[The statement of Mr. DeFazio follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me thank you, sir, for your very on-
point testimony. I would ask you, by the way, you talked about
the flowchart, if you could bring it forward to the committee,
we would love to submit that in the record.
Mr. DeFazio. Sure.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I think without objection. So, Mr. Price.
Mr. DeFazio. Mr. Chairman, if I could, the first time when
we were holding one hearing on this in the last Congress and I
put it up on the screens and the chairman looked at it and he
said, I have never seen that before. I said, yeah, well, your
staff could have developed it. We just followed the legislation
and it looks like a Rube Goldberg, so I would be happy to
provide it.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you. My colleague and I have been on this
journey together since we were both elected some years ago, so
I appreciate it.
Mr. DeFazio. Do not say how many.
Mr. Price. We will not say. So I appreciate your testimony
on a number of fronts this morning, and actually, you are not
the first member to testify this morning as to the harm we will
suffer if we have a yearlong CR, if we cannot get off of this
CR and into a regular appropriations, at least for the last 5
months of the year. So I appreciate you underscoring that. It
is not just dollars that are involved. It is also how those
dollars are directed. But thank you for being here.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Any further questions?
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, sir. Thank you very much.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. We will now proceed. The gentleman from
Arizona, Mr. Gosar, you are recognized for 5 minutes, sir. And,
again, thank you for being here, sir.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. PAUL A. GOSAR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
ARIZONA
Mr. Gosar. Thank you. I would like to first thank you,
Chairman Diaz-Balart, Ranking Member Price, and the committee
for their work on the appropriations process under their
jurisdiction. I am Paul Gosar and I represent the 4th
Congressional District of Arizona, and I appreciate the
opportunity to provide testimony supporting the specific
appropriation priorities for Arizona and the country as a
whole.
First, I would like to applaud the committee's leadership
and fiscal prudence in previous years that saved taxpayers
money and protected the civil liberties of our constituents by
preventing funds from going to the wasteful National Roadside
Survey. As such, I request once again that the following
language be retained in the next fiscal year Transportation
Housing and Urban Development and related agencies
appropriation that, quote, ``None of the funds made available
by this act may be used to obligate or award funds for the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's National
Roadside Survey,'' end of quote.
Civil libertarians have raised legitimate concerns about
the unconstitutionality of this program. Put simply, this
survey looks like and acts like a police checkpoint and uses
uniformed officers to pull cars over. Under the Fourth
Amendment, the United States Supreme Court has ruled that a
seizure occurs when a vehicle is stopped at a checkpoint. The
question thus becomes whether such seizures are reasonable
under the Fourth Amendment.
More importantly, the courts have allowed police
checkpoints only when there is compelling public safety
justification, such as stopping and arresting drunk drivers.
However, under the circumstances of this program there is no
public safety jurisdiction. The surveys do nothing to make our
communities safer because drivers who ultimately refuse to
participate are free to drive away, even if the driver is
impaired. This results in a wasteful program that is invasive
in the least, and at worst is an abuse of power and the
violation of our civil liberties.
Let me be clear. I strongly support efforts which are
proven to have actually contributed to the decrease in impaired
driving since the 1970s, such as local law enforcement
operations, effective State and municipal policings, curb
abuse, and worthwhile education efforts from organizations like
Mothers Against Drunk Driving, or MADD, and similar groups.
I thank the committee for their previous support of the
civil liberty language and ask that it be included again in the
next appropriations bill.
Another issue I would like to highlight for the committee's
support is funding for congressionally designated high-priority
corridors, or HPCs. These corridors are critical to the economy
and security of the United States.
Last Congress I was proud to work with a bipartisan group
of members and stakeholders to pass legislation which expanded
the designation of the future Interstate 11 to extend from
Mexico all the way to Northern Nevada. This interstate
comprises two high-priority corridors: the CANAMEX Corridor and
the Intermountain West Corridor. Since 1991, HBCs have been
identified, updated, and funded in various transportation and
appropriation bills. Although funding has been authorized,
Congress has not recently appropriated funds specifically to
these high-priority corridors.
The statutory definition of these corridors found in 1105
of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act in 1991
clearly identifies HPCs as appropriation projects of national
importance and appropriate recipients of Federal funding. As
this committee works to identify spending priorities that will
address truly national, multistate transportation needs, I
would encourage support of the high-priority corridors.
Now, I understand the monumental task this committee faces
each year to appropriate scarce taxpayer dollars to national
priorities, and I appreciate their hard work. As you well know,
the conversation cannot always be about finding more money. We
must also look for ways to spend money more efficiently. In
that regard, I look forward to working with this committee as
well as other legislating and authorizing committees to
institute reforms that will make our scarce transportation
dollars go further.
The high-priority corridors identified as a future
interstate present an amazing opportunity to build truly 21st
century infrastructure. Real policy reforms, such as
streamlining NEPA process and simplifying Davis-Bacon
preventing wage requirements, can reduce the costs of these
projects by millions. These future interstates could serve as
the pilot programs to test and demonstrate innovative policy
reforms that save taxpayer money and better meet the
infrastructure development we need to make American great
again.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you. I would
like to thank all of the members for all that you do and the
important work that goes forward from this committee. I yield
back.
[The statement of Mr. Gosar follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Gosar, thank you for your testimony,
and we have been working for a long time on a lot of these
issues. I appreciate you bringing up some very important
issues, and I look forward to continue to working with you on
those issues.
Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Let me echo the chairman, say we appreciate your
testimony and we will give it careful attention.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Actually, before I recognize our next
colleague I want to once again congratulate Mr. Joyce, who has
been recently named as vice chairman of the subcommittee. Mr.
Joyce, you are a heartbeat away from the chairmanship of this
subcommittee. So I do not know why you keep giving me fatty
goods all the time now and I am a little concerned about that.
But, again, congratulations.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you very much and I apologize for being
late, but there was somebody who slightly resembled you, not as
good-looking and not as well-dressed, named Diaz-Balart that I
ran into on the way here who tied me up, so.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Obviously----
Mr. Joyce. Lincoln something or other.
Mr. Diaz-Balart [continuing]. Cannot be related to me.
Cannot be related to me. Thank you.
Now we will recognize the distinguished gentleman from
California, Mr. Panetta. You are recognized. Thank you for your
testimony.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. JIMMY PANETTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
CALIFORNIA
Mr. Panetta. Thank you. I appreciate that, Chairman Diaz-
Balart, Ranking Member Price, other members, and
congratulations Mr. Joyce as well. Thank you for this
opportunity to speak here this morning.
I would like to talk about the important programs that are
very critical to my district's transportation infrastructure
and its economy. I represent the Central Coast of California in
the 20th Congressional District. And this winter, although we
had been clamoring for it for quite a while, we got a lot of
rain, a tremendous amount of rain, actually. And we were hit by
a hard series of record-setting storms, storms that washed out
major roads, highways. They isolate communities and they caused
a tremendous amount of damage to individuals' homes and
properties.
And because of these storms the Pacific Coast Highway, in
my biased opinion, one of the most beautiful stretches of road
in the world, remains temporarily closed in many places. And
near the southern part of that highway, the Town of Lucia,
debris from landslides have covered lanes of traffic and closed
an 8-mile section of that road. The boulders, as said on some
of these slides, are so big, literally truck-sized boulders,
have had to be removed by explosive ordnance. They are that
big.
In Big Sur, on the main route, Highway 1, there is a
bridge, a 315-foot bridge, the Pfeiffer Canyon Bridge, that has
suffered irreparable structural damage and has had to be taken
down and replaced. Now, it is not that iconic Bixby Creek
Bridge that you all see when you hear about Big Sur, but it is
just as important of a venue, literally in the main part of Big
Sur. And as you can see from this picture that I am holding up
the slide occurred right here underneath this pillar, took out
that pillar, caused the bridge to sink. No one can go on this
bridge, you cannot walk over it, you cannot drive cars over it;
it has got to be taken down and completely replaced.
The residents who are in between this bridge and the slides
are isolated. There are families who are separated, there are
children who cannot go to school, and there are businesses who
are absolutely shut down at this point because no one is
driving on this highway. And just last week I took part in an
airlift where pallets of food, supplies, and actually fuel were
brought to these individuals, to these families, by helicopter.
Repair crews are on the ground and they are trying to
repair this all-American highway as quick as possible. However,
with more rain in the forecast for the coming days many are
concerned whether this work will have a lasting impact.
To live in Big Sur you have to be tough, you have to be
hardy; there is no doubt about it because they deal with these
types of extreme weather situations. In 1982, parts of Highway
1 were closed for 13 months after a massive mudslide buried
more than a quarter-mile of road. In the wake of this event 400
people lost their jobs and the tourist industry lost nearly $34
million.
Now, hopefully, history will not repeat itself this year
when it comes to the amount of losses. But if not replaced
quickly, that bridge that you just saw, the fact that it won't
be replaced could devastate the economies of the communities of
that Big Sur area. They rely on that influx of tourism during
the spring and summer months. It is times like these when
communities like mine look to the Federal Highway
Administration's Emergency Relief Program for assistance.
So I appreciate the $1 billion supplemental appropriation
included in last year's continuing resolution and I encourage
this committee to continue to provide the needed support for
this critical program. Though we have not yet seen the
President's budget proposal for fiscal year 2018, it is my hope
that he demonstrates his commitment to improving our roads,
bridges, airways, transit systems, and railroads through a
strong Federal investment with the understanding of the
importance of a strong Emergency Relief Program.
Your subcommittee, Mr. Chairman, has the opportunity to
make infrastructure investments that are desperately needed in
districts all across the Nation so that we can ensure a modern
transportation system that sustains economic growth.
Thank you for the opportunity to advocate on behalf of
these programs and thank you for the opportunity to be here to
speak to you today.
[The statement of Mr. Panetta follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. And let me thank the gentleman for his
testimony, and for being here. I know I can speak for everybody
in the subcommittee when we tell you that we look forward to
working with you.
Mr. Joyce. I am sorry, sir, I might have missed it. For the
bridge replacement, as I understood you, was there a cost
estimate that you gave them?
Mr. Panetta. They have not come up with that. So I cannot
give you that now, but I can assure you that Caltrans, the
California Transportation Authority, is working on that. I
actually spoke with one of the heads of Caltrans, they said
that they are obviously going to have to do an emergency
replacement and that is going to take--what they are saying,
which I was actually surprised, could be 6 months, which I
think is pretty quick for that long a bridge, that big a
bridge, in that area that is on such a dangerous cliff like
that. But I think that that is, though, the time that he gave
me. I will get back to you in regards to a number as to what it
is going to cost.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And I want to thank the members of this
subcommittee because they have been very, very sensitive to
making sure that we have that money there. And so, again, we
look forward to working with you. Thank you.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you.
Mr. Aguilar. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yes, sir.
Mr. Aguilar. It is a terrible place to live. Beautiful, you
know. Very tough vistas as well. So if there is a, you know, a
trip that needs to be seen, I am sure Mr. Panetta would host
you, Mr. Chairman, to take a look at the seriousness of this
issue.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, Mr. Aguilar, you are always willing
to sacrifice greatly to help our colleague here.
Mr. Aguilar. Yeah. As I shared privately I just want to be
a team player, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I am getting choked up. I am getting
choked up and emotional. But thank you, thank you very much.
Mr. Panetta. Open invitation.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Panetta.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. We will now recognize The Honorable Sheila
Jackson Lee. And thank you for your testimony and we know you
have a number of different issues that you want to talk about.
We might be able to give you a little bit more than the 5
minutes. If somebody else shows up, then I will have to cut you
off, and if not, we might be able to give you a little more. So
we will have to play that by ear, ma'am, but you are
recognized.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. SHEILA JACKSON LEE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
TEXAS
Ms. Jackson Lee. That may not be somewhat contentious, but
I want to emphasize some points that I think are important.
And, first of all, I want to thank this committee and thank the
ranking member, thank the chairman. We admire and appreciate
the bipartisan efforts of the Appropriations Committee as a
whole, but, more importantly, Subcommittee on THUD, which I
know you are very popular. And so I really appreciate there is
a great need for both the protection and enhancement of our
infrastructure.
Let me quickly say I support $1.25 billion for
transportation investment generating economic recovery. These
are the TIDA Grants. TIDA Grants encourage cooperation between
agencies and jurisdictions and often funds multimodal,
multijurisdictional projects that are difficult to support
through traditional transportation projects, and I think that
is very important.
I support $2.5 billion for New Starts Program. The New
Starts Program provides funding for commuter rails, subway,
light rail, ferries, and bus transit. And I want to make the
point that Houston is a transit city, Harris County is a
transit county. No one should suggest that the people of
Houston do not advocate for transit. City government is a
transit city government. Our metro is very responsive to the
community, and we are eager to listen to members of Congress
and community leaders on how best and how effective we can make
this transit system. Harris County is a $4+ million metroplex
area. The City of Houston is growing past a million and we need
mass transit, and I would say that we need it now.
So we support the Starts Program. We are one of the New
Starts. We want to continue to finish our work. We just
finished celebrating an overpass for the Harrisburg Bridge that
will help that community make transit more effective. And we
invite any of you to see how we are using the transit system.
Certainly the Super Bowl evidenced how important our transit
was and I think the NFL, if I might say, went away and said
that we are one of the best cities in their scheme of cities
for the Super Bowl and it was because of the transit system.
I support $120 million for the Federal Transit Authority,
provides grant funding to State, local, and tribal governments,
public and private operators, and other recipients. And I
support the funding request because access to transportation is
a civil right, and that full funding for transit is imperative.
It is very important for those citizens that rely upon it.
I support the $2.3 billion for the Amtrak passenger rail. I
think that is a vital part of that corridor.
I support $3.1 billion for capital systems for high-speed
rail corridors and inner-city passenger rail service. We are in
the midst of a high-speed rail system in Texas. It is mostly
privately funded. We are going through some of our challenges,
but I know that it is an important element of our
transportation.
The airport, the major airport, Bush Intercontinental
Airport, is in my congressional district. I support $3.4
billion for an airport improvement program which provides
grants to public agencies for planning and development of
public use airports. We are growing. We are growing in our
terminals, we are growing in the per passenger travel. And the
improvements, we hope that we have been important fiscal agents
of the Federal Government in using your money effectively and
building on the national system of aviation.
Now, I understand there is rumor that there may be a 14
percent cut in public housing, $6 billion. I don't know whether
to throw myself on the floor or the table or to show you to
have mercy. And I know it all deals with your--I do not want to
use the term ``allotment,'' but what you all have to work with.
I am on the Budget Committee. We will be seeing that budget
next week, and I hope to be bipartisan in my passion that that
just cannot be.
I support $3 billion for Community Development Block Grant.
We have not seen fraud of any extensive form. This is down
payment for homes, this is fixing roofs after hurricanes. And
we are loaded, what we call blue tarps, with senior citizens in
my district still from Hurricane Ike. They have never had their
roofs fixed. We have a program in the city that we are trying
to fix it, Mr. Chairman, and trying to use that money
effectively.
Parks and other forms of community development are
lifelines to inner city and rural communities, which I support
greatly, even though there is an Agricultural Rule Program that
I have been involved in and support heavily. And so I hope that
is not true.
I support $120 million for housing for the elderly, and
that is extreme in my community.
I support $1.6 billion for the Home Investment Partnership
Program, which is the largest combination for affordable
housing. I worked with Habitat for Humanity. Our community
helps build homes, but a lot of that is in partnership with
Habitat for Humanity.
I support $20 billion for the tenant-based rental
assistance, $42 billion for fair housing.
I support $500 million for HUD-VASH program that is for our
veterans; $87.5 million for housing counseling; $155 million
for childhood lead poisoning. Just to comment that there is
lead poisoning going on today in many of our communities and we
cannot be less active in that program because our children are
still getting lead poisoning.
Finally, I support $355 million for housing opportunities
for persons with AIDS. One of the first programs that I
utilized as a member of the Houston City Council, still today
is for housing for people living with AIDS, affected by AIDS,
and it is an effective program.
So, Mr. Chairman, finally, you do great work. We want
transit in Houston, Harris County; I want transit for the
Nation. And, finally, I think that the HUD work for providing
people access to housing is crucial and these are the programs
that allow that to happen.
[The statement of Ms. Jackson Lee follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me first thank the gentlelady for your
testimony.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. For your hard work. And by the way, you
have done an extensive testimony, you have done it in record
time. So again, thank you very much. Thank you. Thank the lady
from Texas.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. We will now recognize The Honorable
Congresswoman Plaskett. Thank you for being here. We look
forward to your testimony.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. STACEY E. PLASKETT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE VIRGIN
ISLANDS
Ms. Plaskett. Good morning, gentlemen. Thank you, Chairman
Diaz-Balart, Ranking Member Price, for the opportunity to
testify on appropriations for the Departments of Transportation
and Housing and Urban Development over the next fiscal year.
This legislation will serve as a statement of the commitment
from the Federal Government to address some of our most
pressing local needs in the Virgin Islands. In the United
States territories, despite being home to nearly 4 million
Americans, we are too often left out of important programs or
underfunded compared to benefits available to Americans living
in the mainland United States.
For example, in the Virgin Islands, despite benefits we
bring to the United States, including enormous tourism commerce
from airline visits, cruise ships, and other vessels, Federal
transportation funding to the Islands falls behind other
jurisdictions even though the traffic strain on our
infrastructure is often greater due to the high number of
visitors year round. We have approximately 105,000 individuals,
but have several million tourists that visit and strain our
infrastructure every year. Territorial roads continue to be
under stress from inadequate capacity. And in the Virgin
Islands most of the Federal highways do not meet current
standards. Because the territories are islands, most of the
road construction is much more expensive than the mainland to
accommodate due to supplier costs, costs of transportation. As
a result of inadequate funds, crucial projects have been
shelved, leaving only stopgap repairs to resolve maintenance
issues, even on primary artery highways.
I would like to emphasize that this negatively impacts
everything, from commerce to disaster relief management,
emergency response, law enforcement capacity, and my own shock-
absorbing bills that I have to pay for our vehicle on the road.
Extreme weather during hurricane season annually
demonstrates how fragile our infrastructure is and how much we
depend on it. The territories are generally less well off than
the States economically, partly due to lower per capita
domestic product. And we pay higher prices for many basic
necessities. We do not have local revenue means to provide for
needed highway infrastructure without Federal assistance.
Although the goal of bringing the territories into economic
parity with the States has been a principle embraced by several
acts of Congress over decades of partnership work, this has yet
to be fulfilled in the area of transportation infrastructure.
Each of the territories were acquired for specific strategic
purposes and we continue to be of vibrant strategic value to
the United States.
Accordingly, I request full funding at or above current
authorization levels for the territorial highway program over
the next fiscal year. I also join others in calling for
enhanced funding for TIGER Grants, preferably at or above the
fiscal 2017 requested levels of $1.25 billion. TIGER Grants
have been particularly important for our ports and
transshipment projects in the Virgin Islands, which we believe
will have adequate benefit to us in terms of growing our
economies.
I also welcome recent statements from leaders in Congress
on both sides of the aisle for new supplemental transportation
infrastructure programs and decisions by the President for this
to be part of his agenda.
If and when this committee will be working with the
Authorizing Committee on any new transport expenditure program,
it is imperative that the territories be fully incorporated in
the package. New infrastructure projects in the Virgin Islands
will create much-needed immediate jobs as well as help promote
safety and security in an economy that is heavily based on
tourism. There are numerous examples of needs that we have that
are out of reach right now due to current levels of funding,
but which could be covered with new or supplemental assistance.
Again, I would point to our desire to really beef up our
transshipment, our ports, which would grow our economy
exponentially, provide jobs, and much-needed capital in the
area. The U.S. Virgin Islands was purchased specifically
because of our transshipment and our strategic location as the
most easterly point in the United States.
In addition, investment in airports and continued pressure
on airlift is crucial to a place like the Virgin Islands. I
urge that any discretionary program reforms expand eligibility
in funding for the Airport Improvement Program, which has been
very important for the necessary modernization of our airport
on St. Thomas, Cyril King Airport.
We also depend on well-funding maritime infrastructure. And
I will be seeking fair inclusion of the Virgin Islands in the
NHS and FTA Ferry Programs to assist in the purchase of much-
needed vessels to accommodate heightened transit demands along
the route from St. Thomas to St. Croix. We at this point have
to have duplicative services in every area, hospitals, our
generators, everything because of the distance between the two
major islands. Individuals cannot travel by airlift because of
the cost, and so a ferry system would be really important to us
to drive the cost down, stop some of the duplication, and
really make our economy a much more vibrant one.
I also strongly support the inclusion of school
construction and broadband expansion programs in any new
infrastructure package. Many of the people living in the Virgin
Islands do not have ordinary access to the computer connected
to the Internet and this continues to have a negative impact on
educational opportunities, workforce development for a growing
isolated island economy.
Lastly, I would like to touch on housing-related programs,
which service antipoverty tools for low-income people. Greater
investment in home and CDBG Block Grants, Section 8 rental
assistance, are critical for the availability of decent
affordable housing in the Virgin Islands. These resources are
especially important amid higher costs facing my constituents
in communities across our country and I urge that they be
strengthened through the next fiscal year.
Thank you for the opportunity to present my testimony
today.
[The statement of Ms. Plaskett follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me thank our colleague for bringing up
very important issues. And it is important. And this is a
subcommittee that has always been very sensitive to making sure
that our territories are not only not forgotten, but they are
emphasized.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. So thank you. And now I know that Mr.
Aguilar, he does not feel comfortable voting for things unless
he sees it personally, so he might have to--but we will have to
work on the potential.
Mr. Aguilar. You did not talk about Houston, though.
Ms. Plaskett. Mr. Chairman, you know the end of the month
is our 100th anniversary as being part of the United States. So
all of you can come down for the celebrations on March 31 and
get a view of it yourself, particularly you, Pete.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much. We appreciate your
testimony and we look forward to working with you.
Why don't we then now take a short recess and let us
reconvene at 11:25, if there is no objection. Without
objection.
[Recess]
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Committee will come to order. Welcome, Mr.
Cartwright.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Love to hear your positions. You have 5
minutes.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. MATTHEW CARTWRIGHT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
PENNSYLVANIA
Mr. Cartwright. All right, and I want to thank all my
fellow appropriators for having me here today. Today, I want to
talk about three policy areas where I urge your subcommittee to
give attention during the fiscal year 2018 appropriations
process.
First one is lead hazard control. I want to invite your
attention to the persistent problem of lead in our communities
and to advocate for full funding support for the Office of Lead
Hazard Control and Healthy Homes in the Department of Housing
and Urban Development. Citizens across the country are rightly
concerned about the threat of lead to public health, and
obviously that was something that was brought to the floor in
Flint, Michigan. But in districts like mine, the threat of lead
comes not just from the public drinking water systems, but also
from old plumbing and paint in our houses.
As you may know, in fiscal year 2014, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention spent nearly $2 million as a
part of a 3-year funding commitment to help some of the biggest
cities in the country monitor lead exposure. The results were
alarming. In Pennsylvania, nearly 10 percent of the more than
140,000 kids tested had elevated levels of lead in their blood.
The major cities in my district, Scranton and Wilkes-Barre,
have a high percentage of homes built before the 1940s when the
use of lead-used paint was highly prevalent. That is why I
strongly support robust funding for HUD's lead prevention
programs. The Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes
provides funds to State and local governments to develop cost-
effective ways to reduce lead-based paint hazards.
In addition, the Office enforces HUD's lead-based paint
regulations, it provides outreach and technical assistance, and
conducts technical studies to help protect children and their
families from health and safety hazards in the home. As the
problem of lead in our homes and its impact on our health and
our children's health persists, we need to continue this
important work, and I do ask the subcommittee to provide full
funding for that office's efforts.
Secondly, rail. I urge the subcommittee to increase its
support for our long-neglected national railway network. In
many parts of the world, especially in Europe and in the
emerging fast-growing economies of Asia, citizens enjoy
advanced modern inner-city railway systems that improve their
quality of life, drive business activity, and boost
productivity. America has fallen behind the curve in this area.
In Northeastern Pennsylvania, where I live and represent,
for example, our cities would benefit tremendously from rail
links that connect our region to New York and New Jersey. This
would help bring companies and growth to our region, improve
the lives of the thousands of people who make a grueling
commute, particularly from southern Monroe County,
Pennsylvania, to greater New York City every day by car and
bus.
In addition, investment in rail decreases road congestions,
improved transportation safety, and curbs our emission of
pollutants that contribute to climate change. And I know that
Chairman Frelinghuysen has getting those cars off the road in
northern New Jersey as one of his priorities.
By laying new tracks and increasing connectivity for our
workers, entrepreneurs, and visitors, we will send a powerful
signal to the private sector that our rural regions and cities
are places where businesses can thrive and have access to
resources, talent, and new ideas. In short, restoring an
efficient railway network will create jobs in the near term and
make our economy more competitive in the long term.
And finally, aviation.
I want to begin by commending the subcommittee's work in
the area of aviation over the last 8 years. This committee has
provided more than 99 percent of the FAA's budget requests.
Your support of the programs and activities of the FAA are a
recognition that the United States operates the largest, most
complex air traffic control system in the world.
In that regard, I want to urge the subcommittee to continue
its vigorous support for the FAA's effort to modernize our air
traffic control system. Transitioning from ground-based radar
navigation to satellite-based navigation is a complicated
endeavor and through your support, the FAA has made noteworthy
progress in its NextGen program from the installation of
automatic dependent satellite broadcast ground stations to the
advancements in data communications. Investments in NextGen
will not only create a more efficient system, but will yield
additional capacity and safety benefits.
Finally, I want to urge the subcommittee to continue to
support efforts to ensure that our pilots are adequately
trained and rested, to ensure our Nation's excellent record of
safety. In that regard, I hope you will resist any efforts to
weaken or eliminate regulations that put the flying public at
risk. Our Nation's ATC system is a public asset and your work
is supported by the millions of passengers that pay into the
Airport and Airway Trust Fund each and every time they fly. I
do hope you will continue to make your effort to ensure that
our ATC system remains under your careful oversight.
I thank you for your time and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Mr. Cartwright follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Cartwright. Your time has
expired. Anyone have any questions? Thank you for your time
here today.
Moving along. Recognized now, Congresswoman Diaz Barragan.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE
OF CALIFORNIA
Ms. Barragan. Yes, thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, the ranking member, and members of the Transportation
and Housing and Urban Development Subcommittee. I want to thank
you for an opportunity to allow me to speak to you today. I am
one of the new members of Congress. I represent California's
44th Congressional District. It includes the Port of Los
Angeles and San Pedro, and then goes through areas like Compton
and Watts, up into Southgate.
Most notably, as I mentioned, is the Port of Los Angeles is
in my district. It is North America's largest seaport. It
touches every single congressional district in this country. I
am proud to represent the thousands of workers that are
directly and indirectly associated with the Port of Los
Angeles. The San Pedro Bay ports, which includes both the L.A.
port and the Long Beach port, accounts for one-quarter of the
Nation's cargo and supports over 3 million jobs nationwide.
My message today is simple. I urge you to invest in our
Nation's freight transportation network, particularly on the
multimodular transportation and on programs that provide
comprehension solutions to combat homelessness.
I want to start first with the freight transportation. With
raising freight volumes, increasing population density, and
growing international competition, we need to make sure to
maintain and modernize and expand our infrastructure, including
landslide freight connections that are necessary to move goods
to and from our ports. A competitive grant program for freight
and multimodular transportation, like fast-lane grants, will
improve congestion, air quality, and helps goods get to where
they need to go faster.
In 2014, the FAST Act was enacted into law, making freight
a national issue, and the first time that ports and freight
were fully integrated into the surface transportation network.
Now, the FAST Act also established dedicated freight programs,
including discretionary grant programs known as FASTLANE, which
authorized $4.5 billion over 5 years. The goals of the FASTLANE
program are to increase the U.S. global economic
competitiveness, reduce congestion and bottlenecks, increase
efficiency and reliability of the highway network, and reduce
the environmental impact of freight movement.
In keeping with these goals, one particular program that is
of national significance is something that was just funded in
2017 for the--rather, an application for the fiscal year 2017
program at the Port of Los Angeles. We submitted an application
known as America's Global Freight Gateway Southern California
Rail Project. This request represents only 29 percent of the
project's total cost. This investment is needed to accommodate
more cargo via on-dock rail at the largest port complex in the
Western Hemisphere while reducing community impacts inland by
grade, separating high-priority railroad crossings.
Now, the two Port of Los Angeles project components
currently accommodate approximately $6 million for--rather,
sorry, they accommodate approximately 6 percent of all
waterborne containers entering and exiting the United States.
So I urge the subcommittee to fund FASTLANE grants at the
authorized amounts of $900 million for fiscal year 2018, and
$850 million for the fiscal year 2017. I also want to mention
that Congress should consider raising or eliminating the $500
million lifetime cap for multimodule projects, like highway
connectors and on-dock rail, that are needed to move goods to
and from our port.
I will move on to homelessness. It is a issue that has just
been exploding just throughout the country, more so in Los
Angeles. And my district in Los Angeles County has the highest
homeless population in the Nation with 47,000 homeless men,
women, and children on any given night. It has reached epidemic
proportions and I urge this body to support programs that will
help break the silence, the cycle of homelessness.
Just to highlight one of the programs is the Continuum of
Care. It provides a comprehensive solution to homelessness
epidemic which emphasizes housing first and provides supportive
services. In Carson and Compton, both in my district, the L.A.
County Continuum of Care has been crucial in preventing a
return to homelessness by providing comprehensive solutions
that previous efforts lacked. The funds can be used to provide
transitional housing, rapid rehousing, permanent supportive
housing, support services, and planning to improve program
performance. It has been successful and I urge the subcommittee
to support the $2.7 billion for homeless assistance grants for
fiscal years 2018 and 2017, specifically, the Continuum of Care
program at $2.4 billion for both fiscal years.
To maintain housing affordability and prevent people from
becoming homeless in the first place, we should support key
programs that ensure access to affordable housing, such as the
Community Block Development Grants. Since fiscal year 2010,
CDBG has been cut nearly 25 percent, amounting to roughly $1
billion annually. So just to get to the end here, I urge this
committee to support things like HUD-VASH at a funding level of
$75 million for both fiscal years 2018 and 2017. We do not have
to accept homelessness. I think it is a solvable problem, and I
thank this subcommittee for your time.
[The statement of Ms. Barragan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you very much for your testimony
here today. Appreciate it. Any questions? Hearing none, thank
you.
Now I have Congressman Johnson from the fine State of
Louisiana.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017

WITNESS

HON. MIKE JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
LOUISIANA
Mr. Johnson. That is right, Mr. Chairman. Thank you and
committee members. We will go from the other L.A. to the real
L-A and that is Louisiana, right?
I appreciate the opportunity to come before you today to
consider funding priorities for the fiscal year 2018. I am
grateful for your continued support of our Nation's
infrastructure and transportation priorities.
Given the importance of northwest Louisiana's unique
national security footprint and mixed infrastructure needs, I
am truly thankful for the opportunity to bring important and
noteworthy projects to your attention. I am going to try to
speak quickly so I can get it all in.
Today I share my support for providing adequate formula
funding for the FAST Act, and specifically grant opportunities
in the FASTLANE program to aid the national needs we have heard
here today. My district, Louisiana's Fourth Congressional,
contains five of the nine Louisiana Department of
Transportation State sectors, and that makes us the largest.
Within that area, my district contains 3,403 bridges; a total
of over 20,000 miles of local and interstate roadway. It is
also home to four shallow draft port authorities with 485 miles
of navigable waterways, 7 freight railroads, and 875 miles of
railroad track. Every single one of these areas are in need of
immediate attention.
We are a poor State and I know there are many needs in your
own districts, as well. Long-term statewide transportation
plans have identified incredibly significant amounts in
transportation needs right now. And we demonstrated that
without adequate funding of about $1.86 billion to address
these critical infrastructure projects, efforts aimed to
improve safety needs will go unaddressed.
Louisiana, despite maximizing and capturing available
Federal dollars every year, sees a transportation budget that
is only about 6- to $700 million annually, and it puts us
drastically short of our critical needs.
Just as many of the other members have here stated, my
State is in desperate need of immediate action. To provide just
a few examples of the critical issues in this district, since
January alone, we have had nine bridges that have been forced
to shut down. According to official reports in recent years,
northwest Louisiana's economic health and our quality of life
are at risk if these transportation and infrastructure funding
challenges continue to go unanswered. Without the necessary
funding, it will not be possible to reverse the damage done by
previous year's failures to address these economic challenges.
In the Fourth Congressional District of Louisiana alone,
our statewide plan identifies at least 13 category A through D
megaprojects.
Given the realities of needing to maintain a fiscally
balanced budget, we obviously accept that every infrastructure
project cannot be met. But despite this fact, we have been
presented with an opportunity to once again prioritize the most
important and noteworthy projects. So in addition to advocating
for adequate funding formula for the FAST Act, I would also ask
that the committee support competitive grant opportunities and
the FASTLANE program.
I would like to provide some specific examples, very
quickly, of the infrastructure and highway projects in my
district that are critical for improving not only the local
economy, but national security, as well.
First, funding for the final portion of I-49. We have got
3.6 miles of the proposed new highway that will intersect
Shreveport, our largest city, in order to connect to I-49, at
the I-20 interchange with I-49 North near the I-220
interchange. This will add a seamless and helpful connection
for a highway that extends all the way from Canada to New
Orleans. This project will reduce travel time and travel
distance for those remaining on I-49, and provide a more direct
access to downtown Shreveport, as well as align needs for
supporting current Air Force plans for our Air Force base at
Barksdale.
A second example is with the interstate project of I-69. It
has been named by the U.S. DOTD as one of the six corridors of
the future. And construction of I-69 is critically important to
provide exponential resources to the port of Shreveport
Bossier, Barksdale Air Force Base, and a much-needed loop
around the urban area of Shreveport and Bossier City. In
northwest Louisiana, the sections of independent utility 14,
15, and 16 need to be completed in order for the project to
continue.
Third, we have a project that would greatly benefit from
these programs, the interstate widening efforts for I-49 and I-
20 in the Fourth Congressional District. The I-20 corridor is
congested with vehicle traffic at several points with
conditions expected to worsen in the coming years. And grant
opportunities have the potential to allow for further
development of these interstates. They are critical for the
economies of the local regions and States.
Bossier Parish is one of the fastest growing areas of our
State, and this rapid growth has caused severe traffic
congestion, especially on Highway 3 and Highway 3105, Benton
Road and Airline Drive. And that congestion threatens future
development in the area. We have to act now. We need funding
for that.
Last but not least, I would like to mention the Barksdale
Air Force Base gate project. Barksdale is a key national
security asset located in Bossier Parish that does not have
sufficient direct access to the interstate system. It is an
issue which is a hindrance to national Air Force priority, and
I met with our four-star general there about this 2 weeks ago.
The State is advancing a project to fix this, supporting
DOD's investment in our national security and in our State. The
project will improve base security and connect the new public
road extending from I-20 at the I-220 interchange to a new gate
at Barksdale Air Force Base, moving the commercial vehicle
inspection station away from aircraft approach. We think this
is critical, especially for the future weapons storage and
maintenance facility that will be there. And it has a
preliminary cost estimate of 80- to $100 million. However,
there is an immediate $11.8 million fiscal year 2019 MILCON
request by the Air Force which has been briefed to the
Secretary of Transportation and our State's governor.
Like each of you, I have got dozens of projects that I
could go on about. I realize that I am quickly running out of
time, but in addition to these new capacity projects, costs to
maintain the transportation system we already have continue to
grow. Providing the needed resources to competitive grant
opportunities in the FASTLANE program to address longstanding
challenges will serve as an economic generator and help
protections for Louisiana, Texas, Arkansas, and our surrounding
areas. It is my understanding that many of these top priority
infrastructure projects have been raised to the President, as
well as to our governor.
I know I am out of time and I want to thank you again for
your hard work and your diligent efforts on all these things.
[The statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me thank you, Congressman Johnson, for
your testimony. You obviously know we are always here to
continue to work with you. This subcommittee is anxious and
willing to work with you on issues that are important to you,
and we want to thank you for your testimony. And remember also
if there is anything else you would like to put on the record,
you are more than welcome to do so. We look forward to working
with you.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you very much. Appreciate that very
much.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. I will now recognize
Congressman Byrne from the great State of Alabama, somebody I
have had the privilege of working with on a number of issues,
so it is a privilege to have you here, sir. Thank you. You are
recognized.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. BRADLEY BYRNE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
ALABAMA
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I might say I am from
the other L-A, lower Alabama.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. I always thought that was part of Florida,
by the way, lower Alabama.
Mr. Byrne. It used to be at one time. We were the
independent nation of West Florida for about 10 months in the
1810s, and neither the British nor the Americans thought that
was a good idea, so we are part of America now.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, it is a pleasure to have you here.
Thank you, sir, and you are recognized.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you very much. It is a pleasure for me to
be here today. I want to applaud the efforts of this committee
which have resulted in steady progress towards improving our
Nation's infrastructure.
I was proud to support the Fixing America's Surface
Transportation, or FAST, Act back in 2015, and I support the
financing necessary to ensure the bill's implementation.
Despite our best efforts, there are many areas across the
country that continue to have major transportation needs. For
example, we continue to have a real transportation problem on
I-10 along the Gulf Coast.
In my hometown of Mobile, I consistently and repeatedly
experience delays at the George Wallace Tunnel. Due to the
tunnel's height and odd design, traffic accidents and incidents
often occur. These result in people traveling around I-10
sitting in traffic for hours, pushing toward 3- to 4-hour
delays in the summer months as people are traveling to and from
the beaches. Some of those are Florida beaches, Mr. Chairman.
This portion of I-10 is incredibly important to our area as
well, given its close proximity to the Port of Mobile and the
need to ensure the safe and expedient flow of commerce to and
from the port.
Just as important, I-10 serves as an evacuation route
during hurricane season, and I know I do not have to tell you
the importance of that, Mr. Chairman. The current traffic
situation could result in Americans being left in harm's way
during a severe weather event.
We have made important progress over the last few years
working together with local, State, and Federal officials to
move forward with a new I-10 bridge across the Mobile River.
Former Secretary of Transportation Foxx came to Mobile to see
the project, and he saw the need firsthand.
So, I ask the committee to fully fund the various
transportation programs in the FAST Act in order to allow
projects like the I-10 bridge in Mobile to move forward. This
project is a textbook definition of a nationally and regionally
significant highway project.
I am encouraged by President Trump's commitment to
improving infrastructure. I completely agree with the
President. However, we must be smart about how we make these
future investments to rebuilding and boosting our Nation's
infrastructure to ensure precious resources are not wasted on
unnecessary or wasteful projects, which brings me to my other
reason for sitting before you today.
I want to urge the committee to avoid mistakes from the
past, like funding for California high-speed rail. Looking back
at 2009, the Obama administration spent $8 billion for
transportation. One-quarter of that funding, $2 billion, went
to California high-speed rail. This project was by no means
``shovel ready.'' In fact, more than 8 years later, the land
has not even been fully procured to complete the project.
Today, California has not met any of the obligations to match
the Federal funding. Even worse, almost another billion dollars
was given to California in 2010, and the project remains
embarrassingly behind schedule.
The Los Angeles Times reported that the project ``will cost
taxpayers 50 percent more than estimated, as much as $3.6
billion more, and that is just for the first 118 miles through
the Central Valley, which was supposed to be the easiest part
of the route between Los Angeles and San Francisco.''
This is the definition of a boondoggle, Mr. Chairman. We
all heard about the ``Bridge to Nowhere.'' It is safe to call
this the ``Train from Nowhere to Nowhere.''
This is one of the largest wastes of taxpayer money ever.
Given the many serious transportation needs around the country,
it is a shame so much funding was wasted on California high-
speed rail.
I hope the committee will use this disaster example of
California high-speed rail to ensure funding is going, first
and foremost, to nationally and regionally significant projects
instead of boondoggles. We must make smart investments in our
Nation's most serious infrastructure needs.
Thank you very much for your time today. I appreciate the
opportunity to share my thoughts.
[The statement of Mr. Byrne follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me take this opportunity to thank you,
sir. Again, you know, you have demonstrated always in my
working with you that you are thorough, you are serious, and
you do your homework. So, I just want to thank you, and just
know that we appreciate your testimony and look forward to
continuing to work with you, sir.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good to be with you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you.
Mr. Graves. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yes?
Mr. Graves. If you are ever in California, I would love to
take the opportunity to show you around on what they are doing
out there in my part of the country. The Central Valley portion
of it does touch my district, and it even comes to the point
where we think it might even touch my own personal property. I
would be happy to show you around and let you see from the
perspective of those who are there what it is really like.
During your testimony, I would say you were pretty accurate
in your description.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Seeing no further questions, we
will now recognize the distinguished gentleman from New Jersey,
Mr. Albio Sires, I think one of the hardest working members of
Congress.
Mr. Sires. Wow.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Absolutely. Congressman Sires, it is a
privilege to have you here, sir, and you have the floor. Make
sure your microphone is on.
Mr. Sires. Is it on? Can you hear me?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yes. Thank you, sir.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. ALBIO SIRES, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW
JERSEY
Mr. Sires. Well, thank you for affording me the time to
express my support for two critical programs that will be
included in the fiscal year 2018 appropriations bill, the
Community Development Block Grant Program and the HOME
Investment Partnerships Program of the Department of Housing
and Urban Development.
As a former mayor, I understand how critical these programs
are to communities across the country, especially our low-
income communities. As you may know, President Gerald Ford
signed this legislation creating the CDBG Program in 1974 to
provide annual formula grants to local governments and States.
Over 40 years later, the CDBG Program continues to provide
funding for critical projects across our country that urban and
rural communities would otherwise be unable to afford. These
grants make investments in local and regional infrastructure,
spur job creation, and fight poverty in communities that need
it the most.
Communities utilize this funding to rebuild streets,
rehabilitate community centers, improve parks, and replace
water mains that are badly in need of repair. These funds also
support youth and homeless services, employment training, and
projects to provide suitable living for the disabled.
Importantly, these funds are flexible enough that local
officials can direct them in areas that need them the most. The
CDBG Program has been incredibly successful throughout its 40-
year history, and I know firsthand it has made a lasting
impression on towns and cities across America.
Like the CDBG Program, the HOME Program supports projects
that would not otherwise be feasible. Using HOME funds,
communities partner with local nonprofits to fund projects
renovating and building or purchasing affordable housing for
lower income Americans. These projects provide shelters for
veterans, senior citizens, and the working poor.
As our Nation's affordable housing infrastructure grows
older, grants from the HOME Program become more and more
critical to providing safe and affordable housing for those who
need it most.
On behalf of 1,000 cities in New Jersey's congressional
districts and the thousands of people impacted by these
programs, I urge you to support both the CDBG Program and the
HOME Program as you continue your appropriations process. Thank
you very much for the time given to me today.
[The statement of Mr. Sires follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me just thank you, Congressman. Mr.
Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to join you in
thanking our colleague for short but persuasive testimony about
the two programs that I believe it is fair to say on the HUD
side of our budget have had historically the broadest
bipartisan support, and certainly support in our communities
across the country. So, thank you for underscoring that. We
appreciate you being here today.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Congressman. Thank you for your
testimony. We will now recognize, again, also from the State of
New York----
Mr. Espaillat It is hard to pronounce.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. It should not be for me. If I can ask you
first to make sure your microphone is on. It is Espaillat?
Mr. Espaillat. Espaillat.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Okay. I will never get that wrong again.
Thank you, sir, it is a privilege to have you here in front of
our subcommittee.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
NEW YORK
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Chairman, Ranking Member Price.
Let me just start by congratulating the chairman on the recent
award he got at the dinner with his brother, Lincoln Diaz-
Balart, for the contributions of him and his family to public
service. I was delighted to be there, where I found out the
handsome level of funding that he will be impacting on for HUD.
So, I hope to work very closely with him as we move forward.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. With his introduction, I think he is doing
really well. I think it was brilliant and on point.
Mr. Espaillat. I hope to do better.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Right, Mr. Price?
Mr. Price. Yes.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you for your kind words, and again,
you are recognized, and we thank you for being here.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you for allowing me to testify during
today's subcommittee hearing to lay out my priorities as they
relate to transportation, housing, and urban development.
It is my hope that Congress will enact regular full-year
fiscal year 2018 appropriations for HUD programs prior to the
end of fiscal year 2017. It is my understanding that none of
the fiscal year 2017 regular appropriation bills were enacted
before the end of fiscal year 2016, and Congress instead
approved two continuing resolutions to provide temporary
funding. This provides funding through April 28, 2017, which is
just around the corner.
When it comes to housing, this kind of insecurity is hardly
acceptable. Moreover, a recent news report has revealed that
the administration is proposing cuts to operational funds by
$600 million, so 13 percent of the budget, and these are
serious cuts, and for big ticket repair items for public
housing, cuts in the amount of $1.3 billion, or 32 percent.
This is also a very serious level of cuts for public housing.
Now, traditionally we think that infrastructure is just
roads, bridges, and tunnels, but we as landlords, because
public housing happens to be our housing--in fact, the
President lives in public housing. The White House is public
housing; we as members of Congress are the landlords, the
owners of these housing units, and so is the President.
We should own up to our responsibility to provide a safe,
healthy, and sustainable life setting in these units, in over
1.2 million units of public housing.
I am submitting testimony because I am concerned with
reports stating that domestic discretionary funding may suffer
at great cost. This is particularly concerning, as it relates
to already poor and struggling communities, like Washington
Heights, Harlem, Inwood, the Bronx, and East Harlem.
The Housing Choice Vouchers Program and the Section 8
Rental Program are on the chopping blocks. My district has the
most number of housing units in the City of New York and,
therefore, the Nation, and has the second most residents in
terms of population.
Having been an organizer, I understand the effects of
housing needs, the need to protect low-income renters from
being displaced from their homes, and the importance and
growing needs for increased funding for Section 8 housing. Now,
the cuts that are being proposed also include cuts in Section 8
Housing Vouchers for people like homeless veterans at the tune
of $300 million, or from $300 million to potentially $19.3
billion. So, this is very concerning.
New York City Housing Preservation and Development, HPD,
and the New York City Housing Authority, NYCHA, collectively
administer over 123,000 vouchers that provide critical rental
assistance to families across the city. These vouchers are a
lifeline for more than 294,000 families in New York City. Since
the 2009 sequestration, New York City families have lost nearly
13,000 vouchers.
New York City is home to the country's largest public
housing authority, and its impact is monumental for low-income
and working families in a high-cost city. Public housing is a
valuable asset for more than 400,000 New Yorkers. That is
bigger than many cities throughout the United States. This is
an asset that needs to be fully funded to prevent the loss of
even more public housing units in our Nation.
Public housing operations and capital have been underfunded
for many, many years, putting long-term viability of the units
at risk, and resulting in health impacts for residents,
including asthma, respiratory illnesses, which are a major
public health concern for public housing residents throughout
the Nation.
New York City has a 5-year backlog of capital needs,
nearing $17 billion. This is the largest unmet need in the
Nation, and a significant portion of HUD's total capital
backlog assessed at $26 billion in 2010.
An increase in funding will be invested in capital repairs
which could tackle the public housing needs and health
concerns. Many of the public housing units in our country are
in disarray, and with an added $600 million, units could
address more remediation, including roof repairs, brick
repairs, piping, asbestos removal, and other issues that lead
to increases in health concerns for low-income residents.
My time is about to expire, Mr. Chairman, but I do want to
stress the importance of having funding channeled to public
housing. In my opinion, infrastructure should include our
public housing network, and we should provide adequate funding
for families to have a safe and healthy environment in which
they live. We as landlords have that responsibility.
Thank you so much.
[The statement of Mr. Espaillat follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me just thank you for your testimony,
and please do know that this committee is looking forward to
working with you. You obviously represent a part of the country
that is very dynamic. So, just know that we look forward to
working very, very closely with you in the coming months.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you so much. I look forward to that
opportunity.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Let me reiterate we are happy to have you as
part of the Congress. I welcome you and thank you for your
testimony today. We will pay very close attention to it.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you so much.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. We will now recognize Mr.
Visclosky, who has been patiently waiting back there, if he is
ready. Then we will have Mr. Suozzi right after that, if he is
ready as well.
Again, sir, thank you for being here, and thank you for
sharing your testimony.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. PETER J. VISCLOSKY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
INDIANA
Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Price, and members of the
committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you
today. I feel like I have come home. My mentor in another
century was chairman of this great subcommittee, so it is good
to be back.
I am here today to emphasize my support and ask for your
support for the Federal Transit Administration's Capital
Investment Grant Program and the New Starts, and Core Capacity
Grants Program. All of you understand the importance of transit
and its economic and beneficial impact throughout the United
States. I want to give you a real world example in northwest
Indiana.
Lake County, Indiana, which is the most populous county I
represent, is on Lake Michigan and it is contiguous to the City
of Chicago. Lake County, Illinois, is on Lake Michigan and it
is contiguous to the City of Chicago. Since 1970, the
population of Lake County, Indiana, which I represent, has
declined by 10 percent. The fact is, the population for Lake
County, Illinois, has grown by 83 percent. The median household
income in Lake County, Indiana, in the similar period of time
has declined by 12.5 percent. The median household income in
Lake County, Illinois, has increased by 17.7 percent.
I would propose to you one of the fundamental differences
is that on the Illinois side of the State line between our two
great States there are over 470 miles of mass transit line,
many of which go to Lake County, Illinois. On the Indiana side,
it is as though someone built a great wall. There are 38 miles
of mass transit in Indiana going to Michigan City. The line
then extends to South Bend. We have been working for a
generation to connect ourselves to the economy of Chicago,
which is larger than the economy of Sweden, to not only access
that economy, but to draw down its benefits to northwest
Indiana.
Over the past several years, we have had 16 of the 20
communities in Lake County make a long-term, 30-year commitment
to meet and match Federal funding. I would point out that in
his capacity as governor, Vice President Pence in 2015 signed
State legislation for a long-term, 30-year commitment to meet
that Federal program. This year in his budget, Governor Holcomb
in the State of Indiana has included money to meet those
Federal grant programs. We will apply in August.
But all of this effort for a generation will be for naught
if that capital investment grant program is not adequately
funded. Currently in 2016, the appropriation was $2.17 billion,
which was sustained due to the enactment of the continuing
resolution. I would point out in this committee's markup for
the House you included $2.5 billion, obviously understanding
the value of this program.
It is not limited to the coast, it is not limited to
northwest Indiana. You have projects in places like El Paso,
Texas; Albuquerque, New Mexico; and Milwaukee, Wisconsin. I
would strongly urge you, when we talk about infrastructure in
this Congress and we talk about investing in the economy, to
ensure that we preserve these programs, not just for the
congressional district I represent, but recognizing that, since
2012, requests for these types of capital construction have
increased from 37 to 63. Because communities throughout our
great Nation understand the importance economically for good-
paying job growth that this Federal investment of our taxes
represent. And again, I appreciate the opportunity to be before
you today.
[The statement of Mr. Visclosky follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, let me thank you, sir, and obviously
you are somebody who understands the appropriations process as
well if not better than anybody in this building and this
facility. So obviously we look forward to working with you. Mr.
Price, any comments or questions?
Mr. Price. I want to thank our colleague and friend for
being here and for taking note of the attention this committee
paid in the current cycle to New Starts, and the importance of
getting closer to that number, hopefully, with a 5-month
omnibus bill for the remainder of 2017. In the meantime, you
have given a very convincing rationale rooted in your own
district's experience for the importance of this going forward,
so we appreciate that.
Mr. Visclosky. Appreciate your efforts very much. Thank you
so much.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Now we will recognize Mr.
Suozzi. And again, thank you for being here on time and, again,
we look forward to working with you. The floor is yours, sir.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. THOMAS R. SUOZZI, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
NEW YORK
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ranking
Member Price, and the other members that are here today for the
subcommittee. I want to thank you for the opportunity and the
time to discuss my request for funding the health impacts of
airplane noise at some of our busiest airports throughout the
country.
Recently, I was elected as co-chair of the Quiet Skies
Caucus along with Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton, and we
are fortunate to have Congressmen Quigley and Lynch serve as
co-vice chairs of the caucus. All of us, along with dozens of
other members from both sides of the aisle, have constituents
who are deeply impacted by unacceptable levels of airplane and
aircraft noise.
I am a new member of this distinguished body, but while
exploring a run for this office, aircraft noise was one of the
first issues I heard about from voters. At a town hall I had
held last June, a constituent rose to ask about what I would do
and could as a member of Congress to reduce aircraft noise over
her home and in that neighborhood. In fact, she was interrupted
twice during the conversation in less than 2 minutes by
aircraft passing overhead. The noise was so loud, she had to
pause and wait for planes to pass before she could continue
asking her question.
I represent New York's Third Congressional District. The
district stretches from northeastern Queens along Long Island's
north shore through Nassau County and Suffolk County. My
constituents have two of the world's busiest and biggest
airport, LaGuardia airport and John F. Kennedy International
Airport, that lie just beyond the district's boundaries.
Although both airports are outside the district, both rely on
flight paths that traverse numerous neighborhoods in and around
my district. This is not a discrete problem affecting a limited
number of people, but a major issue impacting people across the
country.
Many of us rely on Reagan National Airport to return home
each week. Congresswoman Holmes Norton's district's
constituents, who call Washington, D.C., home, are impacted by
travelers like ourselves, who come from our districts to engage
in the people's business or visit our Nation's capital. Mr.
Quigley's constituents live near O'Hare International Airport,
one of the world's busiest airports, and suffer greatly under
the volume of flights that land and depart every day. And Mr.
Lynch's constituents in and around Boston's Logan Airport also
suffer from unacceptable noise levels along with constituents
of dozens of other members who are part of the Quiet Skies
Caucus.
This is not a partisan issue. Mr. Coffman of Colorado is a
member of the Quiet Skies Caucus and works with us on behalf of
his constituents to alleviate and reduce unacceptable noise
levels.
Our friends in the Senate also believe this is an important
issue. Senators McCain and Flake of Arizona have championed
this cause and have taken the lead in the Senate to help
mitigate noise from aircraft in Arizona and across the country.
I have tried to make the case that unacceptable noise levels is
a bipartisan national issue of significance worthy of
congressional attention.
Today my primary goal is to impart the significance of the
issue to you and my colleagues. One of the key takeaways was a
realization from a town hall meeting I had that there is an
ongoing failure to understand the seriousness of this issue. In
other words, we still need to persuade the Federal Aviation
Administration and others that this is not a subjective
complaint of a bunch of cranks, but an objective problem
harming human health.
In order to legitimize concerns, I believe we need to
federally fund health studies conducted by the leading
universities of our country to demonstrate that this issue
objectively raises health concerns. I have followed up with
members of the Quiet Skies Caucus and found they agree with
this conclusion and even relayed their own constituents'
frustrations that their complaints are often dismissed without
due consideration. We believe these health studies which will
objectively determine the impact on individuals and their
families' health will demonstrate the need for all stakeholders
to address the issue.
In addition to health studies, and while they are
conducted, I believe other steps should be taken in the
interim. Many districts are experiencing unacceptable noise
levels as a result of the NextGen route changes. While the FAA
says the noise is within the acceptable 65 day/night level,
that standard was developed more than a decade ago. I believe
that the FAA needs to conduct an expedited review of the 65 DNL
standard and incorporate actual noise sampling, not just rely
on the modeling and simulation. Therefore, I ask the Committee
to include report language urging the FAA to expedite DNL
review and to provide the Committee with a report no later than
60 days after enactment of the act describing a pilot program
for conducting actual noise sampling as part of the DNL review.
On its face, this issue may appear to be one of mere
annoyance, but I can assure you that it is not a trivial issue.
The members and Senators I have mentioned above, and many more,
can echo and expand upon the thoughts and points I have raised
today. Our constituents raise legitimate concerns because they
are subjected to unacceptable noise levels at a volume and
frequency that have dramatically impacted their quality of life
and their health. My hope is that the subcommittee will join
with us to assist from across the country by raising the
profile of this issue and working with us towards results and
getting things done for the American people.
Thank you so much for your time. I cannot imagine what is
like for you to listen to everybody's different requests that
come in here, but I am very grateful for the opportunity to be
here.
[The statement of Mr. Suozzi follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, let me first thank the gentleman.
And I will tell you, obviously, on this subcommittee we have
Mr. Quigley, who never lets us forget the issue that you have
just brought up, and just know that we look forward to working
with you.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you so much.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Let me reiterate that receptivity. We have a
history on this committee of trying our best to deal with what
are often difficult situations, so we appreciate your
testimony.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Price. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. We are not going to
recognize, by the way, members of the subcommittee. Mr. Lawson
will be our last colleague testifying in front of us today.
While he gets ready, let me just tell you that Mr. Lawson
is a freshman, but he has been involved in Florida politics. He
and I served in the Florida legislature and so it is, frankly,
a real personal--just it is wonderful to recognize him here now
as a colleague as we were for many years in the Florida
legislature and now in the United States Congress. So on a
personal level, it is great to see you here, sir, and obviously
as chairman let me recognize you for your testimony.
----------

Thursday, March 9, 2017.

WITNESS

HON. AL LAWSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA
Mr. Lawson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and it is a real
privilege for me to be here with you and I am real honored to
be able to represent the Fifth Congressional District in
Florida. I need to say that it runs all the way to
Jacksonville, you know, from Gaston County to Jacksonville, to
make sure to include it.
There are a number of critical programs that I would like
to discuss given the importance of our district. First, I would
like to see full funding for the Capital Investment Grants
Investment Program. These projects not only generate economic
development, but also help to reduce energy consumption. I know
the subcommittee has been very supportive of these programs and
your work should be applauded for providing over $408 million
in fiscal year 2017, the THUD bill more funding than the Senate
bill.
I would like to highlight one project for my district that
is currently in the small start pipeline for funding. The
Jacksonville Transportation Authority had begun implementing a
57-mile bus rapid transit, the BRT, network system called the
First Coast Flyer. It is made up of five district lines, two of
which are already operating. The fiscal year 2017 bill, there
is currently $14.9 million pending for the First Coast Flyer
East corridor and for fiscal year 2018 budget, $37.9 million
for the Southwest corridor. I would like to see both projects
funded.
The BRT is an important investment in Jacksonville public
transportation system. It has provided us with a variety of
options to develop safe, reliable, premium service in a cost-
effective manner. I would like to see the subcommittee continue
to provide funding for the TIGER Grants program and bus
facilities.
Finally, I recently had the opportunity to visit Eureka
Gardens Apartments, a privately owned, subsidized apartment
community in Jacksonville. Like most Americans, the residents
of Eureka Gardens want a clean, affordable, and safe place to
raise their families and to call home.
The conditions I saw really kind of broke my heart. Sadly,
under the previous management company, Eureka Garden has fallen
into a horrible state of disrepair where residents have to
combat black mold, infestation, gas leaks, the loss of heat and
hot water, no air-conditioning, and persistent crime problems
which is very prevalent. It is my firm belief that the people
who pay rent, regardless of their income, neighborhood, or
whether they live in privately owned or public housing, have
the right to expect and get routine maintenance, and that no
one should be forced to live in conditions that threaten health
or safety.
It is my hope that as the committee begins to put together
the 2018 budget that it would consider adding additional
funding for oversight, renovation, and modernization of older
public and private housing units. Not only that it was brought
to my attention, it was also brought to the attention of
Senator Rubio, who had the opportunity to visit that area.
It is my hope that a separate line of funding could be made
available for small, medium, and large communities. I would
also ask that the committee consider providing low-income loans
to owners of subsidized housing until--units to make necessary
repairs to their facility.
I want to thank you all for this opportunity to share with
the subcommittee my thoughts on funding and thank you again for
ongoing support of these programs. I really cannot say enough
about the chairman's commitment that he had in the State of
Florida. I had the opportunity to work with him and it is truly
an honor to be reunited with the chairman here, and I am sure
that he remembers all of the good things that we did in the
State of Florida, even though he was, in my opinion, the
southern part of Florida, and we always thought they were
separated from America. We were up there around Georgia and
Alabama, but it was a big difference.
So we were still able to work together and I am so honored
to have the opportunity for the first time, to meet many of you
all, and to realize that I have got 13 seconds, I want to thank
you all for this great opportunity.
[The statement of Mr. Lawson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, let me just again, for those of you,
Mr. Price and others, as he said, he and I worked together, we
conspired together on a lot of difficult issues. And just be
forewarned, he will not let us forget the issues that are
important to him.
So thank you, sir, and, again, an honor. And you are right,
for me, it is a personal moment of personal satisfaction to be
able to be reunited with you, sir. Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Mr. Lawson, we are very happy to have you here.
We can benefit, I think, from your years of experience and your
political savvy as well as your attention to the needs of your
part of Florida. So we look forward to working with you.
Mr. Lawson. Thank you so much, I look forward to it.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me now just thank each and every
member of the subcommittee, also those members who came to
testify on their THUD priorities today. We appreciate the
opportunity to hear their testimony and we are pleased to share
this process with all of us. As I said earlier, everyone's
written testimony will be included in the record.
And again, lastly, as a reminder, the member database to
submit your appropriations requests for fiscal year 2014 bill
is open and the deadline to submit THUD requests is April 4. So
please be sure to submit your request by the deadline, again,
so we may include them in the fiscal year 2018 process. And,
Mr. Price, any closing remarks?
Mr. Price. No, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Members, any closing remarks? Great.
Well, again, our next hearing is next Thursday, March 16,
where we will hear from the Inspector General at the Department
of Transportation and of HUD.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned. Thank you.

Thursday, March 16, 2017.

OVERSIGHT HEARING--DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND DEPARTMENT OF
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

WITNESSES

CALVIN L. SCOVEL III, INSPECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
DAVID A. MONTOYA, INSPECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
Chairman Diaz-Balart. I am going to call the meeting to
order. But before we start, I do want to announce that,
obviously, since we have two inspectors general today, I just
want to announce that there is another inspector general here,
and that is my personal inspector general, and that is my wife,
Tia, who is here along with my son, Cristian. They do not get
the opportunity to come up to Washington a lot, so it is great
to have them here today.
With that, today, we welcome Inspectors General, The
Honorable Calvin Scovel from the Department of Transportation,
and The Honorable David Montoya from the Department of Housing
and Urban Development. So the oversight work, gentlemen, that
you do for our committee, and for our country, frankly, is
vital. Please know that we cherish what you do. You ensure that
tax dollars are being well-spent and that those dollars are
stretched as far as possible, whether it is for our Nation's
transportation or housing needs. We rely on your good work, on
your judgment, on your dedication to find waste and fraud and
abuse in agencies, and, obviously, that is something that you
do not tolerate and we do not tolerate. So when we have
concerns regarding the management and effectiveness within both
departments, you know that we look to you for much-needed
oversight and guidance, and the guidance that you provide
through, again, your various audits and the investigations that
you all do. So you help us get there, you help us get these
agencies back on track as much as humanly possible and ensure
that they are working as efficiently and as effectively as
possible. We look forward to your testimony.
With that, let me recognize the Ranking Member of this
committee, a person who we work very closely together, the
gentleman from the great State of North Carolina, Mr. Price,
for any opening remarks that he might have. You are recognized,
sir.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I join you in welcoming
Mr. Scovel and Mr. Montoya here today. I will keep this
statement relatively brief, because we will need to get to the
questions, but I want to just underscore a few concerns.
The oversight hearing is an important opportunity for us to
examine the key management challenges facing the Departments of
Transportation and HUD. Many of these issues are not new. For
example, HUD has struggled to modernize its IT infrastructure,
facing ongoing challenges associated with human capital
management, and over the years, failed to establish
sufficiently strong internal controls over how it obligates and
controls funds.
Meanwhile, the DOT Inspector General has highlighted
ongoing challenges associated with the safe integration of new
transportation technology, namely, unmanned drones and
autonomous vehicles, as well as the department's management of
certain high-risk contracts. I look forward to exploring these
topics in more detail this morning.
I am also concerned with the Trump administration's
painfully slow pace when it comes to the appointments of deputy
and assistant secretaries and other high-ranking officials. You
simply cannot run a complex department without a strong
leadership team in place beneath the Secretary.
Compounding the problem is the recently announced Federal
hiring freeze imposed by the Trump administration, which, I
believe, could threaten core government functions if it is left
in place. The GAO has noted that across-the-board hiring
freezes are almost always counterproductive.
Finally, the Trump administration to-date has shown a
blatant disregard for addressing possible conflicts of
interest, starting with, but limited to, the man at the top.
Oversight is a key function of Congress, but it is especially
integral to the work of the Appropriations Committee.
Independent inspectors general enable this subcommittee to
conduct effective oversight, make informed funding decisions to
ensure our limited Federal dollars are spent wisely, and that
most certainly includes exploring conflicts of interest. I will
address that in our question period.
So I look forward to learning more about how HUD and DOT
are meeting their management challenges and where they stand to
improve. Thank you, both, for being here today. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much, Mr. Price.
Today, we will begin with the Department of Transportation's
Inspector General, Mr. Scovel. Your full written testimony,
sir, will be included in the record, and we look forward to
listening to your testimony. You are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Scovel. Chairman Diaz-Balart, Ranking Member Price,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today on the Department of Transportation's (DOT) top
management challenges. Every year, DOT invests more than $70
billion to operate and modernize our transportation
infrastructure. My office supports these efforts through audits
and criminal investigations that identify and help protect
against fraud, waste, and abuse of taxpayer dollars. I greatly
appreciate the subcommittee's support and continued focus on
the important work of government oversight performed by offices
like mine and that of Inspector General Montoya.
My testimony today focuses on three critical challenge
areas that we have identified for DOT for 2017: safety,
stewardship, and completion of mandates and recommendations. As
Secretary Chao has noted, safety remains at the forefront of
DOT's mission. The United States continues to have one of the
safest transportation systems in the world. However, new
technologies and industries bring new challenges.
For example, FAA recently issued a rule to help safely
integrate small unmanned aircraft systems, known as UAS, into
our airspace. However, the number of UAS sightings by pilots
and others continues to go up, over 1,400 this past year, as
compared to just over 200 in 2014. Many of these occurred at
altitudes where other aircraft operate. Maintaining safety will
require a strong risk-based oversight system by FAA and
coordination with other agencies.
Similarly, the emerging technology of driverless cars poses
new safety challenges for DOT and NHTSA. Several companies are
already developing, testing, and selling various iterations,
and the number is expected to grow quickly. DOT and
policymakers must clearly define the tools and standards
necessary to oversee and regulate this industry and the
technology underlying it.
At the same time, NHTSA must continue to improve its
processes for investigating vehicle safety defects. Most
recently, a Takata air bag defect resulted in 11 fatalities and
180 injuries. Due in part to our investigative work, automobile
makers recalled tens of millions of vehicles, and Takata
Corporation was sentenced last month to pay $1 billion in
criminal penalties. NHTSA is making progress towards addressing
our recommendations to collect and analyze more comprehensive
vehicle safety data, but must continue to improve internal
controls within its Office of Defects Investigations.
With regard to stewardship, we have identified areas where
DOT can improve how it manages and oversees the billions of
dollars invested each year in our transportation
infrastructure, from highways and bridges to air traffic
control.
For example, FAA faces ongoing challenges to deliver six
programs that are essential to implement NextGen and modernize
our outdated air traffic control systems. Expenditures since
2003 for these six programs now total over $5.7 billion, and
their completion has been pushed to well beyond 2020. As a
watch item, many requirements remain undefined, and FAA has yet
to fully quantify how these programs will achieve expected
benefits for the aviation industry.
Protecting our infrastructure also requires addressing
increasingly sophisticated cybersecurity threats. However, DOT
has not effectively implemented programs to actively monitor
and mitigate security breaches immediately, during, or after an
attack. Recent trends in mobile, cloud, and workplace
technology also present new challenges to monitoring and
securing DOT's network.
Finally, as it carries out its mission, DOT must develop
strategies to efficiently carry out mandated and recommended
improvements. These include provisions in the 2015 FAST Act, to
improve investments in highway and transit projects, as well as
key aviation safety mandates from the 2016 FAA Extension Act.
Those mandates include, for example, requiring better records
on a pilot's training and background. DOT has also faced delays
in addressing recommendations to improve pipeline and hazardous
material safety from both our office and NTSB.
In conclusion, my office will continue to assist DOT and
Congress as we work to meet these and other challenges,
including helping the department leverage its resources to
promote safety and efficiency and prevent fraud in any
forthcoming infrastructure investment plans.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my prepared statement. I am
happy to answer any questions you or other subcommittee members
may have.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much, sir. We will now
recognize HUD's Inspector General, Mr. Montoya. Mr. Montoya,
your full testimony also will be included in the record, and
so, again, you are now recognized for five minutes, and thank
you for being here, sir.
Mr. Montoya. Thank you, sir. Chairman Diaz-Balart and
Ranking Member Price and members of the subcommittee, thank you
for the opportunity to discuss the Department of Housing and
Urban Development's top management and performance challenges
for fiscal year 2017 and beyond and the oversight my office
conducts.
Just this past year my office's contribution realized
financial benefits to the government of nearly $8.5 billion,
which represents a leading return on investment of $67 for
every dollar spent on our work. We have a talented staff, and
together through the years we have developed a culture of
focusing on stewardship, accountability, and impactful
oversight work. I want to share how proud I am of our team at
HUD OIG and I am proud to serve them as their Inspector
General.
HUD's key management and performance challenges are so
interrelated and interconnected that our reviews indicate one
impacts another to such a degree that in many cases HUD will
not be able to remedy one without first correcting another.
This becomes a taxing challenge to determine which needs to
come first or whether several need to be accomplished
simultaneously.
Achieving HUD's mission continues to be an ambitious
challenge for its limited staff, given its diverse programs,
the thousands of entities carrying them out, and the millions
of citizens who receive benefits from them. HUD's most
significant challenge is reflected in it struggle to establish
and implement effective and required financial management
governance.
In our fiscal years 2016 and 2015 (restated) financial
statement audit report we expressed a disclaimer of opinion due
to HUD's inability to deliver principal financial statements in
a timely manner and other unresolved audit matters. This marks
3 years in a row now that HUD has been unable to receive a
clean opinion.
The absence of having key financial staff with appropriate
skills, background, and knowledge to oversee the preparation of
Federal financial statements was best illustrated when we found
several instances where rounding was performed to the nearest
billion and hundred billion while OMB requires the highest
level of rounding only to the nearest million.
The result was that HUD had to withdraw it published agency
financial report in December of 2016 in order to correct
material errors. The Office of the Chief Financial Officer did
not inform my office of changes it made after it submitted
final financial statements for our review, and left the
impression that certain sections of its published financial
statements had been audited by my office when they had not
been.
HUD and the Office of Chief Financial Officer had failed to
design and implement an adequate system of internal controls
over financial reporting necessary to mitigate the challenges
and risks in its complex financial reporting process, which
will continue to contribute to the persistence of disclaimers
in the Department's annual financial statements for the
foreseeable future.
These challenges and risks were exacerbated by the
Department's New Core project that was to have transitioned
HUD's legacy general ledger application to an enterprise
resource management application housed in a Federal shared
service provider. Our audits have determined that HUD's
transition to a shared service provider did not improve the
handling of its financial management transactions.
A year after the transition, HUD had inaccurate data
resulting from the conversions and continued to execute 97
percent of its programmatic transactions using legacy
applications. HUD also continues to face challenges and funding
constraints in addressing outdated information technology
systems, its ability to integrate updated application systems,
and replace the legacy systems.
The use of aging systems has resulted in poor performance
and high operation and maintenance costs, and have also
inhibited HUD's ability to produce reliable, useful, and timely
financial information. They also leave the Department's
financial systems and information at increased risk of
unauthorized access and modification.
Ginnie Mae also continues to face challenges in its
financial management accountability, managing counterparty
risk, and monitoring nonbank issuers, which has grown by
approximately 62 percent since 2010, and now represent a
majority of issuances annually. By the end of fiscal year 2016,
Ginnie Mae had made guarantees on loans with the remaining
principal balance of approximately $1.7 trillion.
In conclusion, HUD will continue to face challenges until
it puts controls and adequate resources in place to address
them. We remain committed, though, to working collaboratively
with HUD and strive to provide best practices and reasonable
recommendations that support HUD's mission and
responsibilities.
We also are strongly committed to working with the
Department and the Congress to ensure that these important
programs operate efficiently and effectively and as intended
for the benefit of the American taxpayers now and into the
future.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony and I would be
pleased to answer any questions you or the committee may have.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much, sir. We,
obviously, have many issues to talk about and I know that a lot
of members have questions.
Members, we will proceed in the standard 5-minute rounds,
alternating sides, recognizing members in order of seniority as
they were seated at the beginning of the hearing. We will try
to move quickly so everyone can get their questions in.
Be mindful of your time. Obviously, the 5 minutes includes
not only your questions, but also the answer time. And I will,
by the way, adhere to that as well. So I will be mindful of
that as well.
Let me start, Inspector Montoya, with you. For several
years now, and you mentioned it right now in your testimony,
that your office has been--well, frankly, has had to express
disclaimers on HUD's consolidated financial statements. Every
Federal agency should be able to produce financial statements
that meet audit standards, but this is, obviously, especially
important for a financial institution like HUD.
As simply as you can, if you can please provide the
committee with an update on the state of financial grievances
and governance, the governance issue at HUD, if you would?
Mr. Montoya. I will do my best to keep it under an hour and
a half.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. And simple, right?
Mr. Montoya. And simple. I will do my best.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. Of course.
Mr. Montoya. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I would sort
of roll this all up into one quick phrase and that is a failure
of leadership at all levels. Having said that, this is a good
example of the interdependencies and interrelationships of the
many programs that HUD faces.
Let us start with human capital. They do not have the
appropriate skills, knowledge, and expertise to prepare Federal
financial statements. That is different from budget process.
You couple that human capital concern that HUD has had for a
number of years, and you overlay that onto the dependency on IT
systems that, in many cases, were never designed to handle
financial management processes, they are aging, and you end up
with a confluence of the problems that you see, right, lack of
internal controls and then lack of systems that can provide the
relevant information that they need. That is the shortest
answer I can give you.
With regards to the failure of leadership, I do not think
for several administrations now there has been a real look at
prioritizing the type of skill sets and the personnel they need
to get to address these many issues, not only in the financial
management internal controls area, but also in their IT,
security, and infrastructure.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. Let me try to see if I can get you to
specifically, if you can, comment on HUD's use of internal
controls regarding its financial statements.
Mr. Montoya. Well, the problem with the Department is it is
heavily siloed. So most of the financial accounting processes
are not centered into the Chief Information Officer. They are
basically left to the various programs, and in many cases these
programs do not understand general accounting principles, if
you will.
And so often they are putting systems into place that do
not comport with Federal financial management. And so when you
go to roll the systems up for the financial statements, we see
a number of areas where there are mistakes, if you will.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. You know, that is, obviously,
extremely disappointing and it is not the first time that we
have heard this kind of thing. It is a persistent problem at
HUD. Now, I think most of us would agree that what makes it
more difficult, actually more alarming, is that HUD has been
without a Chief Financial Officer (CFO) for more than 18
months. So, you know, I do not know how an agency can deal with
all these issues without having a qualified CFO.
And so can you briefly discuss what is happening there, and
also what gaps do you think HUD needs to fill to tackle some of
these problems that you have mentioned?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. They have, in fact, have been
without a CFO for quite some time. I would say that out of
their nine senior accounting positions only two of them, at
best, have an accounting background, let us say a certified
public accounting type of certification. A lot of them are
budget-related type backgrounds. But, again, that is different
from Federal financial management. And so that is problem
number one and goes back to my earlier statement that they do
not understand the intricacies of the systems they oversee.
The best example is this idea that somebody could approve
to round to the nearest billion and hundred billion when all
that is allowed is a million.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. Yeah, that is insane.
Mr. Montoya. So you understand how the numbers get crazy.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. That is insane.
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. And I am trying to be kind.
Mr. Montoya. I would not disagree with you, sir. And that
goes, again, to the lack of experience and knowledge that you
need in a CFO's office to prepare the statements.
I will give you an example, if you will bear with me for a
second here. So the assistant chief financial officer for
accounting has an MBA in finance, but that does not necessarily
relate to the accounting principles that individual needs to
know. So I think that would be my biggest concern is, again,
the failure of leadership to get these positions filled and get
them filled with the appropriate skilled staff.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. In the 14 seconds that I have, the
fact that they have not prioritized filling the CFO position,
to me, does it take 18 months usually?
Mr. Montoya. I would not think so, sir. But apparently it
has here.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Price, you are recognized, sir.
Mr. Price. Thank you. I would like to ask both of you to
address conflicts of interest and how your offices deal with
them, what your responsibility is, and a couple of more
detailed aspects of that. Of course, this is especially a
challenge as we start a new administration, hundreds of new
personnel come into the departments to fill important
positions. These individuals bring experience from outside
government.
With that comes, of course, the risk of conflicts of
interest. Such conflicts become a focus of Senate confirmation
hearings, so Cabinet-level nominees. But the scrutiny, of
course, has to go beyond that and that is where, I assume, your
offices come in.
So what role do the inspector general offices play in
investigating conflicts of interest, assessing the
effectiveness of the Department's existing processes to deal
with conflicts of interest? How are these concerns brought to
your attention, typically? What responsibility do you have to
deal with them? Are you free to initiate inquiries before a
complaint is registered? And then how do you handle potential
conflicts of interest after a senior officer is confirmed? Do
you proactively review ethics filings? You see where I am
going? I would appreciate your elaborating as much of this as
time permits.
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Mr. Price. Let me take a stab at it
from the perspective of the Department of Transportation. Our
Office of Inspector General (OIG) takes its responsibility to
investigate allegations of conflict of interest most seriously,
and over the years we have done so with some notable successful
investigations and prosecutions.
We receive allegations from many different sources,
oftentimes through our Hotline, oftentimes through information
that is presented by other Federal employees, frankly, to our
field officers, our field investigative offices. And in some
instances our field offices are colocated with other Department
offices, and so staff get to know staff and generates that kind
of understanding and trust so that we will come by interest
might exist.
Through our investigative resources we will pursue as
quickly and as thoroughly as possible any allegation of a
conflict that rises potentially to the level of a crime. We are
under obligation as well, as an OIG, to inform the FBI in every
case where public corruption--and that is one of the
acknowledged and longstanding focuses of interest on the part
of the FBI--where any allegation of public corruption might be
involved. And together we will investigate these cases.
I have referred to a couple of notable examples, one dating
back some years now, but it involved the Deputy Administrator
at the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), and allegations
that she had improper business relationships with other
associates in the industry, business and personal
relationships.
Much more recently than that we investigated and arrested
and secured a conviction, with the assistance of the U.S.
Attorney's Office in the District of New Jersey, of the number-
two Federal Highways official for the State of New Jersey. He
was alleged to have engaged in conduct that amounted to a
conflict of business interest between what he was supposed to
be doing for the Department and the government and what he was
doing on the side as well.
We also review with the Department, and the Department has
a standing obligation, the Department's agency ethics officials
have a standing obligation, to refer to us any matters that
they have questions about. And occasionally we will get
information through those sources, too.
So, to sum it up, sir, we take it most seriously. We have a
proven track record. We will continue to keep our eyes open,
and, in fact, we have a couple of inquiries open at the moment
that I am not at liberty to discuss in a setting like this. But
I hope I can reassure you that we do understand that to be one
of our prime responsibilities.
Mr. Price. Thank you. Mr. Montoya?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, Mr. Price. We, like Inspector General
Scovel, do take the matters seriously. We have a proven track
record as well at looking at conflicts of interest. On several
occasions we have found that they are unfounded and we move on.
Several cases we have found issues.
One in particular had to do with the deputy secretary some
years ago on a lobbying issue. I believe in that case he was
ill-served by the Office of Ethics for the Department. And I
think that within the Office of Ethics in the Department I
would not have any confidence in them, sir. They have proven
time and time again that they do not have, I guess, the ability
to speak truth to power, if you will, and to make the tough
calls when necessary.
As an example, they referred a matter to us of an ex-
employee who may be lobbying, if you will, back into the
Department, having business with the Department that they
should otherwise not have. When we go back to them with our
findings and the results, because they are the ones that have
to make the determination as to whether there has been an
ethics violation, they do not want to make that determination
and that troubles me that they will not want to make the
determination.
We had another example having to do with the interpersonal
act, hiring appointments, where an individual from the
regulated community was brought into the Department in a high-
level position, and the Office of Ethics was nowhere to be
found when it came to not only this individual's financial
disclosure reports, but talking to the Secretary and the Deputy
Secretary about what this person should or could do while they
were in the Department.
Now, in fairness to them, I think any Office of Ethics
within a department or agency should have some degree of
organizational independence. It is that organizational
independence, maybe not so much like an IG, but certainly some
independence that would keep them from having concerns of fear
of reprisal and conflicts themselves with the folks that they
have to serve.
I think in our case, they do not ask the relevant
questions. They do not dig deep. They take at face value what
the individual says and they leave it at that.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. If I may?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir?
Chairman Diaz-Balart. Because our time has run out. But,
Mr. Price, I think you have touched on a very important issue
that we need to further look into. Thank you.
Mr. Price. Yes. We will pick it up later. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Montoya. Absolutely. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Price. Absolutely.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. Mr. Young, you are recognized, sir.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Price,
and my colleagues. Good morning. Gentleman, thanks for coming
today.
Mr. Montoya, thanks for your testimony. And the issue of
the financial statements, the auditing, the lack of
understanding key information that should be there, the human
capital issue, I appreciate the chairman's attention to this
and I know my other colleagues on both sides want to try to get
to the bottom of this and fix this because it is a very
frustrating situation.
In your testimony you shared since 1991 the OIG has
reported a lack of a integrated financial management system.
How long have they been using the same integrated financial
management system? And how does that dovetail with the computer
systems as well? So you have a process and then you have, I
guess, a product. Do they match up? Just talk a little bit
about that.
Mr. Montoya. So a lot of their IT systems are 15 to 30
years old.
Mr. Young. Okay. Wow.
Mr. Montoya. Many of them were not designed to handle
Federal financial management processes. That is the first
troubling part.
The other issue, I would say, and I have a great example
here--well, let me talk about the fact that these problems, not
all the IT issues, but the human capital and the financial
management processes, are problems that are going to take years
to correct, sustained leadership not only from Congress, but
the administration, a commitment to really correct these
problems. And absent any kind of a budget shortfall or cut,
these are still things that are going to be resonating and
still issues that they are going to have to deal with.
Probably one of the best examples I can give you is just
the lack of systems to handle some of these financial
management processes. It is within the Office of Public and
Indian Housing there is a lack of an automated process to
complete the reconciliations required to monitor the public
housing authorities and to ensure Federal cash, mind you, that
is not maintained in excess of the immediate need. These
reconciliations are prepared manually on unprotected
spreadsheets. So for over 2,200 public housing authorities
receiving $17 billion annually, they manage this on an Excel
spreadsheet.
So you can see that when we talk about implementing IT
systems that can handle these types of accounting issues, it
becomes very critical.
Mr. Young. I want to get to a few of your recommendations.
Would you recommend having an integrated technology system that
was up to date, but as well when it comes to the human capital
issue and the Office of the CFO, ensuring that the people
coming in there--like you said, I think there was only 2 of the
10 maybe had accounting backgrounds. Is that what you said?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir.
Mr. Young. Okay. What can Congress do to help you with
that? To help ensure that those who are coming into those
positions have the appropriate backgrounds. I mean, do we go as
far as not just recommending, but mandating that those within
that office have an accounting degree? I mean, how far do we
go? Because we have to make this work. This is not about
attacking HUD. This is about ensuring the taxpayer dollars are
spent wisely and the programs are effective.
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. Thank you. Well, to be clear, I
think in some of these high-level positions, high-leadership
positions, you do not necessarily have to have the accounting
degree, but you should surround yourself with people that have
the requisite skills. You should be willing to listen to them
and to provide you advice and counsel.
In the area of let us talk about Ginnie Mae, the General
National Mortgage Association or the Government National
Mortgage Association. They are handling a $1.7 trillion
portfolio. By the end of the year that will be about $2
trillion. They do not have the infrastructure, again the IT
systems or the personnel, to handle the security processes they
have to handle in the markets that they have to deal with every
single day. I think in their particular case, I think Congress
and the administration need to think about a different pay
scale, quite frankly, not one consistent with Fannie Mae, for
example, where the CEO makes $1 million a year, but maybe
something on the order of what the Federal Housing Finance
Agency or CFPB or the SEC and some of these other governmental
agencies make in order that the salaries are high enough to
entice the right type of personnel. Often Ginnie Mae loses good
candidates to higher paying banks and financial institutions,
so it is very difficult for them to compete. So that is on the
one hand.
On the other hand, with regard to these systems, HUD
continues to be so heavily siloed that even within the IT
environment and the financial environment, each program office
could do its own thing from an accounting standpoint and an IT
standpoint that does not relate to another office's accounting
and IT functions, so the two do not talk. And that was one of
the biggest problems in the New Core program that they tried to
implement. These systems do not talk because the data is not
the same, the systems are not the same. And so I do not know
that New Core would have ever worked quite frankly.
Mr. Young. This is frustrating and I imagine it frustrates
you, too, but you are helping us get to the bottom of the human
capital needs. The systems are not integrating together. They
are very old as well as maybe the structure. You talked about
all the silos, but I would like to have further conversations
with you on this. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Mr. Aguilar.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member.
Thank you, gentlemen, both for being here. Picking up on what
my colleague was just talking about, I mean, Mr. Montoya, some
of the key words you mentioned is something anyone who has been
in a public financing realm never wants to hear, which is lack
of internal controls, something that is deeply troubling.
Specifically to follow up on what Mr. Young was saying, HUD has
on two different occasions taken steps to implement new systems
and it has not worked. Additionally, outsourcing data entry and
financial management activities have raised oversight concerns
from your office.
Can you talk a little bit about the centralization of these
procedures versus outsourcing some of those activities, and
what the effect of budget reductions could do on our ability to
deliver accurate financials in the future?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir, Mr. Aguilar. Thank you for the
question. With regard to internal controls, it boils down to
the lack of policies and procedures. Now, they are getting
better at updating their policies and procedures. These are
accounting policies and procedures. And, yes, it has to be
centralized in the chief financial officer position and that
should flow then to the rest of the programs. So that is the
biggest problem when you talk about internal controls.
With regard to the collaboration between all these
programs, there is difficulty there in sort of talking to each
other before they created a separate financial management
structure, for example, or even their IT structures. And, yes,
it is frustrating that for years these things have been going
on, and I will say that some of the stuff is not new. On the
order of 23 years ago, GAO had testimony on these very same
issues and yet we are here 23 years later talking about the
very same things: the IT systems, the ageing systems, and some
of the financial systems.
That is troubling for me as an IG and that is why I make
the statement that I think it is a failure of leadership at all
levels, and even at the IG level, that maybe as IGs, my
predecessors and I, have not been forceful enough and outspoken
enough to say do we need to wait 23 more years? You have two
financial institutions sitting with this Department, the
Federal Housing Administration and Ginnie Mae. Together their
portfolio is about $3 trillion. If one of those has a major
breakdown, if you will, that is going to affect the national
economy. And these two organizations are really not
prioritized.
When you talk about human capital, for example, hiring a
CFO for Ginnie Mae is not any more important than hiring a
typist. The president of Ginnie Mae and I had a pretty good
relationship. We talked often. He would tell me stories where
he wanted to pull his hair out because when he would send up a
request to hire a chief financial officer, it took a back seat
to whatever was in front of him in the queue: a typist, a
general staff person. There is no prioritization to put
everything aside and let us get the CFO hired first. After that
person is hired, we will hire whatever else we need. That is
the kind of stuff that is most frustrating to me, and that is a
leadership issue. That is a basic, fundamental governance and
management issue.
Mr. Aguilar. With fewer resources will that get better or
will that get worse, with fewer resources, centralization
versus in-house work? I mean, how is that going to look?
Mr. Montoya. You know, I do not know that it is going to
get--I do not think the budget really has anything to do with
it, quite frankly, sir, because whether you have everything you
could possibly want or not, if you do not prioritize the staff,
the systems, the processes that you need first, it does not
really matter how much money you have, and I think they have
shown that. They have not had this kind of a severe budget cut,
whatever is anticipated, for years and yet they have chosen not
to prioritize it.
So will they prioritize it with a budget cut? I am hopeful
because with any kind of budget cut, you really have to
prioritize and do what is important first.
Mr. Aguilar. Appreciate it. Mr. Scovel, I will try to get
this out quickly to give you a little bit of time. In your
testimony you indicated that more needs to be done to ensure
that high-risk contracts are managed well and you also indicate
that many of the issues with contract management could be
avoided if the contracts were properly specified and properly
scoped. How is DOT working to improve those specifications and
limiting the use of high-risk contract vehicles in the future
and what can we do to make this acquisition piece a little
better?
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, sir. It is a concern of ours. We
have identified a number of issues across the Department,
including even at the Department level. We focused a lot of our
efforts, however, on the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
and its contract practices, and we have gotten into all of that
through our work when we are called on to review the NextGen
Air Traffic Control Modernization Program.
High-risk contracts, cost-reimbursable contracts, of
course, leave the door open to a contractor billing the
Department, excessively perhaps, for costs. We have found
instances where the Department did not sufficiently check on a
contractor's cost-accounting systems to ensure that the costs
that were actually advanced by the contractor to the Department
for reimbursement were backed up within that contractor's
accounting system.
With regard to sole-source contracts, particularly on the
FAA side, those have been a consistent concern of ours. FAA
tends to acquire a lot of proprietary technology through sole-
source contracts. That means it is locked in in future
contracting cycles to a particular contractor. Oftentimes those
contracts are let without conducting the sufficient market
research and the independent government cost estimate that is
required in order to properly let a sole-source contract.
Mr. Aguilar. I appreciate it, Mr. Scovel. My time is up.
Mr. Scovel. Thanks.
Mr. Aguilar. And it is my first real hearing and I do not
want the chairman to get upset with me.
Mr. Scovel. I understand.
Mr. Aguilar. So I will cut you off there and we will
restart this.
Mr. Scovel. Thanks. Thanks very much for your question.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. Thank you again, Mr. Aguilar. Mr.
Joyce, you are recognized, sir.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to follow
up on a couple of the questions here and have you put on your
hat of a private citizen who has all this intel as to what has
been taking place. How do you fix those problems? You said
money is not necessarily the issue. How do you get to the
bottom of this and cure these issues?
Mr. Montoya. I think just getting the right people in the
right seats and looking at the right things.
Mr. Joyce. That is easy to be said, but, I mean, we need to
get down to it--we cannot continue to do the same thing year
after year. You said you have been following through now on 30
years of this and have the same issue. This is ridiculous.
Mr. Montoya. So I think like many organizations, HUD in
particular does very well at looking outward, managing its
programs outward. They do not do a very good job at looking
inward. And if they do not get to that soon, they might not be
able to do their job looking outward.
I will give you an example again where the IT systems and
financial management accounting sort of interplay. HUD relies
heavily on IT to deliver and manage its services throughout its
own organization and externally.
Mr. Joyce. One question. Are these old legacy systems that
continue to be patched that we have invested a lot of money in,
so, therefore, we think we should keep them versus something
that is obviously better? I mean, you and I probably grew up
when they had a plastic phone that you would dial and now we
have these. Is the agency keeping up with the technology?
Mr. Montoya. They are not. In fact, many of their systems
cannot even be patched. Some of their systems do not even have
application support. And the example I was going to give you
was the Tenant Rental Assistance Certification System, TRACS as
it is known. It satisfies the Multifamily Housing Program. It
accounts for 78 percent of HUD's housing subsidies, about $10
billion annually.
And I want to quote something the Department, the staff
folks, told us when we were doing this review, and I am going
to quote: ``TRACS has no vendor support agreement. Therefore,
when the old system catastrophically fails, there is no means
to manage Housing's rental assistance programs and/or pay
subsidy payments of approximately $9.8 billion annually.'' My
point to that is when this thing fails--and it is not a matter
of if, it is a matter of when--there is no manual way to get
$10 billion out to the general public who need these funds.
That is the kind of critical point or mass that we are at.
And so to your question, no, some of these cannot even be
patched anymore and some of them do not even have vendors that
keep up with them, quite frankly.
Mr. Joyce. Which is something that you brought up as well,
the fact that some of these things are being allowed without
any vetting of the people who are getting these contracts. So
these are age-old contracts that continue to stay in place, yet
they cannot keep up with the system that they are allegedly
trying to maintain?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. I was just passed a note, 87 percent
are past their end-of-life system. These systems, 87 percent of
them, are past end of life. And that is the other problem
within the Department. Yes, we are heavily reliant on
contractors. The problem is that the Department has divested
itself of its own internal expertise, background and
experience, that we do not even have staff that can properly
manage these contracts. So we do not have staff that can manage
an IT contract from the standpoint that if an IT contractor
says you need $1 billion over here, that we would know to say
yes, no, or that is not $1 billion. It should be $1 million.
And that is another concern that we keep seeing.
And I am driving the point home with these systems because,
again, the Department has--I think we tend to forget--has two
financial institutions in it, and these institutions are
reliant on the same systems that the rest of HUD is.
Mr. Joyce. I am outraged that we would be in a position
where you do not have an IT department that can make a judgment
on whether or not these systems that are being implemented are
worthwhile or even cost-effective, and there is no way to get
to the bottom of that? I am a former prosecutor, so I am sort
of a brass tacks guy. I want to get down to how do we fix the
problem?
Mr. Montoya. You know, so the CIO's position at the
Department is a politically appointed position. The gentleman
who was there, I have to give him credit. I think he was really
advanced the ball, but he left. He was there 2 years and he
leaves. So you are absent the CFO. You are absent, I think, is
the Chief Security Officer. We are also absent the Chief
Architect for these systems. So, again, much like in the
financial arena and the IT arena, we are absent key staff. The
only one that is a political appointee is the CIO, Chief
Information Officer. The rest are careerists. So, again, even
there we lack very critical positions being filled.
So, again, with the lack of leadership--now look, do not
get me wrong. The Department is made up of really hardworking,
dedicated staff. I want to make sure we are clear about that;
99.9 percent of them, like any environment, are hardworking,
dedicated, and they are committed to an honorable mission. The
problem is they are not given the tools, the resources, to do
it well and to do it efficiently and eventually not even
effectively when these systems break down.
Mr. Joyce. The crazy part is that we are spending money but
not giving them the tools that they need so they can operate in
a 2017-2018 setting.
I realize I have gone beyond my time, Mr. Chairman, and I
will yield back. I guess I do not have any time to yield back.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Ms. Clark, you are
recognized.
Ms. Clark. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and
thank you to our witnesses for being here today. As part of the
accountability, the Whistleblower Program is an important piece
of that. Mr. Scovel, I missed that from your status update, but
I did see, Mr. Montoya, that there has been training going on.
Could you both update me on where that is? Are there challenges
that you see? And do they have sufficient resources to carry
out the mission?
Mr. Scovel. Let me start, Ms. Clark. Thanks very much for
the question. I appreciate your interest in this important
topic. Whistleblowers and other insider reports are key areas
for us to be able to explore in order to effectively protect
the Department's programs and the taxpayer dollar.
In our Office of Inspector General we have an individual
whom we call our whistleblower protection ombudsman. He has
been in charge of our whistleblower protection and the training
within our office for a number of years now. We have a training
effort to educate all of our OIG staff, so that should they
come in contact with individuals who express an interest in
perhaps revealing information and could be characterized as
whistleblowers, that all of our staff know the procedures to
refer them to the proper person.
Our whistleblower ombudsman has handled several dozen cases
during the time that he has been with us and since he has been
appointed. Seventeen of those cases have been referred to the
Office of Special Counsel, which has primary jurisdiction to
investigate and resolve whistleblower complaints raised by
Federal employees. Within our office we have got six open
investigations currently, one involving a Federal employee,
another five involving Federal contractors, and we have primary
responsibility for those.
We have closed four, and let me give you a taste of how
those have been resolved over the last couple of years. One
individual took our report of investigation and deemed it
worthy of pursuit in District Court in the District of
Columbia; another was denied at the Department level. One, we
have determined we had no jurisdiction because the
whistleblower allegation was lodged under the Recovery Act, and
it turned out there were no Recovery Act dollars implicated in
this particular contractor employee's case.
One we substantiated; it was a whistleblower matter that
was submitted by an employee of WMATA, the Washington
Metropolitan Area Transit Authority. He was alleging contract
improprieties within the agency and he entered into settlement
negotiations and, in fact, resolved the case and received a
settlement from WMATA based on that.
Ms. Clark. Do you see any challenges specifically to this
program?
Mr. Scovel. We do, most certainly. The whistleblower
protection ombudsman is a specific designation that we are
required to have only through November, I believe, of this
year. We would consider it an important designation to maintain
by law. We are prepared to do it, notwithstanding a
requirement. So, we will continue it in our office because we
deem it that important.
However, we find that we are strapped for resources. We
have one attorney investigator who not only doubles as our
whistleblower ombudsman, but also as an investigator for some,
if not most, of the matters alleged in these whistleblower
communications.
So, should we have more resources? Of course we could do
more. In the meantime, I am reasonably satisfied that we are
doing all we can with what we have got.
Ms. Clark. Great. Thank you. Mr. Montoya, I wanted to talk
to you in my remaining time, about some of what you highlighted
in your report of September 30th about prosecuting civil fraud.
Specifically with financial institutions there is quite a list:
Wells Fargo, 1.2 billion; Freedom Mortgage, 133 million; seven
major cases.
It does not look like it is the first time that you have
gone after some of these bad actors. How many financial
institutions have been debarred from participating in HUD
programs since 2008?
Mr. Montoya. Thank you for your question, Ms. Clark. I do
not believe any have been debarred from doing business with the
Department or FHA.
Ms. Clark. And is there a reason why? Is that part of your
calculus with disbarment, is repeated violations?
Mr. Montoya. Well, it certainly could be, that is actually
up to the Department to make a determination as to whether that
would happen; highly unlikely. You know, many of these failures
are, if you will, lack of appropriately ensuring that folks
could actually pay for these loans occurred years and years
ago, and I think a lot of that conduct has really changed over
the last 5 years.
So, could that have happened 5 years ago? Maybe. I think it
would be highly unusual to debar a bank or an institution that
could otherwise, you know, provide mortgages to low- to
moderate-income families. I think, in fairness to the
Department, we work jointly with them, with the Department, my
office and the Department of Justice, to address these issues.
I think the Department took it seriously. But again, yeah, it
would be a question for the Department, whether they actually
ever considered debarment.
Ms. Clark. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Before I recognize Mr.
Valadao, let me announce I am going to have to be in a markup
on budget on the Health Care Act. So, I am going to ask the
vice chairman if he could take over.
And with that, I recognize the distinguished gentleman from
California, Mr. Valadao.
Mr. Valadao. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Montoya, I
understand your office published an audit back in July 2015,
which concluded that over-income tenants blatantly abused the
public housing system. It has been reported that thousands of
people across the country receiving HUD benefits despite
earning incomes greater than the eligibility threshold. The
audit report also indicated with more than 300,000 qualified
families that are stuck on waiting lists.
For example, I am aware of cases in my own district in
which families making over $100,000 were receiving public
assistance from HUD. Audits like these provide HUD the
opportunity to reevaluate policies and initiatives, make
improvements to take sufficient steps to reduce abuse such as
over-income families in public housing.
Can you please describe steps HUD has taken to negate
flagrant abuse by tenants who make more than the low-income
threshold?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Valadao, for the
question. Well, yeah, so the subject our work took on, not only
a lot of public interest, but obviously a lot of congressional
interest, and legislation was passed unanimously about a year
ago. It was called the Housing Opportunity Through
Modernization Act, and it requires public housing authorities
to evict over-income families after 2 consecutive years of
exceeding applicable income limitations. The key will be the
oversight that HUD provides to that process and whether public
housing authorities are actually doing it.
It is unfortunate, but the Department really does not have
the resources to provide that level of oversight. We, at some
point, will probably come in some several years later to do a
follow-up audit or evaluation to see if we find any extreme
outliers. But really it is going to fall to the Department to
provide that oversight.
Mr. Valadao. So, my next question then is to Mr. Scovel. In
2015, Congress passed the FAST Act, the largest transportation
package in more than a decade. With the FAST Act it was
reported that the inspector general submit an assessment to the
Department of Transportation on the impact of delays, and the
pick up and delivery of goods by motor carriers and drivers. To
my knowledge the report has not been submitted to the
Department of Transportation.
Do you know when the Department will have the ``Delays in
Goods Movement Report'' completed to submit to the
Transportation Committee? And do you mind providing this
Committee with an estimated timeframe for the completion?
Mr. Scovel. Yes, sir. In fact, I may be able to answer all
aspects of your question right now. The Department, as
required, did complete its study--I am sorry, you were
referring to a study on freight delays?
Mr. Valadao. Yes.
Mr. Scovel. Yes. I am sorry. I mistook your question for
one regarding hours of service for motor carriers. I do not
have a timeframe for you on the freight delay study. I
understand that we will be auditing it, and we will be happy to
follow up with more information to you and your staff when we
have that available.
Mr. Valadao. Okay. And then on the hours of service, you
were going to say?
Mr. Scovel. Yes. I was going to say that in the
Appropriations Act, the Department's imposition of suspended
hours of service for motor carrier drivers, the Department was
required to conduct a study, and then, in the meantime, suspend
the imposition of those aspects of the rules, often called the
restart provisions of the rule.
That study was completed. My office was required under the
Appropriations Act to certify, in effect, the methodology that
was used in the study. We did that. We completed that review
and communicated to both the Congress and the Secretary on
March 2nd that the study had met all requirements.
The Secretary, I believe, has already submitted her report
to the Congress. If not, then it should happen any day, because
that matter had been in her office the last we were informed.
Thanks.
Mr. Valadao. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you very much, Mr. Valadao. There is no
time to yield back, but that is fine; just kidding. Starting, I
hate to be rude, but I guess I'll start this round and then we
will continue to go through the questions.
Inspector Montoya, first, both of you gentlemen, I notice
your lovely green ties, so thank you for keeping it in honor of
St. Patrick's Day; my birthday, too.
As you know Ginnie Mae has had problems with tracking and
hiring staff that have the right skill sets to perform mission-
critical jobs. What are the effects of not having employees
with the necessary skills in Ginnie Mae's financial accounting
management and overall management capacity?
Mr. Montoya. Well, sir, I think the first problem you see
is disclaimers of audit opinions, and so that is the first
part.
The second part is that, you know, with these nonbanks that
they are starting to see a huge influx of, there is really no
oversight body to them. Maybe the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau, but there is not an oversight body like you would have
like if it was a bank.
These nonbanks are not capitalized as a bank would be, and
so it is going to be incumbent upon Ginnie Mae to do that
oversight. If they do not have the appropriate accounting
skills, financial-type background, it is going to be even more
difficult for them to do the proper oversight of these
nonbanks. And so those are two areas where I think it could be
very detrimental to Ginnie Mae.
Mr. Joyce. Following up on that, is it a significant issue
that individuals with the necessary skill sets are extremely
well paid in the private sector, so it becomes nearly
impossible for Ginnie Mae to compete. What would make the
agency more competitive?
Mr. Montoya. Well, as I stated earlier, sir, I think what
would make it more competitive is that the Department, the
administration, and Congress get together to consider a
different pay structure for at least Ginnie Mae. And by that I
am not even advocating for all of Ginnie Mae employees, and
they have got about 140, but there is a small cadre that you
could probably look at that are paid a higher salary.
And again, consistent with other Federal agencies, like the
Federal Finance Housing Agency, CFPB, even makes a higher
salary. So, consistent with that, it gives you a little bit
more latitude, if you will, to attract folks.
Mr. Joyce. With a portfolio of 1.7 trillion in outstanding
principal balance, Ginnie Mae is a big and important financial
institution, needless to say. What are the potential
consequences if they do not get their financial house in order?
Mr. Montoya. Well, we saw it in the case of TBW when they
had to take over these portfolios when these organizations, you
know, tank, in essence. They do not have the infrastructure to
handle that. So if you get a lot of these issuers that cannot
do what they need to, well, Ginnie Mae is guaranteed that there
is--you know, through the good faith and credit of the U.S.,
you know, that these payments are going to be made. That means
they have got to take it on, they have got to service, they
have got to operate these things. They do not have that
infrastructure. Without that you have major problems.
And they do have contractors, they use a lot of
contractors. In fact, most of the work is done by contractors.
But therein lies, still, the problem with the lack of actual
onboard expertise. They do not have the proper skills to
oversee the contractors who are overseeing all these things
that need to be overseen.
Mr. Joyce. Yes. I would like to recognize Ranking Member
Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you. I actually want to continue this line
of questioning, but first I want to return briefly to the
previous discussion of conflicts of interests and ethics. I am
impressed with the testimony both of you gave as to the
authority and responsibility you have to pursue conflicts of
interest at all levels. Especially caught my attention, Mr.
Montoya, with your comments about the disabilities of the
Ethics Office within HUD. You are responsible for overseeing
that office for making those critiques public inside and
outside the agency. You have the ability to be proactive and I
take it you have the ability and the responsibility to do a
post-confirmation review of the ethics filings of senior
officials. All of those things true?
Mr. Montoya. No, we do not do a post review of the filings
of the ethics official per se.
Mr. Price. What would it take to trigger such oversight?
Mr. Montoya. Well, we have an allegation of a conflict of
interest.
Mr. Price. An allegation from some credible source of a
conflict of interest?
Mr. Montoya. Right. So, for example, in the matter where
they hired somebody through an IPA that really should not have
been there, at that point, we asked for this information. The
irony there is they had not made or produced it.
Mr. Price. All right, fine. Let me turn to this line of
questioning having to do with financial management. Mr.
Montoya, you cited over two decades of challenges in this
regard and you provided a rather generic explanation, failure
of leadership. It seems to me if you have got two decades of
failures of leadership, you might look beyond that. And
actually, the more you talk, the more I think you have, in
fact, looked beyond that, that that generic explanation may not
be your entire explanation because you are citing the ability
to attract and compensate and motivate first-rate personnel.
This Ginnie Mae case seems like a case in point. So if
administration after administration, if decade after decade you
are observing a failure of leadership, it looks like you
certainly want to scratch beneath that generic explanation and
see if there are systemic or system problems that make
leadership difficult or impossible as you define it.
So that takes me to the Ginnie Mae case. And you have just
talked about what I take to be an overreliance, certainly a
heavy reliance, on third-party contractors to perform key
functions, the inability inside the agency to oversee those
contracts. You have cited the pay structure that makes it hard
to attract the right kinds of employees and to have them
exercise authority effectively.
It is hard to imagine that a budget like we have seen in
the last 24 hours or a hiring freeze makes any of this easier.
You say it is not budgetary, but surely budget and personnel
cuts of a drastic sort do not help. I do not understand your
statement that this is not, in any way, budgetary. So you see
where I am coming from in terms of wishing you to elaborate.
Give us a little fuller, more satisfying explanation.
And then, Mr. Scovel, if we have time, I would like for you
to--I assume DOT does not have problems of this magnitude. I
would like to have your attempting to compare here what maybe
is going right or at least differently in that agency. But, Mr.
Montoya.
Mr. Montoya. At some point, somebody has got to make these
decisions that you are going to find the right people to put
them in the right place, in the right seat. You are going to
look at those things that are a priority to the Department, and
that is what I am getting at. Yes, we have done a lot of
behind-the-scenes reviews, audits, investigations. We relate
that to the Department through our recommendations for best
practices. I will give you the best example I have.
In the first 3 years I was at the Department, we had maybe
six or seven disagreements with the Department senior
leadership. Eventually, we were able to figure those out and
come to some resolution. So these things never went to the
Deputy Secretary for a decision, i.e., where she is playing--
you know, having to make a decision between us as the IG and
the assistant secretary for the program.
In the last 2 years, with the prior administration,
particularly the Deputy Secretary, those skyrocketed to 16
disagreements. And in those occasions, really what it related
to was an atmosphere that was created that was to not listen to
the IG, they do not have anything to provide, and many of these
recommendations went to these core management and performance
challenges that I am talking to. So when you have leadership
who fails to see that these recommendations are going to
hopefully help them and yet they discount them out of turn,
that is troubling to me.
As I have often said, as IGs, we are not there to make
those Departments look bad. We are part of those Departments.
It is our job to help them succeed. It is our job to help them
reach their mission assignments and their responsibilities, not
the opposite. And there was a culture created for the last 2
years that was to not trust the IG. Slow them down as much as
you can. I had to, on several occasions, I had to threaten to
come to Congress with 7-day letters because there was a failure
of cooperation, failure to give us the documentation we needed
to do our audits, our investigations. If it had not been for
the Secretary and his team to come in to say to the Deputy
Secretary, no, you will give them that information, we would
not have done it. We would have had to come to Congress.
So listen, I want to credit publicly Secretary Castro for
honoring his commitment when he signed a joint letter with me
that his staff would cooperate with our office. But if not for
him, the Deputy Secretary would have allowed these things to
basically go by the wayside. That is what I mean by a failure
of leadership.
Mr. Price. My time has expired. We will return to this.
Thank you for elaborating that.
The question remains, though, given stellar leadership or
outstanding leadership, what kind of measures, what kind of
policies are required here? And, of course, we need to get to
that as well. That is where I think this Ginnie Mae case is
troubling and, at least for me and I think many others, raises
questions about the wisdom of such across-the-board measures as
hiring freezes. And certainly, the kind of budget cuts we are
looking at here, that pertains, by the way, to your own offices
and the kind of ability you are going to have to perform your
functions as well, of course, as Ginnie Mae and other offices
who have these severe management challenges. So we will return
to this. Thank you.
Mr. Montoya. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Ranking Member Price. And I think I
speak on behalf of this whole committee that if you feel
compelled that you need our help at any time, come before this
committee. With that, I recognize Member Young.
Mr. Young. Thank you, sir. Mr. Scovel, I want to talk about
unmanned aerial aircraft systems, what we call drones commonly.
You released a report in December 2016, finding that the FAA
has not established a comprehensive oversight framework for the
use of drones overseeing the UAS industry. Can you share some
of the key recommendations from this report and what, if any,
steps are being done to implement those findings?
Mr. Scovel. Yes, thank you, sir. Key area, it is one of--
probably the top one in terms of emerging technologies that
keeps me awake at night; a significant safety threat, as anyone
who flies can appreciate.
FAA is working, in my view, deliberately in an effort to
integrate Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) into the national
airspace. A key part of that will need to be developing this
comprehensive oversight framework that we mentioned in our
report. And by way of oversight framework we would start first
with consolidated data, relevant data, that right now is spread
between three different offices within FAA. It is not
integrated, it is not analyzed comprehensively; it is spread
between different silos within FAA to the detriment, we think,
of the Agency's ability to understand the threat to safety
posed by UAS and also to deal with it.
Mr. Young. Are they moving on that recommendation about
consolidating their data, do you know?
Mr. Scovel. They have agreed, but they are holding off.
They have a target action date and they are working to
complete, I understand. However, I think that within the minds
of many there is a question mark related to what will happen
should air traffic control be separated from FAA proper.
Right now, responsibility for UAS integration is spread
between the Air Traffic Organization, ATO--the safety
organization that is separate from but also within FAA, of
course--and then there is a UAS Integration Office. All three
of those entities are responsible for collecting some data, but
it is not all integrated. Some of those entities may remain
within FAA should air traffic control be separated.
Mr. Young. Do you know if in your findings,
recommendations, and within the folks at FAA looking at this,
if they are taking into account proprietary information by
private citizens? Particularly in agriculture, we have a lot of
farmers and producers who use drones, UASs, for many reasons,
and I am just wondering regarding that proprietary information
and privacy if that is being addressed.
Mr. Scovel. Yes, FAA does not have a primary responsibility
for privacy, that is, you know, in the classic sense of a drone
hovering over your backyard or whatever the nature of the
perceived intrusion might be. However, FAA has agreed with the
National Telecommunications and Information Administration that
has, by designation of President Obama at the time, primary
responsibility to develop a Government-wide framework regarding
privacy concerns--to address privacy concerns.
The role that FAA has taken on for itself has been that of
education. So when applicants register their UAS with FAA, they
receive a packet regarding privacy and the best practices
there.
The other aspect that you mentioned, sir, specifically with
regard, say, to precision agriculture and other specific uses,
FAA--and I do want to give them good credit for this--FAA has
undertaken stakeholder communication and collaboration most
diligently, and it has a Drone Advisory Committee, for
instance, that is helping the Agency understand better how to
integrate beyond--what is called in the industry and the
Agency--beyond line-of-sight operations, which would include
many agricultural applications as well. That is a key area that
both industry and the Agency realize they need to focus on.
There need to be some technological improvements in order to
facilitate that.
Mr. Young. Well, that is encouraging.
Mr. Scovel. But they are keyed onto it.
Mr. Young. That is encouraging because it is always good, I
think, when you take into account who this affects and the
opinions and needs, wants, comments of the stakeholders.
My time is about up, Mr. Chairman, but will there be a
third round?
Mr. Joyce. Yes, sir.
Mr. Young. Thank you.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Young. The Chair recognizes Ms.
Clark.
Ms. Clark. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to follow up on
a point from our ranking member. And as we are looking at
conflicts of interest, as we are looking at personnel issues, I
think, Mr. Montoya, your testimony was that 43 percent of HUD
career permanent employees will be eligible to retire by 2019.
What is the impact of a blanket hiring freeze?
Mr. Montoya. Well, there certainly will be an impact with a
blanket hiring freeze because it goes back to my concerns that
they then are very limited in who they can hire and, of course,
it slows the process down in hiring some of these key roles and
positions they need to fill. With regards to the retirements,
the troubling part there is much of the expertise that the
Department currently holds will leave with it. And that goes
again to what limited staff we do have to provide the contract
oversight, if you will, and the financial management governance
side and the IT side will be gone and so we will even have less
internal. So from the standpoint of making sure the Department
has it right with the limited hires they will get, assuming
they get any, they have got to make the right hires and they
have got to prioritize those hirings.
Ms. Clark. I also want to go back to our discussion about
disbarment. And in your testimony you raised that HUD is often
hesitant to take strong enforcement actions against lenders
because it has a competing mandate to continue FHA's role in
restoring the housing market. Do you believe this is part of
why we have not seen financial institutions with multiple
violations being disbarred? And if so, what kind of
recommendations do you have around this tension between the
mission of HUD?
Mr. Montoya. So that is probably a question best for HUD.
Whether that is their reasoning, it certainly could be. With
regards to the tension, you know----
Ms. Clark. But that was your testimony, right, you do
believe that?
Mr. Montoya. Oh, yes, I do.
Ms. Clark. Yeah.
Mr. Montoya. I do believe that. But with regards to why
they do not disbar, I think part of that is, you know you do
not--and in fairness, they do not really want to lock down the
economy. They do not want to lock down the ability for people
to get homes. You just want----
Ms. Clark. But even if we took disbarment away, if we are
just looking at repeated violations and pursuing those----
Mr. Montoya. Right.
Ms. Clark [continuing]. Do you think that would be--is
there a way to address this tension that might ease that
problem?
Mr. Montoya. So they do have an MRB, a board that is
supposed to look at these actors who continuously do these
things. And at that level, they can impose financial penalties,
they can disbar at that level. And so they do have a mechanism
outside of a civil case, for example, the DOJ, to take strong
enforcement. Often it is very weak.
We did some work on that, on the MRB, the Mortgagee Review
Board, about 10 or 12 years ago. I have asked my staff to do
another review. But even back then, we saw very weak penalties
were doled out even for some of the most egregious things; very
low penalties, if any. Usually they will walk away with a slap
on the hand. And, again, I think that goes to they are really
reticent to try to do the carrot and the stick. You know, they
are there as regulator, encouragers, you know, open up the
market.
Ms. Clark. Yeah.
Mr. Montoya. But they also have that role of overseer to
say, well, look, yes, we want you to open up the market, we
want you to provide, you know, loans for housing, but we do not
want you to defraud us in the process. So there has got to be
that balance and, unfortunately, they lack a lot of that stick
side. Right? They leave it to me in a lot of ways to do that.
Ms. Clark. All right, thank you. I want to get a quick
question in for Mr. Scovel about the Merchant Marine Academy
and the sexual harassment and assault. You said in your
testimony they had completed 29 of the 44 action items
suggested in the 2014-15 action plan. Can you give me an
update?
Mr. Scovel. Still working on the remaining items, Ms.
Clark. As we informed the committee, and we have also worked
with the Department and the Maritime Administration (MARAD) and
the Academy on these, the 42 action items were those that had
been identified by the Academy itself as a result of its last
full-fledged survey of students. The Academy had made good
progress on those, and we reported to this committee back in
August that they had completed 29 in our view. They claimed
credit for having completed a few more. We pointed out that, in
our view and reasonably, their count could not be accurate, and
they ended up fully agreeing with us.
I think they are completely focused on those areas that
demand the most attention and that is, to use Inspector General
Montoya's terms, proper leadership at the top, continued
engagement at that level, incident reporting. The last survey
from the 2014/2015 time period indicated a completely
unrealistic number of reported incidents compared to those
students who, in an anonymous survey, had reported instances of
sexual harassment themselves. That and coordination with the
industry on the Sea Year program where cadets from the Academy
are especially vulnerable when they take their many months at
sea with the shipping industry. Working with the industry on
that and also preparing cadets for that Sea Year experience,
the school realizes that those are the key elements that will
bring them to success. Important area, of course, especially
this week in light of testimony from the Marine Corps over on
the Hill, so, you know, the services themselves are wrestling
with it.
Just yesterday I saw a media report that the other service
academies, too, had reported an increase in reports of sexual
harassment as well. So the Merchant Marine Academy knows that
it has still a lot of work to do, but I am confident that they
are focused in the right directions.
Ms. Clark. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Joyce. Ms. Clark. Mr. Aguilar.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Nice tie. Happy
birthday, again.
Mr. Scovel, your testimony notes that more than $6 billion
was spent in contracts annually for fiscal years 2015/2016.
Specifically, you note that cost-reimbursable contracts may be
considered high risk because contractors are paid whether work
is completed or not. We have also heard examples where the
product delivered by a vendor may have included services not
designed within the contract or needed by the Department of
Transportation. This may result in additional costs to the
overall completion of the project.
So my question is, does the DOT have a mapping tool that
tracks in real time the progress infrastructure projects are
making toward completing the work required within the Federal
grant process--Federal contract process? And if not, are there
standards in place to collect information that could be used to
aggregate this tool utilized by the agency? I believe that
mapping tools that organize and display the progress of these
infrastructure projects across the country can support the
agency's efforts better and help them manage assets and
investments.
Mr. Scovel. Absolutely, and I would entirely agree. I think
you are right, those are critical tools in order to ensure
success for the Department's mission.
I would distinguish between those aspects of the
Department's funds that are allocated to grants and the
individual operating administrations, especially the Federal
Transit Administration (FTA) and Federal Highways. While they
do track or map their grants within their divisions, in the
case of Federal Highways that would be 52, so each State is its
own--has its own division and office under Federal Highways,
plus the District and Puerto Rico. I would need to get back to
you to see how far Federal Highways' headquarters is on
integrating and comprehensively analyzing, across the Nation,
how all of those particular grants might map out. But I do know
that division-by-division they are tracked and followed through
that tool.
The Federal Transit Administration is organized by region.
They do attempt to do the same thing. We have worked in the
past with the Federal Transit Administration at the
headquarters level to try to identify best practices between
its regions on how they can track and monitor and assess the
progress of their grants. And FTA has made pretty good progress
in that area.
Mr. Aguilar. So you can work with them on best practices,
but it is really left up to each office as to how they
administer?
Mr. Scovel. Most certainly, but that has been a consistent
theme with us when we have audited both FTA and Federal
Highways. And that would be greater oversight at the
headquarters level of what the division offices are doing
within Federal Highways; what the regional offices are doing
within Federal Transit to ensure greater consistency and better
understanding at the headquarters and the Secretary level, and
at the congressional level, of what those two operating
administrations are doing.
The $6 billion figure, sir, that we cited in our written
testimony has to do with contracts that are let by the
Department as opposed to grants. And it is that cost-
reimbursable aspect that we highlighted by way of finding some
particular audit that we completed as posing a particular
danger, a special danger to the Department. And the Department
has agreed with our recommendations on that and is making some
progress in executing on those.
Mr. Aguilar. I appreciate it. Mr. Montoya, by statute, FHA
is required to maintain a capital ratio of 2 percent or more in
the reserve fund. In fiscal years 2015 and 2016, the capital
ratio was 2.07 and 2.32. It is projected that the fund will
continue to be above the threshold limit. President Obama
issued guidance to lower the FHA premiums, partly because the
FHA Reserve Fund achieved the capital ratio that surpassed its
legally required threshold 2 years in a row.
On January 20th, President Trump suspended the guidance and
eliminated the opportunity for homeowners to take advantage of
the lower FHA premiums. Does the OIG have any data to
demonstrate that increasing FHA premiums is necessary to
maintain the 2 percent capital ratio threshold in the FHA
Reserve Fund?
Mr. Montoya. Well, we do not have any data, per se. I think
what we have looked at with regards to the actuarial report is
they seem to be on track, assuming nothing goes wrong in the
mortgage market, to continue to add to that MMI Fund. You know,
our concern is that the Department does not make decisions that
could negatively impact it. We have an ongoing body of work
that we were in major disagreement with the Department having
to do with down payment assistance and the fact that mortgages
are being given to low- to moderate-income families with very
high interest rates. And if those homeowners cannot eventually
afford those higher interest rates, if we have a downturn in
the market, you could have defaults. So it is really incumbent
upon FHA itself to make the right decisions on risk versus
reward, and we understand they have got to do that.
In this particular case, our disagreement is that we think
they are in violation of the Housing Act in allowing these sort
of what we call borrower-funded down payments to occur and so
sometimes FHA can be its own worst enemy. But what we know now
with regards to our review of the actuarial is that they are
above the threshold and they seem to be on track to continue to
add to that.
Mr. Aguilar. Appreciate it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Aguilar. And here we are at the
end of the second round and we recognize Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning.
Mr. Scovel, I would like to ask you just a question on MAP-
21. On March 6th, your office issued an audit report on DOT's
progress in implementing initiatives under MAP-21, which are
designed to accelerate project delivery. While the report
detailed certain initiatives that had a low level of State
participation, during your office's examination of this issue,
were there any programs that you found that had a high level of
State participation?
And two, if Congress is going to be considering a
transportation infrastructure package at some point in the near
future, it would be helpful to understand what programs may be
working to expedite project timelines so that Congress can, you
know, best direct its efforts and ensure that any resources
provided for infrastructure have a real and immediate impact. I
think that is one of the frustrations we have all seen with
infrastructure, that we are not in the 1930s and the 1950s
anymore. When we said we were going to go build a road, we used
to go out and build it, and now we spend a hell of a lot of
time and money on preconstruction activities and we do not have
a whole lot of stimulative effect because there is not much
shovel-ready. So have at it.
Mr. Scovel. Okay, thanks, sir. Yes, we did recently
release--very recently release--our audit report to fulfill our
obligation in the act to audit the progress or the successes
under Subtitle C of MAP-21. This had to do specifically with a
thought that shifting responsibility from Federal Highways
especially to the States--should they decide to take it for
environmental reviews--might, in fact, speed things up. While I
think to most laymen it would make sense, for many of us, we
see the requirement for an environmental review to be a
significant showstopper.
In fact, I was rather surprised that our audit report did
not substantiate my supposition. And that is because,
generally, the States declined to accept the invitation, if you
will call it that, to take from Federal Highways the
responsibility to conduct these environmental reviews for a
number of reasons. Primarily, there was no financial incentive
for them. Many States are resource- and budget-strapped at this
point. Some States identified to us--when we questioned why
not, you know, you might be able to get your projects underway
sooner--they said, well, our lawyers are telling us that we
will be required to waive sovereign immunity, which we are
loath to do because we know that in many of these instances, we
are going to get sued.
So one State especially stood out as an example of being
willing to take that step, and that was the State of Texas. And
they indicated to us that they were willing and the legislature
was willing to waive sovereign immunity, and it required an act
of the legislature, of course. And furthermore, they considered
their budget picture and resource-staffing picture to be
sufficient to allow them to take it on. They did. They achieved
some successes in moving some projects a little bit quicker
than others, developing some innovative approaches on other
projects, but the other States that we questioned did more
detail. Oregon, Georgia, Pennsylvania was one, they tended to
hang back, so we would characterize it very much a mixed bag.
I do not know that there is any particular silver bullet,
frankly, to make a huge progress in accelerating projects. The
changing nature from project to project, State to State, and
what resources the States are able to develop make it difficult
to say that there is any universal method to achieving
accelerated project delivery that would be the hope for all of
us.
Mr. Dent. Well, thank you. And I would like to turn to Mr.
Montoya. On January 20th, your office issued a report that
found HUD program participants may be receiving multiple
subsidies through both multifamily housing programs and Public
and Indian Housing programs. And according to these findings,
you provided recommendations for HUD to address these issues.
These recommendations required public housing agencies to
better utilize the Enterprise Income Verification system, which
contains resident information. Given the constrained fiscal
climate in which we are operating, it is imperative that all
appropriated funds are put to qualified and proper uses.
Could you tell us if, one, if HUD has begun to implement
the recommendations in your report to prevent future waste? And
two, if your office believes there are any other areas where
HUD could prevent duplicative awards by utilizing information
or verification systems that are readily available to them? And
my time is almost up.
Mr. Montoya. Yes, Mr. Dent. Thank you for the question. I
would have to get back to you on whether they have actually
implemented or are working on the recommendations. I think
other areas where there is duplication of benefits is the
Disaster Program, and that is really not only within the
Department, but as it relates to SBA and FEMA money. We are
doing a body of work in that arena to see where there might be
duplications of benefits and maybe where there could be some
legislation that could help correct that.
Mr. Dent. Thank you. I see my time has expired.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Dent. We will start on the third
round of questions and continue on as long as the committee
people have questions to ask. I will start off myself.
Mr. Scovel, one of the things that has troubled me is the
local metropolitan transit system, WMATA. Incidents this year
included a track fire, a derailment, a flooded station, and
one-day emergency shutdown of the entire system. These
incidents have unveiled a massive extent of disarray to WMATA's
infrastructure and repair process.
Additionally, it was announced that nearly half of the
Track Inspection Department is under review, discipline,
suspension, or at risk of being fired after investigation into
the July 29th derailment at East Falls Church suggested it was
a widely accepted practice within the department to complete
reports for inspections that had not been performed.
In light of these developments, I am curious what
recommendations your office has, if any, to WMATA that would
help ensure the safety of the riders, the cost-effective use of
taxpayers' dollars in repair efforts, and that these projects
are completed in a timely and efficient manner?
Mr. Scovel. Thanks, sir. This is a significant question for
all of us in the Washington area and has broader implications
for transit agencies across the country, of course. Our office
has not undertaken any specific review of WMATA proper. WMATA
has its own Office of Inspector General and for that reason and
others, we have not looked at WMATA. I can say that GAO,
however, was asked by Congress to look at WMATA's specific
implementation of its current SafeTrack effort and recently
reported out and recommended to WMATA that it engage in far
better project management practices than it had undertaken when
it first initiated the SafeTrack surge.
As I understand it, WMATA's reply was, yes, but we felt we
were under the gun for significant safety challenges and we
wanted to get started; realizing that, of course, we had not
completed every mark on the checklist by way of project
management expertise, but we will get to it.
Where our office, where DOT OIG has focused our efforts has
been on FTA's oversight of transit agencies, and specifically
with regard to WMATA, the process by which FTA decided to
exercise its recently granted safety oversight authority that
came to that Agency from 2012 legislation. We issued an audit
report immediately upon enactment and suggested to FTA that it
may wish to consider a number of best practices that we had
gleaned from regular audits of other safety oversight agencies.
FTA had embarked on that, had been making pretty good progress
in our estimation. However, then it had to pull the trigger and
assume direct safety oversight of WMATA itself.
We initiated another audit and have completed that one that
reported that FTA, in exercising that safety oversight
authority, had a number of challenges. One had to do with
staffing. Did it have the right expertise and the right number
of staff to enable it to do that?
The other was, what kind of data was it collecting? It is
not going to be able to focus its efforts without the right
data.
The final one was oftentimes, as in the case of WMATA, FTA
will be pulled into a direct oversight role, but it has to have
a way to pull out. It needs to have an exit strategy too, which
it had not been able to do sufficiently at the time we
conducted our audit with regard to WMATA itself.
So that is the area where our office has been working with
FTA and indirectly with WMATA on its current woes.
Mr. Joyce. Well, it would appear it is a tetra-headed
monster, if you will. All the different agencies that are
involved, but no one really claiming oversight----
Mr. Scovel. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Joyce [continuing]. Or taking it--and that there are
too many people on the Metro rail every single day with
potential for disaster. Do you believe in its current structure
WMATA is internally equipped to efficiently manage and execute
the necessary repairs?
Mr. Scovel. Clearly, room for improvement, and I would cite
the GAO report in that, particularly with regard to SafeTrack.
This is the most significant rehabilitation effort that this
transit agency has ever undertaken. GAO found some noteworthy
areas where the planning and execution could be far better
achieved. It is up now to the board of directors and to the
chief executive officer to put those into play. We can see--and
I ride Metro myself, every single day. We can see how it is
working out and not working out over the course of SafeTrack.
Clearly, WMATA has a ways to go.
Mr. Joyce. Well, I hope you continue to ride in a safe
fashion.
Mr. Scovel. Thanks.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. Moving now to Ranking Member Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Scovel, I belatedly
have consulted your resume here, and note the bachelor's degree
from UNC-Chapel Hill and the law degree from Duke University.
As a former Marine, I assume you have a more courageous answer
to this question than I do as to who you root for in ACC
tournaments.
Mr. Scovel. Oh, absolutely, and I appreciate the question,
sir. And thank you for your able representation of the Triangle
Area. It is going to be Carolina all the way.
Mr. Price. That is a more courageous answer, yes.
Mr. Dent. Villanova.
Mr. Scovel. I love Duke. When they are not playing
Carolina, Duke is my team, but when they are going head to
head, it is Carolina, so.
Mr. Price. Very good. Well, as opposed to ducking, that is
a good answer. And, of course, when they are not playing each
other, it is a very easy answer.
Well, I do want to turn to you because we perhaps have a
point of comparison here in terms of DOT's financial
management, things that might have occurred to you in terms
especially of the factors that go into better performance.
I also want to turn to the question of these new challenges
and the budget implications of them. Autonomous vehicles,
unmanned aircraft going to need to communicate with other users
in the national airspace and on our roads and highways. And as
you have said repeatedly here this morning, this is a daunting
task. It requires new skills, new tools for the Department to
safely integrate these technologies into the transportation
network. It will likely require additional resources and skill
sets at DOT and, for that matter, in your own office to carry
out and oversee these efforts.
So, that is my question. If you have reflections on
financial management generally, but then, in particular, when
we are talking about hiring freezes, the budget cuts of the
magnitude we are looking at here, how on Earth are we going to
get on top of this new challenge?
Mr. Scovel. Thanks, Mr. Price. Yes, just listening to
General Montoya relate his woes at the Department of Housing
and Urban Development, I count myself lucky to be at the
Department of Transportation in terms of its financial
management. And I say that even remembering that within 2 weeks
after my taking office as Inspector General in 2006, my office
issued a qualified opinion to the Department, the only time,
certainly within my tenure as Inspector General, that we saw
the necessity to do that. And the reason at the time had to do
with how FAA was accounting for its capital, if you will, its
plants and equipment, and how it was accounting for
depreciation and all of that.
FAA is a big enough part of the Department that it rose to
be a material deficiency. And our contract accountants at the
time, KPMG, told us that they would be required to issue a
qualified opinion and, of course, we did.
I will give the Department and FAA great credit for
immediately, upon that problem, setting about correcting it,
and within the following year, had it nailed. And while it has
been a watch item for us and our contract auditors in the years
since, it has not risen to the point again where it threatened
the integrity of the financial operation.
We have had other problems that have arisen. I would have
to cite Federal Highways. They had a significant problem with
regard to unobligated balances for specific projects. The
Department created a working group and immediately set upon
that when we informed them early on that this was a potential
problem.
We have also had more recent questions with regard to how
FTA has been cooperating with our contract auditors, and the
Department has taken the stick to FTA on that. So, I am very
much encouraged by it.
With regard to an overall budget picture for the
Department, I will leave it to the Secretary and her team to
figure out how to do that with some of the emerging
technologies that you cited, UAS, autonomous vehicles--a key
for the agencies now trying to work through that problem. What
will become even more significant going ahead will be
engagement with stakeholders, keeping in mind, of course, the
danger, if you will, or the specter of takeover of the
regulator. But I think between us and the Secretary and the
Congress, of course, we will be able to guard sufficiently
against that.
In my own office, I do have concerns about our budget. The
hiring freeze is one thing for the next number of months, but a
much longer concern and more immediate problem will be the
hiring or the budget picture for our office.
I respect General Montoya's 60-to-1 return on investment.
In the last year, we had a 54-to-1 return on investment,
meaning for every single appropriated dollar that our office
received, we were able to return to the Government and the
taxpayer $54.
Together, I think we stand very near the top, certainly
within the top five or six among all OIGs in Government.
Seventy-five percent of my budget, sir, is allocated to
personnel salary and expenses, because that is how we
accomplish our mission. We have no programs. We have no
hardware. We have no grants. We have no loans. We deliver
reports of investigation to prosecutors so that they can try to
nail the bad guys. We deliver audit reports to you and to the
Secretary, so that together we can figure out how to improve
efficiency, economy, and effectiveness for the Department's
programs.
I need people to do that, and most of my budget dollars go
to pay them. If I cannot do that, then my ability to keep you
and the Secretary fully and currently informed, and that is my
mission by way of the IG Act, my ability to accomplish that
mission will be threatened.
I used the phrase earlier, sir, that elements in the
Department do all they can with what we have. We are at the top
of that list in terms of our OIG. I do not tell our people that
we are going to do more with less, because that is a sure-fire
method to drive people into the ground, but what I do tell them
every day, I expect them to come to work and do all we can with
what we have got.
It will be up to the Congress and the administration to
determine what our sum might be, but I want to assure this
committee that you will have our 100-percent effort every day.
Thanks.
Mr. Price. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. Mr. Young?
Mr. Young. Mr. Montoya, the Mutual Mortgage Interest--
Insurance Fund, I'm sorry, Insurance Fund, there is an issue
out there regarding the implication of this fund. The Property
Accessed Clean Energy, or PACE loans as they call them, they
are attached to the property rather than the borrower, have
high interest rates, and are repaid by an assessment.
So, there are concerns that allowing HUD to insure
mortgages on properties with PACE loans because this puts them
in a second lien position, and thereby increases the risk for
the MMI Fund and taxpayers.
As you know, the Federal Housing Finance Agency prohibits
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac from insuring properties with PACE
loans. So, there are concerns that the PACE loan problems echo
the subprime mortgage issue that we had years ago.
Creditworthiness does not matter, some say. No down payment is
required. Contractors function as loan brokers. Often
homeowners may not know what they are getting into. I am sure
that all of us do not want to go back to the 2008 crisis, and
avoid another $1.7 billion bailout.
So, would you agree that allowing FHA funds to take a
second lien position creates a greater risk to the MMI Fund and
to taxpayers? And just talk about the implications of this
policy and what you found. I would like your insights.
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question, Mr.
Young. It goes to the point I made earlier that sometimes FHA
is its own worst enemy, and we would agree. Putting the FHA
mortgage in a second lien position to these PACE loans could
very well be detrimental to the MMI Fund if homeowners default.
And you are absolutely correct. Often, these homeowners do not
understand the obligations of these loans, that these are
assessments, they are not part of a loan, the traditional loan.
And, in fact, we are not even sure that these PACE loans or
these homeowners are actually going to benefit from any energy
measures, and so that increases, obviously, the liability.
It is a concern for me that back in 2015, we thought FHA
was on pace to maybe not sort of back this idea. Something
changed within the year, and they decided to go ahead and put
out guidance that said they would insure these types of loans,
with certain caveats that people needed to know that the loan
should not be put in a second position, but they do not really
have that say so because that is a State issue as to lien
position on loans.
So, we are troubled by it. We are appreciative that you
brought this to our attention, to my attention. I actually did
not realize this, but my audit staff has a proposed audit on
these PACE loans, so I would commit to you that when we get
done with that body of work and even maybe before that, we
would love to give you an oral briefing, and certainly give you
the report when it is done.
Mr. Young. When do you anticipate that that audit may be
done? We do not want to rush it, but just maybe a timeline.
Mr. Montoya. Well, sure. So it was an audit proposal in
this year's audit planning stage. So I obviously jumped into
the fray and said that is going to be one of them, so it will
be starting, hopefully, some time in the next several months.
And so certainly, what we want to determine is the adequate
controls that might mitigate the risks associated with insuring
these loans, sir.
Mr. Young. Thank you for that, appreciate that.
Mr. Montoya. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Young. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Young. Mr. Aguilar?
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you. Mr. Montoya, picking up a little
bit on that, and maybe go back and forth between the MMI Fund
and also, as you mentioned, some of the down payment assistance
programs that present problems to your office.
Just thinking about it from the perspective of underserved
communities, in 2015, the top four home lenders scaled back on
FHA lending in 2015, prioritizing conventional loans, while 39
percent of all mortgages issued were government insured, 63
percent of Latinos took out government-insured mortgage loans.
So this is something that affects the community that I
represent. Down payment assistance is crucial for families who
would like to buy a home.
In your office report on the FHA-insured loans published
recommendations that HUD consider a position allowing some
borrower-financed down payment assistance programs to also
participate in the FHA program.
So I guess my question is how do we ensure that proposed
reforms do not create barriers to homeownership that
disproportionately affect the Latino community?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question, and it
is a valid question. What we are sort of mandated to do and
what we want to ensure we do is that the home borrower, the
loan borrower, the homeowner, goes into these loans fully aware
of what they are getting into, and that has been the problem
all along is they are not fully informed of what these loans
really mean, what this down--now, just to be clear, we do not
have a problem or disagree with down payment assistance
programs, generally speaking.
We have a contention and a concern over a particular
program where these premiums are raised often without the
borrower knowing, so that when they get into the loan, they are
going to have a higher premium interest rate on the loan. So
that is the troubling part of this.
Certainly, with regards to homeowners going into these
loans fully informed, fully aware, fully understanding that
they can or cannot pay for it, that should not close any
community from accessing the loans. Our main purpose here is to
ensure these borrowers are fully informed and aware of what it
really means and what those numbers are going to really look
like when they get into these loans.
Mr. Aguilar. Can that be done through added disclosures? Or
how can we further the goal of informing consumers so they know
what they are getting into?
Mr. Montoya. Absolutely, sir, added disclosure, and that
was one of our recommendations. We had several recommendations
on the down payment assistance audits that we did. And part of
that is they have to fully disclose that, and you have to
disclose that very overtly. You have to get a certification
that you did disclose it.
The Department does not even track these types of loans,
which is even more troubling. They do not track them
separately. So there is no real history on whether these things
track well or not, you know, the higher premium interest rate
of these loans as compared to general down payment assistance.
These down payment assistance loans were initially designed
to receive a grant or money to get people into the homes,
right? With no expectation that the money would be paid back.
Well, these higher interest loans are designed so that the
money is paid back, and it is paid back on the back of the
borrower. That is what the borrower does not understand. This
is not, you know, a grant that is going to get you into a home
and help you. They are going to pay for it themselves.
So absolutely it goes to disclosing and to ensuring that
occurs. And so that has been the biggest point of contention on
this particular down payment assistance program.
Mr. Aguilar. Right, okay. But your office is not expressing
disagreement that offering the increasing affordability and
access to these programs is a worthy goal. The question is how
do we get there? What disclosures do we offer in order to
protect consumers, and how do we ensure the program is legal
moving forward as well?
Mr. Montoya. Absolutely. It is a worthy goal and, as I said
earlier, the mission of the Department is an honorable mission.
What we want to ensure is that these individuals who are
receiving these loans are fully aware and they are not taken
advantage of.
In the case of the PACE loan that we were just talking
about, these contractors are pushing these loans, right? So it
becomes this idea that you are not really protecting the
consumer, and it really becomes sort of predatory lending,
right?
And so that is what our focus is, is to ensure that that
sort of thing does not happen to these individuals, these
families.
Mr. Aguilar. I appreciate it. And, Mr. Scovel, I just
wanted to let you know that I am sure I cannot speak for Mr.
Montoya, but I am sure if you really felt some sympathy for his
position, there are plenty of vacant positions at HUD, CFO as
we have heard and others. So feel free to jump in with two
hands and help out.
Mr. Scovel. Ah, great.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, sir. Okay, I'm going to--any more
questions? Well, I have got on here of local interest. Mr.
Montoya, if you would not mind, the point-in-time count, are
you familiar with that?
Mr. Montoya. Generally familiar with it, yes, sir.
Mr. Joyce. Okay. As you know, it requires communities
receiving funds through the homeless assistance grants to
conduct annual PIT counts, of people experiencing homelessness.
The counts are to occur 1 day during the last week of
January. The data collected on this day is then often used a
model for total homelessness in a given area, and this has been
problematic for communities that I represent, specifically
Ashtabula County, Ohio. Located in the most northeast corner of
the State, the county represents both rural and urban areas,
and its proximity to Lake Erie leads to some of the most
extreme weather patterns in the country, especially this week.
Local homelessness assistance program directors have
expressed concern that the PIT data collection method for which
they must abide is problematic in obtaining an accurate count
of homelessness in this region. For one, homeless individuals
in rural areas take shelter in hard-to-locate and spread-out
locations, making it difficult to pinpoint and register
individuals in the timeframe given.
Additionally, it is a safe bet at this time of year you are
going to see some extreme weather, during which many homeless
individuals take shelter in local businesses, such as
laundromats, fast food restaurants, making it even harder to
account for a large population of the vulnerable.
Has your office evaluated any ways by which the assistance
programs can collect more accurate data? And if so, what are
your recommendations for doing so?
Mr. Montoya. Thank you for your question, Mr. Joyce. We
have not done any body of work on this particular program. I
would be interested, and I have asked my staff to look into it,
as to whether the systems that HUD uses to collect this data is
something we could do analysis on to figure out where these
accounts are occurring.
Recognizing they do do this one night every year, and every
other year I think they go to those populations who are not in
shelters in very specific areas. I think it would be difficult
in all cases to sort of make sure you are not missing anybody.
But we have not done any body of work. I certainly would be
interested into looking into that a little bit deeper for you
to see what we might be able to ask with regards to how
complete this program really counts.
Mr. Joyce. Well, thank you very much. Mr. Price?
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, in this final round,
would like to turn to an issue that is extremely important and
needs to be addressed. And I hope that in the time remaining
you can at least give a cursory update on your progress. Both
departments, of course, have critical and sensitive
information, technology systems, air traffic control,
processing of federally insured mortgages, and on and on. And
cyber attacks are a very real and a serious threat in all these
areas.
Every day outdated legacy information systems perform these
critical tasks and yet pose unique information security
challenges. And they are often fragile. They often lack the
resiliency of their modern counterparts. So, just to take HUD
alone, you note, Mr. Montoya, that the fiscal 2016 IT funding
decreased 16.3 percent from the previous year, and then
decreased another 16 percent in 2017. So, constrained resources
is a euphemism, I think, for how these agencies are operating
in this area. And then looking ahead, maybe even more
constraints.
So, could you give us an update on what work remains to be
done in improving the security and resiliency of legacy IT
systems in each of your departments? Give us an idea of whether
or not this can be achieved within existing resources.
Mr. Montoya. Yes, Mr. Price. So, with ours, just to give
you a sense, I think there is over 400 HUD IT products that are
running on unsupported platforms. So, again, that goes to the
critical need for that.
To the extent that any budget cut will certainly have an
impact on how quickly they can get to these security concerns
and issues, but really for them, it is not even a matter of
patching and security awareness, it is about creating new IT
systems that can take over where these aging systems will
eventually just--will stop. So, that is naturally the more
critical aspect.
So, even with any budget cut, I think it is going to have
to be a real focus on the priorities, what has to come first
and what should come first. And I think that would be my
simplest answer, that even when it comes to our Department, at
some point security patches really are not going to work on
these things. So, it is beyond patching these things. It is
really about moving them on to new systems.
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, sir. For DOT, I would say somewhat
much the same thing. There needs to be, certainly,
prioritization of replacement for those key of the 460 or so IT
systems that the Department of Transportation relies on. With
regards specifically to your point about cyber attacks and
vulnerabilities, of course we do the required FISMA audit every
single year.
We have highlighted across all the domains of cybersecurity
areas where the Department needs to make progress. With regard
to continuous monitoring, for instance, last year we found that
with regard to one of the Department's major networks, the
monitoring tool had detected 110,000 weaknesses at the time,
yet the Operating Administrations that rely on that network had
not been informed where those weaknesses were, so that they
could undertake remediation at that level.
With regard to incident handling and reporting, we found
similar shortcomings. The committee may remember that in 2014
there was a fire caused by a contract employee in the En Route
Air Traffic Control Center near Chicago. The center had to be
shut down for several weeks. The aviation industry reported
losses of upward of $350 million as a result. Yet that
significant incident had not been reported. Everyone knew about
it because it was in the news, but it had not been reported
officially to the Department, because the Department views FAA
as separate and apart in its incident-reporting requirements.
Neither FAA nor the Department had reported it to the
Department of Homeland Security, to the U.S. Computer Emergency
Readiness Team. Glaring, glaring deficiency.
With regard to contingency planning, this is mentioned
specifically in our longer statement. Of the Department's 460
systems or so, we determined last year that 86 percent had not
experienced recent or comprehensive contingency testing of its
recovery plans should the inevitable cyber attack occur.
So, those would be three areas where the Department clearly
needs to prioritize its efforts. Longer range, ultimate fixes,
like at HUD, may rely on upgrading, as financial resources
permit, updating the networks themselves. But clearly in the
meantime, there is much work to be done.
Mr. Price. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Price, Mr. Young. Well, I just
want to thank both of you gentlemen, along with your staff, for
all the answers and your participation here today. The
committee staff will be in contact with the budget officers
regarding questions for the record. I know I have a number of
questions to submit, and I would imagine other members of the
subcommittee do as well. And if you would work with the OMB to
return the information for the record to the committee within
30 days from Friday, we will be able to publish a transcript of
today's hearing.
Mr. Price, any final comments?
Mr. Price. No, it was a very useful hearing. Thank you both
for being here.
Mr. Joyce. Yes, thank you both. As a former prosecutor, I
appreciate exactly what you are doing. And keep up the great
work.
Mr. Montoya. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Joyce. With that, this hearing is adjourned.
Mr. Montoya. Thank you, sir.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Thursday, May 18, 2017.

EMERGING TRANSPORTATION TECHNOLOGIES

WITNESSES

NIDHI KALRA, PH.D., SENIOR INFORMATION SCIENTIST FOR THE RAND
CORPORATION
PROFESSOR MYKEL KOCHENDERFER, STANFORD UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENT OF
AERONAUTICS AND ASTRONAUTICS
DAVID STRICKLAND, COUNSEL AND SPOKESPERSON FOR THE SELF-DRIVING
COALITION FOR SAFER STREETS
BRIAN WYNNE, PRESIDENT AND CEO OF THE ASSOCIATION OF UNMANNED VEHICLE
SYSTEMS INTERNATIONAL
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Good morning. Let us call the subcommittee
to order. Today we are here to discuss how new technologies are
changing our transportation system, not to mention our entire
world. We are going to focus our time today on two specific
technologies: on Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, or what is commonly
known as UAVs, and Automated Vehicles, also known as AVs, which
those, in essence, are self-driving cars and trucks.
I do not have to tell anybody that these are interesting
and exciting times when it comes to technology that will make,
whether its freight or travel, far more efficient and
convenient; we hope, we think. It will clearly change the way
we live and the way we work and, frankly, it is hard to imagine
what we may be looking at in 10 years, not to mention 20 or 30
years from now.
Even more exciting is the potential for a much safer and a
much more reliable and potentially more efficient
transportation system. Last year there were over 40,000 deaths
from auto accidents and 90 percent of those were due to human
error. By removing this human factor, the automated vehicles
could theoretically one day save tens of thousands of lives
every single year, and it is difficult to imagine what an
incredible achievement that would be for our country and for
mankind.
On the unmanned vehicle aircraft side, I should say it
appears that the future is, frankly, already here. The promise
of drone and that technology is already beginning to transform
our day-to-day lives. Together we need to figure out, to
support innovation, how do we make sure that we continue to be
on the forefront of innovation in our skies while also
maintaining a world-class safety record? And I know all of us
are proud of having the safest airspace on the planet.
To realize those benefits of these new technologies we must
strike a balance between obviously the promotion of innovation,
of private innovation, and also of protecting the public
interest and the safety of the public so these potentially
disruptive technologies offer a world of new possibilities.
But, the safety of the American people obviously has to always
come first, and that is the balance that we have to deal with.
All levels of government are going to play a role in
safeguarding the public as these technologies come to market,
and there is no doubt that agencies funded by this subcommittee
will play a very active role in research and regulation of both
UAVs and AVs. And in addition, to try to understand how these
technologies will change the marketplace, the transportation
networks, et cetera, we must also understand what is the
appropriate role for government, and for the different
agencies.
So to help explore all of that, we are here today. I want
to thank the members of the panel, this wonderful panel that I
am, frankly, really, really, really, really looking forward to
hearing from.
But with that, let me recognize Mr. Price, the ranking
member of the committee, and thank you, Mr. Price. You are
recognized.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I join you in welcoming
this distinguished panel of witnesses here today and look
forward to receiving their testimony. This hearing is an
important opportunity for us as appropriators to examine the
emerging technologies in the transportation sector,
particularly unmanned aerial systems and automated vehicles.
In many respects these technologies have already arrived,
as the chairman stressed. Drones are being used to help farmers
inspect crops; utility companies check their power lines in
remote or hard-to-reach areas. Car manufacturers have already
rolled out semiautonomous systems designed to help drivers
detect and avoid crashes before they occur. I actually have one
on my own vehicle, a remarkable cruise control system which
does it for me when a car slows down in front.
As these technologies mature they have the potential to
provide enormous benefits to our transportation network and to
society at large by enhancing efficiency and safety. But before
this technology becomes ubiquitous, technologies from industry,
academia, and government will need to grapple with a lot of
issues, policy, regulatory, operational concerns.
For example, as unmanned aerial system begin flying over
population centers how do we ensure the safety of those on the
ground as well as other aviation users in the airspace? How can
we quickly identify drones when they fly into restricted or
sensitive areas?
As more and more cars on our roadways have semiautonomous
driving features, how do we account for human behavior which
both experience and research tell us can be far from rationale?
Automated systems already generate immense amounts of sensitive
user data. When these technologies proliferate in our
transportation network, how can we use that data to improve our
underlying technology while respecting privacy and keeping data
safe from those who would abuse it?
As appropriators we especially want to make sure that the
Department of Transportation and its various component agencies
not only have the resources they need to facilitate innovation
and fulfill their critical safety oversight responsibilities,
but that they are using these resources most effectively and
with a full knowledge of the emerging technologies they are
dealing with.
I believe this hearing will provide an excellent platform
to discuss these issues and inform our subcommittee's work as
we assemble our bill for the coming fiscal year. So, Mr.
Chairman, I appreciate your calling this hearing and look
forward to the testimony. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Let me introduce our
distinguished panel. Professor Kochenderfer from Stanford
University, the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
that is correct? Thank you, sir.
Mr. Brian Wynne, president and CEO of the Association of
Unmanned Vehicle Systems International. Thank you, sir.
Nidhi Kalra, Ph.D. and senior information scientist for the
RAND Corporation.
And also then Mr. David Strickman, counsel and spokesperson
for the Self-Driving Coalition for Safer Streets.
I want to again, as I said before, thank each and every one
of you for joining us this morning and we all really, really
look forward to hearing from you. So with that, we will today
begin with Professor Kochenderfer.
Professor, your full written testimony will be included in
the record and, with that, we look forward to hearing your 5
minutes.
Mr. Kochenderfer. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Diaz-
Balart, Ranking Member Price, and members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the integration of
unmanned aircraft systems, or UAS, also commonly called drones,
into the airspace.
I am a professor in the Department of Aeronautics and
Astronautics at Stanford University and a third-generation
pilot. I am speaking solely for myself.
For research over 10 years, it has involved statistical
estimation of risk and development of technology for enhancing
aviation safety and the safety of other transportation
technologies. While at MIT Lincoln Laboratory, I developed a
collection of airspace models directly funded by the FAA, DHS,
and the Air Force. These models have been since used to
estimate collision risk for manned and unmanned aircraft by
government, academic, and commercial organizations around the
world.
My work has also led in part to the technology underlying
the FAA's next-generation Airborne Collision Avoidance System
X, called ACAS X; the FAA is developing and flight testing a
version of for unmanned aircraft. My students at Stanford
University have been supporting this effort and the effort of
NASA to build a UAS traffic management system, or UTM.
I will begin by outlining the motivation for building a
system for enabling the safe and efficient operation of drones.
This new wave of unmanned aircraft technology has the potential
to save lives and create jobs, as mentioned by Mr. Price.
Drones are able to assist in the inspection of
infrastructure, search-and-rescue operations, agricultural
surveillance allowing famers to increase yields, more
effectively use water resources, and reduce crop damage. In the
medical space drones can enable the swift transport of organs
for transplants and the delivery of medicine.
The transformative nature of unmanned aircraft technology
on the benefits they bring to society are difficult to deny.
However, there are significant worries about the reckless use
of drones and the risks they pose to other air traffic
participants as well as people and property on the ground.
There are also concerns about the violation of privacy given
that many drones are equipped with cameras and landowner rights
to the airspace immediately above their property. These are all
valid concerns, but I will focus my opening remarks on the
challenges associated with the airspace integration.
The airspace in the United States is the safest and most
complex in the world. The FAA is charged with the
responsibility for ensuring that this impeccable safety
standard is maintained even with the proliferation of new
airspace users, platforms, and applications.
The UTM appears to be the best way forward for integrating
these new users, allowing for the flexible use of the airspace
while preserving the ability of the FAA to regulate the traffic
as needed to preserve safety. The UTM is an air traffic
management ecosystem for uncontrolled airspace. NASA has led
the effort in developing the concept and prototype in the
system with broad participation from industry, government and
academia along with coordination with the FAA and the FAA test
sites.
The development of the UTM has aimed to identify the
relevant services, responsibilities, information architecture,
data exchange protocols, and so forth. The vision that has
emerged from these research activities over the past few years
is that the FAA maintains regulatory and operational authority
for airspace and traffic operations.
The UTM would be used by the FAA to issue directives,
impose constraints, and modify air space confirmations. But air
traffic controllers are not required to actively control drones
in controlled airspace. The FAA maintained situational
awareness through the UTM. The FAA manages the Flight
Information Management System, or FIMS, which interacts with
various UAS service suppliers.
A private entity can apply to become a USS, a UAS service
supplier, and the various service suppliers coordinate with
each other to--oh, thank you--coordinate with each other to
provide service such as real-time position information and
notification to drone operations and operators. The concept is
that participation in UTM may allow, with FAA concurrence,
exceptions from the current part 107 requirements.
I would like to conclude by saying that there is an
opportunity for the United States to be a leader in the
development of the UTM and ushering in the next generation of
aviation bringing with it the benefits I mentioned earlier.
Thank you for this opportunity and I am happy to be a resource
to this subcommittee.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much, Professor. We now
recognize Mr. Wynne for your opening testimony. And as I said
before, your written testimony will also be included in the
record. You are recognized, sir, for 5 minutes, and thank you
for being here.
Mr. Wynne. Thank you, Chairman Diaz-Balart, Ranking Member
Price. I really appreciate the opportunity to be here this
morning to testify at this hearing, speaking on behalf of the
Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International, the
world's largest nonprofit organization dedicated exclusively to
the advancement of unmanned systems and robotics, UAS, and the
resources needed to fully integrate UAS safely and efficiently
into the national airspace system.
As you know, UAS are regulated by the Federal Aviation
Administration, which has taken several positive steps in the
past few years. I hope to take a few minutes today to tell you
about where the unmanned systems aircraft industry is going and
how an appropriately funded FAA is necessary to help the
industry reach new heights and create enormous economic value
for the country.
The FAA implemented the small UAS rule also known as part
107 last August. It was the result of years of collaboration
between industry and government that established a flexible,
risk-based approach to regulating UAS. These regulations have
been in effect for more than 8 months and there is strong
evidence the commercial UAS market is poised for a significant
growth.
As of this month, there are more than 820,000 UAS
registrations with the FAA, the vast majority of which are
hobbyists. Of those about 62,000 platforms have been registered
for commercial use. The FAA expects more than 400,000 UAS could
be flying for commercial purposes over the next 5 years, a more
than sixfold increase from today.
An economic analysis by AUVSI projects the expansion of UAS
technology will create more than 100,000 high-paying jobs and
generate more than 82 billion to the economy in the first
decade following full integration into the national airspace.
These figures will likely go higher under the right conditions.
In addition to part 107. an FAA extension measure was
signed into law last year which would advance UAS research,
expand commercial operations, and enhance the safety of the
national airspace for all aviation systems manned and unmanned.
While this extension measure will provide some short-term
stability through September 2017, it is critical that Congress
pass a long-term bill this year. A vital prerequisite for
advancing UAS is an adequately funded FAA that can meet the
employment and staffing needs required of the future as well as
provide the necessary resources to update and automate the
FAA's infrastructure to support this new technology.
To safely manage the hundreds of thousands of UAS
anticipated to operate in American skies, the FAA needs first
and foremost to automate its UAS processes. Automation will
also be important beyond part 107 for more complex operations.
Many of its important management tools and processes which
facilitate safer and more seamless UAS operations currently
operate by manual data input or processing.
If the UAS wants to remain a global leader in UAS
innovation manual processes and out-of-date technology will not
suffice. The FAA also needs additional employees who are
dedicated to future UAS rulemakings to move us beyond part 107
and allow for more complex operations. More resources to
advance UAS regulations will help enhance the safety and
security of the annual airspace.
We recognize that the recent budget agreement that this
Congress passed and President Trump signed into law made some
additional investments in the FAA. I would like to personally
thank this committee's leadership for providing resources to
expedite UAS innovation. It is definitely a step in the right
direction.
I want to hasten to add that industry is not relying on the
FAA and government alone to advance UAS. Industry is currently
shouldering much of the R&D costs, finding solutions to make
UAS fly higher and farther more safely and efficiently.
Industry has also been a close partner with government in
advancing a UAS traffic management system known as UTM and in
developing standards for remotely identifying operators and
owners of UAS.
The UAS industry is primed for incredible growth thanks to
industry representatives and government regulators nurturing
innovation. Vital to these efforts, however, is an FAA that is
appropriately funded and empowered to engage meaningfully in
the process alongside industry stakeholders.
Thank you again for the opportunity this morning. I will
look forward to answering the committee's questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Wynne. We now recognize Ms.
Kalra. Again, your opening statements and your full testimony
will be submitted into the record. And you are recognized.
Thank you so much.
Ms. Kalra. Chairman Diaz-Balart, Ranking Member Price, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on important emerging
opportunities and risks created by autonomous vehicles.
Now, in the interest of full disclosure, I want to let you
know my spouse is the co-founder of a Silicon Valley startup
working on autonomous vehicles, though his work has no bearing
on my testimony or vice versa.
Now, today, first I would like to talk about safety, and
then I will briefly talk about mobility. Now, as you know,
traffic crashes pose a public health crisis in the United
States, and autonomous vehicles have the potential to mitigate
this crisis, and as a society we want them to become as safe as
possible, as quickly as possible. But they probably will not
eliminate all crashes and may introduce new safety risks,
particularly in the near term.
So, please let me describe several challenges that stand in
the way of managing the safety risks and realizing the safety
potential, and then I will propose some solutions.
The first challenge is that there is not yet a practical
way to prove that autonomous vehicles are safe prior to
allowing them on the roads for consumer use.
Second, there is no consensus about how safe autonomous
vehicles should actually be before they are allowed on the
road. This means we neither know what test autonomous vehicles
should have to take nor what would constitute a passing grade.
Now, resolving these questions is urgent, because real-
world driving experience is actually crucial for improving
autonomous vehicle safety, but this presents a third problem,
while in the real-world setting presents risk to early adopters
and to other road users.
It is a lot like allowing a teenager driver on the road.
They may not be good drivers yet, but they need experience to
become good drivers. Until then, they pose risks to themselves
and to others which we try to limit with learner's permit
restrictions. And we might need some policies for autonomous
vehicles in their teenage years.
And there is a clear and essential role for sound
policymaking, and I will make three recommendations.
First, I recommend that we rapidly develop methods of
testing autonomous vehicle safety.
Second, I recommend that that these methods be used to
shape a flexible, adaptive, regulatory framework that defines
what safety thresholds must be met in order to put autonomous
vehicles on the road.
A lower threshold of safety might be okay for demonstration
projects designed to improve autonomous vehicle performance in
controlled environments, but a higher threshold of safety would
be warranted for widespread consumer use in uncontrolled
environments.
Such new approach could, for example, be built into the
changes that are being considered to exemptions to the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards. Some autonomous vehicle
developers are seeking a potential increase from today's 2,500
vehicles per year to 100,000 vehicles per year. But this is
risky given the difficulty of assessing autonomous vehicles
safety prior to widespread deployment.
Now, a two-phased approach might help. For example,
initially allowing a small number of exemptions, and then after
safety is demonstrated increasing the cap on exemptions, could
be a viable path to deploying innovative vehicle designs while
also managing risks.
Now, such a framework would likely fall under NHTSA's
jurisdiction, but NHTSA and Federal policymakers should work
with industry, State and local policymakers, and the public.
NHTSA has already released Federal policies for autonomous
vehicles, but these do not specify testing methods or
performance requirements, or yet develop such a framework.
There also are not yet requirements, but industry guidelines
for technology development and use.
And a regulatory framework like the one I describe will
take time, so in the interim I thirdly suggest that pilot
studies and data-sharing can help manage risks while
encouraging technology development.
And before I conclude, I would like to briefly talk about
mobility. Autonomous vehicles could improve mobility for
millions of Americans who are elderly, young, have disabilities
or live in poverty. But policies may be needed to make
autonomous vehicles affordable, available, and accessible to
these groups. Policymakers can incentivize developers to reach
these markets faster than they might otherwise or integrate
them into public transit.
Policymakers may need to help developers make them
accessible, for example, by complying with ADA Guidelines and
building payment systems for these technologies.
And while the cost of shared autonomous vehicles is
expected to be low, policymakers could extend transit and peer-
transit reduced fares to these technologies.
To conclude, we cannot forecast the impact that autonomous
vehicles will have on transportation safety and mobility in the
decades to come, but we can shape that trajectory with well
thought-out policies.
Thank you very much. I look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Ms. Kalra. I am sorry I got
that wrong. We now recognize Mr. Strickland. And again, your
statement, your entire testimony, will be submitted for the
record. We look forward to your testimony as well. Thank you,
sir.
Mr. Strickland. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
and members of this august committee, I thank you for the
subcommittee's interest in exploring the tremendous potential
benefits provided by fully automated vehicles. I am a partner
at Venable LLP, and testifying here today as counsel to the
Self-Driving Coalition for Safer Streets.
Additionally, I served as NHTSA administrator from 2010 to
2014, when the agency issued its first testing guidance in
2013. The Coalition, whose members are the Ford Motor Company,
Waymo, Lyft, Uber, and Volvo Cars, is focused on enabling the
development and the deployment of level 4 and level 5 self-
driving cars.
Despite these companies' different backgrounds, they came
together because of their commitment to bring the tremendous
safety benefits of self-driving to consumers in the safest and
the swiftest manner possible.
The Coalition believes fully autonomous vehicles have a
great potential to make our road safer and more accessible. In
2015, 35,092 people died in motor vehicle crashes. The early
estimates from NHTSA in the first half of 2016 suggest a 10.4
percent increase in roadway fatalities compared to the same
period last year.
Since an estimated 94 percent of all crashes are the result
of human error, such as drunk driving, reckless driving,
distracted driving, all your variance, fully autonomous
vehicles may reduce these crashes because they remove human
error from the driving process.
In addition, self-driving vehicles hold the promise to
enhanced mobility for the disabled and the elderly, reduce
congestion, and improve productivity. As you are aware, in 2016
NHTSA released voluntary guidance regarding the testing and
deployment of autonomous vehicles.
The Coalition supports NHTSA's effort to construct a
voluntary framework that would promote the expeditious and safe
introduction of self-driving vehicles as a means of improving
safety and mobility.
Today, I want to discuss three areas where we believe that
the Congress can play a key role in promoting the safe and
expeditious deployment. The Coalition first wishes that the
FMVSS, or the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, be
updated and modernized.
We feel that the development of an updated FMVSS to which,
according to the automated vehicle policy, manufacturers could
certify HAVs that do not have controls to permit operation by a
human driver, i.e., no steering wheels, pedals, et cetera, the
potential safety benefits of such vehicles would vastly reduce
crashes caused by human drivers are enormous.
Second, we will ask that NHTSA be granted the authority to
expand testing and deployment. The Coalition supports NHTSA's
proposal in the policy to extend its statutory exemption
authority. Limitations that currently exist under law are
insufficient to achieve efficient and thorough testing.
Current authority permits NHTSA to exempt not more than
2,500 vehicles per year for a 2-year period on the basis of
equivalent safety. There are other lesser flexibilities in the
code, but none of them are sufficient to the task. To increase
the exemption cap in a significant manner, the Coalition
supports eliminating or raising the exemption cap to a level
that will help facilitate meaningful commercial deployment of
HAVs.
To achieve this, the Coalition supports the NHTSA's
proposal to be provided new authority to ``grant incrementally
increasing exemptions of the same manufacturer, progressively
relaxing the numerical limits on annual production volume and
exemption duration over time, or even eliminating those limits
altogether while following incremental one-step-at-a-time
approach with a preference for the latter.''
To be clear, the Coalition believes expanded exemptions
should be conditioned on a demonstration to NHTSA of equivalent
safety for the FMVSS for which an exemption or exemptions are
sought. We strongly believe that the Congress should act to
provide this authority to the agency immediately to fully
enable the potential lifesaving innovations of level 4 and
level 5.
Third, and finally, to promote uniformity at the State and
local levels. In the FAVP, NHTSA encourages States to focus on
traditional areas of jurisdiction, such as licensing, traffic
enforcement, and setting insurance requirements. However, we
are concerned that the FAVP still provides a leeway for States
to fill in gaps and build their own regulatory framework for
automated vehicles.
Recent and ongoing legislative activity in the States
across the country has demonstrated the importance and the
urgency of this concern. We encourage the Congress and NHTSA to
signal to State and local authorities against rushing into
legislating simply because the subject matter is new and novel.
With that, I conclude my remarks, and I am open to any
questions that the panel may have. Thank you so much, Mr.
Chairman.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much for your testimony. We
are going to begin with the rounds as usual. Remember, as
always, leave time for not only your questions, but the answers
within that 5 minutes.
Let me start with a question to you, Professor. So you have
worked with NASA, EFA, and UTM.
Mr. Kochenderfer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And so what are your observations
regarding the relationship between the two in developing the
UAS Traffic Management System? And we have heard a lot about
that. So what is that relationship like?
Mr. Kochenderfer. Yes. So, fortunately, NASA Ames is just
down the street from Stanford, and so I have been able to
participate in many of the meetings between NASA and FAA as
well as industry. NASA in particular has been very successful
in engaging industry in participation, and many of them have
brought their own resources and investment to build up this UTM
prototype.
Both NASA and the FAA have worked together to put together
some research transition teams, and that they have put together
a Joint Management Plan. I think it is a very good relationship
because the FAA in this context is the regulator and NASA is
serving the role as a research organization and facilitating
the connection with industry.
And I would say that so far this has been very successful,
but we do need to makes sure that the FAA is fully equipped to
act upon the recommendations and so forth that have emerged
during the development of the system.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Professor, is there a timeframe for the
actual deployment of the UTM system, and have NASA and FAA
established milestones and goals?
Mr. Kochenderfer. Yes, they have. I actually reviewed the
report last night. They do have milestones. And it is important
to understand that this is a very complex engineering problem.
And in order to really address it, you need to take these baby
steps and validate every step along the way. And so they have
set appropriate milestones and so forth that will bring us
closer to the goal of flexible airspace access.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Mr. Wynne, I would love to hear
your comments on how the UTM effort is using public-private
partnerships. How is that working? Is it working?
Mr. Wynne. I think it is. The concept of operations that
the professor laid out in his testimony I think are extremely
important; the FAA obviously needs to continue its role in
managing the airspace. I think increasingly what we are
developing, and industry is bringing to the table, is the
ability to potentially offer services that offload that from
the government and make it more widely available, and, more
importantly, do so very, very quickly and interoperable with
the existing air traffic control system.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. How can the FAA and industry, for example,
cooperate or collaborate on research activities?
Because the issue is, you know, they need to be flexible
enough, to respond to issue changes and challenges. And so how
do you see that happening?
Mr. Wynne. Well, I think that a massive change inside of
the FAA is--they have embraced this technology, recognizing
that we are working on technologies that will scale much faster
in unmanned systems, but will also benefit manned systems. So
that is a very, very important step forward in mentality. And
they also understand that the technology is advancing very
quickly. So it is very difficult without the help of industry
to understand how to leverage this, but I think that is
happening. It is happening from Michael Huerta, the
administrator, on down.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Great. Mr. Price, I have some time left,
but my questions are a little bit longer than that, so I will
go to you now.
Mr. Price. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, let me
turn to our AV group and pose some questions that your
testimony raises, especially yours, Mr. Strickland, but happy
to have either of you chime in.
You have referred to the NITSA Initiative here and the kind
of guidance that has been offered for about a year now, I
think, since that was issued. There have been about 50 bills, I
understand, however, introduced in over 12 States affecting
autonomous vehicles. Most of them were introduced before the
NITSA guidelines were published. And I have imperfect
information, incomplete information as to how much has actually
been enacted in the State level, much less what kind of range
of proposals, how wise they are, how consistent they are, what
those look like.
I wonder, Mr. Strickland, if you maybe for the record could
furnish any inventory you or anyone else has of this, but here
I would appreciate either of you characterizing these
rudimentary regulatory efforts at the State level. Presumably,
what we do not need is a patchwork of legislation that makes it
impossible for these technologies to thrive for that matter,
for there to be a consistency State to State that achieves the
basic objectives of safety and efficiency.
So could you say more about this and the kind of guidance
you believe is necessary beyond what NITSA has done,
particularly, of course, the Federal role?
Mr. Strickland. Mr. Price, your assessment of what is going
on in the States is correct. We have seen activity; over, you
know, over 50 bills in a number of States and they address a
variety of number of issues, some of them that are well within
the purview of what the States regulate, such as rules of the
road issues, registration, financial responsibility. Those are
all the appropriate State roles. The concerns are that the
States may step in and become a non-Federal motor vehicle
safety regulator. And that is incredibly problematic in terms
of the motor vehicle manufacturing market consistency and the
regulatory patchwork.
For us, some of the--all the legislation from our
perspective we do not think is entirely necessary for there to
be safe deployment and testing of these vehicles. However,
there are some issues that need to be taken care of at the
State level. We would encourage the Congress and NITSA to
really try to fill that space. Unfortunately, NITSA does not
have a rule which they can then have the opportunity to preempt
any inconsistent Federal motor vehicle safety standard or
standard out in the States. So it really is going to be
incumbent to really use the bully pulpit to really show Federal
leadership to encourage the States to really focus on those
areas which are very necessary in order for us to have safe
deployment.
Ms. Kalra. Now, if I may add, you know, since those policy
guidelines were laid out, you know, States do not actually want
to pass technical regulations. They recognize that this is not
something they necessarily know how to do well, it is not going
to help the industry. So they were trying to, I think, fill in
a gap. But since the indications are out that NITSA is rapidly
working on this, I think we are going to see less of that.
Now, to be clear, we already have a patchwork of different,
you know, insurance rules and rules of the road. So the
question is, can we not add to that particularly with a
technical design? And I think we are seeing States back away
from particularly those aspects of regulation now that NITSA is
showing a lot of activity here.
Mr. Price. So both of you are saying that NITSA is on
track?
Mr. Strickland. Yes. I would say NITSA at this point in
trying to fulfill its leadership role is very much on track,
recognizing the limitations of its being able to fill the space
with a rule. It just does not have the time to do that and the
market is moving so quickly that it is using all of its tools
necessary to fill that leadership role, but it does have
limitations.
Ms. Kalra. I do not know if NITSA is on track. I do not
underestimate the difficulty of the task that NITSA has, but I
do think that there are areas that need serious attention,
again related to how will we know how safe autonomous vehicles
are and how safe should they be.
Mr. Price. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Mr. Valadao.
Mr. Valadao. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate all of you
taking some time to be here today.
In addition to unmanned aircraft systems or drones simply
being a hobby for many Americans, drones have various business
applications in a variety of industries, including agriculture,
which is obviously important to me and my district.
Accordingly, Congress provided more than $20 million over the
requested amount in fiscal year 2017 to further support and
accelerate the safe integration of drones into national air
space, including funds to support continued development of
unmanned traffic management system.
Mr. Wynne, why do you think the unmanned traffic management
system implementation is so important to the long-term success
of the United States drone industry, and in particular, how
will it ensure safety, security, and most importantly for a lot
of us, privacy?
Mr. Wynne. Yes, that is an excellent question, Congressman.
I think that UTM first and foremost needs to be viewed on sort
of an evolutionary basis, that NASA talks in terms of build,
build 1, build 2, build 3, et cetera. And some of the
technologies that are needed to fully implement that system are
being developed as we go. So we are speccing those out.
Ultimately what UTM envisions is the ability to do the most
complex operations in urban areas, in congested airspace. There
is a lot airspace out there that is not being efficiently
utilized, and I think it offers tremendous opportunities for us
to deliver the massive number and increasing number of packages
under 5 pounds, just as an example, taking a very complex
application and moving it forward. And that would take cars off
the road, that would take trucks off the road, that would, you
know, help us alleviate some of the congestion problems we have
just as one of the externalities that are associated with this.
All of these questions of what data is being utilized on
the back end of that are being developed as we speak. I think
the UTM system would allow us, for example, to segregate
certain airspace that drones would naturally just go around.
That will be extremely important from both a privacy and a
security perspective, as well as safety.
Mr. Valadao. So reading even just this morning about a
prison in the U.K., this sky fence that is being built, I mean,
how much is something like this going to play a role into--I do
not know if you guys read this story. I mean, it is something I
guess happens quite a bit where they are always trying to find
ways to smuggle in drugs, cell phones, and things. There are
some examples in the U.K. where they are using drones to drop
them in over the fence lines, and the first place I guess in
the world where they are actually installing a sky fence. It
should be operational soon. And does something like that play a
role in the future of this, especially from the privacy
perspective? And how affordable can something like this
possibly be if you are trying to protect, let us say, your home
or your business from people coming and invading your privacy?
Or even the prison system, where there--I represent a lot of
prisons, too. I mean, is this something that they are looking
into as well?
Mr. Wynne. Absolutely. The community that I have the good
fortune to represent includes tracking, identification, counter
solutions as well. Our foundations are fundamentally in the
military and we have been expanding that into the commercial
sector and into the civil sector. So the concepts that you were
describing, obviously this will not be successful unless we do
all of this flying safely and responsibly. The kinds of things
that you are describing are already against the law. So
anything that we can do to help individuals or organizations
keep their property safe will obviously be brought to bear as
well.
Mr. Valadao. All right. And one more question. Dr. Kalra,
am I saying that right?
Ms. Kalra. Good enough.
Mr. Valadao. Thanks. In your testimony you made the point
that autonomous vehicles could pose a new and serious crash
risk, for example, cyber attacks. Last fall the Department of
Transportation released guidelines for the development of self-
driving cars and made cybersecurity part of the 15 point
assessment for autonomous vehicles.
In your opinion, what role should government regulators
play in keeping self-driving cars from hackers and what more
could manufacturers be doing to secure vehicles against such
threats?
Ms. Kalra. You know, I mean, the issue of cybersecurity in
autonomous vehicles really cannot be understated because these
are large cyber-physical systems that if hacked could cause
serious harm to people and property. The challenge, I think,
and the challenge for the role of government is--I mean, part
of is to create the right incentives, but the incentives are
already there, so I think it is largely a question of best
practices being followed in the industry. I mean, you know,
cybersecurity cannot be sort of shrink-wrapped on top. You
cannot make a car and then be like, oh, let us, you know, tape
it up so no one can get in. It really has to be baked into the
very design of the vehicle because the vehicle is not made by
one manufacturer, it is made by many, many manufacturers. And
so the industry may need to rethink cybersecurity as a supply
chain issue as our vehicles become more connected rather than
icing on the cake.
Mr. Valadao. All right. Well, my time is up. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Ms. Clark, you have a
question?
Ms. Clark. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Price, and thank you to the panelists for being here. It is
really a breathtaking technology and the changes that we are
talking about that comes with many challenges. I cannot even
picture AVs in Massachusetts. And we do a lot of things well,
driving is not one of them, and the challenges you are going to
have with our rotaries and our drives.
But I wanted to talk to you about a challenge that I see
coming with automated driverless cars. And I was looking at
Census Bureau occupational data. Almost 3 percent of all
working Americans are employed as drivers of some sort, truck
drivers, cab drivers, bus drivers. And, in fact, truck driver
is the most common job in 29 of our States. In total, 4.4
million Americans age 16 and over earn their living driving a
vehicle. So just for a comparison, that is more than 36 times
the 121,000 jobs the coal industry has lost since 1985 when
that industry's employment peaked.
So, Mr. Strickland, do you have a sense of how many of
those 4.4 million jobs will be replaced by autonomous vehicles
and what role does the industry have in helping transition
Americans to different employment, and what steps are being
taken?
Mr. Strickland. Well, Ms. Clark, it is an excellent
observation about the potential of disruption. And I do not
need to tell you about the, you know, transitions in history
which have changed employment prospects. This is nothing new
for us. But what we can do is think about this prospectively
and work in partnership with not only the private sector, but
with the government, and sort of think about how we prepare the
possibility of this transition and not knowing the exact scale
of it. I think that is still to be determined.
One thing I just want to note, especially on the commercial
truck driving side of the question, right now we are looking at
about a shortfall of 50,000 drivers. They are constantly
looking and constantly advertising. And one of the issues in
the truck driving industry is that younger people are not
interested in the profession and the current constituents that
are in these professions are getting older. So in some ways
this is a situation where, frankly, some levels of automation
will probably help the industry maintain its productivity.
Second, probably in delivery, I mean, in the commercial
driving industries, because it is not just a federally
regulated concern, it is both State regulations, there is
operator regulations from the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration, there is Hazmat with EPA, and all these other
issues. Just to be blunt, you may not actually be able to have
a fully unmanned truck driving universe just because of the
risks with heavy-duty, over-the-road trucking. So that may be a
situation where automation may assist, but may not necessarily
fully replace.
In the livery situation, however, to be determined on how
it may impact. You may see in taxis in highly urban areas
possibly have the diversity of unmanned transportation being
available, but I think that is incumbent upon us as an industry
and, frankly, the government, State and local, and Federal, to
be able to work and think through these transitions so that we
are prepared for that eventuality.
Ms. Clark. So you said that the scale is sort of hard to
know, but do you think that the timing--I have seen estimates
that the timing really is 5 to 10 years when we are going to
see big impacts. Does that timing sound right to you?
Mr. Strickland. I would say, Ms. Clark, that I do not think
necessarily in terms of a wide-scale deployment that will
actually cause displacement. I do not see that between a 5 to
10-year period. I think what you will probably be seeing is
smaller deployments in more discreet areas. And this is just me
speaking individually, not necessarily for the Coalition. Lots
of our members have sort of different business plans. But I
think when you are talking about rotating the fleet or rotating
livery vehicles of that massive scale, it will take a long time
to have a full replacement that is necessarily, say, a one-to-
one replacement for taxis and black cars for self-driving. So I
think you will probably see some aspects of it in smaller
pieces, but it will be a much longer time before you probably
see the type of job impacts that some people are estimating.
But I do not necessarily think that may be the case.
Ms. Clark. Ms. Kalra, I wondered--I only have a few seconds
left--if you have anything briefly to add on this?
Ms. Kalra. Yes. I would add that what is often not talked
about in the job prospects is that adding access to
transportation, to physical mobility, is often an incredible
driver of economic mobility, and I think that should not be
underestimated. The questions policymakers ask, on the one
hand, while we are going to lose some jobs, how do we make sure
that this technology is used so that people can actually get to
better training, better education, jobs that they otherwise
would not be able to get into so that we can create benefit,
economic and job benefit to the same people that might be
losing their jobs?
Ms. Clark. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Graves.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate the
panelists being here. This is a great discussion. And I think
we can all in this room really appreciate the benefits here of
the mobility and safety and technology and excitement of the
advances that we are discussing.
I have basically two questions, but the first one is I am
curious because I believe this technology, from an autonomous
vehicle perspective, is driven mainly as a result of safety,
safer roads. And I have not really heard any--and I came in a
little bit late--any statistics that might indicate what the
incident statistics might be, autonomous versus nonautonomous,
and where is that going as an industry.
We hear a lot about flaws here and there, but I think we
can all admit that sometimes we are distracted drivers in many
cases. But what are some statistics that we are seeing? And I
do not quite know who to direct the question towards, but if
you could help us with that, incident statistics.
Mr. Strickland. Certainly. I am happy to start off and hand
it over to Nidhi.
As the Federal safety regulator for 4 years, the human
tragedy that I had to deal with on an everyday basis is just
astounding. And nobody really thinks about it because it is one
our top 10 killers of our youngest people. It has been that way
for a very long period of time.
I am the chairman of Mothers Against Drunk Driving. Drunk
driving crashes kill one-third of all traffic fatalities
combined. Distraction, the numbers are not as good. About 3,500
people die because of distracted driving. And the numbers go up
because of speed, because of all these issues we are talking
about. If you eliminate human error, which 94 percent of all
crashes have that element in it, you are going to make a huge
improvement to safety.
In terms of actually having a study of what a self-driving
vehicle does and compare it to a regular driver, we do not have
hard numbers as to, you know, the actual reductions because
that is ultimately going to be a road-user data question. But I
think from what we see from the technology of the vehicles
being able to maintain the driving task, we are sure that we
are going to be able to directly drive down human error
significantly and ultimately we will be able to know those
numbers as we get more testing on-road and we see more limited
deployments.
But the bottom line, sir, is that what we see and the 2
years of increases that we have seen in traffic fatalities is
that our successes in eliminating bad driving behavior through
the behavioral programs, you know, Click It or Ticket or all
the drunk driving programs, they have gotten us to a point, but
we are going to need this next technological evolution for us
to really drive these numbers down to where we are seeing that
maybe some time in the future, 30, 40, 50, 60 years from now,
people are going to be wondering why we lost so many people to
traffic crashes in the first place.
Ms. Kalra. I, too, am optimistic about the safety benefits,
perhaps not quite as optimistic, though. Let me say two things.
One is I caution about the use of the 94 percent statistic
on human errors because often that is looking at the last line
of defense before a crash occurs, and there are many things
that lead to a crash. So, I absolutely agree that, you know,
drunk driving, these kinds of obvious human errors, autonomous
vehicles will never make those mistakes.
We have to ask ourselves what new mistakes would they make?
Basically, the fact that humans kind of stink at driving does
not mean that a machine necessarily will be better. So, I
caution about inferring that we are going to get rid of 94
percent of crashes.
The second part is about statistics. The challenge is that
although we have so many tragedies, so many fatalities on our
roadways, we also drive an enormous amount. Americans drive 3
trillion miles a year, and that translates to, I am going to
loosely approximate, 1 fatality per 100 million miles driven.
What that means is, for example, say you had a 20 percent
improvement in your fatality rate with autonomous vehicles, so
they only have 0.8 fatalities per 100 million miles. To prove
that with statistical confidence would require driving 5
billion miles, which is like going to Neptune and back and back
again. That is way too many miles to drive with a test fleet
where you have trained drivers behind the wheel. It is not
going to happen. It would take hundreds of years.
The thing is, once we get people on the road that is going
to be easy because Americans drive 8 billion miles every single
day. So, that is the conundrum: how do we determine the safety
of the vehicles before we let our friends and our families in
them? And I do not have an answer to that, and I think that is
an urgent question.
Mr. Graves. Thank you. I have just a few seconds, but from
what I hear the purpose of this clearly should be safety. And
what I hear is that even where technology is today, there is an
indication that it is possible that autonomous vehicles can
provide additional safety measures and prevent incident. We
just do not know quite what the number might be.
What I would be interested in in the future, Mr. Chairman,
is how do insurance companies factor all of this in, and would
my rates go down if I had an autonomous vehicle versus my own
personal driving? And that might indicate where the safety
measures are. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Aguilar.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Ranking Member.
Dr. Kalra, if we could continue down this safety path
discussion with you and Mr. Strickland for a moment. You just
said from a recommendation standpoint we just do not know
enough yet. So, when will we know enough from a deployment
perspective of whether a fleet of, let us just say autonomous
ride-share vehicles, you know, when they will be safe enough to
be deployed? And what recommendations from a policy perspective
do you think we should consider?
Ms. Kalra. I think the reality is we will not know before
the public starts--I think given the state of methods we have
for testing, we may not know with the certainty we would like
how safe these technologies are. We do not have a crash-test
dummy or fuel economy testing standards. We do not have the
analogy for this space.
What that means to me is that we would want to deploy the
technology in ways that manage the risk even if we cannot
quantify it. So, deploying it in favorable conditions, in well-
designed environments with an informed public, informed
participants, and doing our very best to make sure that there
are things being done in the vehicle and outside the vehicle
that address these risks.
For example, having vehicles that drive at lower speeds or
only in certain conditions where everyone is required to buckle
up inside; they have the highest internal and external safety
technologies. I think these are methods of managing the risk
until we better understand what it is.
Mr. Aguilar. Mr. Strickland, if we can pick up on this, and
let me add a component to it. I think from the folks that you
represent they are going to be a little bit more potentially
vertically integrated, right? So, they are going to be some of
the manufacturers as well that can control more things. So,
when we talk about the cyber risks that Mr. Valadao brought up,
which are very real, it is a little easier when you are
vertically integrated if they are designing, they are building,
they are doing all this, they are not buying something else and
then putting autonomous technology into it; they are developing
it themselves and then building it from scratch.
So, can you talk about the safety component from that lens
of kind of vertical integration, as well as when we know a
fleet could be ready?
Mr. Strickland. Certainly, sir. Safety by design,
especially in cybersecurity, and, frankly, all of the vehicle
systems is a must. You can never think about safety after the
fact because, as Ms. Kalra made note, it is an unsuccessful
pathway. And if you are thinking about vehicle automation
specifically or just cars in general, being a Six Sigma
engineering prospect, making sure that you are 99.999 percent
sure that the vehicle or the component is going to operate
within its tolerances as it is designed is essential.
The ease in terms of whether you have a company that is
better integrated to do that or not is, frankly, to be blunt,
not the important issue. The issue is to create the signal for
all players on the marketplace that you have to comport and
have safety by design. Now, there are going to be some
combination of companies that can do that better because of its
organization, but that should not be the driver of how you do
it.
But to circle back to when we are going to know when the
cars are going to be safe enough to be used within some scales,
I think a number of issues that Ms. Kalra brought up are very
important. But I also want to contrast to the fact of how we
think about design and test new systems on vehicles today,
things like adaptive cruise control, I think the Ranking Member
says he has on his vehicle, or Crash Imminent Braking systems
or Electronic Stability Control. There was no special construct
or limited environment for any of these technologies as they
were deployed, and they were very, very important.
Now, what you had was two things. You had manufacturers and
component designers that, frankly, looked at their own
particular risks in terms of deploying new technologies for
possible commercial deployment, which is a huge limiter on how
much risks are being taken. That is number one. Number two, you
have NHTSA, which uses its defect authority, which is whether
or not something on the vehicle poses an unreasonable risk to
safety.
The combination of these two things have allowed for us to
have numerous vehicle innovations without there having to be
any new Federal motor vehicle safety standard established
beforehand. I do not think that we need to think about self-
driving vehicles. There are some different variances because we
are talking about full control of the vehicle.
But we should not stray away from the native way that we
have done this for, frankly, over 50 years in vehicle design.
And I think that it has proven to be very successful and that
we have gotten these things that are life-saving on the road.
For example, Electronic Stability Control was invented by
Mercedes in 1990. That technology now deployed throughout the
fleet and mandated in 2012 saves tens of thousands of lives a
year. That is what we are so concerned about. If we slow this
technology down, we lose the opportunity to save lives.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for putting
on this hearing.
Dr. Kalra, a small business in my district, Royal Truck and
Equipment, has developed the world's first autonomous truck-
mounted attenuator, or ATMA. You see them on the backs of
trucks, if an errant vehicle crashes into it, so not to hurt
the construction workers. You see them in the work zones, they
are placed in the construction zone to absorb the impact of
that errant vehicle.
Currently, these vehicles must have a driver who is
understandably placed in a dangerous situation. By developing
an autonomous version of this vehicle the driver can be taken
out of harm's way. The technology is being tested in London. It
will be tested next month for use in Colorado by their DOT.
Given the dangerous environment that these TMA truck
drivers operate in, it seems to me that making such operations
autonomous could help save lives while still performing the
important tasks that those trucks carry out for construction
crews. Would you agree with that? And if so, what do you see
are the biggest impediments toward further exploring and
implementing such technologies?
You have seen them on the backs of trucks, you have seen
them on highways, they make them in my district. But they want
to have an autonomous vehicle because the guy who is driving
that truck obviously is there to take the impact of the errant
vehicle. It seems like this technology might make sense. But
you see them on the roads.
Ms. Kalra. I hope you will forgive me, but I am simply not
familiar enough with either the problem or the solution that is
being proposed to have an informed opinion. So, anyone else.
Mr. Dent. Okay. Maybe Mr. Strickland or somebody who is
familiar with it.
Mr. Strickland. I am familiar with it, but just basically
as an adjunct to improve crash protection on commercial heavy-
duty trucks. I think the bottom line being for the entire
heavy-duty and medium-duty fleet any technology that, frankly,
helps reduce this driver error issue, number one, but also,
frankly, makes it more protective for others when you are in
the eventuality of a crash is always a good thing.
And, you know, there are a number of technologies that are,
frankly, being put on the trucks now, such as Electronic
Stability Control for heavy-duty systems, things of that
nature. So, yes, I am familiar with it and, yes, it would be an
improvement.
Mr. Dent. I have been seeing these demonstrations. I see
them on the highways and I thought, well, this would be great.
You put a driver in one of those trucks, and to take the
impact, well, that would be a great use for a driverless
vehicle. So, okay. Well, thanks. Maybe we will follow up with
you on that.
Professor Kochenderfer, I am supportive of the UAS Traffic
Management, UTM, work being carried out by NASA and the FAA,
and I would like to see how those initiatives move forward in a
manner that allows for the safe, efficient integration of the
UAS as soon as possible. The recently enacted fiscal year 2017
Appropriations bill provided additional funds for NASA's UTM
efforts to help ensure the safe integration of UAS into the
national airspace system.
Looking at our current work on fiscal year 2018, do you
feel that a continued emphasis on promoting UTM will help to
fulfill the goals of establishing a system that safely manages
diverse UAS operations in the airspace in both suburban and
urban areas in a timely manner?
Mr. Kochenderfer. Yes, it is definitely helpful. As you
know, there are a number of challenges that need to be
addressed in the near term, and those dollars will be extremely
helpful in addressing things like communication and data
challenges. It will be important in hiring the right people
with the right areas of expertise. It will help in terms of
transitioning the UTM to a deployable system.
I think another priority is continuing with these pilot
programs. As I mentioned before, this needs to be an
incremental process, and this will be another important area of
research over the next few years.
Mr. Dent. If I could follow up, I understand there are many
individuals, both in the government and the general public, who
would view UAS more as a threat to public safety than as an
innovative technology to generate positive change.
What are some of the most effective initiatives that the
UAS industry has undertaken to help alleviate some of those
concerns, and how can Congress help to facilitate further
collaboration and cooperation between the FAA, NASA, and UAS
industry and other Federal agencies, like DHS and FBI?
Mr. Wynne. Actually, in those conversations, very
immediately we have a meeting on Monday to discuss this as well
with many of the key law enforcement agencies.
I think a simple example, sir, is right now, most of the
drones are flying somewhat anonymously, as it were. We need
remote identification technologies, and our organization put
out a call for papers on that on behalf of the FAA, and we got
almost 50 papers back from some very sophisticated
organizations inside of 2 weeks.
This technology needed to be developed. It is in the
concept of operations for UTM. We just moved it up very, very
quickly, and are working on that, and we are doing that with
DHS, with members of the Department of Defense, et cetera, and
with the Department of Justice.
Again, industry collaboration while we are bringing the
solutions to the table.
Mr. Dent. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for being
here today. Mr. Strickland, I would like to ask you, since you
have some expertise in NHTSA, being familiar with the research
centers the agency utilizes, including the Transportation
Research Center in Ohio, what role have these sites played in
helping develop HAV technologies, and how can Congress assist
these centers to expedite the deployment of HAVs onto our
roadways?
Mr. Strickland. Well, you gave me a moment to brag about my
old staff. They really are some of the best and brightest in
the world in terms of automotive research and especially in the
safety space.
The TRC in East Liberty, Ohio, is a fantastic facility, but
I believe they would be helpful in deployment if they had more
resources to address a number of these issues, specifically
their ability for simulation training--simulation testing, I
should say.
I think also their work in battery research would be very
essential because there seems to be a strong nexus with having
automated vehicles have a high level of electrification, but it
is not necessarily individually set. You could have a regular
internal combustion engine and the car would also be an AV.
I think an important aspect of resources is, frankly, of
all the not sexy things, is the Counsel's Office. They are a
fantastic group of lawyers, but, frankly, thinking about the
evaluation of exceptions, a number of these other issues that
are going to be coming to the office making decisions about
testing, they need more resources there to help expedite these
requests across a variety of things, but specifically for
automated vehicles. Being able to get these decisions out
quicker would help get thoughtful decisions being made and get
these vehicles deployed quicker.
Mr. Joyce. You may not be aware, but the State of Ohio has
also recently put money into that center.
Mr. Strickland. I know very well.
Mr. Joyce. Since the time you left. We would like to
continue to see some of the testing done there, and any
expertise you could lend to that would be quite helpful.
Mr. Strickland. Mr. Joyce, I would be happy to help in any
way I can.
Mr. Joyce. Great. Thank you very much. Nothing further, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Joyce never misses an opportunity to
push for Ohio. Mr. Young.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This issue goes out to
anybody who wants to try to dive into it. I have asked my
colleagues to think about this as well. As we are talking about
within Congress, infrastructure and making some serious
investments in our infrastructure, roads and bridges, should we
be looking at roads and bridges in traditional transportation
systems in a new way when we are looking at unmanned and
autonomous vehicles?
If we are entering that new age and new dawn of mobility in
traveling and delivery, what considerations or applications
should we take into account when we are making those serious
investments to ensure that this new age of transportation is
fluid, it fits, it is functional, it is safe?
Does it run parallel with sensor towers, some kind of grid
relay system, new materials in the roadways, or what I believe
to be traditional roadways, some kind of positioning system?
What should we be looking into as we go forward with this
infrastructure bill? What considerations would you be wanting
to see possibly included as we dip our toe into this new world
here?
Mr. Strickland. Mr. Young, I am just going to make a
general statement about vehicle safety, which would include
AVs. Better infrastructure helps everyone. Better road design
helps everyone.
For automated vehicles, once again, I am going to go into
the realm of unsexy and talk about more resources for Counsel's
Office at NITSA, the real fantastic unsexy for road work,
better line paint. That would be a huge, huge deal for
automated vehicles.
The bottom line being the manufacturers are building a
vehicle for the road environment today. They are not building
vehicles anticipating needed road improvements in the future.
Frankly, the most rudimentary improvements to road safety and
road building would, frankly, benefit not only AVs, but it
would benefit all drivers.
The one thing I would suggest, it is not necessary, but
thinking for road efficiency in the future, better
communication between the road and vehicles in the future has
shown huge benefits, and in this work that was done by the
Department of Transportation and my old agency.
It would be beneficial, not necessarily for automated
vehicles, but I think making those investments and having the
infrastructure communicate to vehicles and being able to
collect data for a better understanding of congestion and how
to mitigate it, I think benefits us all.
Mr. Young. That is the point I kind of wanted to dive into,
having the infrastructure communicate to vehicles, and what is
needed to do that. I do not know.
Mr. Strickland. Mr. Young, I am happy to get back to you on
that. There are a number of things that could be done, all the
way to right now the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration has a pending proposed rule for having DSRC,
dedicated short-range communications, chipsets being placed in
every vehicle, so that vehicles can communicate with each other
transmitting safety messages. Somebody has run a light, you
should slow down, all these other types of things, ultimately
tying the infrastructure being able to communicate with
vehicles so you can let road users know of changes for
congestion, being warned about hazards, being able to pre-plan
or even providing a benefit.
You are driving home late at night and there is no oncoming
traffic, and you are sitting at a red light and nobody is
coming. You could actually have the vehicle being communicated
to by the road saying, well, since there is nobody coming, we
are going to automatically change the degree so you can keep
moving.
There are a variety of things that the Department is
working on, and I could circle back on some of the things that
we know internally, but certainly connect you to the folks at
NITSA as well that can give you a longer explanation than that.
Mr. Young. Thank you.
Ms. Kalra. If I could add just briefly, I completely agree
with David that basic stuff, lane stripes, better signage,
these things will improve safety for absolutely everyone.
I think it is too soon to begin investing in vehicle-to-
infrastructure communication on a large scale because if it is
going to take, let us say, 10 years for there to be widespread
vehicle-to-infrastructure communication, in 10 years, so much
happens in the communication industry, if we think back 10
years ago, we were on like 2Gs or something. Even now there is
a debate about whether DSRC is correct or 5G or something else.
It may be, in my view, premature for the public sector to
make massive investments in vehicle to infrastructure
communication, but to monitor and know this may be something
that is needed in the future, I think, would be the right move
at this time.
Mr. Young. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Mr. Wynne, a couple of things.
I can envision, and that is why today has been so interesting,
we are potentially looking at a different world, and not in 50
years, but in relatively short order.
Does the FAA have the right level of engagement with the
industry to ensure that this is a public-private partnership,
for example? Is the organizational structure appropriate at the
FAA for the task of integrating UASs?
Mr. Wynne. I think so. They have been evolving very, very
quickly. As you know, the UAS Integration Office only became a
line of business at the end of last year, I think. They have
been building that process, and now they are getting properly
funded.
It is difficult, even the question Mr. Young asked about,
how do you future proof? UTM, in some respects, is a future
infrastructure that we are building, but we are building it a
piece at a time, as it were, very rapidly. We are reiterating
very, very rapidly.
There is a vision now for how do we do that, and I would
say if the FAA was not able to keep up with that, we would be
in a lot of trouble. And for a while, I think that was the
case, but I think they have now gotten caught up, and now they
are trying to get ready for that future.
Just to add an interesting part between these two, the
automated vehicles on the ground and the automated vehicles in
the sky, as it were, we have Uber Elevate, which had a meeting
3 weeks ago in Dallas, where they had some of the stalwarts of
both the electric vehicle community as well as the aviation
community coming together to develop this ``Jetsons'' vision,
as it were, of people being able to dial up a device on their
phone that they would be able to get into and fly from one
place to another. As a 25-year pilot, that got my attention.
That, I think, is going to continue to push this envelope,
but there again, good representatives from the FAA, Wes Ryan
from the Small Airplane Directorate was there, they are paying
attention. They are looking for how do we support this into the
future?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Wynne, again, we tend to think of the
FAA as air traffic, big airplanes, small airplanes, going from
one airport to another. We are now potentially looking at
something totally different. We are looking at, in essence,
airspace, not only being in the corridors we are used to, but,
frankly, over urban areas and over rural areas.
Do you think the FAA is the right setup to deal with all
that?
Mr. Wynne. Well, again, it is difficult to future proof.
What I have seen from the FAA, Mr. Chairman, is not only are
they bringing some of the highest, the best talent into the
Unmanned Office, but I think they are reaching into every
element of every department, every office of the FAA, and it is
a very, very large organization, as you know, with many
different tasks and many different responsibilities. So I think
there has been a serious effort from the top down to develop
collaboration with industry and to communicate throughout the
organization and pull resources and quality thinking from all
elements of the agency. By no means have we figured it all out
yet.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. The concept, for example, of segregating,
one of the main aspects, this is now totally different and
separate from the FAA. Separate from parts of the FAA, just
from what I have heard today, it would seem to me that would be
kind of just the opposite of what we want to hear.
I keep hearing you all talk about integration and
communication as opposed to just the opposite. Am I wrong
there?
Mr. Wynne. It is an excellent point. I view it as we have
been working on the air side, we have been working for
accommodations in the airspace. Eventually, that will start to
become integration into the airspace, and then ultimately the
evolutionary part is, is that interoperable with the ATC?
Air traffic controllers are not standing still either. They
are in the process of moving forward with NextGen. How do those
things move in parallel? These are very, very active
discussions right now between the industry and the regulators.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Mr. Price?
Mr. Price. We will just continue in this vein because we
are dealing with a mind-bending reality here. I do not know how
far along we are toward the day when human-piloted flights are
a minority of air traffic, but we are surely going to get
there. Is that correct? And that would seem to have profound
implications for how we do air traffic control, the kind of
areas we are covering with what kind of technology, what kind
of techniques, and also the human factors involved here, major
adaptation, retraining required for pilots, controllers.
So, let me just bring it back to the previous line of
discussion with the account--the rather optimistic account, I
would say both of you were giving--about the UTM development
thus far. I think, Professor, you talked about the baby steps
that have been taken, but you described it, basically, an
incremental process that you felt was on track. Can you say
more about that and about--this cannot be incremental forever.
There will be points at which we are doing what, certainly,
would now look like radical changes in the way we manage air
traffic, airspace, the kind of personnel we deploy, with what
kinds of training, and, for that matter, the implications for
pilots as well, the human beings who are now operating in the
airspace.
So, I am basically just giving an opportunity to talk
further about this UTM process. Any kind of counsel you have as
we go forward as to what that should look like?
Mr. Kochenderfer. Yes. So, actually, in preparation for
this hearing, I spoke with a number of members of industry--
from FAA, from NASA--and one of the themes that emerged in
these discussions is that the FAA will, just due to scalability
issues, mean to delegate some of their authority for
certification. You also see this inherent in NASA's prototype
and vision of UTM with these UAS service suppliers, which would
be run by industry members, but, of course, with oversight and
so forth by FAA.
Mr. Price. All right. That does elaborate. It is not
terribly conclusive in terms of the specifics we might be
looking for as we oversee this process and evaluate it.
Mr. Wynne, you have anything to add?
Mr. Wynne. Well, I would start with where we are. Where we
are today is the FAA has provided us with rules that allow us
to fly with very little risk in the airspace that already
improve safety on the ground; that improve our ability,
actually, to look at bridges and do bridge inspections when we
get around to addressing the infrastructure challenges that are
before us. And there have been some great examples of using a
drone to survey a bridge and decide we do not need to spend $20
million on rebuilding that bridge, we just need to handle these
particular parts of the roadway that are deficient for a much
less amount of money.
I say nothing of the people who no longer have to hang from
harnesses doing that bridge inspection and other kinds of
vertical infrastructure where, essentially, we are providing
people with tools that allow them to do things more safely. To
get to more complex operations, we need to work collaboratively
with NASA, with the FAA, and build these things in such a way
that in stark contrast to the carnage on the ground, we have
extremely high safety rates in the air and we need to maintain
those. Clearly, we want to use unmanned systems and automated
technologies to improve the safety record on the ground as
well; and, I think, the part that is fascinating to me is that,
ultimately, some of these technologies, like near-field
collision technologies or collision avoidance technologies,
will scale across these domains. So, there is a lot of learning
that will be gained from efforts on both sides of this
equation.
Mr. Price. Thank you. My time has expired. Let me just
flag, though, for future reference, a related question that if
you have thoughts you might supply to the committee, and that
has to do with the implications of all of this for the NextGen
program. We know that it is integrated; we know that it is
implicated. As you well know, the NextGen program is under
intense scrutiny from both the appropriators and authorizers up
here, so this, for me, and I think for other members, is a
relevant issue. Is this being adequately addressed amid the
myriad of other issues that are on the table?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have one question
for Mr. Wynne. As this hearing has demonstrated, the committee
holds a great deal of interest in supporting efforts that will
allow the United States to gain and maintain a lead in the
research, development, and the eventual integration of UAS.
This sentiment is shared by a number of our colleagues on the
authorizing side in the Transportation and Infrastructure and
also on the Science, Space, and Technology Committees. In light
of such broad congressional support for these efforts, do you
feel that UAS issues in the FAA's UAS integration office are
receiving sufficient attention and support from within the FAA?
Mr. Wynne. I do. I do, sir, and I appreciate the question.
And, yes, there has been phenomenal support here on Capitol
Hill, and we are grateful for that and I think with good
reason. I think the challenge, of course, is the FAA has an
extremely important job to do. This is adding to their burden
as well. And as you point out, we need to stay along, in
addition to just addressing the potential safety issues if we
do not regulate properly--and industry and government are
working to make sure that we get those regulations done
properly--we will miss a trick or two as an economy if we do
not take advantage of this technology. So, I think, it is worth
leaning in, and I appreciate, again, the leadership of this
committee in investing in this particular technology and all
unmanned system technologies.
Mr. Dent. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Ms. Clark.
Ms. Clark. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Wynne, this drone
technology really has the potential to revolutionize the way we
move goods, maybe even in our ``Jetson''-like fashion move
people someday. But since coming to Congress, I have worked a
lot on technologies and their unintended consequences: the
cellphone app that allows an abuser to secretly track their
victim; the Twitter game that allowed people to own social
media profiles of people that then became a target of
harassment; the webcam that can be appropriated remotely by
someone else. None of these technologies was invented for
nefarious purposes and yet that is what the result was. And I
loved the imagery that you used, that you cannot think about
privacy and law enforcement afterwards and sort of shrink-wrap
it around a product.
So, I am hoping you can share with me what the industry is
looking at as far as taking steps to address and work with law
enforcement in the development of this technology before its
widespread adoption. And, specifically, do you see a need to be
developed to identify the operator of a drone that is used for
criminal purpose? Are you thinking about putting those sorts of
protections in?
Mr. Wynne. Indeed. I think you have put your finger on an
extremely important thing. For me, personally, over the last, I
think, 8 months, this has been one of my top priorities. Law
enforcement, public safety officials, generally, really wants
to benefit from this technology. They see tremendous benefits
from this technology to do things as simple as an accident
investigation on a busy highway or fire fighters, or search and
rescue, et cetera.
So, the law enforcement community is a great partner for
the industry, and we are working with them very, very closely
to figure out what are the standards that need to be done, and
how do we help them do their jobs, not just with the
technology, but in enforcing the laws that might be violated
with the technology.
Ms. Clark. Right.
Mr. Wynne. And let us be clear, most of the laws pertain to
this technology whether it is specific to this technology or
not. So, all laws pertaining to privacy also pertain to drones.
You cannot use a drone any more than you can use a telescope
to, you know, to spy on someone. So, I think that is really
important.
A specific example, tomorrow I will be up working with the
folks that are in charge of law enforcement or safety at the
Tappan Zee Bridge project in New York. They are using drones to
build that, to do that multibillion dollar construction
project. Very, very important that they be able to do that for
safety reasons and for efficiency. But they need to be able
to--the law enforcement need to know that those are authorized
drones.
Ms. Clark. Right.
Mr. Wynne. So, I am not a fan anymore of no-drone zones
because we use drones in many different places. But I am a big
fan, increasingly, of authorized drones only. And so, that begs
the question that you are raising, how do we remotely identify
the people that are flying that? I leaned in on the
registration process. I personally supported that with former
Secretary Foxx when he gave the administrator of the FAA the
task to get that done inside of about 2 months before Christmas
of 2016, and we did it. The FAA did it with the collaboration
of industry. Now we need to take the next step of how do we
remotely identify--and, once again, industry is leaning in here
to provide those technologies.
Ms. Clark. That is great. I wondered, specifically, we have
Federal law right now that criminalizes video voyeurism only
within special jurisdictions in the United States where State
laws do not apply: national parks, Federal government
buildings. Do you believe we should extend similar
technologically-neutral criminal statutes to the rest of the
United States in anticipation of more widespread drones?
Mr. Wynne. I am not familiar with that, ma'am, so, I would
not be able to take a position on that, but I would be happy to
provide an answer for the record.
Ms. Clark. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Young.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Public transit--and we
have been kind of talking a lot in our minds thinking about
personal use of these autonomous vehicles in deliveries--you
know, commercial applications--but public transportation, are
you engaging at all with any transit authorities? I know that
Des Moines, which is in my district, the regional transit
authority is really excited about trying to get engaged on this
to do some kind of pilot project and is working with the
Department of Transportation on this. How do you see this
fitting into the public transportation?
Mr. Strickland. Oh, Mr. Young, once again, I have an
interesting intersection in my career.
Mr. Young. Do tell, David.
Mr. Strickland. I know. I am one of the Federal voting
members for WABATA. So, in addition to--so I think about this
personally a lot, but, frankly, I think that the self-driving
industry, in addition to thinking about the way that self-
driving can help support the disabled and the elderly, which is
a hugely underserved community which relies upon public
transit, it is the opportunity for automated vehicles, and a
variety of types, too, frankly, to be an extension of public
transit and help support it. So, I think, as for having last-
mile solutions as being part of it, being able to have the 36
million people that are disabled, and the 20 million of them
that are of working age, being able to have solutions that are
more tailored in order to be able to get to public transit
pipelines.
So, yes, I think there are a lot of folks that are thinking
about this individually, and I know that I have had a number of
conversations through APTA and others about how we better work
together. But I think you are right. I think, once again, as I
think that both of us stated earlier, this is the opportunity
to think ahead so that we build a system that is thoughtfully
integrated so that we can have automated driving help support
public transit and increase those efficiencies.
Mr. Young. And do you view this in the context, and
differently, I would imagine, in between rural transportation
needs and urban transportation needs as well? Because I have a
very rural district in some areas, and there are some unique
transportation needs that are needed there in public transit.
Mr. Strickland. That is absolutely right. I think that is a
reason why thinking about, again, last-mile issues. I think,
especially in rural communities, that is a big issue, making
public transportation more efficient. One of the keys to it is
because the configuration of rural communities, it is really
tough to be able to get those efficiencies of scale. Automation
could help build those efficiencies because you can have last-
mile solutions to get to the main trunks for bus lines, and et
cetera.
So, I think you are absolutely right, Mr. Young, in
thinking about this prospectively that this is not just simply
an urban solution. I think that automation could be supportive
of public transportation in a variety of aspects in our
communities across the country and I think it is a real
opportunity for all of us.
Mr. Young. Mm-hmm, and then you just mentioned on your own,
and I was going to touch on this, that the opportunities that
this can bring for our folks with disabilities and who are kind
of homebound sometimes and not able to get out to where they
need to be sometimes. Are you taking into account working with
the disability community to make sure that there is access, and
that there is safety, you know, and confidence in that system,
too, to allow them to participate in this as well?
Mr. Strickland. Mr. Young, actually we have a number of
partners in our coalition that represent folks that are
disabled. But, more specifically, and Ms. Kara mentioned this
earlier, is that--you know, one of the things when you think
about economic opportunity, the one thing that automated
vehicles, self-driving could do is those 20 million folks that
are disabled that have the capability to work, but may not have
the possibility to do so because of their transportation
choices, one of the great things that we can look at is having
those people being involved in the economy, being able to work
because we have solutions for them.
So, the short answer is, yes, we are working very hard with
those communities and thinking about making sure vehicles that
are being designed in the beginning to support people that are
disabled, not thinking about retrofitting vehicles that are
already in assistance, which is very expensive for those
communities, which I know that you are aware of.
Mr. Young. Well, thank you for engaging with them because
there is a lot of opportunity there in the folks with
disabilities, and then just making sure that there is
confidence with that community and those people because, you
know, something new like this, you know, you think about
vulnerabilities in these systems, and anything that you can do
to just really keep that pipeline open in communication, and
alleviate and bring confidence to that system for them, it will
be awesome. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Young.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Those 20 seconds that you have, if I may
take them.
Mr. Young. Take them, 18, 17.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. You know, some of these projects that we
fund are 20 years out; massive transit projects. Are we
funding, in essence, the equivalent of the horse and buggy as
opposed to is there a possibility that some of what you all are
looking at could replace those large systems?
Mr. Strickland. I do not think you are talking about horse
and buggy. I think you are thinking about spoke and wheel. I
think that, frankly, public transportation is still necessary
in a centerpiece, but I think what you really think about in
terms of automation is how we can make those transit systems
more efficient and thinking about, as I said to Mr. Young, how
do we have an efficient usage of last-mile solutions? And I
think that is where automation comes in.
Mr. Aguilar. Mr. Chairman, do you need any more time? Okay.
For Mr. Wynne and Mr. Kochenderfer, Mr. Wynne first, you talked
about the registry. We know the importance of training and
educational play in the UAS system. The educational component
requires for the registry only an acknowledgment of bullets of
safety guidance. I understand that there are six UAS test sites
throughout the United States meant to collect data to help
inform decisions on how to integrate the systems. What role do
these test sites provide in developing educational programming
for operators? Additionally, is industry playing a role in the
development of training for the UAS operators and, if so, how?
Are there ways that we can work better with FAA and the
industry to help on the training and education side?
Mr. Wynne. Yeah, that is a very big topic right now. AUVSI
recently launched a Remote Pilots Council since the advent of
part 107, we now have certificated operators under part 107 and
we have just finished I call it a whistle stop tour, where we
had nine meetings around the country gathering those folks
together in a room with the FAA in many instances. Actually, in
all instances, we had an FAA representative talking about what
they saw as the needs from a training perspective to make
certain that remote pilots maintain the highest levels of
airmanship and standards of operations.
So we are in the process of figuring out what that is going
to require and backing up to how do we at least get an
alignment on that, because I think that is one more thing that
industry can do that we do not necessarily need to burden the
FAA with today. As far as everyone else that is flying out
there, the people that are not necessarily commercial
operators, which requires a part 107 certificate, hobbyists as
it were, AUVSI has been pressing forward with the Academy of
Model Aeronautics and the FAA and a hundred now plus supporters
with our Know Before You Fly campaign, which is information
that is increasingly right in the boxes for a device. So if you
walk into an electronics store and walk out with a drone to
fly, and we love people doing that, you know, people love
things that fly. They have the information at the ready hand to
know, you know, how to get the information, the latest app, et
cetera, to know am I flying in the right place, am I flying
responsibly.
Mr. Kochenderfer. Yes, so I would have to applaud the
efforts of AUVSI and AMA and FAA on the Know Before You Fly
program and the success in the registration. So you mentioned
that they only had to demonstrate knowledge in a limited area.
But keeping that test simple for the hobbyists, I think, was
critical in the success of the registration. So the required
registration started February 2016 and then by June 495,000
registered. And if you increase the burden of that training, I
think that would decrease the registration. But, of course, you
do, for the commercial operators under 107, they do need to
take a much more comprehensive FAA exam. And I feel that is
appropriate.
Mr. Aguilar. And the test sites discussion, are we doing
enough?
Mr. Wynne. Yes, the test sites I think are extremely
important and one that I am aware of, for example, one of the
largest broadcasting organizations in the country, Sinclair,
does all of the training of their pilots to capture news at one
of the test sites. So that is an easy, that is one of many
examples of how the test sites are being used. Probably more
appropriately, the test sites are set up to do more advanced
things and collect data on flying beyond visual line of sight
and such, things that we are trying to prove out with more
complex operations with additional risks.
Mr. Aguilar. Thanks, I will yield back, Mr. Chairman, give
you some more time.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. I think we can do one more
round, if that is all right and you all are willing. Thank you.
Obviously, we have a lot of interest in this committee. Ms.
Kalra, and kind of what I was asking before is, this
subcommittee allocates funds for projects that not only take
years to build, but are supposed to be there for decades and
decades. And so, looking ahead, how disruptive potentially is
the AV technology going to be? When should the transportation
planners start factoring in this disruption or this addition,
whatever you want to call it, for these large-scale, expensive,
long-term projects?
Ms. Kalra. You know, it would not be an overstatement to
say that it will be as disruptive as the automobile was for the
horse and buggy. But similarly, it is also as uncertain. I do
not think anyone who is riding around in their buggy could say,
oh, the car is coming, here is what it is going to look like in
50 years. So it is extremely important for transportation
planners to think now about the changes that are coming. But
that is extremely difficult to do because there is deep
uncertainty about what those changes will mean. And so I think
attention needs to be paid to identify investments, investments
that are vulnerable to making no sense in a particular future
or that cannot be repurposed, readapted, you know, the designs
are fixed.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, for example, let us look at
something like hard rail, you know, rail?
Ms. Kalra. Yes.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Which is exceedingly expensive, it is
inflexible, you know. Is that something that we should now be
looking at? Are there different alternatives? Should it be an
alternative that can later be transferred over to, unmanned
vehicles, I mean that kind of thing?
Ms. Kalra. Rail has, you know, but rail also has enormous
advantages. And so the question needs to become is a particular
project vulnerable to changes, and I do not think there can be
wholesale dismissal, I think this is important. But certainly
to say okay, we are going to, even if we think of light rail,
we are going to build an extension from point A to point B, to
think does that make sense in the future that may have people
with better last-mile connectivity, it may become even more
important actually in a world where there is last-mile
connectivity. So the question I do not see as being asked
enough because it is a difficult question to answer, but I
think it needs to be asked now.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yes, sir?
Mr. Strickland. Mr. Chairman, I will say the one thing that
I think is a certainty is that we will always be capacity
constrained on the ground. You cannot build your way out of a
congestion problem. The more roads you build, the more capacity
you build, the more people use it. So ultimately transit and
rail are always going to be important components of, frankly,
our transportation system. I think that Ms. Kalra made a
fantastic point is really sort of looking at the individualized
project level about whether or not that particular investment
in this specific macro point works. But I do think that in
general, the specific continued investment in transit, frankly,
it future proofs us for a number of things, not only
congestion, but who knows what the cost of fuel is going to be
in the future, and all those other types of things which we,
frankly, face every single day.
And I think automation has a real opportunity, if done
right to help public transit. But I do not think that this is
an offset to transit or an offset to rail. We just have to be
much smarter about where we invest it and how.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me talk a little about how it has been
on the forefront of helping consumers make decisions right,
better, and whether it is things like seatbelts. So, I do not
know who wants to deal with this or what we should be doing to
make sure that drivers understand what their cars either do,
and the technology that is already here and that is already
coming and, more importantly, maybe what they do not do. And
are there opportunities for NHTSA to educate consumers through
traditional awareness campaigns or product reviews? Anybody
looked at that and thought about that?
Mr. Strickland. I have thought about this for a long time,
and when I was administrator and even post my service. The
issue of consumer education is not only a governmental
function. Frankly, it has to be fully participatory of
everybody in the industry, especially when you are talking
about those that are at points of sale, the folks that are
selling you the car. Right now, I will just be blunt because I
purchased a new car recently. Most dealerships do a very poor
job in describing active safety technologies that are on the
road today because they do not understand them. It is not
something that is visible, too, because it is usually--it
intervenes when you are about to have a crash, so nobody really
sees it. There are some manufacturers that work very hard and
try to get their dealerships trained up.
I think the New Car Assessment Program has been a wild
success in incentivizing manufacturers to raise the bar of
safety, which ultimately they go and try to sell and educate
the consumers. I think thinking about a more robust effort as
part of the new car assessment in the future to help teach
people about if you have an automated vehicle, what it can and
cannot do. But I think it is incumbent upon, frankly, the
private sector and those at points of sale, and then continuing
efforts to make sure people truly understand what environments
this vehicle can and cannot operate in.
Ms. Kalra. I completely agree, but I will.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. My time is up.
Ms. Kalra. Oh, I am sorry.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. But it is good to be chairman. Go ahead.
No, please, please proceed.
Ms. Kalra. I think that is absolutely right and the one
thing we want to avoid is using engineering terminology to
communicate to the public. And we have adaptive cruise control,
smart cruise, there is a million ways, and consumers are
confused. And I think that is a role for NHTSA to play.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Price, thank you.
Mr. Price. Well, these last exchanges have opened up a
really important set of questions, I think, having to do with
congestion and capacity. And I would think this is an important
consideration in both areas. I would like to have our UAS folks
comment on this. But I first want to go to the more obvious
questions maybe about transit and about the implications of
what you are saying.
We have had, I would say it is fair to say this morning, we
have had a rather expansive view of the possibilities of both
of these technologies and it will improve our lives. And as far
as the need for some kind of regulatory regime is concerned, it
has been overwhelmingly focused on safety. That is appropriate.
But I would think that the collective good questions apply in
this area as they do in all areas, and that there are questions
about how much of a good thing we can deal with and what is the
capacity, what are the tradeoffs in terms of congestion and how
do we deal with that. And I am especially impressed by what you
say, Mr. Strickland, about transit.
You know, one can imagine roads just as clogged with
autonomous vehicles as they are clogged with ordinary vehicles,
and the solution of simply putting on more lanes would be
equally probably counterproductive. So one can readily
appreciate the need for mass transit for all sorts of reasons.
But I think what you are saying is really exciting as well,
though, because that last-mile problem is really a problem,
connecting the shut in, the people in rural areas, the people
with special needs, collecting those folks to transit is a huge
issue. And then you think about the future of Park and Ride,
and we would not need huge tracks of land in valuable areas
devoted to Park and Ride, maybe remote parking becomes much
more feasible. I think there are lots of implications. So I
think we really need to think this through, and I appreciate
any further comments you have about this, about that set of
issues, congestion and capacity, and how we can anticipate and
deal with this.
Mr. Strickland. I will touch on it very quickly, Ranking
Member, is that the ability to have automated vehicles to be a
mixture in the fleet really does give us a number of models on
opportunities. As you said, car share, ride share, where you
have a resource, which is an owned car, which sits 90, 95
percent of the day, is only utilized for a small percent of the
day to actually have increased utilization of vehicles so that
you would need fewer of them, could be an implication which
happens in the future and helps address congestion.
And the other issue which I think you touched upon greatly
is how do you re-reclaim living space, green space, from the
roadway? And I think that thinking about capacity issues and
self-driving could impact of how cities are thinking about it.
The city of Beverly Hills in California is very aggressive
right now in thinking about its future, about possibly having
Beverly Hills being an AV city, where they can reclaim the
parking and turn it into retail, they can turn that into
housing, they could turn it, they can free green space and more
pedestrian space.
So I think that is very much, I think, the larger, broader
thinking, but it does take long-reach thinkers as well.
Ms. Kalra. I would add that I think for parts of our
transit, which we normally think of like large buses, fixed
routes, there is an opportunity to reimagine that, because many
of the goals of transit include it is public, it is
sustainable, it reduces congestion, it reduces air pollution,
it is equitable. Some of these goals can be achieved in
portions of our current transit system more efficiently with
autonomous vehicles that are better sized and more convenient
on demand, so that instead of just, well, do we have private
vehicles connecting us to main transit hubs, we reimagine how
we can meet the goals of transit more efficiently and with
greater effectiveness.
But the other side of it, any time the cost of driving goes
down, people drive more. There is a latent demand. And so I
think these cost reductions that we hope to see need to be
offset by policies like congestion pricing that send the right
market signals, that internalize the externalities that we
currently largely ignore in our transportation system.
Mr. Price. Mr. Chairman, can we ask our aviation guests to
chime in briefly?
Mr. Wynne. If I might, yes, thank you, Mr. Price. I think,
we think of Washington airspace, for example, as very
congested. It is complicated airspace for a whole bunch of
reasons, security being among them. But, you know, all large
metropolitan areas generally are--the airspace is dominated by
airports, we have many here. But that airspace is almost empty
at night for noise abatement reasons alone; that airspace is
available at night.
I go back to my milkman analogy years and years ago. The
milkman would come in the dead of night and bring you your
milk. There are a lot of opportunities for us to use what we
normally think of as very congested, complex airspace at night
to do deliveries that are currently being done in the middle of
the day. And that is a good example of how capacity, this world
of the way we think about congestion and capacity, can change
very radically with this technology.
Mr. Kochenderfer. And just to add to that, our national
airspace is a national resource and it is important that it be
used efficiently. On the drone side, you can imagine a
contention for some areas of the airspace, especially as we
begin to have drone operations in urban environments where
maybe both Google and Amazon want to deliver to the same areas,
and resolving those kinds of conflicts is something that UTM is
poised to do.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, a
privilege to be with you today. This is a very exciting issue
and we have had a good two or three of these kind of issues
hearings. And so you are obviously experts on your issue, and
obviously, you probably are looking around the world at what
other countries are up to and are we on par. When we are
looking at the world right now, and the United States, are we
on par with the other countries, are we ahead of them, are we
behind them? And is our testing and operating this framework
ready to launch compared to other countries? And then as well,
where are we in terms of the public acceptance of the reality
that this is coming and to get ready for it?
And please, each one of you, I would like hear where you
think we are in regards to our peers around the world.
Mr. Kochenderfer. So maybe I can start. So, Stanford is
pretty much adjacent to Google, so we see the Waymo vehicles on
our streets all the time.
In terms of drones, for a long time, many of the drone
startups and companies would do their testing in other
countries with more flexible airspace regulations. But I think
we are starting to catch up and we have the potential to be a
leader in this area.
Mr. Wynne. I agree. I think part 107 was an enormous step
forward and many of our colleagues internationally are paying
attention to that; UTM, which we have been discussing today.
ICAO has just announced an initiative on--that is the
International Civil Aviation Organization in Montreal. Again,
they are inviting NASA and the FAA to come, because a number of
the member States of ICAO do not want to have to try and figure
this out for themselves, and as an industry, we are very much
in favor of harmonization around the world.
So I think we are in very, very good shape. I think we
could easily lose that lead quickly. The advantage that we
always have in America, of course, is that we have the largest
market and many of the technologies are going to be pulled
through here by the huge numbers of vertical sectors that are
going to use this technology. So I think we have that advantage
if we can keep up from a regulatory standpoint.
Mr. Young. So when you say lose the lead, it is because of
the regulatory standards that we have not met yet or are not
out there for us to meet?
Mr. Wynne. That is the potential that we worry about.
Mr. Young. Okay. Please.
Ms. Kalra. You know, I think from a technological
standpoint, I would argue that we are ahead and I think we have
the intellectual and investment powerhouse, you know, whether
it is in Silicon Valley or Detroit or really in many parts of
our country. I will leave it to David to speak about what the
deployment is happening abroad. But in terms of public
acceptance, people are becoming--particularly if you diversify
by age, the public is very interested in this technology and
particularly younger people. They do not want to drive. They
are looking forward to this technology. Many of them do not
know how to drive. I think particularly if the benefits of this
technology in terms of safety and convenience are truly
realized, I do not really see this as being a problem in the
same way that we do not need regulations to encourage people
to, like, buy an iPhone or buy another gadget that makes their
lives better or more fun. I think this could be one of those
technologies where we do not need to encourage the public to
adopt it too much.
Mr. Young. Thank you.
Mr. Strickland. I absolutely concur in terms of our
technological capacity. I think that as a country, I think that
we are very much in the lead because of the diversity of
manufacturers and Silicon Valley companies. But I literally
just got back from Korea yesterday, and I will say that I think
both our AUV folks captured it. We have a technological
advantage, but we have regulatory uncertainty which, frankly,
certain countries do not have, like the People's Republic of
China. If they want something to happen, it just happens. And
we do not have that flexibility here.
And so my biggest concern is that we may lose our
advantages in terms of development and capacity and technology
to, frankly, a country that could just simply just put a rubber
stamp and then it is free open season for any manufacturer that
wants to deploy. I think that that has probably always been our
concern. Consumer acceptance, I think, talking back to the
chairman's question about what can be done to help consumer
acceptance, people are very interested in technology, but I do
think there are questions because people have concerns about
automation, and they have a greater sense of their own ability
to drive. I am a great driver, everybody else stinks. And that
is a problem and I think ultimately for us to be able to
encourage people to use and try the technology is going to be a
long reach effort, it is going to take lots of effort to make
sure that we get this done right.
Mr. Young. Thank you for educating us and thank you for
helping us navigate our way to this new world. And so, Mr.
Chairman and Ranking Member, thank you very much for the
opportunity.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Mr. Young closed it out
marvelously well. Thank you all very much, it has been
exceedingly interesting. Thank you very much.

Thursday, June 8, 2017.

DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

WITNESS

HON. BEN CARSON, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
Mr. Diaz-Balart. We will now call the subcommittee to
order. Good morning, everyone. Today we welcome Secretary Ben
Carson from the Department of Housing and Urban Development to
discuss the fiscal year 2018 budget request.
Mr. Secretary, I know that I do not have to tell you that
you have one of the most difficult and important jobs in
Washington. You have said several times that HUD can and should
provide a ladder of opportunity to those hardworking families
that can obtain social and economic upward mobility and pursue
the American dream. HUD's mission is to create strong,
sustainable, inclusive communities and, frankly, quality,
affordable homes for folks. Achieving this mission is an
ambitious challenge.
HUD has many diverse programs, thousands of entities that
carry out the programs, and millions of citizens who have
received benefits and who, in many cases, depend on HUD. And
frankly, HUD is a very large financial institution as well.
Ginnie Mae and the Federal Housing Administration together hold
a portfolio of $3 trillion. And safeguarding the financial
health of these institutions is essential for, frankly, our
national economic health.
HUD is requesting a total of 40.7 billion and new budgetary
resources in fiscal year 2018 which is 15 percent below 2017.
The budget request proposes to eliminate a number of programs
that are important to our mayors, and I am sure you have heard
and will hear from them as well, cities, towns, and, for
example, community development block grant programs, the HOME
Investment Partnership programs, in particular are some of
those. So I am sure, Mr. Secretary, that we are going to have a
robust conversation and discussion about these programs and
many other things. And again this is a long process that I look
forward to, all of us look forward to working with you on.
In addition, the budget includes cost-saving proposals and
reforms across its rental assistance programs. Now, however,
most of those reforms are outside this committee's jurisdiction
and must be addressed first by the authorizing committee. Some
of the reforms are to provide public housing authorities
benefits such as flexibilities and regulatory relief from
administrative burdens. The budget would also set a mandatory
minimum rent and increase tenant rent contributions, and it
would suspend rent increases for private-owned units.
Mr. Secretary, your budget states that these policies would
result in additional resources that would allow more homes to
be available to more households. You know, Mr. Secretary,
because you were recently in the district that I am privileged
to represent, that I represent low-income and urban areas, and
I support the spirit of HUD's mission and the desire to operate
more efficiently obviously and to do more. My mayors, my city
council, my community leaders, and constituents, all rely on
HUD programs and this is why it is so important that we work
together to explore the implications of any reforms and cost-
saving proposals in our communities. It is not the intent to
impose additional undue burdens onto our most at-risk
populations or to reduce our affordable housing stocks or its
conditions. That said, I agree that it is critical that HUD be
a good steward of its resources as nearly all of what HUD
oversees helps the most vulnerable in our society.
So yet I continue to receive reports that HUD has
tremendous difficulty with basic management. The number of and
seriousness of those negative inspector general reports is
astonishing, and I know that you share that concern. Poor
financial controls, possible Antideficiency Act violations, lax
program oversight, major risks to IT systems, gaps in
cybersecurity, the list goes on and on. These core management
challenges have plagued HUD now for 24 years, a quarter of a
century.
The HUD IG has indicated that the problem boils down to
lack of leadership or management attention issues and,
unfortunately, those are challenges, Mr. Secretary, that you
are inheriting. And so we are grateful that you have decided to
take on this very difficult task. So, Mr. Secretary, I ask you
to take a fresh look at these core issues and prioritize them.
I know you are interested in doing that. I want to work with
you, with the administration, to make HUD the high-quality,
high-functioning organization, you know, that it has to be to
oversee these crucially important programs.
Mr. Secretary, you know, you have come from humble
beginnings and are exceedingly sensitive to people who are
experiencing poverty and hardship. Together, we have to work
together to strive to make HUD programs more effective, more
efficient for the American people. I look forward to working
with you, sir, as we make the hard choices, and they are hard
choices, necessary to meet our Nation's housing and economic
development needs, all while obviously being accountable to the
taxpayer.
Before we get to your opening statement, Mr. Secretary, I
want to recognize the ranking member of this subcommittee. The
gentleman from North Carolina and I have developed a great
relationship.
So with that, Mr. Price, you are recognized for your
opening statement.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, look forward to
working with you as we navigate this challenging budget cycle.
And I want to join you in welcoming our Secretary of Housing
and Urban Development, Dr. Ben Carson. Welcome, sir, to our
subcommittee.
Nearly all of HUD's affordable housing and community
development programs are at this moment underfunded and have
been underfunded compared to demonstrated need. I think we have
to honestly acknowledge that at the outset. These are programs
that serve some of the most vulnerable people in our country:
the elderly, the disabled, children, veterans, single parents
trying to make ends meet.
It is not an exaggeration to say that America, the most
prosperous nation in the world, is in the midst of an
affordable housing crisis. More and more families are
struggling to pay rent; meanwhile, only one of four people
eligible for Federal rental assistance can actually receive it
because of funding constraints. We should not be comfortable
with this reality. In fact, it should force us to ask tough
questions about our values and priorities.
Unfortunately, the Department's fiscal 2018 budget request
before us today would make these daunting problems even worse.
The request includes $36.3 billion in funding offset by 9\1/2\
billion in receipts. The total budget authority provided in the
request would be lower than last year's level by about $7\1/2\
billion, 17 percent.
Since more than three-quarters of HUD's budget is devoted
towards simply maintaining current resident and housing cuts of
this magnitude will disproportionately affect a community
development and other targeted housing programs, for example,
community development. Let's look at that, a flexible source of
funding of hundreds of urban and rural communities to help meet
the needs of low- and moderate-income people, a program that is
remarkable for its bipartisan support over many years. That
program is proposed for complete elimination. The home program,
complete elimination. That is the largest Federal block grant
to State and local governments designed exclusively to produce
affordable housing for low-income families.
My colleagues and I have heard from hundreds of local
elected officials and housing practitioners that these programs
play a critical role. They are the most flexible programs in
your portfolio. They play a critical role in helping address
affordable housing shortages and other pressing community
needs.
Mr. Secretary, in your Senate confirmation you spoke about
addressing housing instability and poverty in what you called a
comprehensive manner. And that would include providing greater
access to healthcare, economic opportunity, so that there is a
kind of comprehensive approach with people in need. And I think
it is fair to say that we widely share those goals, but I, for
the life of me, cannot find in this budget any evidence of
taking that vision seriously.
It is especially troubling that your budget would eliminate
the Choice Neighborhoods Initiative. This program helps
transform aging public housing developments into vibrant,
mixed-income communities, and it does leverage non-Federal
funding to promote small businesses, to bring other services
into the community. It is the very epitome of a comprehensive
approach, the best example in your portfolio, yet you are
proposing to totally eliminate it, totally eliminate choice
neighborhoods.
Even the Self-Help Home Ownership Opportunity Program,
SHOP, and Section 4 capacity-building would be zeroed out. SHOP
is used by Habitat for Humanity, other nonprofits to help
create affordable housing. It has a huge multiplier effect in
the kind of funding and the kind of support it brings forward.
They use the sweat equity model in Habitat. But any Habitat
local or national leader will tell you that SHOP is essential,
essential seed money for what they are doing; same for Section
4, which expands their capabilities and their technical
expertise.
Finally the National Housing Trust Fund, that does not even
constitute discretionary budget authority, yet you are
proposing that it be eliminated. This is a real head scratcher
because these are mandatory funds, they are derived from
contributions by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. The Housing Trust
Fund has only recently been tapped by the States, but it is
already being used to finance the development and rehab of
affordable housing for low-income people. Why would we want to
see that go away?
These sweeping program eliminations, I must say, fail to
demonstrate the surgical precision, if I may say so, that we
might expect from you. They are the equivalent of taking a meat
axe to the HUD budget, which has already faced steep reductions
in recent years. This budget request says that State and local
governments should pick up the slack, but how? How? It is
incomprehensible, it is unacceptable.
And there are many reductions as opposed to outright
eliminations. There are many, many damaging reductions in this
budget. I will not go into them in detail except just to note
that tenant-based Section 8 is cut by 5 percent. We are talking
here about 265,000 people nationwide back out onto the streets,
public housing cut across the boards, massive cuts: housing
opportunities for people with AIDS, 7 percent cut; homeless
assistance grants, 6 percent cut; housing counseling, 15
percent. The list goes on. Without sustained increases in
funding commensurate with need, people will lose housing and
they will lose the supporting services that they rely upon.
I would also want to register my concerns with the
Department's so-called rent reforms, which would essentially
shift HUD programs' costs onto residents, raising minimum
rents, eliminating utility allowance reimbursements, ending
higher payments for new enhanced vouchers. These could have
serious repercussions for people who rely on housing
assistance. If changes are needed here that is best left to the
authorizing committees, they should not be loaded onto a budget
proposal.
And why on Earth roll out these reforms first in places
like project-based rental assistance? The 202 housing program,
rental housing program for the elderly, 811 program for the
disabled. Why on Earth start there? These are programs that
serve vulnerable, elderly, and disabled individuals. It just
sounds counterintuitive at best and just terribly mistaken at
worst.
As I said at the beginning the current state of housing in
America should force us to ask tough questions. Unfortunately,
looking at this budget proposal raises many unsettling
questions. Does this administration care about the most
vulnerable among us? And have you been appointed, do you find
yourself in this position only to preside over the demise of
HUD? I think that is not too severe a question to pose.
Before I close I want to remind my colleagues that although
in the beginning of June we still have no budget resolution, no
top line spending number, no subcommittee allocations, and the
debt limit is rapidly approaching.
So without another bipartisan budget deal, we will also be
forced to cope with the devastating return of sequestration
and, of course, the numbers proposed in the Trump budget are
below sequestration for HUD and for other critical agencies. In
the past years we know this has been a recipe for disaster. It
is simply a formula for not being able to appropriate and
having a crisis at the end of the fiscal year. We do not need,
our country does not need this kind of breakdown this year. We
should anticipate this. We should do a budget deal. We should
have a more comprehensive approach that will let us write our
appropriations bills on budget and on time.
Mr. Secretary, I look forward to hearing your testimony
today. We have some really important questions to explore. We
have got to work together to ensure that vital housing and
community development programs are adequately funded and
continue to rest the crying needs that we see in our
communities.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Price. Now it is a deep
honor for me to be able to recognize the leader of this
committee, the chairman of the full committee, the gentleman
from New Jersey, Chairman Frelinghuysen.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, thank you, Chairman Diaz-Balart,
and Mr. Price and Ms. Lowey and I, we all welcome you here to
the appropriations process. Today's hearing is an important
part of the oversight duties of the committee now that we have
formally received the administration's budget request, yours in
particular, this committee will undergo, given a thorough
analysis. Today's hearing is part of the process we follow to
determine the best use of taxpayers' dollars after all the
power of the purse lies in this building. It is the
constitutional duty of Congress to make these types of spending
decisions.
As the chairman said, HUD provides critical resources to
some of our most vulnerable populations in our country in need
of housing, including seniors, homeless veterans, and those
with disabilities and those with very limited incomes. I am
sure you would agree, Mr. Secretary, it is completely
unacceptable that even one veteran in our country should be
reduced to homelessness as they struggle with post-traumatic
stress syndrome or drug and alcohol abuse or a lot of other
things.
In my neck of the woods we have an incredible facility at
the Lyons VA Hospital in northern New Jersey which provides 62
affordable housing units to homeless and at-risk vets. Of these
62 units, 50 are supported by HUD-VASH vouchers, so we need to
take a look at that, make sure that we make the right decisions
on their behalf.
Throughout my time in Congress, I have been a strong
advocate for those with disabilities. As has been said by
others on the panel here, your budget proposal calls for
cutting housing for persons with disabilities, the Section 811
program, by 18 percent. I think we are all curious to
understand how the Department plans to serve those families
given such a cut. And like others I am concerned about the
proposed cut of a billion dollars to Section 8 tenant-based
rental assistance and would like to know how the Department
plans to honor all existing vouchers with such a sharp
reduction.
And lastly, I join with my colleagues in being concerned
about, and we are all concerned about, waste, fraud, and abuse,
but the fate of the community development block grants. These
have had, I think you know well, bipartisan support for
decades. In fact, they were created under President Nixon's
administration to give power back to the people to make
decisions locally to focus on community needs. So I share with
my colleagues my concern about a lot of the programs you are
reducing and I look forward to hearing your answers. And may I
say I will be working very closely with the chairman and the
ranking member to make sure we get a budget across the finish
line for all of our departments that meets the needs of the
American people.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is also a
privilege to be able to now recognize the ranking member of the
full committee, the gentlewoman from New York, Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to
thank Chairman Diaz-Balart and Ranking Member Price for holding
this hearing, and, Secretary Carson, thank you so much for
joining us.
Simply put, Mr. Secretary, your budget is inadequate at
best and unconscionable at worst. It would eliminate community
development block grants which Congress funded at more than $3
billion in the recently passed bipartisan fiscal year 2017
Omnibus, the HOME Investment Partnerships, which leverages
Federal funding to build affordable housing and receive
bipartisan support for a $950 million investment.
Your budget would also cause great suffering and harm,
including cutting housing opportunities for persons with AIDS
by $26 million; increase homelessness by slashing homeless
assistance grants by $130 million and rental assistance by
$64.9 million; decrease lead hazardous control, a program that
I have been working on for a very long time, but the need is
still clear to most everyone. It keeps our children safe from
lead-based paint and other hazards in their home. That was a
cut of $15 million.
Secretary Carson, there is no justification for this
drastic approach. And given your public statements, I have
really serious doubts about your grasp of the difficulties that
millions of Americans face and the resources available to give
people a hand up. I say that because when I worked in the State
with Mario Cuomo a long time ago, I ran the anti-poverty
program and most people want a hand up. They do not want a hand
out. So cutting these programs is just unconscionable.
You have suggested that the government has made things too
comfortable for people living in public housing and that
poverty is merely ``a state of mind.'' In fact, I visit all our
public housing and one of the major problems we have, people
are there too long because there is not enough affordable
housing so in many instances we cannot move people out of
public housing into affordable housing, not enough resources to
do that either.
Perhaps you have not really studied the people your
Department is assisting to realize that this budget would
result in millions of Americans, many of whom are senior
citizens, veterans, children, people with disabilities, and the
working poor, living in homeless shelters or on the streets.
These cuts, Mr. Secretary, do not exist in a vacuum and would
end up costing taxpayers even more than if we invest now in the
very types of assistance you propose to severely cut or
entirely eliminate.
Housing must play a big role in strengthening and growing
the middle class, empowering hardworking Americans, providing
economic opportunity for all Americans, providing economic
opportunity for all Americans.
And I just want to say, Mr. Secretary, I know you just
assumed these responsibilities, I really look forward to a
productive discussion. I hope we can have it today and I hope
we will continue the discussion, because we are people,
Democrats, Republicans, and on Appropriations we really try to
work together.
So, I hope you will be listening to our concerns, which
come really from the bottom of our hearts and based on the
experience many of us have had in our communities, and I do
hope that working together, we can make some changes.
Thank you and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mrs. Lowey.
Mr. Secretary, your full testimony will be included in the
record. We look forward now to hearing from you, and so, sir,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Secretary Carson. I am delighted to hear the passion and
the compassion from all the speakers, because that means that
it will be much easier to work with you. Thank you for inviting
me to discuss the Department of Housing and Human Development
proposed budget for fiscal year 2018.
The first Secretary of HUD, Robert C. Weaver, said that we
must look for human solutions, not just policies and programs.
I want our efforts to assist those in need, but also to support
a path to self-sufficiency. At the same time, we are keenly
focused on efficiency throughout the agency with a mindset of
doing more with less.
Of course we continue our mission. The budget reflects the
President's commitment to support HUD's critical functions,
such as to provide rental assistance to low-income and
vulnerable households; to promote decent, safe, and affordable
housing for Americans, and to have access to home ownership;
and to help work-eligible families achieve independence,
freedom from regulations and bureaucracy, and the ability to
govern themselves.
The President's 2018 budget also continues to provide
rental assistance for 4.6 million households, while recognizing
a greater role for State and local governments and the private
sector to address community and economic needs.
We also support borrowers through the FHA on their path to
home ownership. This is very important for first-time home
buyers and those on limited incomes. But again, it is a part of
the path forward to wealth creation through investments,
equity, and responsibility.
For 2018, the budget proposes a set of policies in its core
rental assistance programs to reduce cost. At the same time, we
continue to assist current residents, encourage work, and
promote self-sufficiency. The budget also seeks to provide
administrative flexibilities and to streamline the complex and
administratively burdensome calculation of income and rent.
I am particularly interested in creating healthy homes.
Now, as a physician I can tell you any amount of lead in our
children is too much. The budget promotes healthy and lead-safe
homes by providing $130 million for the mitigation of lead-
based paint and other hazards in low-income homes, especially
those in which children reside. We also fund enforcement
education and research activities to further support this goal,
all of which contributes to lower health care costs and
increased productivity.
Turning to community development and the homeless
population, this is where our humanity must be evident and our
commitment steadfast. Our programs must reach out and so must
our hearts. We must be compassionate, yet wise. HUD's homeless
assistant grants serve vulnerable individuals and families who
are homeless or at risk of becoming homeless through a wide
variety of service and housing interventions, including
homelessness prevention, emergency shelter, rapid rehousing,
transitional housing, and permanent supportive housing.
These programs are the vehicles used by HUD to promote
evidence-based approaches leading to more effective use of
resources. The budget would provide $2.25 billion for homeless
assistance grants and supports the renewal of over 240,000
beds.
HUD will continue to work closely with our State, local,
and nonprofit partners who are close to this issue to help
continue to find efficiencies and to work to end homelessness.
We continue to make progress in eliminating chronic
homelessness.
The American housing market must remain stable, secure, and
safe, FHA mortgage insurance programs, along with the mortgage-
backed security guarantee Ginnie Mae, will continue as a path
for responsible home buyers to have access to credit so they
can build wealth through ownership.
The budget includes 400 billion in loan guarantee authority
for FHA mortgage, insurance programs, and 500 billion in
authority for Ginnie Mae's secondary market guarantees. These
programs would generate approximately $9.5 billion in receipts
in 2018.
In summary, the President's budget is fiscally responsible
and meets the requirements of my Department. It reflects
commitment to fiscal responsibility while supporting critical
functions. It also administers programs to help low-income and
vulnerable households. It helps work-eligible families achieve
self-sufficiency and supports a path for borrowers to upward
mobility.
Thank you for your time today, and I look forward to
answering your questions, and most importantly working with
this committee to find appropriate solutions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary. Mr.
Secretary, as I mentioned before, and as you mentioned, your
budget represents a 15 percent reduction from fiscal year 2017,
the enacted level, and it bases that funding level in part on
rental reforms that depend on changes to statute, which, by the
way, as I mentioned before, that is outside the subcommittee's
jurisdiction. So it is going to depend on the authorizers
working with you and buying in on these issues.
So just what is your plan to engage with the appropriate
committees of jurisdiction? If you have any idea of timelines
for these reforms to receive full consideration and being
implemented.
And because here is my concern, and let us assume for
argument's sake that if some of those things are not done, you
know, would that require modification of your budget, or what
alternatives then would you be willing to look at? To just kind
of throw that in your direction.
Secretary Carson. All right. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for the incredible work that you have been doing
in your district. I have had a chance to visit there with you,
and really appreciate that.
The authorizers have, in fact, requested that we meet with
them, and we are extremely happy to do that and making
arrangements to do so. You know, this is very much a
collaborative process, and, you know, in the multitude of
counselors is safety.

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Let me go now to the Community Development
Block Grant issue, and also the HOME issue. We are obviously
hearing great concerns from local leaders on the proposed
elimination of CDBG and HOME programs. Is the administration
contemplating ways to address the loss of that reduction of
community or loss of community development in affordable
housing funding?
For example, will there be a potential housing and
community development funding portion in the infrastructure
proposal? You know, this subcommittee deals with both
infrastructure and housing. So, you know, how would you respond
to that, and what do you think the administration is looking
at?
Secretary Carson. Well, certainly we have been advocating
for housing to be included in the infrastructure bill, and
things do seem to be moving in that direction. But obviously I
cannot comment on that because it has not been formulated yet.
You know, the community development block grant program, in its
original intent, was really to provide flexibility to State and
local governments to be able to use Federal fundings in the way
that they saw most appropriate for the community development in
their particular area. And that was a good mission;
particularly worked well with the mission of HUD to provide
safe and affordable housing with a particular focus on those
individuals of low income.
Over the course of time there has been significant mission
creep, and only about 20 percent of CDBG dollars are used for
housing. It does not mean that the other things are not good
things, but, you know, about 15 percent is used for State and
local administrative purposes.
And we have to say within the budgetary constraints that we
have what is critical. We have to prioritize very much like a
family, who discovers that there are 12 major problems with
their house that they only have enough money to fix six of
them. How are they going to prioritize? You know, it is really
hard to say to the other six, well, you are going to have to
wait.
But the fact of the matter is, the main purpose here is to
be able to provide safe and appropriate shelter for millions
and millions of American households and, therefore, that goes
to the top of our priority list. And again, that does not mean
that other things are not important, but it is critical that we
be able to do that.
It is also important to recognize that there is over $8
billion in the CDBG pipeline, 3 billion of which was
appropriated for the 2017 cycle. We are looking at ways to make
sure that that money will be used in the most efficient and
effective way, as we are with all the pipeline monies for the
different programs.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Secretary, I try to lead by example.
My time is up. So now I will recognize Mr. Price.

OVERSIGHT

Mr. Price. Mr. Secretary, there have been reports, I am
sure you are aware, that the White House has ordered agencies,
including yours, to ignore Democratic oversight requests. Now,
the administration seems to be saying that Democratic oversight
has no legitimacy, that oversight is only the prerogative of
the majority party. That seems to be the position. And if so,
it is a new level of partisanship that is unprecedented,
totally unacceptable, and can only worsen our gridlock.
So, I want to ask you some questions about this, so the way
it affects you. What is the policy of your Department with
respect to responses to congressional inquiries? More
specifically, do you have policy or do you have guidance that
would prohibit or delay responses to ranking members of
congressional committees or subcommittees with jurisdiction?
Thirdly, is there a policy or guidance that would prohibit
or delay responses to Democratic members of Congress?
And finally, if such policies or guidance are in place to
prohibit or delay responses to ranking members or to all
Democratic members, was such a policy developed in consultation
with the White House or the Office of Management and Budget?
Secretary Carson. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member, and
particularly for your extreme concern about your constituents.
As far as transparency is concerned with the operations at HUD,
as far as I am concerned, that is high priority, and has
nothing to do with the person's political party. I would be
extremely opposed to withholding information based on party.
And, you know, one of the reasons that I accepted this position
is because I was horrified by the level of partisanship that
exists in our country.
You know, a house divided against itself cannot stand. And
the problems that the poor in our country face are not partisan
issues, and I am delighted that many have expressed the desire
to work together, and I will certainly be doing that and will
not be withholding any information.
Mr. Price. Thank you. I am glad to hear you say that. I was
glad to hear your colleague, Secretary John Kelly, make a
similar declaration yesterday. I want to ask you to be a bit
more specific, though.
Of course we appreciate the offer of cooperation. We are
talking here, though, about inquiries, requests, that sometimes
take a very specific form and that require extensive follow up,
that require a timely response. Are you saying that when those
responses come from the minority side, as well as the majority
side, that you would give them equal priority? In other words,
you would not honor what the administration seems to be saying
about the oversight being only a majority prerogative?
Secretary Carson. Yes. I hope that is a misinterpretation
of what the administration is saying, but I can tell you at
HUD, we will treat all inquiries equally.
Mr. Price. Have you had any directives to the contrary?
Secretary Carson. I have not had any such directives.
Mr. Price. All right. I will take you at your word. And we
appreciate that commitment. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I suspect I am
the only one on the panel that actually has ever met Secretary
Weaver. He was a friend of my late father's and I ran into him
on several occasions. And he often said, I would be happy to
come up to your congressional district to be helpful or stay
away from your congressional district if it would not be
helpful. But he was a good man, and he was committed to the
same endeavor you are here.

SECTION 811

I would like to--and I am concerned about the fate of
people with disabilities in your budget proposal. Certainly,
Section 811, I am particularly concerned about Section 8. Those
who are nonelderly oftentimes in the Section 8 program, older
Americans, I won't say crowd out those with disabilities,
developmental disabilities, mental disabilities. I want to make
sure, and may I just say for the record, you may not know it,
but in that nonelderly area, there is actually something called
housing vouchers, and I have an amount of pride in making sure
that people with a variety of disabilities continue to get the
services they need and the housing they need.
Would you talk more about your commitment, your
Department's commitment, to those with a variety of
disabilities? There is a broad spectrum, but certainly the
optics of cutting a billion dollars here and the 18 percent out
of Section 811, those are not very good optics.
Secretary Carson. Well, thank you. Thank you for
particularly your concern about the disabled. As you know, I
spent 36 years in medicine, most of that as a neurosurgeon and
most of that as a pediatric neurosurgeon, and had to deal with
a lot of disability and----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. That is exactly why I am--knowing of
your background, it is important for you to----
Secretary Carson. So, obviously I am going to fight for
that group of people. I am going to fight for everybody, but
with particular interest. What we have discovered, and
particularly in the whole rental reform package, is that we are
able to find a lot of inefficiencies and improve the way that
services are rendered. And in continual care for permanent
supportive housing we are getting basically 14.8 percent more
households per dollar spent on that program, just through
examining what was going on with waste and inefficiencies. That
is being applied to virtually all of the programs.
And again, for those families or those individuals who have
particular hardships, we have waivers available for them, so
any changes to the program that adversely affect them in a way
that would impact upon their ability to maintain our goal of
safe housing and secure housing, we have waivers.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, respectfully, and I know my time
is limited, individuals with disabilities, families with
disabilities, I am sure we are all focused on inefficiencies,
but in many of their cases, the potential for sharp reductions
would put those families and individuals in a very bad
position.
I hope that as we move towards a completion of this bill,
that you will, hopefully, be working with both the ranking
member and the chairman to address the needs of this very
diverse and important community.
Secretary Carson. We will not allow that community to be
adversely affected.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, while
thousands in Flint were tragically exposed to lead through
drinking water, historically paint has been the most prevalent
source of lead exposure, and much of the success we have had in
reducing the exposure to lead has come from a partnership
between HUD, the EPA, and the CDC, each providing expertise and
resources. In the fiscal year 2017 Omnibus, Congress provided
an increase to $145 million, and just a month later we received
your proposal to cut that bipartisan investment by $15 million.

LEAD

Your own budget estimates that similar lead hazard control
programs have a return on investment of at least 17-to-1 at a
value of over $30 billion. Given the tremendous needs, why do
you propose this cut? And at the current levels, how many grant
applications are turned away due to the lack of funding?
Secretary Carson. Okay. Thank you for your concern about
lead. That is something that, obviously, I am very concerned
about having worked for 36 years in Baltimore and seeing the
effects of that lead exposure. It is approximately 310,000
children per year are adversely affected, and those are the
ones that we know about.
You know, we have altered the considerations for lead
action to make them consistence with the CDC at 5 micrograms
per deciliter, helping to establish a national standard for the
first time.
In terms of the funding, based on the previous two cycles
we suggested a $20 million increase, so from $110 million up to
$130 million. At that time we did not know that you would
recommend $145 million, which we will happily accept, but we
did not have the ability to do that at the time of the budget.
So that does not reflect disconcert. It reflects just the
opposite and we feel very strongly about that.

SHOP

Mrs. Lowey. Well, that is good news. Thank you very, very
much and I look forward to working with you on that.
In the couple of minutes I have left I wanted to talk about
the SHOP program, which awards grants to national and regional
nonprofits to purchase home sites and develop or improve
housing for those with low incomes.
It is a really good program because I have visited them.
The home owners are required to put in sweat equity towards the
construction or rehabilitation of their homes, and in fiscal
year 2017 Congress funded SHOP at $10 million. We have heard
from advocacy groups who would like to see the program funded
at $15 million, not eliminated.
Mr. Secretary, you have spoken about the importance of home
ownership to our country and our economy, so why should we
eliminate a program that increases home ownership among the
low-income and first-time home buyers?
And I also want to say SHOP grantees have raised a
significant amount of private leverage, bringing in more than
$2 billion of investment into communities. So when you take
away the Federal dollars, you take away that ability to
leverage and create these investments. I am hoping that we can
work together on this program as well.
Secretary Carson. Well, I would be delighted to work with
you on the whole concept of home ownership. It is so critical
and it is the principle mechanism whereby family wealth is
generated in this country.
Again, we have to work within the constraints of what we
have, but I am always happy to work with you on that.
Mrs. Lowey. Well, I thank you so much. I will even give you
back 45 seconds. Working with you on these programs would
really be a privilege, so I thank you----
Secretary Carson. Thank you.
Mrs. Lowey [continuing]. Very much for your commitment.
Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Dent, you are recognized.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning. Mr.
Secretary, thank you for your service to our country.
Secretary Carson. Thank you.

CDBG AND HOME

Mr. Dent. Just a few things. As others have already
mentioned here on this panel, the President's budget does call
for eliminating both the CDBG program and the HOME program,
among others. In the communities that I represent I have seen
the importance of affordable housing developments and other
programs that have been made possible for leveraging both the
CDBG and HOME funds.
Just earlier this week, on Monday actually, before I came
down I attended the grand opening of an affordable senior
living center in Allentown, Pennsylvania, my home town, that
made use of home funds and Federal housing vouchers to bring in
private capital to finance this particular project. As
demonstrated by the project, Federal funds can serve as a real
catalyst and leverage private investment for development.
Its justification for eliminating funding for CDBG and HOME
programs the administration stated, in part, that it recognized
that State and local governments are better positioned to
address overall economic development needs, and that evolving
affordable housing activities to State and local governments
would be a more appropriate solution to addressing these
challenges.
While certainly I agree that the State and local
stakeholders should have the most control possible over their
needs and decision making, eliminating these Federal funds
would seriously eliminate their ability to bring capital, to
bring in private and State and local government investment for
these important projects. So these funds will be eliminated.
How does the administration expect that the States and
localities would be able to attract the needed private
investment for affordable housing and other projects? And while
the budget states that State and local governments should be
the ones to address these challenges, it does not provide any
sort assistance relief or other mechanism to replace the
programs taken away.
Secretary Carson. Thank you, sir. I would draw your
attention to RAD.

RAD

Mr. Dent. To what? I am sorry.
Secretary Carson. RAD, Rental Assistance Demonstration--
Mr. Dent. Yes.
Secretary Carson. Here is a program that does a tremendous
amount of leveraging of public dollars at a national average of
about 19-to-1, and is able to rehabilitate many of these
multifamily public housing situations, convert others. And
those are the kind of things that we are very much behind.
And, again, I do not want to give people the impression
that I do not like the things that have been done before. I
think that the effort that people have put into these and some
of the benefits are very laudable.
But we are working within a different framework here, and I
know it has been talked about for years and years, fiscal
responsibility. We have to get on track, but compassion, I
think, also involves thinking about future generations and what
we are doing to them if we just continue to think about what is
going on in the here and now.
So I am very happy to work with people on ways that we can
use the funding that we do have. But it is absolutely essential
that we do not allow the most vulnerable people in our society
to be discarded and thrown out on the streets as we look at all
the other programs.
Mr. Dent. I would agree, Secretary. I just want to convey
to you the concerns that I have heard from the leaders in
cities like Allentown, Bethlehem, and Lebanon, Pennsylvania,
Republican and Democrat, that these two programs in particular
have real value to them.

HCAP

Another issue, too, that I am very concerned about is the
Housing Counseling Assistance Program, and that provides
housing counseling services to home owners and tenants, both
pre and post purchasing, and can help struggling home owners
prevent foreclosure and assist them in avoiding difficulties in
the first place.
In the case of pre-purchase counseling, these services are
able to teach a person to fish, so to speak, instead of only
providing a single instance of monetary assistance. And the
services have had a demonstrable, positive impact for those who
participated.
In the wake of the national housing and foreclosure crisis,
Congress created the National Foreclosure Mitigation Counseling
Program in 2007, to provide counseling to struggling home
owners. Many entities that made use of these housing counseling
funds also then received funding from the NFMC.
And as the country has obviously recovered quite a bit from
the housing crisis, the NFMC has been phased out. Bottom line
is I was encouraged to see that they finally had requested
level funding with the Further Continuing Appropriations Act of
2017 for the Housing Counseling Assistance Program. Could you
please elaborate a little bit on the administration's decision
to support funding for this particular program?
And finally, do you think it may be prudent to increase
funding for this program in light of the NFMC's winding down,
so that buyers are prepared for the responsibilities of home
ownership and divert a future crisis?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Secretary and Mr. Dent, I fear that we
are going to have to get to that question later. I apologize to
Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Well, I will ask it in the second round.
Secretary Carson. I had a dynamite answer for it.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. There you go.
Mr. Dent. I am here for the second round. Yield back.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Dent. Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary. Speaking as someone well-acquainted with the medical
issues, Doctor, I appreciate you being here.

HOPWA

The HOPWA program, Housing Opportunities for Persons with
HIV/AIDS, is facing a 7 percent cut. Your reaction to that just
given the understanding of what the program means for Americans
living with HIV.
In Chicago, about 23,000 people were living with HIV in
2015. The viral suppression rate for others, that means the
viral load is so low that the person cannot transmit HIV, was
48 percent in Chicagoans. That is about 18 percent higher than
the national average. We have worked hard to achieve this rate.
It is interesting, a sample of persons who lived in HOPWA
housing in Chicago, 66 percent were virally suppressed. That is
much higher as well. You seem to be today merging passion,
compassion, and efficiencies. The HOPWA program seems to be
doing all those as well. Your reaction given that to the
proposed cut?
Secretary Carson. Sure. First of all, I am, along with you,
happy to see the tremendous progress that has been made in the
treatment of HIV/AIDS. And many people are able to lead
completely normal lives now, so things are changing for the
better in that sense.
I had an opportunity on my listening tour to visit a HOPWA
facility. It was beautiful. The people there were
extraordinarily happy. And one of the things that impressed me
the most was the executors who were telling me that at first
there was a lot of opposition, and now they have reached a
point where they almost have to turn away people in the
community who are trying to help. And that facility was built
through public-private partnerships.
Those are the kinds of things that represent sort of the
new model. The old model was the government came in with a
whole bunch of money and said build this facility for people
with AIDS, build this facility for low-income people in this
area, et cetera. The new model is the government sees a program
and then facilitates public-private partnerships by creating
win-win situations. And I think that is going to provide much
better footing for allowing people to develop to their full
potential, so that we do not actually need so much aid for
people. But we have to lay the foundation to do that.
Mr. Quigley. Well, according to your own agency there are
about 390,000 people eligible for HOPWA through this program
that can currently only service about 60,000 households, and a
7 percent cut only makes that worse.
Secretary Carson. And the same can be said about affordable
housing in general. We have three to four times as many people
in need of it as we are able to provide. But if we continue
along the same kinds of ways that we have been doing it for the
last several years, we are treading water.
Mr. Quigley. Well, you mentioned----
Secretary Carson. We need to do something that----
Mr. Quigley. Respectfully----
Secretary Carson [continuing]. Will expand.
Mr. Quigley. Respectfully, though, you talked about
priorities being those most vulnerable. Every study I have seen
indicates that one of the most important factors in suppressing
the viral load of HIV-positive Americans is stable housing, as
you would imagine, for a variety of reasons.
So, to your earlier point, this seems to be working against
helping those most vulnerable, most exposed from a passion,
compassion point of view, but clearly from a dollars point of
view. Because people who are HIV-positive go off their
medication, they are going to be an extraordinary cost as well
given that their treatment is upset and they are going to get
sick.
Secretary Carson. I do not----
Mr. Quigley. And they are going to potentially make others
sick.
Secretary Carson. I do not disagree with you. But, again,
the pie is only so big. We need to make the pie bigger. If we
can make the pie bigger, we can make more slices.
Mr. Quigley. Well, now we are talking the same thing,
making the pie bigger. Thank you.
Secretary Carson. Okay.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Mr. Vice Chairman, Mr.
Joyce, you are recognized.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Secretary,
pleasure to see you today. Thank you for being here. As you are
well aware, many of our districts still see the effects of the
housing crisis, and they are still struggling to cope with the
aftermath a decade later.

FORECLOSURES

A particular concern in my district is home foreclosures
and, subsequently, vacant properties that have caused blight
throughout once thriving communities. Cities end up owning a
large percentage of these properties and, therefore, have the
responsibility of maintaining or demolishing them, but this has
proven overly burdensome, so these abandoned properties often
remain vacant and in a dilapidated state. Consequently, they
are devaluing nearby homes and serving as sanctuaries for
criminal activity.
Does your Department have any plans to complement the
initiative taken by the Department of Treasury through the
Hardest Hit Fund, refurbish these communities? And secondly, do
you have any recommendations as to how the fund can operate
more effectively and efficiently?
Secretary Carson. Well, I am glad you brought that up.
Thank you. Yes, we are working hand-in-hand with Treasury and
with several of the departments, quite frankly. The blight
issue is severe because a lot of those houses are used for
criminal activity, and they promote disease as well. So the
long-term cost of them is quite significant.
And we are looking for ways to better use all the dollars
and to more rampantly authorize the demolition of these kinds
of facilities. There has been previously a lot of red tape
involved in getting that done, and we are trying to reduce that
very significantly so we can quickly move to take care of that
program.
Mr. Joyce. I would like to help you to that extent, but the
other part, obviously, is when these abandoned homes become
city property, they have to be boarded up. Boarding up is a
telltale sign to a criminal that here is a place that you can
continue to do your criminal activity, whatever that may be.
There is a clear boarding requirement in lieu of plywood
for vacant and abandoned properties that have been expanding
across the Nation through Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the VA.
They have begun reimbursing for the full cost of clear boarding
given its cost efficiency and its long-term benefits.
Has your Department done any recent assessments on the
benefits of clear boarding technology in preserving vacant and
abandoned homes?
Secretary Carson. I believe that is something that is being
looked at, but I have not been given a full appraisal on that
yet. We will look into that.
Mr. Joyce. Please. It is something that as you go through
these neighborhoods you would have no idea which----
Secretary Carson. It makes sense.
Mr. Joyce [continuing]. One is a residence. Yes. Thank you.
Secondly, I will move on quickly since I see I have a
little bit of time remaining here, as you know, earlier this
spring our subcommittee had the pleasure of meeting with
Inspector General Montoya.
Secretary Carson. Yes.
Mr. Joyce. His testimony is insightful and I appreciate the
work that both of you are doing to ensure the efficient and
proper use of our taxpayer dollars.

HUMAN CAPITAL

I would like the opportunity to follow up on an issue that
he raised during the hearing that is an ongoing concern to me,
and that is HUD's human capital. A 2015 survey by HUD stated
that fewer than half of HUD employees felt their training needs
have been addressed. A July 2016 GAO report further echoed
those findings.
Can you please elaborate on the initiatives HUD is
currently carrying out to better equip its employees, and has
the Department implemented a new strategy for its hiring
authority to better target qualified candidates for employment?
Secretary Carson. Yes. Our Department of Human Capital is
in the process of being beefed up, so to speak, as are several
of our departments. Many of the findings that Inspector General
Montoya found, there were 11 material weaknesses, very, very
legitimate. I have looked at it, I have talked to him about
him, and we are going to address all of them, but want to
really do it in a more holistic manner rather than just
pinpoint things at a time. So we have hired a COO because you
need an operator. That is one of the things that I have
discovered in my many years in the corporate world, and we are
going to be nominating a CFO and a CIO.
And we will be able to really merge our effort to solve
each of those 11 material weaknesses.
Mr. Joyce. Well, I wish you Godspeed to that end. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I have no further questions at this time.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Congresswoman Clark, you
are recognized.
Ms. Clark. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being with us today. I was struck by some things
in your testimony. One was your statement that we must be
compassionate, but wise, and also that as you are looking to
reduce costs, you would assist current residents, encourage
work, and promote self-sufficiency.

HOUSING VOUCHERS

So I am hoping you can help me put together those goals
with a quarter of a million Section 8 vouchers that would be
lost under this budget proposal. I am sure you are aware the
vast majority of rental assistance in this country goes to
households that are composed of children, elderly, and the
disabled.
Secretary Carson. Yes.
Ms. Clark. And by ``vast majority'' I mean in
Massachusetts, that is 90 percent of the households that
receive Federal rental assistance. In the chairman's home State
of Florida, that is 91 percent. In the ranking member's home
State of North Carolina that is 92 percent. So a vulnerable
population makes up, overwhelmingly, closing in on 100 percent
of the assistance recipients.
And I want to tell you about a constituent in my district.
She is 76 years old. She has a gross income from Social
Security of $18,025 a year. She receives a $5,000 deduction for
her medical expenses, which means under the current formula
using adjusted income she pays $188 per month in rent.
Under your reforms she would pay $450 a month. That is an
increase of over $3,100 a year or 17 percent of her entire
gross income. Never mind the vouchers that we are just going to
lose, that every housing group, whether at home or nationally,
has said there is absolutely no way attrition can make up for
that.
So, how does this square? I have been thinking, like, how
does this square with your statements about being compassionate
and wise and taking care of our current residents and self-
sufficiency?
And when you say the pie needs to be bigger, I guess my
question to you, is it ultimately you are being held to
constraints by this administration, that you are forced to make
these sort of draconian and heartless cuts that are so
damaging?
Secretary Carson. Well, it is a back-and-forth process to
try to reach a compromise on where things should be. Obviously,
you know, my goal is to use with the great efficiency anything
that we have. As far as the specific example of the woman you
gave, there are cutoffs in terms of the formula that is used so
that people do not experience what you said she is going to
experience.
If that, in fact, is happening, there is a problem, and we
also have hardship exemptions, particularly for the elderly and
for the disabled.
Ms. Clark. I am curious about that statement with the
hardship waivers because as these programs already do not have
sufficient funding, they are serving the very lowest income
people in our country. So the idea of a hardship waiver around
that seems to beg the point, I just do not see the efficiency
that we are gaining in this when we are cutting off a quarter
of a million vouchers that are such a lifeline for such a
vulnerable population.
Secretary Carson. Okay.
Ms. Clark. And if we are looking at that like building that
path, as you said, to self-sufficiency, but then we are taking
away the community development block grants, the Choice
Program, the SHOP program, in fact, every incentive that helps
create robust, public-private partnerships. Where are those
incentives in this budget?
Secretary Carson. Well, I do understand what you are saying
and do recognize that we have carefully looked at who would be
impacted to make sure that we did not displace any of those
most vulnerable people.
Ms. Clark. How are you going to choose who losses their
voucher?
Secretary Carson. People who already have vouchers and who
are already sheltered--when you talk about 250,000 people
losing, you are talking about people who are on a waiting list.
You are not talking about people who are already being
sheltered. That is a different population.
Ms. Clark. Well, that is not my understanding from my
housing communities, but I see my time has expired.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, very much. Mr. Culberson, you
are recognized, sir.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
thank you for your service to the country. I admire you
immensely and the work that you have done throughout your life.
Mr. Price, our ranking member, pointed out quite correctly
that we need to have a more comprehensive approach to
appropriations when we look at the Federal budget, and I wanted
to give you an opportunity to talk about that bigger picture
and the more comprehensive approach because as many of the
folks in this panel have been talking about their concern about
recommended reductions in different programs that do a great
deal to help people that are most in need. And obviously, we
have to have a safety net for people that are the most fragile
and in need.

BALANCING THE BUDGET

But in order to do so, I wanted to give you an opportunity
to talk about the urgency of balancing the Federal budget and
the bigger problem, and that is that 70 cents out of every
Federal dollar that comes in, every one of our taxpayers' very
precious, scarce, and hard-earned tax dollars, 70 cents
immediately goes out the door to the automatic pilot mandatory
spending programs: Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, the
Affordable Care Act, veterans benefits, principal on the debt
and interest on the debt, which leaves the annual operating
expenses of the Federal Government under the jurisdiction of
appropriations 30 cents on the dollar. Yet 15 of that 30 cents
goes to the Defense Department, which has been so badly
underfunded that half of the Marine Corps planes--excuse me,
half of the Navy planes cannot fly for lack of spare parts.
Seventy percent of our young men and women in the Marine Corps,
the airplanes, 70 percent of their planes cannot fly because of
a lack of spare parts.
We face great threats around the world. We are going to
need to dramatically increase defense spending. So we are left
with the 15 cents on the dollar to try to spread around all the
other vital functions of the Federal Government.
Now, you were very eloquent during the presidential
campaign in talking about the urgency of balancing the Federal
budget. Would you talk to us a little bit about the need for
members of Congress to be honest with our constituents and tell
them how urgent it is that we rescue Medicare and Social
Security for insolvency, and the amount of money that will free
up while ensuring that Americans that paid into those programs
received the benefits that they have paid for.
Secretary Carson. Well, thank you. I cannot tell you how
refreshing it is to know that somebody actually cares about
this. I mean $20 trillion in national debt, just back it back
to $18 trillion, if you tried to pay that off at a rate of $10
million a day, 365 days a year, it would take over 5,000 years.
And this is what we are putting on the backs of our citizens.
Every one of those thousands of babies that are born today will
come with a debt of $60,000 on their head. This does not go
away. So we have to work within that reality.
Almost every society had an opportunity to do this. You go
back to 17th century Spain, 18th century France, 19th century
Great Britain, ancient Egypt, ancient Rome. Every one of them
knew that there was a problem. They did nothing about it and
they collapsed. Are we going to face the same thing or are we
going to be smart enough to learn from their examples?
And again, I want to emphasize the programs that we are
talking about, the things that have been done, they are
wonderful things. And if we had the funding, we should do them
all; we should do them, take care of everybody. It would be a
wonderful thing. But we cannot. Therefore, we have to do the
most responsible things that we can do and we have to try to
lay the groundwork for, you know, economic growth and to be
able to take care of people. If we destroy these programs
because we are fiscally irresponsible, we won't be able to take
care of anybody.
Mr. Culberson. Absolutely. And is it possible, logically,
to even begin to balance the budget by only looking at 15 cents
on every Federal dollar?
Secretary Carson. I do not think so.
Mr. Culberson. Impossible. So I really welcome the help of
my Democratic colleagues. I know my Republican colleagues are
committed to paying off that national debt, which is a terrible
thing to pass on to our children and grandchildren.
Secretary Carson. But we can still do it if we start now.
Mr. Culberson. But we can still do it. If we start right
now, people who are 45 years of age or younger, Social Security
will not be there for them. If you are 54 years of age or
younger, Mr. Secretary, the Medicare hospital fund can only pay
50 cents on the dollar. These are hard realities that we in
Congress, the Republican majority--this is why I believe Donald
Trump was elected, because people are sick and tired of the
debt, of the deficit, of the inaction, the refusal of the
Congress and the President to deal with reality. The country
expects us to get her done and balance the budget and
accomplish these things so that you have the money that you
need to take care of the most vulnerable and fragile in our
society. Would you agree?
Secretary Carson. I would agree and I thank you for your
willingness to talk about it. I think a lot of people, of your
colleagues, actually understand this, but it is not a popular
thing to say.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Culberson. Mr. Young.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Carson, thank
you for being here today.
Secretary Carson. Thank you.
Mr. Young. I am just going to have a conversation with you.
There are a lot of challenges that you are going to be facing
with this Department and you have probably already realized a
lot of that.
Secretary Carson. Yes.
Mr. Young. Why did you accept this job?
Secretary Carson. Well, you know, I spent my entire
professional career trying to give children a second chance,
only to see many of them go back into an environment that was
not healthy. And this is an opportunity to try to do everything
I can to improve that environment for them, so it is a
continuation of my work.
Mr. Young. Do you have just a handful of real goals that
you want to accomplish with this Department? To leave it not
necessarily as a legacy with your name on it, but we are
talking about the people that are impacted within the programs
of this Department. What kind of goals do you have for them?

HUMAN CAPITAL

Secretary Carson. Well, the real goals for me are to
recognize that our people, all of them, are human capital. And
when it comes to our Nation and the future, we have to compete
with China and India, nations that have three to four times as
many people as we do, which means if we do not develop our
people, we will not be able to compete into the future. So, I
want to see us take a much more holistic look at the problems
that we have rather than pinpointing things and having our
little special groups. We need to take a holistic view of
America and what we must do in order to stay strong into the
future.
Mr. Young. And speaking of America, I urge you to spend as
much time as possible outside of the district, being on the
ground in our neighborhoods, in our communities, not just in
urban areas, but as well in some of our very rural areas. I
represent a district that is very rural and very urban at the
same time. I represent Des Moines and then 16 very rural
counties, parts of those. And so with the challenges, though,
that you have, there are two things I think could be a hurdle.
But if you hire the right people and have the right
accountability, I am hoping that you can get to where you want
to get.
And you talked about hiring a Chief Information Officer and
a Chief Financial Officer. We have had some hearings in this
committee when we have had the Inspector General before us and
talking about the real challenges with the different networks,
technology networks and systems that you have at HUD.
Secretary Carson. Yes.
Mr. Young. And if some of them went now, there would not be
anybody who was trained to replace some of the parts, or that
software would not even be available today, and also really
getting a grasp on the financial management of the Department
as well. I hope you really challenge your employees to make
those goals, just so that the Department can run better, and
also you have got to have accountability for the taxpayer.
Secretary Carson. Yes.
Mr. Young. Make sure that the hardworking folks in America,
the taxpayer dollars they send out here, they are used in a
good manner.
Secretary Carson. That is a huge goal, basically, to run it
like a business. And, you know, I have spent 18 years on
Kellogg's board and 16 years on Costco's board as well as
started a national nonprofit and I have had, despite what the
media will tell you, a great deal of experience in business and
how to do things. And I have already seen enormous savings that
can be realized by doing things in a rational way.
Mr. Young. Well, I want you to know that many of us here on
the committee, we want to work with you for the benefit of the
American people and to help those who are struggling to get
that opportunity to just reach that higher ladder of self-worth
and economic worth as well, and to be able to give back to this
great country some day. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Mr. Valadao.
Mr. Valadao. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Secretary, for
your time today and your testimony.

REGULATIONS

In your testimony, you highlighted that HUD is weighed down
by too much bureaucracy and unnecessary regulations. This is
evident in my district where a public housing agency was
awarded a grant of over $3 million last December. Six months
have passed since the announcement of this award and the agency
is still yet to see those funds. How are you proposing to
reduce regulation and bureaucracy in order to ensure your
Department is able to appropriately and efficiently direct
these funds to the individuals who are desperately in need?
Secretary Carson. Thank you so much for that question. That
has been a pet peeve of mine for a long time, bureaucracy. And,
you know, I define bureaucracy as people who care more about
the rules than the goals. But we have appointed a task force,
as has been asked for by the President in Executive Order
13777, and we are looking at every single regulation. And also,
we have open comment period and during my national tour, which
will be continuing, listening particularly to our local HUD
employees and to the people who administer the programs,
finding out from them what are the things that keep you from
being able to move efficiently and effectively, and dealing
with those directly.

COMMUNITY PROGRAM CUTS

Mr. Valadao. All right. And then in my district, my
district has many small communities with a very limited tax
base. These communities depend on Federal community development
funding for housing, infrastructure, community facilities. For
example, in unincorporated areas, like Del Rey, Earlimart,
Richgrove, and Lamont, all within my district there in
California, developers of affordable rental housing utilize a
combination of funding sources in addition to the private
equity they raise through the low-income tax credit, especially
in small towns or rural areas. Very often, these include key
HUD funding programs like HOME and Community Development Block
Grant. And I know you touched on it a little bit earlier with
the chairman's questions, but I did not really hear a
substitute. So I would like to know what your substitute--or
what do you propose to keep these projects viable for low and
very low-income wage earners?
Secretary Carson. Okay. Well, first of all, keep in mind
that many of those projects that have been set in motion
through some of those grants will be continuing. The CDBG
funding is not really meant to take care of the debt service.
It is more like collateral. And the effect of those projects
will extend, in many cases, for decades and will generate funds
which can then be used for the debt service.
But in terms of the public-private partnerships, the use of
things like the low-income tax credits, you know, we are
working with the Treasury Department and across multiple silos
to make sure that no matter how we end up we will have programs
that encourage the public-private partnerships because there is
so much more money in the private sector than there is the
government, particularly considering the conversation that we
just had about national debt.

RURAL COMMUNITIES

Mr. Valadao. I guess I have got time for just one more. HUD
is tasked with supporting housing needs across America in
urban, suburban, and rural communities alike. However, the
previous administration and Federal policymakers and Congress
often overlooked the needs of rural America, including the
rural communities like my district and many of those
represented up here. How much of HUD's funding goes toward
supporting housing needs specifically in rural communities and
how can HUD programs be improved to make the most of those
funds and ensure consistent practical support is provided to
rural communities?
Secretary Carson. Well, obviously, we are very concerned
about the rural communities and of working with the Agriculture
Department. We have combined programs to deal with housing
needs in the rural communities.
But the other thing about rural communities I think is
incredibly important is the use of internet. In many cases, it
is nonexistent. I have went into a lot of places when I was
campaigning, I was absolutely shocked about the communication.
And of course, that makes a big difference for the
opportunities that are available for those young people. And
now that we have reached the point in our society where a lot
of work can be done from home, it makes it even more important.
So, yes, we are paying attention to that, very much so.
Mr. Valadao. Well, I appreciate that and I appreciate you
bringing up the internet, too. So, thank you, Chairman, my time
is up.

PACE LOANS

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Mr. Secretary, last summer
HUD began allowing FHA to ensure mortgages on properties with
what is known as PACE loans, property assessed clean energy
loans, on them, which potentially puts them in a second lien
position. The second lien position potentially increases the
risk for the MMI funds and taxpayers. Now, the MMI fund was
forced to draw $1.7 billion from Treasury 4 years ago to cover
the projected losses on loans that are guarantees, and it
reached its statutory research level just 2 years ago. The
Federal Housing Finance Agency prohibits Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac from insuring properties with PACE loans. Do you believe,
Mr. Secretary, that a second lien position actually could
create a greater risk to the MMI fund and to taxpayers?
Secretary Carson. Well, I think it is a potential problem
and one that I had a number of conversations with some of your
colleagues in Congress and one which we are looking at very
carefully. A lot of the people who get involved in those PACE
loans do not really understand them. They do not understand
what they are getting involved with. And at the very least,
there has to be mandatory counseling before someone gets into
something like that, but it does create real problems.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. So you are going to be looking; I am
assuming and I am hoping, that you are going to be
reevaluating.
Secretary Carson. Absolutely.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Reevaluating the policy?
Secretary Carson. Absolutely.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And I do not know if you have had a chance
to see there is a bill, the PACE Act, Protecting Americans from
Credit Exploitation.
Secretary Carson. Yes.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. All right. So you are looking at that as
well?
Secretary Carson. Yes.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Great, I am glad to hear that, Mr.
Secretary. Let me change the subject.

VOUCHER FLEXIBILITIES

Over 7\1/2\ million Americans depend on either public
housing or private vouchers to afford a place to live, and I am
speaking quickly. I always speak quickly, and I am doing it
quicker now because I have got a lot of questions. And
obviously, helping these people remain in stable housing is one
of HUD's fundamental commitments, and so I appreciate you
taking a hard look at these programs, Mr. Secretary.
We obviously have to do everything that we can to address
unnecessary costs. You have spoken about that. The budget
requests a broad authority, a broad authority to provide
waivers and other flexibilities to the PHAs, public housing
authorities, to cut costs. Can you provide some specifics on
what some of these flexibilities might mean and how much
potentially they could save?
Secretary Carson. Well, you know, the PHAs right now have
their hands tied when it comes to operating funds versus
capital funds. If they just had the ability to shift money from
one to the other as needed, it would take care of a lot of the
problems that they have, that one thing.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And I know that you have visited a lot of
locals and so I am assuming that you have gotten some feedback,
potentially some good feedback, right, as to some of the things
that they need to be helpful?
Secretary Carson. It has been actually quite wonderful to
sit not only with the HUD employees, and most HUD employees are
outside of Washington, D.C., by the way, but also to talk with
the tenants, the beneficiaries. And one of the things that has
been very enlightening is that those communities that have
tenant associations tend to do much better, tend to work much
better with the people who manage, and tend to have a much
higher quality of life. So we are encouraging the establishment
of those in all of the units.

NEGATIVE RENTS

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I do not have a
lot of time, so I had a question which I am going to have to
kind of reword. The issue of what is known as negative rent
payments, which, you know, some people say that it is, well, it
is, you know, you are paying people to live in public housing,
but I would tell you that obviously I believe that certain
costs like electricity, et cetera, I know that those are real
costs. Your budget makes some proposals and I just look forward
to working with you because I believe we should probably not be
treating folks whose utilities are not paid in HUD programs
differently than those that are because obviously those are
real costs. And I just had some questions, but I just wanted to
throw that your way as an issue of concern and something that I
look forward to continue to working with you.
Secretary Carson. It is a big issue of concern for a lot of
the tenants, also, and people who are on the waiting list and
who are looking for some equity and some fairness. So I look
forward to working with you to make sure that we do things in a
fair and equitable way.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. One of the
reasons I get such great cooperation from the members of the
subcommittee to keeping on time because I try to do the same
thing. So anyways, Mr. Price.

PUBLIC/PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP

Mr. Price. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Secretary, you have referred to your listening tour, glad to
see you doing that, going around the country to communities and
HUD field offices. I know you went to your native Detroit, you
went to Jacksonville, Miami, Columbus, Ohio, other places. You
have said some things along the way and I want to know about
how they relate to this budget proposal. You said you want a
housing policy that delivers more bang for the buck, partly by
encouraging, leveraging more State and local support as well as
private sector investment. You also have spoken often of
partnerships, one of the best tools we have to revitalize the
communities, public-private partnerships, partnerships among
levels of government. And I am going to say that is music to
our ears in the Research Triangle area of North Carolina. That
has been our stock in trade.
I am not sure the notion of partnership, though, and of
leveraging is brought out by this budget. And so I do want to
ask you, on your tour did anybody suggest that it was a good
idea to totally eliminate the seed money? Did anybody suggest
it was a good idea to totally eliminate community development
block grants, for example, or did anybody suggest that we
should get rid of the HOME program or did anyone suggest we
should get rid of the SHOP program? You know, it is one thing
to have Federal seed money, it is one thing to make sure
Federal money leverages other monies. But how does that work if
the Federal money is totally eliminated?
Secretary Carson. Well, the Federal----
Mr. Price. And let me just zero in a little bit more on
SHOP because it has been mentioned here this morning. One
example of the kind of partnership that presumably you are
talking about is the kind of work we do with Habitat for
Humanity. The first time, I am sure you do not remember this,
the first time I met you was in Raleigh, North Carolina, at a
meeting involving Habitat for Humanity. There are three pillars
for Habitat, three sources of the partnership that the Federal
Government has with Habitat: CDBG, which often does the
infrastructure for these communities; SHOP; and the section for
capacity building. Every one of those programs is eliminated in
this budget. So did anyone suggest that? Did anyone suggest
that that is the way to an effective kind of catalytic role for
the Federal Government?
Secretary Carson. What has been suggested in all of these
places that I go is that we do everything that we can to
facilitate the public-private partnerships and working across
silos with other departments, including Treasury. We are
looking for ways to do that. I very much believe in Habitat for
Humanity. I very much believe in self-sufficiency. But there
are ways to do that and we are going to be working on those
ways.
Mr. Price. Well, the Habitat folks that I am talking to are
just baffled by this because you know what else this budget
does is eliminate AmeriCorps. Who do you think organizes those
Saturday morning builds that bring all these volunteers in and
makes sure that goes in an orderly way? AmeriCorps, national
service. I just do not get it. I certainly get the idea of
partnership and seed money. I mean, that is really the best way
to spend Federal funds, not just total Federal financing of
these efforts. But when you totally remove the core funding,
that just seems like a formula for making these things go away.
Secretary Carson. Well, do keep in mind that there is
billions of dollars in the pipeline already in these programs
as we work on ways to effectively and efficiently utilize the
money and with the principle in mind that public-private
partnerships are the way to go. So that is all on the plate for
things that we are proceeding to do
Mr. Price. Well, presumably, that means future budgets
would not be as destructive in this respect.
I just have a minute left here, but, you know, you have
talked about hard choices, you have talked about the kind of
things we want to give more emphasis to, knowing we cannot do
everything. But I, for the life of me, do not see what is
strengthened in this budget. One thing I thought we might see
would be, for example, bringing back the kinds of partnerships
we used to have with religious communities.

SECTION 202

My district is peppered with 202 housing for the elderly:
St. Joseph's AME in Durham, First Baptist in Chapel Hill,
Cosmopolitan Baptist in Raleigh. These are congregations that
took on the formation of, you know, an NGO and worked with HUD
to build rental housing for the elderly, and those are
wonderful communities. Is that the sort of thing you might want
to bring back? I mean, what are we strengthening in this?
Secretary Carson. Well, you know, there are probably a lot
of things you do not see in the budget that do not necessarily
reflect what we are going to be doing.
Mr. Price. That is why I am asking you.
Secretary Carson. You know, for instance----
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Secretary, I apologize, but I am going
to have to cut both of you off.
Secretary Carson. Okay.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. But we will, hopefully, get back to that.
Mr. Valadao?

MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES

Mr. Valadao. Mr. Secretary, the Inspector General states
that your key management and performance challenges are so
interconnected that it is difficult to remedy one without first
correcting the other. One significant challenge is to establish
and implement effective and required financial management
governance. HUD has not had a clean opinion on its financial
statements in 3 years, and HUD has not had a CFO for 2 years
running. Financial leadership starts at the top. Where are you
in the process of filling the CFO position you mentioned
earlier and can you give us a timetable of when you expect to
have a CFO?
Secretary Carson. Yes. Obviously addressing these issues,
as I said before, holistically, is important and you have to
have a CFO in order to do that because many of the material
weaknesses dealt with financial weaknesses. We have been doing
a diligent search looking for people who are highly qualified.
We have a number of them and we are just in the process right
now of paring that list down and presenting it to Congress.

HUD FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

Mr. Valadao. The IG has noted that HUD's key financial
staff do not have the appropriate skills or background to
oversee the financial statements. The most significant example
was rounding to the nearest billion or hundred billion in the
fiscal year 2016 financial statements. What is your plan to
address the lack of financial knowledge at HUD and not only
ensure that you are hiring people with the right skill sets?
Secretary Carson. We have already addressed that issue. We
are already staffing up with the people who have the requisite
knowledge to deal with that. That has been a big concern of
mine from the first week I was there.

HOUSING SERVICES

Mr. Valadao. All right. And then there are nonprofits in my
district that provide a variety of home ownership services to
low- and moderate-income home buyers, including housing
counseling and education for purchase and resale of HUD homes,
providing essential secondary financing to enable families to
purchase their first home in a sustainable fashion. These
nonprofits provide a valuable service by building stable home
owners who have become an important part of the infrastructure
in their communities. Routinely these nonprofits complain about
the onerous nature of the HUD certification process to provide
such services, creating bureaucratic and sometimes invasive
oversight that adds cost and complication to the organizations
who should actually be treated as trusted partners. What will
you do to streamline such processes?
Secretary Carson. We have recently undertaken a
comprehensive program to review that very issue and are making
very significant and rapid progress on that. There is 2,100,
you know, such organizations around the country. We are looking
at that and moving rapidly.
Mr. Valadao. All right, thank you. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Mr. Quigley, you are
recognized, sir.
Mr. Quigley. Thanks again. Thanks again, Mr. Secretary.
Let's talk about something that does not cost any money.
Secretary Carson. All right.

LGBTQ

Mr. Quigley. Complying with existing law of rules and
regulations. When Senator Brown asked you a question during the
confirmation process, she asked if you believed that HUD
currently provides, and I will quote, ``extra rights to the
LGBTQ people,'' I am quoting, ``that need to be withdrawn.'' I
believe your answer was that you did not. But either in the
last couple weeks or months, the Department has purged at least
six documents that involved training to emergency shelters and
other housing that keep particularly sensitive teenagers,
transgender teenagers, from getting kicked out on the street,
how to comply with these things. The timing seems odd and why
would they be removed without being replaced with substantially
the same, if you felt they needed to be better or something,
materials?
Secretary Carson. Well, you may be referring to the survey
that was pulled back dealing with LGBT youth homelessness.
Mr. Quigley. No, I am sure this is just training materials
given to these facilities so that the staff at the emergency
shelters and the housing facilities can make sure that they are
not discriminating against LGBTQ and particularly transgender
youth.
Secretary Carson. We have a policy of making sure that no
one is discriminated against and are looking at all of our
policies across the board for everybody when it comes to
discrimination.
Mr. Quigley. Well, not everybody is discriminated against.
There are particular groups that have been discriminated
against more than others obviously and that is why you have the
training materials. That is why you have these materials
available so that these shelters can comply with the rules. So
why would you remove anything if your goal is not to
discriminate against anyone?
Secretary Carson. The only reason that we would remove
anything is so that we can look at it and determine whether its
effective in turn. And some of the things, we have discovered,
were not effective and were not providing good data. We want to
make all of our decisions based on evidence, not on ideology.
Mr. Quigley. I go back to my original point, though. If
these shelters, if these facilities need to know how to comply,
just removing the existing instructions does not help. I mean,
at the best of circumstance, when would you tell me that they
would--are they going to be replaced and are they going to be
designed to protect LGBTQ?
Secretary Carson. All the policies will be designed to
protect LGBQ and everybody else.
Mr. Quigley. Why would you remove these and not replace
them at the same time or at least wait until you have got a
suitable replacement, if indeed there is a suitable
replacement?
Secretary Carson. As I have said, if anything has been
removed, it is being removed in order to be looked at and
improved.
Mr. Quigley. And what would your timeline be to be
replaced?
Secretary Carson. Well, I need a specific----
Mr. Quigley. On those six materials that were purged from
the website?
Secretary Carson. As soon as possible.
Mr. Quigley. Well, I guess the bigger picture here no one
has really gotten into it, your discussion, and I guess maybe
this is germane, of poverty, and I am sure your words were
different, being a state of mind. Let me just ask if your sense
of poverty being a state of mind applies to particular groups
or excludes particular groups given that about 14.5 million
Americans live in poverty that are under the age of 18 and
about 10 percent, 4.2 million, are over the age of 65. And
clearly those were all groups that live in CHA housing. Would
those be included in those where poverty is a state of mind?
Secretary Carson. Well, I appreciate you asking that
question. Because, first of all, I said partly, so it is a
part----
Mr. Quigley. Well, I will let you----
Secretary Carson [continuing]. Of the state of mind.
Mr. Quigley [continuing]. Draw the parameters.
Secretary Carson. And secondly, recognize that the human
brain is extraordinarily complex and it is programmed
throughout the course of a person's life, and that programming
determines how a person faces things. For instance, if you are
a minor league baseball player, you come up for the first time
at bat and you see Nolan Ryan, you say, oh, no, Nolan Ryan. He
has got a 100 mile an hour fastball and I am probably never
even going to see the ball. You are probably going to approach
it differently than another minor leaguer who comes up and says
Nolan Ryan, he is an old man, I am going to knock the cover off
this ball.
So the way that one approaches things makes a very big
difference, and I think everybody knows that. Some people
always, you know, take advantage of a situation to distort the
meaning, but the fact of the matter is America is a very
special place. And I know there was a New York Times article
last week that said, you know, it is just the other way around
in terms of the mindset and that America is the most difficult
place for anybody to rise. And if that were the case, why would
so many people be risking life and limb to get here? We have
something very special. We need to preserve it. And the can-do
attitude is a big part of what made America a great Nation.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. On that note, Mr. Quigley, I hate to
interrupt you, but I think we should have time for another
quick round. And so, Mr. Dent.

HOUSING COUNSELING

Mr. Dent. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the Secretary.
You did not get a chance to give me your blockbuster answer
that you said you were going to give me on housing counseling,
on the question that I had posed to you earlier. You know, we
were talking about how, you know, housing counseling assistance
was important and that obviously there is still a demonstrated
need for services, particularly for people before they buy
homes. But you were going to give me an answer, as I had
mentioned, level funding, you know, for the housing counseling
assistance program and feel free to answer.
Secretary Carson. Well, I think I have already answered it
with one of your colleagues, but we have placed an enormous
amount of emphasis on this, recognizing that, you know, there
used to be a time when people in this country actually knew
about housing. Everybody when I was a kid growing up knew that
you do not pay more than two and a half times your annual
income for a house. That kind of information has been lost and
that makes counseling ever more important at this time. So we
have concentrated a great deal of effort on all of those
housing counseling centers, all 2,100 of them, to try to bring
consistency and to educate the people who are actually doing
the counseling.
But also, we are looking at the use of the internet to
create tutorials for people because it has to be done at
different levels. People operate at so many different levels in
this country and the average American operates at about the 8th
to 9th grade level. But a lot of the material is not at that
level so we need to have it at various levels so that people
can use it at their own pace, in addition to taking advantage
of the housing counselors.
Mr. Dent. Well, thank you. I have seen some real value to
the housing counseling programs in my community. I saw it
during the financial crisis and I have seen it since, so I just
wanted to put a plug in for that.

VASH PROGRAM

And I am just going to return to another issue that
Chairman Frelinghuysen had discussed as it related to the VASH
program, the HUD Veterans Supportive Housing program. My staff
tells me that these programs have been very effective in
reducing homelessness among veterans. In fact, in my community
we have the Street Medicine Program, which you might actually
find interesting, run by one of the hospitals, where we
actually go out on the streets with medical professionals and,
you know, sit on the streets down by the railroad tracks, along
the river, you know, where people are living. A really
impressive program and it is not just treating veterans, but
all sorts of folks.
Secretary Carson. Sure. No, I have seen it.
Mr. Dent. And, well, I invite you to come up to our
community in Allentown, it is really impressive.
Secretary Carson. Can I do neurosurgery on the street?
Mr. Dent. Well, I would never try to tell you where you can
and cannot do surgery, Doctor. But just so my main question is
the budget request seeks additional support, as you know, for
the HUD-VASH program. If HUD awards all of the potential new
vouchers, I believe the HUD-VASH program would be supporting a
total of approximately 93,000 vouchers as of late 2017.
Secretary Carson. That is correct.
Mr. Dent. And then the VA cannot move forward with
providing social services for a veteran's housing with HUD
vouchers until in 2018 without new HUD vouchers, which the
budget request appears to propose stopping the issuance of. And
as you know, these vouchers are used to provide rental
assistance for homeless veterans along with case management,
and clinical services provided by the VA at the medical centers
and clinics.
Should I assume from your budget request that you intend to
support the 93,000 vouchers that will be in place at the end of
this year, but that you do not intend to add additional
vouchers in the coming year?
Secretary Carson. All the vouchers will be supported. As
you correctly mentioned there is about 90,000, a little under
that. About 8,000 of those are not being utilized and the $40
million that was added in the 2017 budget brings that to
13,000. That is an adequate number to take care of the needs
currently, but we will--this has been a very important alliance
between the Veterans Administration and HUD. And we feel
extremely strongly about this and recognize that the HUD-VASH
program has been at the leading edge of what is responsible for
reducing homelessness in veterans by 47 percent. That is not
good enough, obviously. We want to get it to 0 percent, but we
will continue to work on that.
Mr. Dent. So I will take that answer as a yes.
Secretary Carson. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Dent. And if you would like to elaborate further on
your rationale for, you know, what appears to be cuts to the
HUD-VASH program and your plans to assist the homeless veterans
population, feel free.
Secretary Carson. We will always provide what is necessary,
but, as I said, we have got 13,000 unused vouchers at this
stage.
Mr. Dent. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Dent. Seven seconds to go.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Ms. Clark, you are recognized.

HEALTHY HOMES

Ms. Clark. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, you have
said you are particularly interested in creating healthy houses
and healthy homes. In 2010, your Department estimated
nationwide there was a deferred maintenance backlog of 26
billion and that was going to grow 3.4 billion a year. But in
this budget you are proposing to cut funding to address this
maintenance backlog by a combined 1.8 billion. Practically
speaking, these cuts are really going to harm efforts that are
underway to not only modernize, but address existing health
hazards.
One example that has been getting some press recently are
the Red Hook houses in New York, where the mold levels, the
asthma rates are three times that of surrounding communities.
How is the New York City Housing Authority, and around the
country, how are we going to remediate that particular health
hazard and maintain our public housing with these funding cuts?
Secretary Carson. Thank you, that is a very good question.
The Rental Assistance Demonstration program has been able to
leverage Federal dollars and bring in an additional $4 billion
recently. And if we lift the cap on that RAD program and allow
it to expand even further, the incentives are already there to
bring in those public-private partnerships. We find that those
are remediating these kinds of problems much faster than the
capital funds ever did.
Ms. Clark. So is that the solution that you see expansion
of the RAD, lifting the $185,000 cap? Because----
Secretary Carson. That appears to be working.
Ms. Clark [continuing]. One of my concerns is that I think
that RAD has been a valuable option. It certainly has been in
Cambridge housing in my district. They have taken advantage of
it, but I have never seen it used without having corresponding
CDBG funds. Ever. Do you have an example where that has ever
happened?
Secretary Carson. I can supply you with some examples for
that. We can send them over to you.
Ms. Clark. That would be great. Because, you know, it is of
grave concern that these programs work as an ecosystem.
Secretary Carson. Yes.

ELIMINATIONS

Ms. Clark. And as we take out CDBG, if we take out SHOP,
HOME, the HOME program alone, every dollar leverages $4.20 in
local and private funds.
Secretary Carson. You are speaking to the choir on that and
we would never do anything to harm what we see as something
that is the solution. The solution is the public-private
partnerships and we are going to be working assiduously to make
sure that we actually expand on those regardless----
Ms. Clark. So then why are you eliminating them?
Secretary Carson [continuing]. Regardless of under what
name we do it.
Ms. Clark. Well, I am getting more puzzled as we go. If you
agree and I am preaching to the choir, why are you wholesale
eliminating HOME, Choice, SHOP? I am confused.
Secretary Carson. I again go back to my initial statement.
We have a certain amount of pie and we have a number of people
who are very much depending on a large portion of that pie in
order to stay sheltered. If we do some peripheral things, a lot
of those people will lose their housing.
Ms. Clark. So I think this brings me back to the discussion
you were having around the deficit. The best way to address the
deficit and the best way to--you know, is to build a robust
economy.
Secretary Carson. Right.
Ms. Clark. And to make sure that we are getting people to
work and that we are investing--
Secretary Carson. Agreed.
Ms. Clark [continuing]. But that comes with investments.
And as I look across this entire administration's budget, we
are seeing dramatic cuts in work training programs--we just met
with Secretary of Labor yesterday--in apprenticeships, in
vocational schools, and career and technical education,
afterschool programs, college affordability student loans. This
budget as a whole is a recipe for killing our economy. And when
you are saying I get the importance of leveraging private
dollars to help us solve our housing crisis, but you are taking
away all the incentives necessary to leverage those dollars, I
am baffled at how you think----
Secretary Carson. I think it depends----
Ms. Clark [continuing]. This is going to work.
Secretary Carson. I think it depends on which set of data
you want to look at in terms of what is happening with the
economy, whether it is improving or whether it is getting
worse.
Ms. Clark. Well, there will be no pipeline of ideas,
innovation, or an educated work force if we put this budget in
place. And I think we can look at any data that we want and you
will find that that is the dangerous truth for the American
people with your budget and the rest of the administration's
budget.
Secretary Carson. Well, the only thing I can assure you is
that we are going to work extremely hard to use every dollar in
this budget to get the biggest bang for the buck, and we are
happy to work with all of you to make sure that that happens.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. We do not have a lot of time,
so what I would like to do then, Mr. Price, is I am going to be
very brief. We will go to you and maybe with that we end it. Is
that all right, Mr. Price?

HOMELESS ASSISTENCE PROGRAMS

Okay. Mr. Secretary, again, since I do not have a lot of
time, let me talk. This committee has been really supportive of
HUD's performance-based focus on homeless assistance programs.
As I am sure you know, the Department shifted its emphasis from
a transitional housing approach to a housing first approach.
And by the way, I need to thank some of your team, your staff,
who have worked with, for example, Miami providers, and you
were there.
Secretary Carson. Right.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And I think some great progress has been
made. But it goes without saying that this shift, you know,
there are some growing pains and some folks and some areas have
been hit. We recognize that in our 2017 bill and provide
resources to communities that lost some funding through this
approach. And I do not know, I do not expect you have it with
you, but it would be great if you could provide us with a
status of additional emergency solution grant funding provided
in--of that 2017 funding for communities that lost funding in
the grant application, you know, the status of some of that. It
would be great and I do not know if you would happen to have it
there, I doubt it, but if not----
Secretary Carson. I do not have it with me at this moment.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. All right. Any idea of how you would
envision some of those resources would be used to move homeless
providers towards more performance-driven programs? Because
that is key.
Secretary Carson. Yes.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. The performance is key.
Secretary Carson. Well, yes, homelessness is a big issue.
Over the last few years it has gone from 800,000 to just over
500,000 so, you know, a lot of progress has been made in that
area. And a lot of the things that we have been doing have
helped with that, but it is an interagency issue and there has
been a lot of private people who have been interested in it,
too.
I think the whole housing first concept is a good concept
in the sense that if you leave somebody sleeping out under the
bridge, they are going to end up in the emergency room and
frequently end up getting admitted. A week of admission costs
more than a year of shelter, you know. We have to, you know,
look at the numbers and do things wisely for that reason, but I
do not think we should stop at housing first. We should then
move on to housing second and housing third. Housing second is
diagnosing why they are in that condition and housing and third
is treating it. Because if we truly want to be compassionate,
then we do everything we can to put people back on their feet.

HOMELESS ASSISTANCE GRANTS

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Secretary, I wanted to bring up, and,
again, I am sensitive to the time constraints, I have concerns
about the budget, the reduction of funds for homeless
assistance grants, but it is something that we will have ample
opportunity to speak about in the future. And with that, and
thanking everybody for being cooperative with me on the time
issues, let me recognize the ranking member to finish up.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I do
want to give you a chance to finish your answer if there is
more to say beyond what you said in response to the other
members, about what the positive side of these hard choices
looks like. In other words, that hard choices are being made,
it implies that some things are being cut, but others are being
strengthened, that there are tradeoffs. I do not see much other
than just indiscriminate meat axe cutting, to tell you the
truth. And we were talking about maybe some things that were
not immediately evident just for the budget numbers, so I want
to give you a chance to respond on that.

BUDGET CUTS

I also want to say something, though, about the broader
budget situation we face. And what I would think is a kind of
all-purpose explanation we want to avoid.
We know that we need to get our country's fiscal house in
order and most people I think know that that requires a
comprehensive approach. We have two examples from the 1990s
about balancing the budget, about paying off a good chunk of
the national debt. It is not too hard to know how that was
achieved, but it did involve some political pain. It involved
some tax increases, it involved some entitlement reductions,
and it involved discipline in discretionary spending. We, for
reasons that are very well known, cannot seem to get back to
that today. But I tell you just simply saying we are under
fiscal constraints and we simply have to whack away at the
discretionary domestic budget, there are two things wrong with
that. It is the worst of both worlds.
Number one, you will never balance the budget that way. We
can eliminate your budget entirely and still have a fiscal
problem, so it is fraudulent as a formula for achieving fiscal
discipline.
And number two, it is destructive in terms of the things a
great country must do to build its economy and to build its
future. It is a formula for disinvestment across the entire
Federal Government. So worst of both worlds and it gives us the
budget that is before us today.
So I will take a back seat to no one in terms of wanting to
confront that larger fiscal picture, but I do not accept that
the HUD budget before us is a necessary product of fiscal
responsibility. Far from it. It really is a disinvestment
budget without redeeming features that are evident to me.
I hope we can do better, I hope we can work with you and
with the administration to, first of all, get the overall
budget numbers in a better place and then within those numbers
write a housing bill that really addresses our country's needs.
But you were cut off in mid-answer and I want to give you a
chance to----
Secretary Carson. Sure.
Mr. Price [continuing]. Give us a little more, a glimmer of
hope, if you will.
Secretary Carson. Well, tell us how you really feel about
it. But no, I was saying that there was some things that are
not in the budget that are very important. For instance, the
concept of our vision/opportunity centers that we want to put
in the proximity of all public housing. These are places
usually that are boarded up right now, but the buildings will
be repurposed and we will be putting into them people who can
help the people have a vision about what actually goes on in
the world.

COMMUNITY OUTREACH

If you go to a lot of disadvantaged communities, you ask
the kids what do you want to do when you grow up, you get about
five answers. But there is 1,000. We need somebody to expose
them to the other 995 and talk about how to get there.
We need to have daycare. And the reason that that is so
important is because a lot of women who have babies out of
wedlock, their education stopped at that first baby, and they
need a safe place to put that baby so they can get their GED or
their associate's degree or their bachelor's or their master's
and learn how to take care of themselves and, more importantly,
teach that to their children. That is the only way you break
those cycles.
And also, mentorship programs have been demonstrated to
have a profound positive effect in terms of people being able
to finish high school. Why is that important? You look at the
Brookings study on poverty. It said that there were three
things that a person could do that would reduce their
likelihood of living in poverty to 2 percent or less: number
one, finish high school; number two, get married; number three,
wait until you are married to have children. So things that we
can do to sort of address the data, not the ideology, so that
we can get people moving in the right direction. Those are
things that will be sponsored completely by the private sector.
I have already talked to people in the business world. They
are very happy to sponsor these just like you sponsor stadiums
all over the country because we live in a country of people who
actually are very compassionate. And it has been very different
from other parts of the world and we need to take advantage of
that.
Mr. Price. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Mr. Secretary,
again, let me first thank you for your time and your staff. I
would ask the Secretary to--the committee staff will be in
contact with your budget officer regarding questions for the
record. I know that I have some questions and I know that other
members will also submit those questions as well. If you would
please ask OMB to return the information for the record to the
subcommittee within 30 days from Friday, that would allow us to
publish the transcripts of today's hearing and make obviously
informed decisions when we are crafting the fiscal year 2018.
Mr. Secretary, as you saw today, you have in this
subcommittee folks who are knowledgeable and interested in
these issues and, frankly, to a great degree, even to the
details, and I know you have had the opportunity to see that.
And obviously it is also clear that a lot of us, including I,
have a lot of concerns about and disagreements with your
budget, but there is no disagreement or concern on my part as
to why it is that you are doing what you are doing and your
service to the country, and so that makes me feel good.
I am comforted in the fact that you have volunteered for
this job and we know that it is a very difficult job in the
fact that you are giving up a lot to do this, so just know that
and I think all of us look forward to working very closely with
you.
Secretary Carson. It is going to be a pleasure to work with
all of you. I appreciate that.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Mr. Price, any
closing thoughts?
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Secretary and Mr. Chairman. Look
forward to the weeks ahead. We have some serious challenges. We
are ready to take them on.
Secretary Carson. Amen.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. With that the meeting is
adjourned.
Secretary Carson. Okay.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Thursday, June 15, 2017.

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

WITNESS

HON. ELAINE CHAO, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Before I begin, I know that all of our
minds are a little bit, in many ways, elsewhere because of the
incidents yesterday at the baseball practice field. And I just
wanted to, once again, mention how all of us are praying for,
obviously, the Whip, Mr. Scalise, the two brave police officers
that were injured along with a member of the staff, and a
former member of the staff, who were injured. So we cannot
forget them and we do not forget them, and we wish their full
recoveries.
With that, this morning we welcome Secretary Chao to
testify on the fiscal year 2018 budget for the Department of
Transportation. I do not have to tell any of you that Secretary
Chao comes to this position with, frankly, one of the most
impressive records of public service that anyone will ever see.
Having served as chair of the Federal Maritime Commission,
Deputy Secretary of the Department of Transportation, director
of the Peace Corps, and Secretary of the Department of Labor,
and, you know, not to mention a number of leadership positions
in the private sector and the not-for-profit sectors.
Madam Secretary, you have led large and complex
organizations, and I will tell you that I think all of us agree
that we are fortunate to have someone of your expertise, of
your experience, of your knowledge as heading DOT, as we are
facing some challenges of course. We always face challenges,
but nobody is more prepared than you. So we are grateful that
you have agreed to, once again, come back to public service, as
you always have.
Thank you for your service to our Nation. I look forward to
working with you to maintain and improve the safety of our
transportation system, all the while ensuring that our
infrastructure investments lead to economic growth and really
to improve the day-to-day lives of the American people, which
is really what we are talking about.
The budget request for the Department of Transportation is
16.3 billion in discretionary budget authority, and a total of
75 billion in total resources, including obligation limitations
for service transportation and aviation programs.
Now, safety is this committee's top priority for DOT. I am
pleased that the budget request places priority on safety
programs, Madam Secretary, funding several programs consistent
with the FAST Act and continuing many of the safety priorities
in the previous 17 bills. So I think that is, frankly, very
good news, in addition to focusing on safety of our
transportation network.
Now, we obviously must ensure that we grow our economy and,
yes, through fiscally responsible transportation investments.
And in doing so we must make sure that we do not leave rural
America and economically distressed areas behind. As we make
the tough decisions that face us for the 2018 budget and
beyond, I want you to know that I want to work with you, that
we want to work with you to make sure that we continue, for
example, air service to small towns and remote communities, and
I want to make sure that we address the passenger rail needs
for our rural communities.
I also want to take a careful look at transit as an
important component of our transportation network. We can and
we must make, obviously, tough choices in Federal spending. We
all have to do that, we have to be willing to do that.
I have some concerns about the administration's proposal to
terminate the Department's work with local governments on
several dozen transit projects, but I look forward to working
with you and through all of those very difficult issues.
I look forward to a spirited discussion about the
administration's proposal to transfer air traffic control
operations and facilities to a corporate nongovernmental
entity. We are dealing with a monopoly, whether it is the
monopoly controlled by the government or a monopoly controlled
by somebody else, it will still be a monopoly.
I have not been shy of saying that I believe that we should
maintain the air traffic control system that is accountable to
the public. It is owned by the public and it should be
accountable to the public, and I do not see any other way to
achieve this than to continue our congressional oversight role.
And I believe that preserving the public's voice, frankly,
is the only way to maintain our airspace as a national asset
and protect access to all users, commercial aviation, general
aviation, and, this is key, new entrants, such as drones and
commercial space operators. And frankly, in many cases we do
not even know what they are, but we know that it is going to
happen now, it is starting to happen now. So we must, to the
maximum extent possible, protect the right of the traveling
public as well.
It is not a secret, our airspace is the most complex in the
world with an unmatched safety record. We can work together to
build on that safety record, and I look forward to it, and open
the airspace to more and more users. Also make sure that we are
not limiting it, but that we open it to more and more users as
technology changes, some of which are beyond our current
imagination, but that are starting to happen right now.
So, Madam Secretary, just know that I look forward to
discussing this issue with you today, and for not only today,
but continuous conversations in the weeks and the months ahead.
Secretary, I appreciate your attention and the attention the
President has given to infrastructure last week. Improving our
Nation's infrastructure is an area where we can find common
ground and make real improvements to the daily lives of the
American people, not only in their ability to get around, but
also, frankly, to help our economy.
So, I really, really look forward to working with you, and
my colleagues with this subcommittee to make smart investment,
to go after waste, to cut red tape, and to protect the
taxpayers. So, again, first thank you for your service to the
Nation, thank you for appearing before us today.
And with that, I would like to yield now to my ranking
member. Mr. Price, you are recognized, sir.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Madam
Secretary, we are glad to have you here this morning. I want
to, first, associate myself with the chairman's remarks about
yesterday's tragedy, and the concern we all have for our
colleague Steve Scalise, of course. And in particular, I want
to acknowledge David Bailey, one of the police officers who was
injured, and we are very proud of him. He is a North Carolina
Central University graduate, and we have followed his progress
over the years.
We really have come together, as we must come together, as
an institution and as a country, I believe, in face of this.
And I hope some good will come of it, but, in the meantime, we
are dealing with real personal difficulties, tragedies that
command our attention and our good wishes.
We are here this morning to examine the 2018 budget request
for the Department of Transportation. This system that we are
funding facilitates the flow of commerce and impacts every
American. We know that investing in transportation
infrastructure keeps us safe and improves our economy, it
creates jobs.
Unfortunately, we also know that we are not doing so well,
according to objective observers such as the American Society
of Civil Engineers, whose 2017 report card gives America's
infrastructure a grade of only D+. The report concludes that we
need to invest nearly $4.5 trillion just to bring our
infrastructure from poor to good condition.
We have heard a lot recently about the need to reduce
bureaucratic red tape to encourage more private investment in
transportation projects. These are laudable goals, but they
will not deliver the transformative results we need without a
core of robust Federal funding. To maintain and modernize and
improve our Nation's transportation system, we must take bold
steps to reduce the backlog of deferred maintenance to move our
transportation infrastructure back to a state of good repair.
And we must make strategic investments in new technologies
to make transportation safer and more efficient. The challenge
before us is clear, and it will only get worse without action
on the part of Congress and this administration. I have to say,
I think this budget proposal falls short of that mark. The
result largely adheres to the funding levels agreed upon in the
FAST Act for programs that rely on trust fund dollars, but
overall budget authority will be cut by $3.1 billion, or 16
percent.
The brunt of these reductions falls upon discretionary
accounts designed to advance public transit rail and other
multimodal projects that are critical to our Nation's
transportation future. For example, the highly competitive
Capital Investment Grants Program would be discontinued for all
projects that currently lack full funding grant agreements
despite the fact that funding for this program was increased
just 2 months ago in the bipartisan Omnibus package.
Ending the CIG program would completely upend dozens of
badly needed transit projects across the country, including two
in my home district in North Carolina. In most cases existing
funding amendments from State and local governments would no
longer be enough to move forward with construction, dooming
many projects to failure. We should be encouraging more State
and local investment in transit, Elimination of the Federal-
matching dollars will have exactly the opposite effect.
Equally concerning is the proposal to zero out TIGER
funding. Here, too, I could point to successful projects in my
district, in my State, that leverage funds from other sources,
so this is a very successful grant program. It supports
innovative projects, multijurisdictional projects of regional
and national significance. They are difficult to fund through
traditional Federal programs. TIGER grants are awarded on a
competitive basis, and every member here knows how competitive
that process is, how far the demand for funding exceeds the
current supply.
Congress provided 500 million for another round of TIGER
grants in the Omnibus package; it is zeroed out in this budget.
Passenger rail also fairs poorly. The Department seeks to end
Amtrak's national routes by slashing investment in the national
network of Amtrak by more than 50 percent.
The request also proposes a 28 percent cut, incredibly, for
the heavily traveled Northeast Corridor. Meanwhile Amtrak is
breaking ridership records, and more Americans are looking to
rail to meet their traveling and commuting needs. Support for a
robust national rail system has been reaffirmed by members of
both parties, including the most recent long-term
Transportation reauthorization bill.
And again, we have strong validation from North Carolina
where traveling from Charlotte to Raleigh, or the other way,
has become a model of efficient and pleasant transportation.
Madam Secretary, you stated on several occasions that
safety must remain a top priority of the Department, yet the
budget request would cut funding in several critical safety
accounts. I will just quickly tick them off: the operations and
research account at NHTSA, the safety and operations account at
Federal Railroad Administration, the pipeline safety account,
the Pipeline and Hazardous Material Safety Administration, and
aviation safety activities within the FAA's operations
accounts.
I am puzzled by these cuts. I hope they do not represent a
lack of commitment to key safety functions. We need to know how
the Department plans to maintain safety with fewer resources at
its disposal.
Quickly, briefly, I want to shift gears and address air
traffic control. The administration has endorsed the outlines
of Chairman Shuster's privatization proposal. I have grave
concerns about this. I have said that repeatedly. This would
sever FAA's aviation safety and air traffic control components.
The government-sponsored corporation model envisioned by
Chairman Shuster and President Trump would reduce transparency
and oversight, while allowing for fee increases, diminished
access to the national airspace for many aviation stakeholders.
It would also represent an unprecedented giveaway of
taxpayer-funded assets to an untested private entity. And it
would threaten the progress we are making, threaten FAA's
ongoing efforts to modernize air traffic operations under
NextGen. That process has accelerated in recent years,
delivering billions in savings to airlines and customers. So,
the budget request not only unrealistically assumes the quick
transition to a private ATC entity, it also defers capital
investments in FAA's air traffic control infrastructure for the
upcoming fiscal year. That seems to be directly at odds with
the notion of improving ATC operations.
Of course the major transportation put forward by the
administration is the much-discussed infrastructure initiative,
and this is something that has potential I believe for
bipartisan support. But we do not have enough to work with. It
is a six-page document. Rather, they mention 200 billion in
Federal outlays that supposedly would leverage 800 million in
private and non-Federal investment, and, of course, we would
need more details about this to even begin to assess it.
Before I close, we need to acknowledge that we still have
no budget resolution, no topline spending number, no
subcommittee allocations. There is talk of rushing to assemble
a Republican-only Omnibus package. I think that is a recipe for
failure. It would represent a complete abandonment of the
regular order.
Even if we reject the administration's draconian cuts to
nondefense discretionary spending, the appropriations process
is at risk of completely breaking down if we are forced to
write our bills to sequestration levels. We have seen this
happen in the past year when we lacked bipartisan budget
agreements. Bipartisan budget agreements are required given the
requirements of the Budget Control Act if we are going to have
workable allocations so that we can cooperatively write the
Transportation, HUD, and other appropriations bills. I know we
want to work in this cooperative fashion, but we also know what
is going to happen to enable us to do that.
Madam Secretary, I look forward to your testimony today,
working with you to ensure that vital transportation programs
are adequately funded. So, thank you. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Price. Now I am
particularly honored and pleased to welcome one of the busiest
leaders in this entire process, and that is chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Frelinghuysen.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Diaz-Balart. It is a pleasure to welcome back Secretary Chao to
another stint serving our public so well. Thank you very much
for being here, Madam Secretary. We look forward to your
testimony.
Let me just add on to both Dr. Price and Mr. Diaz-Balart, I
think many of us were shocked to the core yesterday. Obviously,
we pray for the quick recovery of those that were badly
wounded, and, may I say, we have raised the profile of the
important role of our Capitol Police.
But may I say, a lot of what you do, Secretary, is you have
within your purview, or just outside your purview, the men and
women who protect our harbors, our tunnels, our airports, our
train stations. Sometimes we pass by them, we acknowledge them,
but sometimes we do not expect that at some point they might
have to put their lives on the line. I would just like to take
this opportunity to recognize their role and raise their
profile.
Today's hearing is an important part of our oversight
duties to the committee. After all, the power of the purses
resides here on Capitol Hill. As Secretary of Transportation,
you are responsible for maintaining and improving our Nation's
infrastructure and protecting it. As we pursue policies and
programs to grow our economy, so, too, we must grow our
infrastructure to support it.
In that context, I would like to bring up a critical
project for our national economy, the Gateway Project and the
Hudson Tunnel Project. As you may know, the Northeast Corridor
Regional Rail, encompassing over 50 million people between the
District of Columbia and Boston, produces over $3 trillion in
output, equal to 20 percent of our gross national product.
Safe and reliable passenger rail service is essential to
that economic opportunity, whether it be the East Coast, the
West Coast, or somewhere in between.
Rebuilding the Hudson Tunnel is of vital importance to our
region, and certainly to my home State of New Jersey. Given the
clear benefits of these projects and the disastrous
consequences of inaction, I am concerned about the fiscal year
budget provision limiting funding for capital investment
grants, what we commonly refer to on the committee as New
Starts. I am eager to hear, either in this setting or outside
this room, how the Department plans to support this vital
infrastructure proposal for the New York/New Jersey region.
I have also taken note of the administration's proposal to
spend $200 billion on targeted Federal investments to leverage
private sector resources so that the end result is at least $1
trillion in total infrastructure spending. I would like to hear
more about the specifics for this proposal, and how it will
improve our infrastructure planning for State and local
governments.
We welcome you, Madam Secretary. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for the time.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
obviously your full written testimony will be submitted,
included in the record. You are recognized now for 5 minutes.
Thank you so much.
Secretary Chao. Good morning and thank you for being here
to discuss the President's fiscal year 2018 budget request for
Transportation. My colleagues and I share your thoughts and
prayers for those injured in yesterday's incidents, and we are
so grateful that the Capitol Police were there.
On transportation, we all share the same goal: to ensure
that our country's transportation systems are safe, dependable,
and ready to adapt to transformational new technologies. The
President's 2018 budget represents a bold vision for our
transportation infrastructure. The administration has carefully
studied our current spending patterns, and it has taken a
closer look at programs that may not be meeting their intended
purposes, have outlasted their usefulness, or could be replaced
with new initiatives that will better address future
transportation needs.
The President is requesting $76 billion for transportation.
This request fully funds surface transportation programs
included in the FAST Act and provides steady State funding for
the majority of other transportation programs. The budget
provides new policy direction in several key areas.
First, our transportation infrastructure is crumbling and
in urgent need of attention. To address this concern the
President has proposed long-term reforms to change the way
infrastructure projects are regulated, funded, delivered, and
maintained. The President's plan will create incentives for
additional State, local, and private funding and will ensure
that Federal funding is leveraged to maximize infrastructure
investment. The President has identified a total Federal
commitment of $200 billion for infrastructure improvements, of
which a portion will be directed towards rural America.
Next, the President's fiscal year 2018 budget also includes
a proposal that represents a major shift for the FAA. Despite
spending billions of taxpayers' dollars, over decades of effort
the government has not been able to fully implement state-of-
the-art air traffic control technology. Air traffic controllers
still use paper strips to keep track of flights and pilots are
guided using 1960s technologies, radar, for example. Congestion
and delays cost more than $25 billion annually in higher fuel
costs, lost productivity, not to mention our quality of life.
By 2020, air passenger traffic will soar to over 1 billion
annually. Air freight is expected to more than double over the
next three decades. Drones and unmanned aircraft systems will
have to be integrated into the national airspace. Without
change, the current air traffic control system will be unable
to keep up.
So this administration has proposed moving air traffic
control operations to a nonprofit, nongovernmental, independent
cooperative. The safety regulatory oversight functions will
remain at FAA. And this would also involve and solve a
longstanding conflict of interest issue with the operating
entity, air traffic control, regulating its own safety. More
than 50 countries worldwide currently have this structure of
separating out air traffic control and air safety regulations.
Finally, the President calls for reforming some of our
other transportation programs, like FTA's capital investment
grants programs, the discretionary portion of the Essential Air
Service, and Amtrak's long distance routes. The President also
recommends that we revisit the TIGER grant programs.
The infrastructure principles outlined by the President
will highlight alternative ways to fund worthy projects using a
different funding formula moving forward. It also will
recognize the administration's commitment to rural America as
we revitalize our transportation infrastructure.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to appear before
you today to discuss the President's budget. I am actually 20
seconds ahead of time. [Laughter] I will be more than glad to
answer your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Madam Secretary. And we try to
keep on time here. So we will proceed with the standard 5-
minute rounds, alternating sides. I want to thank the members
of the subcommittee. We are pretty strict here, Madam
Secretary, in trying to keep to the timeline and, of course, I
get a lot of help from the subcommittee chairman in doing so.
With that, Madam Secretary, as I mentioned in my opening
remarks, I have drawn a very bright line to really my
opposition to transferring air traffic control systems to what
in essence is a corporate monopoly. It is a monopoly that will
remain a monopoly, the question of who is going to run it. And
so I am obviously wide open to finding ways to improve the way
that FAA makes decisions and investments. And I welcome, by the
way, working with you and your suggestions as to how I can even
do my job or our job better. We are always subject to doing a
better job.
The problem, though, is that I am concerned that the
proposal would reduce or even eliminate, frankly, the public's
voice in something as critical as our national air traffic
controller. While I am open, and I have for decades been open,
to privatization and competition, this is not privatization.
This is a monopoly that will remain a monopoly except that all
the assets that have been paid by the taxpayer will be
transferred over to this other group. And I think it
potentially could, frankly, create great risk if we were to
hand decisions over to an unaccountable corporate board. And so
that is the only level of accountability that I am hearing in
this bill through this board of directors. But I just do not
see how a board of directors made up of good people, but from
different industries, are going to do anything other than
support the issues of their industries, of their special
interests.
So, yes, I agree that our current system, like everything
else, is imperfect, but it does give a guaranteed voice to the
public interests. And so that is one of the issues, Madam
Secretary, that I want to continue to talk with you about.
In addition to basic accountability to the public, I also
want to make sure that we preserve our Nation's airspace as a
place of innovation. I know that is something you are committed
to as well. You know, we are seeing an explosion of new
entrants into the space, as you mentioned, drones, commercial
space operators, new general aviation technologies. And in this
next generation we will be moving people and goods through the
air in ways that are beyond what we see today. And so that is
why, again, handing that decision to a board controlled by
special interests, I am sure they will be good men and women,
to me would be like handing the streets over to the taxicab
commission right at the time when Uber and Lyft were entering
into the marketplace.
But I do want to say where one of my greatest concerns is.
Right now the FAA has extensive engagement with communities
when new airline routes are planned that could bring, for
example, higher levels of noise over neighborhoods, and we hear
that in this subcommittee all the time. So right now the public
can go to Congress if the FAA is unresponsive. But the
corporation would have no such obligation when they create new
routes or when they change the frequency of those routes. So
this goes to the health, the home values, the basic quality of
life. So, you know, how do we address this issue with a board
that has no direct public accountability? None whatsoever.
So, again, I have other concerns and we will talk about
those at a future time, Madam Secretary. I just wanted to,
again, start that conversation, and we are going to have many
more, but to just throw some of the issues that are concerning
to me. So I would like to ask a couple of questions about it. I
do not have a lot of time.
So would the traveling public have any say on new fees
charged by this new entity? And I know it is in the early
stages, so I do not know if it is even fair to throw these
things at you right now, but, you know, any idea about, for
example? Would the public have any say, any input as to any new
fees that would be charged?
Secretary Chao. The public would have the same recourse to
appeal to their congressmen and to their senators on fees like
they do now. That part will still be the same. What we are
seeing now is a very congested airspace. Our airspace is the
safest in the world, but delays and congestion plague air
travel. And with increased traffic, with new entrants like
drones and unmanned aircraft having to be integrated into the
national airspace, we need to upgrade the technology to ensure
that new entrants and that there is a system that can respond
to all this new traffic and congestion and delays.
And this is not a new idea. It has been proposed decades
ago by the Clinton administration. What we are trying to do is
to allow the air traffic control system to have the latest
technology with which to manage the airspace. So for noise, for
example, noise regulation would still remain at the FAA. So
what we are doing is actually addressing one of the major
issues that has been longstanding, and a conflict of interest
of the air traffic control system regulating its own safety. We
are separating that out. There will be a safety component which
stays with FAA, the air traffic component will be independent
and separate.
And on noise, that still stays with FAA. So citizens will--
the new air traffic control system has to respond to the same
regulations, the pollution regulations, noise regulations. And
if people are unsatisfied, they would have the same recourse.
They can go to their congressmen, their senators as well.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Madam Secretary, I try to keep myself on
time as well, but we will continue this conversation.
Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, I want
to first ask for your assurance on a matter that includes the
entire appropriations process, and it has to do with the
reports that the White House has ordered agencies to ignore
Democratic oversight requests. The administration seems to be
saying that Democratic oversight has no legitimacy, that
oversight is the prerogative of the majority party. That is a
new level of partisanship that is unprecedented. It is
unacceptable, will only worsen gridlock in Washington. So I
want to just ask for your assurance on this. What is your
policy? What is the policy--it is your Department with response
to----
Secretary Chao. I will be more than glad to answer that,
but I would like----
Mr. Price. Let me ask you a couple of related questions----
Secretary Chao. Sure.
Mr. Price [continuing]. About your policy in your
Department. Is there any policy or guidance that you know of
that would prohibit or delay responses of ranking members of
congressional committees or subcommittees? Is there any policy
or guidance that would prohibit or delay responses to
Democratic members of Congress? And if such policies are in
place to prohibit or delay responses to ranking members or
other Democratic members, was that developed in consultation
with the White House or the OMB?
Secretary Chao. There are a lot of questions. So let me
say, first of all, it has always been my policy to work on a
bipartisan basis with members of Congress. Having said that, I
think it is worthwhile clarifying that previous
administrations' policy regarding oversight requests has always
been to work with the majority chairman. And I will quote from
a DOJ opinion, ``The executive branch's longstanding policy has
been to engage in the established process for accommodating
congressional requests for information only when those requests
come from a committee, subcommittee, or chairman authorized to
conduct oversight.''
This opinion also says, with regard to responding to a
request from individual, ``Members who are not committee
chairs, the executive branch has historically--historically--
exercised its discretion in determining whether and how to
respond following a general policy of providing only documents
and information that are already public, or would be available
to the public, through the Freedom of Information Act.''
So in terms of requests from members who are not committee
chairs, regardless of party, the DOJ opinion makes clear in its
final paragraph that the response depends on the circumstances.
I am reading obviously from the recent opinion that has been
made public. It probably puts into writing what has always been
the established precedent.
I am not here to anger anybody and I will say that from my
point of view, to the extent that I can, it is my intent to
work fully with both sides of the aisle.
Mr. Price. Well, that statement of intent that you just
appended to the other things you said is the kind of assurance
that I have gotten, and other ranking members have gotten, in
asking your counterparts across government. So for you to
revert to some kind of supposed precedent that there is some
kind of unique channel to the chairs of the--who represent the
majority party, the way I asked the question represents my
historical understanding and my experience in numerous
committees and in numerous administrations. I have never heard
what you articulated made explicit or, for that matter, as
just--it just does not reflect my experience. And so there is
something new here.
And what does your assurance mean? I mean, you say where
possible you will respond. What kind of----
Secretary Chao. Well, I do not want to get into an
argument, and I am not being disrespectful, but I have been in
the Federal Government before, in the executive branch, and
this has been the precedent before regarding oversight. I am
not talking about information relevant to policy making, but
rather investigations inquiries.
So, but having said that, there are circumstances--I can
say to you I will work with both sides of the aisle the best
that I can. And there will be some issues on oversight that it
must come from the chairman, whether it is Democrat or
Republican. That has been a longstanding practice. And I have
been in government in the executive branch when the majority in
Congress was Democrat.
Mr. Price. Well, I must say it has not been my experience.
And the kind of issues the chairman just raised, the kind of
things that are our day-to-day grist for the mill here, airport
noise, you know, the kinds of bureaucratic snafus that develop,
I mean, we have so many things that we need to bring up with
you in these hearings and questions for the record.
Secretary Chao. And we welcome that. The issue is
oversight. This is not a blanket policy of not answering
requests. It is an issue specifically related to oversight. So
we, of course, will help members on both sides of the aisle
with technical assistance, with information, with constituent
services. You will find that in my record, you know, we always
are very, very responsive. But I think in this particular case
it refers to oversight.
Mr. Price. Well, oversight is about oversight of executive
performance, agency performance. The Appropriations Committee
is the epitome of congressional oversight and it has
historically been nonpartisan, bipartisan. That the
administration is called to account no matter who the president
is, no matter what the party division is, the administration is
called to account by this committee. That is the American
system, the power of the purse.
Secretary Chao. I totally agree with you.
Mr. Price. And the notion that that would somehow in your
mind be segmented----
Secretary Chao. It is not only in my mind, sir.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, it looks like it is in the
administration's.
Secretary Chao. This is a memo that we have received.
Mr. Price. Yes, that is right. And I--all right.
Secretary Chao. Yeah. And it is public.
Mr. Price. You have made it much more explicit than other
secretaries have and we certainly will need to explore this
further.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Price.
Mr. Culberson.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Chao, I
appreciate your service to the country and I can confirm that
that has indeed been the policy under President Obama. And when
he was first elected, under the 4 years when the Democrats were
in the majority here, the administration followed that exact
same policy that you just read. So you are exactly right.
And, of course, we all work together. I know Mr. Price
works very well, we all work together very, very well on any
oversight or concerns that, Mr. Price, the minority have. I
know our chairman would work with them arm-in-arm to make sure
that the appropriate oversight is conducted.
But I wanted to focus on a superb speech that President
Trump gave with the Secretary at the Department of
Transportation, Madam Secretary, where he pointed out that it
only took 4 years to build the Golden Gate Bridge and only 5
years to build the Hoover Dam, and less than 1 year to build
the Empire State Building, but that today it can take 10 years
and far more just to get the approvals and permits needed to
build a major infrastructure project. He pointed out that, for
example, in highway permitting it includes 16 different
approvals, including 10 different Federal agencies, being
governed by 26 different statutes. And in the case of an 18-
mile road in Maryland, they had to build--excuse me, get
approval and permitting. They spent $29 million for an
environmental report weighing 70 pounds and costing $24,000 per
page.
President Trump quite correctly said at that speech, and he
is absolutely right about this, I was not elected to continue a
failed system. I was elected to change it. All of us in
government service were elected to solve the problems that have
plagued our Nation. We are here to think boldly, we are here to
think big, and rise above petty partisan squabbling. It is time
to start building our country and we are here to take action.
He is absolutely right. I am tremendously proud of the bold
agenda that he has taken to cut through all the red tape when
it comes to transportation. And I wanted to ask specifically,
much of this lies within your authority. I wondered if you
could talk to us about what you have done and what you can do
with the authority that you already have as Secretary to
combine the party process, to let them make sure they go in
parallel to accomplish what the President has asked.
And then, number two, this committee is better equipped
than any other to help the President achieve his agenda with
our authority over the power of the purse. That, as James
Madison said, is the single most powerful check and balance on
the executive branch.
So, number one, what can you do and have you done to speed
up the permitting process? And then, secondly, what can the
chairman and this subcommittee, working arm-in-arm in a
bipartisan way, do to help simplify the permitting process for
the critically needed infrastructure projects that President
Trump is so correctly focused on?
Secretary Chao. The administration issued an executive
order very early in the administration coming on board. And
this executive order takes a look at the regulatory aspects
that delay infrastructure projects, and so----
Mr. Culberson. It is to set up the council that was
designed to--is that the council that the President set up?
Secretary Chao. Yes, that is the infrastructure council,
number one; deregulatory council as well.
Mr. Culberson. To examine the process and come up with a
report and recommendations?
Secretary Chao. Right. And, as you mentioned, it talks
about ways in which the permitting process can be streamlined:
if there are sequential processes, whether they can be made to
occur concurrently; if there are duplicative regulatory
processes, whether that can be collapsed or consolidated. And
this is also an effort throughout the government. So in the
Infrastructure Task Force there are about 16 different Federal
agencies. And so the Department of Transportation is also
working with EPA and with Department of Defense, Army Corps of
Engineers, with Fish and Wildlife, and many other departments
in an effort to see how we can work better together to
facilitate and speed along some of these infrastructure
projects.
Mr. Culberson. I guess really what I am driving at, and you
are right, of course, it does need to be carefully examined and
thought through, but the President's right that he was elected
to think big, act boldly. What could be done to speed that up?
I mean, we have had a lot of councils and commissions before to
study things, but you have the authority, I believe, already to
cut through a lot of this red tape and create parallel
permitting, and no committee in Congress is better equipped
than the Appropriations Committee to support you in that
effort. The chairman has got your back, we have got your back.
What can we do to help speed that up in order to really act
quickly and boldly.
Secretary Chao. Well, the President has also made it very
clear that he would like to reduce the infrastructure
regulatory process from 10 years to 2 years, and so he is very
results-oriented, and we are looking at that.
Mr. Culberson. I look forward to working with you on that.
I know the chairman is as well, and Mr. Price. And please come
to us with specific suggestions so that we can help that
process along as quickly as possible. Thank you very much.
Secretary Chao. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Culberson. We are honored
to have the ranking member of the full committee. I know you
have been running around between hearings, Ms. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you very much, and I am sorry but we have
a defense hearing, EPA hearing, and I have the privilege and
pleasure of attending them all.
Madam Secretary, we have had the opportunity to meet
before, and I congratulate you on taking this position. But I
am truly shocked with the report I just received while I was in
another committee. I understand there was a question from Mr.
Price that you have referred to the Department of Justice
guidelines about responding to oversight requests, and that you
stated that you will respond to committee chairs and work with
the minority when possible. I have known you for a long time. I
have been in this Congress for 28 years; I cannot believe that
this is true. Does this mean if I have a request and I send you
a substantive request you may or may not, or your Department
may or may not respond? You could not have said that.
Secretary Chao. I have always worked across the aisle, and
I want to reassure the members on the dais that I will always
work with the committee, and if there are specific incidences
where you have not received a response, please come to me. I
will be more than glad to work with you.
Mrs. Lowey. So, you are saying, you said to the committee,
but you would respond to my request as ranking member of the
minority, as well as you would to our distinguished chair,
which, frankly, with whom I work very closely and I have
enormous respect? And I just want to make this clear that on
Appropriations, we always say there are Democrats, Republicans,
and appropriators. So, I just want to hear you say you will
respond to requests whether we are a Democrat or a Republican.
You do not have to agree with me, but, I think, each of us--
Democrat, Republican--deserve a response. Could you respond
again?
Secretary Chao. I will try my best.
Mrs. Lowey. I will take that as a yes, you will respond
to--I do not understand when you say you will try your best.
Secretary Chao. I will try my best and I have some
discretion under the OLC opinion. You know me.
Mrs. Lowey. I do.
Secretary Chao. And my history, I have always worked----
Mrs. Lowey. So, just say yes, of course, I will respond to
you.
Secretary Chao. I cannot quite say that with regard to
investigatory document requests. It is a narrow category.
Mrs. Lowey. Then that leaves a question, Madam Secretary.
So, think about it while I ask another question because I am
really surprised that you would not say, of course,
Congresswoman, you know me, I will respond whether it is a
Democrat or a Republican. One more chance.
Secretary Chao. It has always been my history to work with
both sides. I have always done it that way and will continue to
do so. But there is precedent that oversight questions are
handled in a certain way. Again, we are not talking about
requests for data or information needed for developing
legislation or any information a member needs to help
constituents.
Mrs. Lowey. Let me just say this and I will get on to
another substantive question because the chairman is being very
generous with me. You do not have to agree with me, you do not
have to agree with my distinguished colleagues, and we could
have healthy debates because that is what Congress is all
about. But I am really shocked that you would not just say, of
course, I will respond, whether it is a Democrat or Republican
or a citizen.
So, I'll go on to the next question, and I would like to
follow-up on Mr. Price's infrastructure plan question. I am
concerned that the President's plan lacks actual funding and,
instead, would put a burden on State and local taxpayers to pay
for those programs. This would be particularly catastrophic in
a State like New York, which gives more in Federal tax dollars
than it receives from the Federal Government. You remember
hearing that from Senator Moynihan who documented that many
years ago.
So, if New York is getting less in tax dollars and giving
more, already pays some of the highest taxes in the country, it
would be unfair, in my judgment, to force New Yorkers to pay
for even more, particularly when many infrastructure
developments and economic gains in New York benefit the economy
of the entire Nation. Do you have more details about how
President Trump plans to pay for his infrastructure plan, and
how will you ensure this infrastructure plan does not force
States and localities to raise taxes to pay for federally
directed projects?
Secretary Chao. The President has always emphasized the
need for new infrastructure, and he has talked about a trillion
dollars, $200 billion of that will be direct government
funding. Some of the monies will come from sale of public
assets, and then the remainder will be a combination of
partnerships and cooperation between the public and the private
sector and through leveraging the Federal dollars, which will
be used like a seed capital that will allow more innovative,
more creative financings. And that leveraging through public-
private partnership is actually seen more often. But, right now
we have certain States that do not allow the private sector to
fund public infrastructure, and so, we want to be able to let
the private sector come in and, if they want to, fund public
sector infrastructure projects. And if there are ways in which
they can participate that will help alleviate the burden on
taxpayers, I think that's something that we should welcome.
Mrs. Lowey. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your generosity of
time. I will just conclude by saying I am a strong supporter of
public-private partnerships, but I am strongly opposed to a
proposal when President Trump has emphasized infrastructure,
and without help from the Federal Government for the new Tappan
Zee Bridge, as you know, that is going up; and without
redevelopment of LaGuardia Airport and Kennedy Airport. A lot
of these infrastructure programs create real jobs and if the
private sector wants to contribute, that is great. But I know
you know the town of Harrison, and I know that my constituents
would be very upset if their taxes are going up to pay for
responsibilities of the Federal Government. It just does not
make sense to me.
So, I would like to continue this discussion because most
people today who responded to President Trump were people who
said, I am tired of paying taxes that keep going up and up, and
President Trump was very forceful about infrastructure,
creating jobs. So I do not think they knew when they responded
to his comments that they are going to pay for those
infrastructure projects.
Secretary Chao. They are going to pay either way. If it is
a trillion dollars in direct government funding, that is taxes.
Mrs. Lowey. That is taxes, but it is the Federal
responsibility, and when you see all these cuts that we have in
the domestic side of the budget, there is a real concern.
Secretary Chao. Which is why we need the private sector to
be involved so we can leverage their input and their
participation as well.
Mrs. Lowey. I am delighted to have the private sector
involved, but I do not want, frankly, the responsibility for
these major infrastructure programs that the President talked
about, and how he was going to create jobs, fall on the tax
base of our local citizens.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your generosity.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Thank the gentlelady. I am
going to ask the members, obviously, the ranking member of the
full committee is always going to have some leeway, but I will
ask the members now to please adhere to, as much as possible,
to the 5-minute rule.
Mrs. Lowey. Let me thank you again for your generosity and
your constant willingness to work together on this committee in
a bipartisan way.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Madam. Thank you, Ms. Lowey.
Mr. Young will have to be a little bit less lenient than we
were with the chairman and the ranking member.
Mr. Young. You just took 5 seconds off my time.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. No, you can have those. We have not
started the clock yet. And for being so nice, I will give you 5
minutes and 5 seconds. How is that?
Mr. Young. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary
Chao, thank you for being here today. Thank you for your past
public service in other departments, and what you are doing
today. I have already admired your bipartisan approach, your
fair approach to your role in leadership and administration, so
thank you for that.
I want to talk about infrastructure. In your statement, you
say, ``Our transportation infrastructure is aging,'' and I
think we can all agree with that, and ``that we need a focused
approach to address this problem.'' I think we also need a
focused approach to address new advancements in transportation,
new technologies, new vehicles, when it comes to taking a look
at what an infrastructure looks like when you have autonomous
vehicles; when you have artificial intelligence.
Should we be looking at a different approach or a different
way to ensure that the next transportation grid is ready to go
for the 22nd century and not be stuck in kind of an analog
approach as we have in the past? Do we need different surfaces,
different tracks within roads? Do we need sensors out there?
Will all the vehicles be talking to each other? I just want to
make sure that we are all thinking about this as we go into the
new century.
And the future is here. It really is. How do you see these
new technologies influencing an infrastructure package?
Secretary Chao. All that you are discussing is currently
being examined and reviewed in various aspects of the
transportation infrastructure proposal. The infrastructure
proposal does not just have transportation. It includes other
departments, other areas, for example, energy, water, veteran
affairs, and possibly broadband; that is yet to be determined.
But what you say about autonomous vehicles on the ground and in
the air is partly a reason why the air traffic control system
is being considered in terms of the need for upgrade and the
need to be kept abreast of state-of-the-art technology. And on
the roads, we are, obviously, thinking more about how do we
accommodate the concerns with autonomous vehicles on the ground
in terms of traffic, but also in terms of safety, security, and
privacy.
So, all those issues are part of the national dialogue that
needs to occur as we talk about this infrastructure proposal.
It will be, actually, probably three different phases, meaning
it will be short term, medium term, and long term. Right now,
we are talking about the short term, which is a trillion
dollars over 10 years; it cannot be funded as our friends on
the other side of the aisle would like, by direct Federal
funding. That would create a tremendous adverse impact on our
deficit and also introduce potential havoc with the private
sector markets with such a large injection of Federal funding.
So, there are States I mentioned that do prohibit public-
private partnerships. While that is not the only solution,
public-private partnerships should not be discriminated
against, and the private sector, if capable, should be allowed
to invest in public infrastructure.
So, all of that is going on and there is a short-term and a
long-term consideration of all of these issues.
Mr. Young. We have had some very interesting hearings
already with the private sector on the new technologies,
autonomous vehicles, what it means, how can we adapt to it. The
Department and this committee, we need to keep being engaged on
this issue. But, more importantly, for us and for you and your
Department, I think, it is imperative that we are really
engaging the private sector every day because they are driving
this, and with consumer demand, as well.
I have about 35 seconds. If you add the 5 seconds, I have
40. The Highway Trust Fund, you know, it has not been self-
sustaining since 2007. Because of advancements, again, in
technologies, innovation, with new vehicles out there, new
fuels, and ways to power vehicles, how do we ensure those using
our roads and bridges are paying their fair share? You know,
kind of pay-to-play on our roads, and are not getting away with
not contributing? We want to make sure that we have an up-to-
date transportation infrastructure program for our roads and
bridges. Because there could be disparity out there because, I
think, more and more with technology, you are going to have
vehicles who are not paying into the Highway Trust Fund, but
are using the system.
What ideas does the DOT have that we all should consider?
And if you cannot name any, just give me some sense of
confidence that you are thinking about this because we need to
think about it.
Secretary Chao. Well, there are various ways to fund the
infrastructure proposal. There is a working list of 13 to 17
under discussion. None of them are attractive. We all want the
benefits, but there will be groups that will not like one or
another financing solution. But the longstanding problem of the
Highway Trust Fund has been resolved until 2020.
But as we prepare for fiscal year 2019 budget, which is
going to be coming up this summer, and as we talk about the
infrastructure proposal, we have to--and I am underscoring your
point, that funding the Trust Fund exclusively with the
gasoline tax is not going to be sustainable. So, we do have to
take a look at other options. And we have not yet made any
decisions, nor any conclusions, nor any agreement among
ourselves as to how to do that yet. But, suffice it to say,
that nothing is off the table.
Mr. Young. Thank you for your testimony and being with us
today. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you. Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here. I do not see the boldness. I think
you look at what you talked about, an aging infrastructure, but
who is using what? In our urban areas, we are about an $85
billion state of good repair. The Chicago Transit Authority
carries more people than Amtrak nationwide in a month. And when
you combine the state of good repair there and with METRA, the
numbers are staggering. These are not conducive to public-
private partnerships. I am all for those. For to use it as we
have, this bold new idea, we are going to do this, is
extraordinarily limited with where people are going.
Millennials are not buying cars. They are doing rideshares,
they are riding bikes, and, thank God, they are using public
transportation. But I have an antiquated, 100-year-old, rickety
transit system that is carrying more people all the time.
In this budget, the grants, the capital investment grants,
are cut in half. So, what are we saying? We are going to have a
bold new idea to transport people the way we did 50 years ago.
Where is the boldness? How does public-private partnerships
work? And how can you assure that they are going to rebuild or
provide positive train control in all of our light rail systems
and around the United States as a whole?
Secretary Chao. The infrastructure proposal is going to
address four principles: One is to target Federal investments
on most transformative projects. Two is to encourage States and
localities to take their own action, with Federal aid coming in
terms of streamlining regulations and permitting. Three is to
tap into the private sector capital and management methods. And
four is to align the infrastructure with the entity best suited
for operation and maintenance. We are going to give the States
a great deal of flexibility, and they are going to have a lot
of say in how all of this is to be spent.
Mr. Quigley. Look, METRA and the Chicago Transit Authority
are not worried about permitting. They are not worried about
the State getting in their way, increasing demand. And the fact
that public-private partnerships are not going to help them at
all, some of this just takes Federal dollars. So, you have
outlined four things that do absolutely nothing for those two
entities, and take away half of the funding to make them
continue to have rolling stock. And let me tell you, these
folks are Democrats and Republicans. My metro trains come
through Chicago, but they go out to my friend Peter Roskam's
district.
These are all people who, right now, these are entities
that need resources, at some point in time, you have got to
rebuild track and you have got to repurchase rolling stock.
They do not have that. Nationally, the backlog on repairs is
extraordinary. So, outlining four things that will help private
sector entities or States move forward with permitting means
almost nothing to them and their most vital need.
Secretary Chao. Approximately 84 percent of transportation
dollars come from the State and local funds. I am not saying
that we are not going to participate. What I am saying is,
under the infrastructure proposal, the States and localities
will have great freedom and great flexibility.
Mr. Quigley. Let us just say you put more money into a
trillion-dollar infrastructure package. You just took away half
the funding for the Direct Grant Program, and the States
matched those dollars, so you have done nothing. Right now you
have cut them in half; this is absolutely vital. So, let us
just say, you come back and say, well, we are going to have
this trillion-dollar package and some of that is going to
include--you will have just taken it from one spigot and put it
into another. That is assuming that you even do this.
Secretary Chao. Well, obviously we disagree with some of
the priorities and some of the missions and some of the
purposes.
Mr. Quigley. And where is----
Secretary Chao. So, what we are doing is repurposing it.
So, we are basically going to----
Mr. Quigley. So, you are taking money, in a sense, from
mass transit and putting it where?
Secretary Chao. That is going to be in the details of the
infrastructure which will be coming out--proposal which will be
coming out in the fall of this year.
Mr. Quigley. We have just got to have some inclination. You
have given us the lead on this that we do not care as much
about public transportation.
Secretary Chao. No, I did not say that.
Mr. Quigley. But you cut it in half, so you have got to--it
cannot be a priority if you cut it in half.
Secretary Chao. It will be reshifted, repackaged, and
repurposed in the infrastructure proposal.
Mr. Quigley. For what?
Secretary Chao. And the details of which have not come out
yet, but states and localities will have the freedom to apply
for grants to address their individual infrastructure needs
whether that is transit systems or something else.
Mr. Quigley. Where would you send it if it is not for
public transportation?
Secretary Chao. Well, that decision has not been made yet,
but states and localities will have flexibility.
Mr. Quigley. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Again, also we are thrilled to have
chairman emeritus. And by the way, Chairman Rogers is the one
who gave me this chairmanship originally. So, for those of you
that are happy that I am chairman, you thank him. Those that
are not happy, he is the one to blame.
Mr. Chairman? I apologize.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And you are doing a
great job and I am glad I had the wisdom name you to this post.
Madam Secretary, good to see you. Welcome to the Hill. Good
to see you outside of Kentucky, although we love you back there
as well.
Secretary Chao. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers. Infrastructure, of course, is the name of the
game this year. We are all tired of traveling on old streets,
bridges that are falling, waterways that are not being
traversed properly, and the like. So, we share your enthusiasm
for doing something big on infrastructure improvement.
I noticed on page 2 of your statement where you list the
key elements, the key principles of the infrastructure plan
that will involve 13 Federal departments and agencies in
concert. The first principle that you list is that the monies
would be spent on the most transformative projects. Tell me
what that means.
Secretary Chao. I think the President would like something
that is bold, that is innovative, something that will really
speak to the future and address the concerns of the future.
Having said that, I understand your question, and that is you
are concerned about rural America.
Mr. Rogers. Yes.
Secretary Chao. And I come, as you know, from a State that
is a very rural, so I am concerned about access, ridership, and
the ability of rural America to be part of the American dream
as well. There will be a separate title to the infrastructure
proposal that will address rural America. The dollar amount has
not yet been decided, but we are very cognizant of the needs of
rural America.
Mr. Rogers. Where is the center of the effort to finance,
the study how to finance the infrastructure improvements? Where
is that research going on? Is that in your Department?
Secretary Chao. I think you asked how will this all be paid
for?
Mr. Rogers. Yes. I am asking, who is studying that portion
of the problem?
Secretary Chao. At the White House?
Mr. Rogers. Yeah.
Secretary Chao. All of us. Prior to your arrival here, we
talked about various different ways, that there is a plethora
of ways, 13 to 17, very commonly discussed ways to pay for
infrastructure. As of yet no decision has been made-, no
agreement, I should say, has reached a consensus. None of the
payment forms are ideal. At this point, suffice it to say that
nothing is off the table. And as you mentioned, there are about
16 different government agencies in the infrastructure task
force that are grappling with how to pay for all this.
Mr. Rogers. Well, given the financial situation of the
country and of the States and localities, it is pretty plain
the money to do whatever we are going to do has got to come
from somewhere else, i.e., private sector. Do you agree with
that?
Secretary Chao. Yes. And again, in an effort to be
bipartisan, I understand that our colleagues--our friends on
the other side would prefer 100 percent Federal funding of $1
trillion, and I had just said that, unfortunately, that would
increase our deficit quite a bit, and it would actually also
create some havoc within the private markets because it would
be such a large presence of Federal dollars.
So, the President is looking more toward using $200 billion
in direct Federal funding, in infrastructure using that as seed
money, and selling off some public assets, and using the
Federal amount to entice or to partner with the private sector
in some creative, innovative public-private partnerships, which
we have seen in the past.
Mr. Rogers. Yes. There are examples of this. For example,
Indiana, 10 years ago or so, sold the cross-State toll road for
billions of dollars, and then used those proceeds to build the
roads around the rest of the State. Is that a possible way to
go here?
Secretary Chao. Toll roads certainly are an increasingly
popular way to finance infrastructure, but I understand both
sides, that some people might not like toll roads, but it is
very effective to finance new roads.
Mr. Rogers. All of us do not like toll roads, but some of
us may tolerate tolls. But the selling, what I am talking about
is the selling of the asset. And I assume the buyer of that
highway would need to enact tolls in order to pay off the
purchase price.
Secretary Chao. This actually is a big issue, whether we
sell off these public assets. And actually there is a
discussion going on about concerns about selling public
infrastructure to foreign interests, and whether there is
sentiment that that is not desirable. And so we are thinking
about some lease and buyback. I mean, these are one of many,
many ideas that are being surfaced as to how we can finance it.
Mr. Rogers. Good luck to you. And thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Representative
Clark.
Ms. Clark. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And we are delighted by
your appointment, and I want to thank Chairman Rogers for that.
And thank you, Madam Secretary, for being with us today.
And I also want to thank you for your commitment on the
Green Line Extension in Massachusetts, and for being up in
Boston recently. A lot of hard work has gone into that project,
and it would not have been possible without the assistance of
your Department. And so, we thank you for that.
And I have lots of substantive questions, but I really was
struck by your comments earlier in response to Ranking Member
Price, especially today, the day after such horrifying events
and attacks on our colleagues yesterday. So, I just want to
make sure that I understand what you are saying.
There was a Letter of Counsel to the President on May 1,
2017. Is that the opinion that you are citing from DOJ?
Secretary Chao. What I am trying very, very hard to say--I
am not trying to anger anybody--especially as you mentioned,
``after what happened yesterday.'' But this is DOJ reiterating
established precedent, and I do not seem to be given credit for
that. It is. I have been in the government before, it is----
Ms. Clark. So, just precedent or not, there is a line in
that note that also says it is established precedent, but it
reads, ``Individual members of Congress, including ranking
minority members, do not have the authority to conduct
oversight in the absence of a specific delegation by a full
House committee or subcommittee.'' Is that your understanding
of the law?
Secretary Chao. That has always been the case with every
executive branch oversight defined narrowly--documents
requested for investigations, not for policy evaluation or
review.
Ms. Clark. So that is a yes?
Secretary Chao. I am committed to working with those
members of this committee----
Ms. Clark. No, I just want to know if that is your
understanding, that individual members do not have any
authority to conduct----
Secretary Chao. That has always been precedent regarding
investigatory document requests. That has been the precedent.
Ms. Clark. Okay. So that is your understanding of the law
and the policy of Department of Transportation?
Secretary Chao. It is not just Department of
Transportation, this has been executive branch precedent for
previous administrations----
Ms. Clark. But you are the Secretary of Transportation.
That is your understanding and policy?
Secretary Chao. It is throughout government, yes.
Ms. Clark. Okay. And your understanding is that is
throughout the executive branch?
Secretary Chao. Yes. I said that is the--the executive
branch, it has always been that way.
Ms. Clark. All right. I am going to move on.
Secretary Chao. Through every administration.
Ms. Clark. I am going to move on to positive train control.
Secretary Chao. Yes.
Ms. Clark. Which is a big issue back in States like
Massachusetts, and really across the country. As the FAST Act
authorized $199 million out of the mass transit account to
create this grant program, but States like mine, are trying to
meet the deadline for implementation, but have struggled to
find the financing to complete the installation.
My understanding is that the application for this grant
program has not yet been fully implemented. As a result, you
have to complete two different applications: one for TIFIA, one
for, is it RIF, RIFR, I am not exactly sure I have that right.
Can you give us an update on how this implementation is going
and whether there has been progress in streamlining this
application process?
Secretary Chao. I can speculate, but let me do my due
diligence and get you, specifically, information, and I will be
pleased to work with you on that.
Ms. Clark. Okay. That would be helpful, because I think it
has become a redundant application process. It is really
causing some problems in meeting the deadlines.
Secretary Chao. I will look into it.
Ms. Clark. On the State maritime academies, they are
essential to a vibrant U.S. Merchant Marine, and ensuring
America's sealift capacity and, frankly, they are key to our
national security. These academies rely on training ships to
fulfill their education mission. The TS Empire State at SUNY
Maritime College is now 56 years old. Its lifetime is expected
to end in 2019. The TS Kennedy at the Massachusetts Maritime
Academy is 51 years old and its useful service life is
estimated to end in 2025.
The 2017 NDAA directed DOT to complete the design of
replacement vessels. And I am hoping that you can tell me, has
the design of the national security multi-mission vessel been
completed? And can you give me an update of the replacement of
these ships?
Secretary Chao. The Mass Maritime and SUNY Maritime are two
great maritime academies, universities, and they graduate
outstanding young men and women every year. I am familiar with
this. These two ships are the oldest. They need to be replaced
at some point. Unfortunately, it is an issue of cost as well.
One ship will cost $300 million. For all the maritime academies
that will be about over a billion dollars in direct outlay.
So we are looking at this issue. And I just recently spoke
with the Mass Maritime president, and also New York Maritime
president, so this is an issue that has to be somehow
addressed. Perhaps one way is to find a renovated vessel, but
then there are waivers required because it would not be U.S.-
built, but that could possibly be $15 million per ship. So, we
are looking at different ways to address this problem.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Congressman Valadao.
Mr. Valadao. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, for your time today.
Madam Secretary, last month the Department of
Transportation approved a $647 million Federal grant arranged
during the last days of the previous administration to the
Caltrain Electrification Project. The power equipment will
eventually be used by the State's bullet train from Los Angeles
to San Francisco. The grant requires that the State match the
official's--requires that a State match that officials have
indicated will come from Proposition 1A, approved by voters
specifically for California's High-Speed Rail Project.
With the use of Prop 1A funds, it is being challenged in
court. If these funds do not become available, what happens to
the Federal grant? And reports indicate that California high-
speed rail is very unlikely to secure private funding. Do you
have any confidence in them being able to match the Prop 1A
funds going forward?
Secretary Chao. That is actually a concern that Caltrain
needs to consider very carefully themselves. The timing of this
particular contract was very sensitive. It was signed off on
January 17, 2017, 3 days before the end of the previous
administration. However, there is a process by which that goes
up to the Congress for 30 days, disputes or rebuttals or
challenges can occur. That really did not happen.
And when the Omnibus basically inserted $170 million into
this, it made the cut for full funding agreement, and the
Department signed it. So, for those that are involved in the
project, they have the funding for 2017. For future years, they
do need to be thinking ahead as to what they want to do.
Mr. Valadao. How do you plan on holding them accountable
for spending those Federal dollars, to make sure that they are
properly accounted for, but also properly spent? I mean, the
whole High-Speed Rail Authority has faced a lot of scrutiny.
All 14 members of the Republican delegation from California
signed a letter to you specifically asking you not to, at least
until they did an audit and gave us some sort of background.
So, I will go with my second question. Prior to the
approval of this Federal grant, all 14 members of the
California Republican delegation sent a letter to you regarding
high-speed rail being an infeasible, counterproductive project,
but it also cited that the project's cost increased, reductions
in its scope, and its failure to secure State and private
funding. Our request was to block any pending Federal funding
until the State High-Speed Rail Authority completes an audit of
the project and its finances, and those findings be made
public. Do you think that was too difficult a request on our
part?
Secretary Chao. I am very much aware of that letter. In
fact, we tried very hard to work with both sides of the aisle
to come to some resolution, but when that Omnibus bill came
through with the full consent of both Houses of the Congress,
there was no choice. It was $170 million we were obligated to
award. They had to proceed. Now, going forward----
Mr. Valadao. And there were some statements from your
office that you were planning on sending more, depending on the
future appropriations----
Secretary Chao. I do not have any money. If there are
future appropriations and it is dictated by Congress, of
course, I have to send it. But there is a natural process of
monitoring that goes on for every single one of these projects,
and so those natural processes will be in place and there will
be monitoring of this project to see that monies are not wasted
and that they are aptly applied.
Mr. Valadao. Madam Secretary, as you are undoubtedly aware,
California has received $3.55 billion in Federal funding. Our
finance report from the Federal Railroad Administration admits
that the High-Speed Rail Authority is unlikely to meet spinning
deadlines established by the grants, and would, therefore, be
forced to forfeit upwards of $220 million back to the Federal
Government. And I am concerned that the authority will start to
use the grant money as a slush fund, spending on frivolous
projects outside the high-speed rail's project.
Does the Department of Transportation require detailed
reports on how the California High-Speed Rail Authority is
spending those Federal dollars? And do you feel that the
Department has proper oversight over where those funds are
being spent?
Secretary Chao. I do. I have only been there 4 months, but
according to what I have seen so far, it is a very professional
organization and there are processes in place to monitor how
funds are spent. This is really a matter before the Congress.
We execute the law as it comes from the Congress, and so the
money was mandated and it needed to go out.
Mr. Valadao. All right. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Mr. Aguilar.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. And
just to follow up on that, Madam Secretary. There was a
difference of opinion, as you mentioned, on that Caltrain
issue, and our office and I personally heard from business
leaders in California who were concerned.
When you talked earlier in your answer about seed capital,
you talked about making sure that the Federal Government has
seed capital as a priority to spur investment. I think
conflating high-speed rail and Caltrain is not fair. This is a
line that is already operating, that is hundreds of millions of
dollars of planned investment that those individuals have taxed
themselves to do. And I think electrification is something that
is helpful for the environment, will reassure that line, and
push more commuters through that transit mode, which should be
our responsibility to help. So I appreciate the consideration
that your agency put forward in making that award.
I did want to shift briefly to TIGER grants. In my
community we were awarded an $8 million TIGER grant. That is a
Redlands Passenger Rail Program. It connects a popular transit
center and terminates at a local university. In between the two
are job centers, as well as a local VA healthcare facility, and
will create thousands of jobs connecting low-income residents
with alternative and affordable transit routes. And I heard
your comments and read your testimony about TIGER previously,
but given the benefits of this program in my district and in
other districts around the country, what did the DOT use to
rely on to decide that the elimination or phasing out of this
program would be beneficial to our national infrastructure
system? What type of data was used? Yeah.
Secretary Chao. I think the purpose was to basically--there
was a basic philosophical disagreement on whether to retain an
unauthorized program from the Stimulus act that are used in an
earmark-like way to fund certain projects. But having said
that, it is the will of the Congress and so you certainly have
every prerogative to restore what you think is beneficial. This
is a new administration, so the President may have different
priorities.
Mr. Aguilar. Are you saying that TIGER grant funding was
earmarks? Is that what I heard you say?
Secretary Chao. Earmark-like.
Mr. Aguilar. Earmark-like, okay. I think----
Secretary Chao. But, again, this is a matter before----
Mr. Aguilar. I am new to the committee. I defer to the
ranking member and the chairman to describe the program and
those who helped craft the language in prior administrations or
in prior Congresses, and then there clearly are prohibitions
against that. So I think I would take issue with that
characterization.
But I will say that creating programs that help our
communities is exactly our role here in Congress. None of us,
to my knowledge, inserted, you know, any language specific to a
project. We are prohibited from doing that.
Secretary Chao. You are right, it is competitively bid.
Mr. Aguilar. It is competitively bid and the administration
is responsible to decide.
Secretary Chao. But that should be in the corpus, you know.
We would prefer that it be authorized rather than have it kind
of like siphoned aside for some specific purpose.
Mr. Aguilar. Yet your----
Secretary Chao. But having said that, we are willing to
work with you. And for those that--obviously, this is a very
popular program. Members of Congress like it and so we will
respond to the will of Congress.
Mr. Aguilar. So you disagree with our ability to siphon
aside funding or take issue with it. The administration may
take issue with it, but you are creating something that you are
going to roll out in the fall that would siphon aside hundreds
of millions--hundreds of billions of dollars in projects that
would be up to the administration to suggest.
Secretary Chao. No, we are not saying that at all. We have
yet to unveil our infrastructure proposal. So that is to say
that we do not know whether distribution of the funds will
occur one way or the other. That is still under advisement and
discussion.
Mr. Aguilar. How do you view--and back to your comment
before about seed capital, because I do think, as you mention,
and in your transit document, as your transportation document
mentioned in your factsheet that so much investment is
occurring at the local level. Local voters in my community have
taxed themselves to build infrastructure projects. As a local
mayor, I was on the authority that allocated those funds.
How do you differentiate the seed capital, as you
mentioned, for some projects, yet in TIGER and other projects
you do not view that as seed capital that is helpful to the
creation of jobs and the movement of goods and bodies?
Secretary Chao. Well, the TIGER grants, you know, I know
that they are very popular, but they were created as an aside
in the 2009 Stimulus bill, kind of like a separate aside, pool
of funds. And I think it would make much more sense if they
were all put together in a large pool where they could be
leveraged for projects proposed by States.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Mr. Joyce, you are
recognized.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon, Madam
Secretary, and thank you for being here today.
I have heard from a number of constituents and local
leaders in my district who are worried about the scope of the
metropolitan planning organizations, or MPOs; that they have
grown too big and that they have begun to impede on surrounding
communities. While I appreciate their directive in providing
cohesive regional planning, it is important to me that we do
not continue down a path of federalizing community planning.
Can you shed any light on the administration's view on this
and if there might be some push now or in the future to alter
this range of authority?
Secretary Chao. We have heard from a number of members on
both the Senate and the House, and we actually are--I think we
have actually rescinded all that, and I will check on that for
you, the metropolitan planning authorities. Yeah.
Mr. Joyce. That is good news. Moving right along, as you
notice, and I understand there have been some questions asked
prior to this, but this subcommittee recently met with field
experts working on emerging transportation technologies,
including autonomous vehicles. And I am encouraged by this
research thus far that indicate these vehicles have extreme
potential to make our roadways safer. So I wanted to make sure
we are doing everything we can to support further development
of these vehicles and, hopefully, one day, their widespread
use.
You recently visited the Transportation Research Center
located in my home State of Ohio. Nearby TRC, along Route 33,
the Ohio Department of Transportation has initiated underground
installation of 35 miles of high-capacity fiber optic cable. As
you know, this cable will help provide researchers with the
data necessary to further develop autonomous vehicles and
design roadways that are compatible with their use. Now, call
me biased, like my chairman does, but I believe the Buckeye
State given everything from varying weather conditions to
innovative centers like TRC, is uniquely positioned to test and
rapidly deploy these technologies.
I might ask you what role of support to our safety-making
agencies, such as NHTSA, do you see these proving grounds
playing? And how can this committee or your Department best
equip them to carry out the work you think valuable to the safe
deployment of autonomous vehicles?
Secretary Chao. These proving grounds are very popular. And
the last administration, a few days prior to departure, had
issued sort a Good Housekeeping, seal to about 10 proving
grounds. We are in the process of looking at all of that.
What I hear, actually, from major automotive manufacturers
and other entrepreneurial entities that deal with autonomous
vehicles is actually that they are going to Australia. They are
going to other countries where there is much less regulation
that governs how they are to test, where they are to test, and
under what circumstances. So I do not think the issue is which
State gets these proving grounds. The issue is how do we make
the whole United States more open to innovation while
respecting the safety regulations that we have? But how do we
make it more welcoming of these new technologies rather than
have these companies, American companies, go overseas to test
their products?
Mr. Joyce. Well, I certainly agree with you and I applaud
your efforts to keep them here. But in Ohio, as you well know--
--
Secretary Chao. You have one in particular that did not
make it.
Mr. Joyce. Correct, and one that the State has invested a
lot of money in, as well, and it is----
Secretary Chao. I actually went there to visit.
Mr. Joyce. I know.
Secretary Chao. Yes.
Mr. Joyce. That is why I mentioned that in my notes and we
are very happy that you went there and had the opportunity to
visit and, hopefully, that in review of this you take that into
consideration. Because as you are well aware, you know, Ohio
had these two brothers named Wright that created flight. And we
had a guy named John Glenn, who was in the Senate with your
husband, who flew around the world for the first time in a
capsule. And Neil Armstrong, an Ohioan, was the first one to
step foot on the moon. So we like to be out front in these
technologies and we certainly think that we have invested a lot
of money in TRC and would appreciate you giving it your look.
Because we do not want to lose any business to Australia.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Chao. Well, thank you for bringing that up again.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon, Madam
Secretary.
I represent a large portion of the Lehigh Valley of
Pennsylvania. And in recent years, we have seen a growth in
freight traffic and operations, which includes truck, rail, and
air modes of transportation. This trend is expected to continue
and industry is expected to grow even more. Part of this growth
is the result of increased online commerce and changing
customer expectations about the speed of delivery. This kind of
growth presents economic and employment opportunities, but it
will also require that our infrastructure keeps pace with these
types of developments.
As the transportation system assumes a growing role of
supporting commerce, how does your Department anticipate
addressing the increased needs to maintain our Nation's roads,
bridges, railways, and airports, specifically in the areas that
are seeing increased freight activity?
Secretary Chao. Freight is very important. We sometimes
forget that, but it is a lifeline for the economic vitality of
our country. So part of the infrastructure proposal will also
include consideration of freight. There are passenger rail
issues with freight lines, and intermodal efficiencies that are
desirable to facilitate the rapid movement of freight. So we
are very much aware of those. And I do not want to--I cannot
say too much about specifics yet, but freight is obviously a
very big concern.
Mr. Dent. Can I ask, I will ask you, too, just about the
infrastructure package and how we might pay for this? I
understand the public-private partnership nature of this whole
thing, which I certainly think is important, but there is
probably going to be a public component, as well. And a
durable, sustainable revenue source will be important. Has the
administration taken a position on how through maybe tax reform
we might be able to find that durable, sustainable source? And
are you open to the user fee, the highway user fee?
Secretary Chao. In the beginning part of our discourse
internally, there was discussion about having this be part of
the--having some portion of tax reform be involved in funding
infrastructure. Those discussions, it seems, have ebbed. It may
come back again, but as of now, I think Secretary Mnuchin has
already said that tax reform will not be part of the funding of
infrastructure. But that, again, may change.
And the second issue you mentioned was?
Mr. Dent. No, that was mostly it. That was mostly it, these
user fees.
Secretary Chao. Everything is still on the table.
Mr. Dent. How to fund----
Secretary Chao. As a gasoline tax you mentioned.
Mr. Dent. How to fund it. Yeah, the user fee.
Secretary Chao. Yeah.
Mr. Dent. The highway user fee.
Secretary Chao. The user fees are--and the gasoline taxes,
I mean, that obviously is a very quarrelsome issue among some
quarters. And so what I can say is that nothing is off the
table.
Mr. Dent. Okay. Final question. The administration and
Congress, as we consider this infrastructure and transportation
package, I believe that we have an opportunity to begin
integrating some new technologies that will greatly benefit
Americans in their daily lives. One of these technologies, of
course, is hydrogen fuel cells, and they have the potential to
be a clean alternative energy to power vehicles with no carbon
emission, only water vapor.
As you may know, a number of States have made commitments
to adopt zero-emission vehicle standards for the auto industry.
And as Co-Chair of the Hydrogen Fuel Cell Caucus, I know that
fuel cells, hydrogen fuel cell vehicles are just one technology
option that automakers are pursuing to meet these obligations.
So I guess how is your Department working with the industry to
remove any possible barriers to entry and ensure a successful
rollout of hydrogen infrastructure?
And I know that the previous administration was not
particularly supportive of hydrogen. Just wanted to hear your
thoughts.
Secretary Chao. We are looking at all new technologies. The
basic principle is that we want to encourage innovation and
entrepreneurship, and this is a new area that we are looking
at. We have just gotten into office, so we do not have a
conclusion on that yet, but we are looking at it.
Mr. Dent. Thank you. I will yield back with 20 seconds to
spare.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Dent. Madam Secretary,
there is a lot of interest, so what I am thinking is let us do
another round. We will limit it to 3 minutes per question and
answer.
We have had multiple hearings, Madam Secretary, regarding
NextGen programs and I think there have been some great
successes in this partnership with the private sector, whether
it is issues like Automated Dependent Surveillance Broadcast
(ADSB) or Datacom development or the NextGen weather programs.
I think those are programs and I may submit some questions, but
those are issues that I think are looking like really good
successes and I want to get some feedback from you, but I do
not think we have enough time to do that today.
I do want to briefly talk about the NextGen Advisory
Committee. This committee has been set up as a public-private
partnership to guide the NextGen decision-making. Do you think
that that body, this body, is an effective body to help guide
our air traffic investments for the future?
Secretary Chao. It is an advisory committee?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yeah.
Secretary Chao. I have not met with them. I have met
individual members. I have not met with the committee in total
yet. It is about 35 members and they meet about 3 times a year.
They certainly offer a great deal of assistance. They are
people are steeped in various aspects of the aviation industry.
And I think it is always good to get a diversity and variety of
opinions and advice.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And I do not know if you have had the
opportunity to look at some of the stakeholders and determine
if that is the appropriate list of stakeholders represented. I
do not know if you have had the opportunity to look at that
yet.
Secretary Chao. I have a list here. I always think it is
always helpful to get as broad a representation of industry
stakeholder groups wherever possible, whenever possible.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Yeah. And also, Madam Secretary, if there
are ways that you think we can improve that, improve the
effectiveness of that, that is one of those things that, you
know, I would like to be in touch with you. I do not know if
you have any ideas at this stage.
Secretary Chao. Of course. I do not say this enough, but we
want to work with the committee, we want to work with the
Congress, and we are very open to your ideas.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, Madam Secretary, you have a history
of doing that and so, again, thank you for saying that. But
more important than the words, you have a history of doing
that, which is why I think all of us are thrilled that you
accepted to do this and to once again serve here.
Have you been able to see the benefits that we have seen to
date regarding the ADSB, which is the Automated Dependent
Surveillance Broadcast? Catchy name. Now that it has been
completed have you had the opportunity to see how that is doing
and the benefits?
Secretary Chao. It is actually one of the successes of the
whole NextGen effort. I commend FAA and I commend the men and
women at the FAA who are doing a tremendous job despite
difficult circumstances. They have been able to maintain the
system, work through the air traffic control, despite
challenging circumstances. I mean, the system is as safe as it
is and it is as good as it is not because of the current
government structure, but in spite of it. And so I think it
says a lot about the men and women who work there, but we want
to do better.
And as I mentioned earlier, we are going to disagree on
this, is that we are thinking about the future----
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Well, we will be working through these
issues.
Secretary Chao. You know, we are thinking about the future:
increased traffic, increased congestion. When we talk about the
NextGen, the project that you mentioned, it is ADB, you know,
we are talking radar here. With radar it is a sweep, once in 6
seconds, and within 12 seconds an airplane travels 1 mile. So
we need to be in a GPS system and not still tied to 1960
technology of using radar. We have the technology now.
That is just one example and there are many other examples
of where the new technological advantages which are available
to us, we are still not--FAA, air traffic control--we are still
not quite up to speed on, and that is what we need to improve
on.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Madam Secretary, and again, this is a
conversation we will continue to have. I do want to note that
the U.S. has deployed the ADSB GPS technology. The issue is not
that the technology is not available. The issue is that the
airlines need to equip themselves with it. But anyway, those
are conversations that I look forward to having with you.
Secretary Chao. Okay.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And again, I am thrilled that----
Secretary Chao. I have an answer to that one, too, but we
can discuss----
Mr. Diaz-Balart. We will continue.
Secretary Chao. Yes, we will continue this.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. This is a long conversation. And again,
Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, I want
to quickly achieve some closure on your earlier conversation
with me and Ms. Lowey and Ms. Clark, saying that the reason you
obviously took us aback is that your answer departs from what
we have heard, what I have personally heard from other cabinet
secretaries about this matter, in my personal case, Carson,
Kelly, Mnuchin.
Secondly, I assure you it is not a question of your good
will. We do not doubt your good will. The question is a matter
of policy, the obligation that anyone in your position has to
respond to oversight inquiries from duly elected members of
Congress, and particularly the committees charged with funding
and overseeing your Department.
Let me ask you about capital investment grants, New Starts.
Your budget request upends the precedent of Federal support for
transit projects, specifically the budget would cut off Federal
funding for new transit projects and those currently in the CIG
pipeline, and spare only those projects with full funding grant
agreements already in place. I want to ask you about that in
particular, that pipeline.
I applaud you for advancing projects like Phoenix,
Pittsburgh. They went into project development. The New York
Canarsie Line went into engineering. Going forward are you
going to continue to rate, review, and move projects through
the pipeline?
And B, what about Small Starts? The fiscal 2017 Omnibus
provided funding for 10 Small Starts projects. When do you
expect to sign Small Start grant agreements for those projects
and award the funds to the sponsors?
Secretary Chao. It is actually a more complicated answer
which I do not think you will appreciate, but the current
guideline from the administration is that for New Starts, that
there is going to be--if there is not funding, then I cannot
sign the full funding agreement. And if I cannot sign the full
funding agreement, obviously there is no funding. But it really
depends on the Congress.
Right now, for those that do not having funding, I will not
be able to sign it.
Mr. Price. There are some that do not have the full
increment, as you say. As I understand it, there is through the
fiscal 2017 bill there is full funding for six of those.
Secretary Chao. Yes, and they are actually listed. So if
you are on that list, you will get funding. If you are not on
that list, then you will not.
Mr. Price. All right. Can you tell us about the pipeline
going forward, since our time is limited? What about the
continuation of----
Secretary Chao. There will not be any New Starts.
Mr. Price [continuing]. Rating and reviewing and moving
projects through?
Secretary Chao. Yeah, the administration does not support
New Starts.
Mr. Price. Well, on what basis did you advance Pittsburgh
and Phoenix and New York Canarsie?
Secretary Chao. I think they were already defined as New
Starts.
Mr. Price. They are moving into----
Secretary Chao. There is actually a list, so.
Mr. Price. They are moving into project development. They
are moving into engineering. That is a process that is ongoing.
Is that process going to stop?
Secretary Chao. I do not think so. I mean, these cities,
they will have to now consider what they want to do. If they do
not have the funding beyond 2017, what will they do? So that is
a question and I cannot answer it for them. They may go to
public-private partnerships. They may find other sources of
funding, but that is something they are going to have to
consider.
Mr. Price. You have no answer for them. You are going to
continue to move them into these various phases, these early
phases, but there is no----
Secretary Chao. I think we are pretty----
Mr. Price [continuing]. But there is no----
Secretary Chao. The good part----
Mr. Price [continuing]. Resources.
Secretary Chao. But the good part is if you are on that
list, as I mentioned, of fiscal year 2017 or for that is for
the fiscal year 2018, if you are on that list, you can be
assured of some certainty. If you are not, it is probably not
going to be funded. So it is pretty clear.
Mr. Price. Well, there are----
Secretary Chao. And then alternative plans have to be made,
obviously.
Mr. Price. All right. My time has expired. There are
projects in this kind of----
Secretary Chao. Let us discuss that offline.
Mr. Price [continuing]. Betwixt and between discussion.
Secretary Chao. Okay.
Mr. Price. It is a situation, so we do need to have some
understanding of that.
Secretary Chao. Yes, then let us discuss this further and
see.
Mr. Price. All right. Thank you.
Secretary Chao. Thank you.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Mr. Valadao.
Mr. Valadao. Thank you, Chairman. Madam Secretary,
livestock haulers in my district and across the country have a
challenging task of balancing both the safety of motorists and
the health and welfare of animals being transported.
Unfortunately, the impending December 18, 2017, electronic
logging device, ELD, enforcement date and existing hours of
service rules do not adequately accommodate this subject of the
trucking industry. Industry members and authorities have
expressed the need for delayed implementation of the rule to
address concerns and provide sufficient training and education
for the uniformed compliance and enforcement.
While motorists safety remains a top priority, so does the
welfare of our animals. What long-term solutions do you
recommend to ensure both motorist safety, as well as animal
welfare? Probably not one you spend a lot of time on.
Secretary Chao. I am sad to hear that. Of course we want to
protect our pets, our livestock.
Mr. Valadao. It is mostly geared to livestock.
Secretary Chao. Yes. I will look into that.
Mr. Valadao. All right.
Secretary Chao. I do not have the answer to that.
Mr. Valadao. In your opinion, are ELD devices able to
accurately distinguish between the times that a truck may be
running, but not yet on the road? For livestock haulers this
would include time to the initial loading location, time spent
waiting, and time loading. In the future, would the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration be willing to work with the
livestock and insect industry to provide further exemptions or
flexibility for them under the hours of service rule?
Secretary Chao. I am not familiar with this subject as you
mentioned, but I look forward to working with you and your
constituents.
Mr. Valadao. Thank you. I really do appreciate that.
Chairman, under my time limit, so I yield back.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. You know, I was very proud of how this
committee always sticks to the timeline. Today we have not been
doing that great, but it is okay.
Ms. Clark.
Ms. Clark. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, I
would like to return to the maritime academies. We talked about
their essential role in sealift capacity, our national
security, but there have also been very troubling recent
reports of sexual misconduct at the Merchant Marine academies
that really allege a hostile culture for the female midshipmen.
And these reports of unwanted sexual advances, harassment, and
assault have caused the academy to suspend its Sea Year
Program.
So I have two questions for you. How is your Department
going to handle these allocations? And also, how is your budget
and your proposed expenditures going to ensure the safety of
female midshipmen during their Sea Year when most of these
incidents occur?
Secretary Chao. I am obviously very concerned about these
issues, as are my colleagues at the Department of
Transportation and at MARAD, so we are investigating this. And
the dollar amount that you specifically mentioned, it has been
increased from $380,000 for education, advocacy, counseling, to
almost a million dollars now. But we are very concerned about
this issue and obviously we need to do something about it
because, as you mentioned, it is connected to the accreditation
issue and it is a safety issue.
Ms. Clark. Right. We had the Inspector General in several
weeks ago and we were talking about this issue. Are you working
closely with them on this issue?
Secretary Chao. Yes, and I say yes although he has the lead
on the investigation, of course.
Ms. Clark. Yeah, yeah.
Secretary Chao. We are kept apprised and he will give
recommendations and we will see where we go from there. But
obviously, we are very concerned about it and so if you have
suggestions, we would love to work with you, as well.
Ms. Clark. All right. We will welcome that opportunity.
Thank you. One minute back to you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Mr. Aguilar.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will not take
Representative Clark's minute. I will stick to my own.
Madam Secretary, as a member of the committee one of our
areas of responsibility is to make sure that these funds are
invested wisely, and I know that you share our concern about
that issue. And one of the ways that some agencies have sought
to utilize technology is by using geospatial analysis and
technology. FEMA has done this, has utilized this technology.
Do you think that it would be beneficial for the Department
of Transportation to employ technology to apply a more kind of
real-time view of where we are with our transportation
infrastructure system, with the projects that DOT is funding,
where they are in the process, what is getting complete at what
stage, or are those being completed? Would you be more open to
looking at how we use technology in the Department in order to
advance the priorities, to make sure that the American public,
similar to what was done with the stimulus years ago, in a
tracking fashion that individuals can track what projects are
being awarded and where they are within the pipeline? Is there
more than we can do and help you with?
Secretary Chao. That is very interesting.
Mr. Aguilar. Yeah.
Secretary Chao. Yeah, I do not know. That is----
Mr. Aguilar. You have--I know you discussed----
Secretary Chao. I understand your concern. Yeah, that is an
interesting concept. I would be more than willing----
Mr. Aguilar. And I know you discussed before your
reluctance to support siphoning aside money, but one of the
ways--one of the areas----
Secretary Chao. The transparency and it allows people to
find out what is going on, yeah.
Mr. Aguilar. Absolutely.
Secretary Chao. Yeah, sure.
Mr. Aguilar. And one of the ways that Congress has asked
you to prioritize the budget and the agency has accepted,
obviously, and there is funding within fiscal year 2017, as
well as the fiscal year 2018 request, is transportation
planning and development. So I just wanted to know your
thoughts on how we do a better job of managing those projects,
having a more, you know, real-time analysis of where we invest
or funds.
Secretary Chao. The real-time analysis is the key because I
believe that the Transportation Department has a good handle on
monitoring funds, how it is being used, whether the funds are
being used for the purpose they were intended, all that.
Mr. Aguilar. Sure, sure, absolutely.
Secretary Chao. So I think we have a good monitoring
system. I mean, after all, we are grant makers----
Mr. Aguilar. That is correct.
Secretary Chao [continuing]. And so we need to monitor for
distribution.
Mr. Aguilar. Yeah. No, no, no, no, and I am not
questioning----
Secretary Chao. But your----
Mr. Aguilar. Yeah.
Secretary Chao. So you are saying on real time----
Mr. Aguilar. Yeah, yeah.
Secretary Chao [continuing]. Which is very interesting.
Mr. Aguilar. No, I am not questioning----
Secretary Chao. Yeah.
Mr. Aguilar. Yeah, I am not questioning the ability of your
staff.
Secretary Chao. So we like to----
Mr. Aguilar. Right.
Secretary Chao. So I would like to hear more about that.
Mr. Aguilar. Yeah, I am not questioning the ability of----
Secretary Chao. And maybe we are doing that already, but
that is a very interesting thought.
Mr. Aguilar. Sure, sure. No, and I think your ability to
provide oversight is totally fine from the grant side. I am
just saying, yeah, as you mentioned, from a transparency
perspective, you know, is there more that we can do to show the
American public, you know, where the investments are occurring?
Secretary Chao. Well, if you have ideas, again, we are very
open to discussing them with you.
Mr. Aguilar. Sure. I appreciate it. Thank you so much.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Let me recognize the vice
chairman of the subcommittee, Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In trying to go through
with the question I asked you about the MPOs to begin with.
There was a bill, 496, that the President signed that talked
about the merger aspect, but I was talking more about the
expansion aspect of the MPOs. And I do not see it addressed in
there, the fact that they are going into neighborhoods and
telling or dictating to communities how they should grow
forward. Is that something we can address with you offline as
we move forward?
Secretary Chao. Of course.
Mr. Joyce. Okay.
Secretary Chao. Let us talk about that. Our rulemaking last
spring dealt with mandatory MPOs.
Mr. Joyce. Great. Thank you very much.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, sir. Madam Secretary, let me
first thank you and also your staff for your participation here
this afternoon. The committee staff will be in contact with
your budget office regarding questions for the record. I know
that we will all have a number of questions to be submitted and
I would imagine that, again, all of us would do that. If you
could please work with OMB to return the information for the
record to the subcommittee within 30 days from tomorrow, that
way we will be able to publish the transcripts of today's
hearings and make obviously informed decisions when crafting
the fiscal year 2018 bill.
I would be remiss, Madam Secretary, if I did not say, you
know, obviously you are a well-known entity for those of us who
have been here, and your reputation has always been one of
obviously talent, but also responsiveness and accessibility.
And I just want to tell you that you have proven that that has
been the case; that you have been exceedingly responsive to our
requests and you have been accessible. So just know that that
does not remain unnoticed and that we do appreciate your
continuing willingness to work with us.
And I will tell you that I for one, and all of us, look
forward to a very close working relationship. You know, we have
to be working very closely. And again, I think all of us are
thrilled that it is you, not only because of your history, but
because you have demonstrated already in the short time that
you have been there and that you remain as accessible and as
responsive as anybody.
So thank you for your service. We look forward to
continuing to work with you.
Mr. Price, any closing remarks?
Secretary Chao. Thank you.
Mr. Price. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also thank you
for your discussion here with us this morning. We will all have
further questions that we want to explore for the record, but I
join the chairman in gratitude for your appearance and a desire
to earnestly work on these transportation issues. You are
leading a department that is at the forefront of our country's
economic wellbeing, the quest for new and better jobs. And it
has a history of relatively bipartisan cooperation and
support----
Secretary Chao. Yes.
Mr. Price [continuing]. Both in the Congress and in the
various stakeholders that you work with. That will be very
important going forward in divisive times to find some way to
invest in our country's transportation future. So thank you so
much.
Secretary Chao. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Price, thank
you so much for the opportunity because I want to reinforce
again I have been in this Department before. It has always been
bipartisan and that is the spirit with which I proceed, and I
look forward to working with all members of the committee.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Madam Secretary. The meeting is
adjourned.
Secretary Chao. Thank you.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
