- PROTECTING AMERICANS FROM ILLEGAL BAIL- OUTS AND PLAN CANCELLATIONS UNDER THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING AMERICANS FROM ILLEGAL BAIL-
OUTS AND PLAN CANCELLATIONS UNDER THE
PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 28, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-167

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
93-578 PDF                    WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  GENE GREEN, Texas
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                      JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            Islands
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PAUL TONKO, New York
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

7_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                  Islands
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     3
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     4
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    52

Witnesses

Stan Veuger, Resident Scholar, American Enterprise Institute.....    14
Prepared statement...........................................    16
Jack Hoadley, Research Professor, Georgetown University..........    21
Prepared statement...........................................    23
Edmund F. Haislmaier, Senior Research Fellow, The Heritage
Foundation.....................................................    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29

Submitted Material

Memorandum of January 23, 2014, from Edward C. Liu, Legislative
Attorney, Congressional Research Service, to House Energy and
Commerce Committee, submitted by Mr. Pitts.....................     7
Article of May 21, 2014, ``Critics call Obama funding plan for
health insurer losses `bailout,' '' by Noam N. Levey, Los
Angeles Times, submitted by Mr. Pitts..........................    10
Blog post of June 19, 2014, ``Insurers Expect $1 Billion in Risk
Corridor Payments, Committee Finds,'' by Sara Hansard, BNA
Bloomberg, submitted by Mr. Pitts..............................    13
Staff report of July 28, 2014, ``ObamaCare's Taxpayer Bailout of
Health Insurers and the White House's Involvement to Increase
Bailout Size,'' by House Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform, submitted by Mrs. Ellmers \1\
H.R. --------, the Protecting Americans from Illegal Bailouts Act
of 2014, submitted by Mr. Pitts................................    54
H.R. 3522, the Employee Health Care Protection Act of 2013,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................    56
H.R. 4406, the Taxpayer Bailout Protection Act, submitted by Mr.
Pitts..........................................................    58

----------
\1\ The report is available at http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF14/20140728/102551/HHRG-113-IF14-20140728-SD006.pdf.

PROTECTING AMERICANS FROM ILLEGAL BAILOUTS AND PLAN CANCELLATIONS UNDER
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW

----------

MONDAY, JULY 28, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 4:01 p.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Blackburn,
Gingrey, Lance, Cassidy, Guthrie, Griffith, Bilirakis, Ellmers,
Pallone, Green, Barrow, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Clerk; Sean
Bonyun, Communications Director; Leighton Brown, Press
Assistant; Noelle Clemente, Press Secretary; Paul Edattel,
Professional Staff Member, Health; Sydne Harwick, Legislative
Clerk; Katie Novaria, Professional Staff Member, Health; Heidi
Stirrup, Health Policy Coordinator; Ziky Ababiya, Democratic
Staff Assistant; Karen Lightfoot, Democratic Communications
Director and Senior Policy Advisor; Karen Nelson, Democratic
Deputy Committee Staff Director, Health; and Matt Siegler,
Democratic Counsel.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The Chair
will recognize himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Today's hearing is once again about protecting taxpayers
and consumers from the consequences of the Affordable Care Act;
namely, a giveaway of taxpayer dollars to insurers, under the
ACA, and another round of planned cancellations in the group
market.
First, Section 1342 of the Affordable Care Act created what
are known as risk corridors, a mechanism that will protect
insurance companies from some of the financial losses they face
under the Affordable Care Act. It works by decreasing payments
to plans whose expenses are below projections, those with
healthier than expected enrollees, and redistributing those
dollars to plans whose expenses exceed projections, those with
sicker than expected enrollees.
The risk corridor provision is in effect from 2014 through
2016, if done in a budget-neutral fashion, taxpayers would have
little to be worried about when it comes to risk corridors, but
while the administration has paid lip service to the risk
corridor program being budget neutral, it has also indicated
that, quote, ``regardless of payments and receipts, HHS will
remit payments as required under Section 1342 of the Affordable
Care Act,'' end quote.
Opening the door to what would essentially be a taxpayer-
funded bailout of health insurers. Additionally, according to
the Congressional Research Service and a plain reading of
Section 1342, the law does not provide an appropriation for
these payments. In the absence of a congressional
appropriation, any payments are clearly an end-run around
Congress and, therefore, illegal. The very idea of risk
corridors assumes that there will be winners in the insurance
industry wjhose gains can be shifted to the losers.
However, the President's decision to selectively enforce
provisions of the ACA along with higher enrollment of older and
sicker individuals than was originally projected, could cause
industry-wide losses, putting the taxpayer on the hook for
billions of dollars in payments.
The committee will consider legislation today to protect
taxpayer dollars from being unlawfully given to health
insurance companies under the risk corridor program.
Second, as we have noted in previous hearings, the
President promised numerous times that if you liked your
healthcare plan, you could keep it. However, millions of
Americans experience plan cancellations in the individual
market last fall, and millions more will likely lose their
employer-sponsored plans in the future. Dr. Cassidy's
commonsense bill, H.R. 3522, the Employee Healthcare Protection
Act, would permanently grandfather all group plans issued by
health insurers that were in existence in 2013, allowing
consumers to keep the coverage they like and giving small
businesses better options than ACA-compliant plans.
I would like to thank all of our witnesses for being here
today to discuss these issues. And I yield back the balance of
my time, recognize the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, for 5
minutes for an opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

Today's hearing is once again about protecting taxpayers
and consumers from the consequences of the Affordable Care Act,
namely an unlawful giveaway of taxpayer dollars to insurers
under the ACA and another round of plan cancellations in the
group market.
First, section 1342 of the Affordable Care Act (ACA)
created what are known as ``risk corridors,'' a mechanism that
will protect insurance companies from some of the financial
losses they face under the Affordable Care Act.
It works by decreasing payments to plans whose expenses are
below projections (those with healthier-than-expected
enrollees) and redistributing those dollars to plans whose
expenses exceed projections (those with sicker-than-expected
enrollees).
The risk corridor provision is in effect from 2014 through
2016.
If done in a budget-neutral fashion, taxpayers would have
little to be worried about when it comes to risk corridors.
But, while the administration has paid lip service to the risk
corridor program being budget neutral, it has also indicated
that ``regardless of payments and receipts, HHS will remit
payments as required under section 1342 of the Affordable Care
Act,'' opening the door to what would essentially be a
taxpayer-funded bailout of health insurers.
Additionally, according to the Congressional Research
Service, and a plain reading of section 1342, the law does not
provide an appropriation for these payments. In the absence of
a Congressional appropriation, any payments are clearly an end-
run around Congress, and, therefore, illegal.
The very idea of risk corridors assumes that there will be
``winners'' in the insurance industry, whose gains can be
shifted to the ``losers.'' However, the President's decision to
selectively enforce provisions of the ACA, along with higher
enrollment of older and sicker individuals than was originally
projected, could cause industry-wide losses--putting the
taxpayer on the hook for billions in payments.
The committee will consider legislation today to protect
taxpayers dollars from being unlawfully given to health
insurance companies under the risk corridor program.
Second, as we've noted in previous hearings, the President
promised numerous times that if you liked your health care plan
you could keep it. However, millions of Americans experienced
plan cancellations in the individual market last fall, and
millions more will likely lose their employer-sponsored plans
in the future.
Dr. Cassidy's commonsense bill, H.R. 3522, the Employee
Health Care Protection Act, would permanently grandfather all
group plans issued by health insurers that were in existence in
2013, allowing consumers to keep the coverage they like and
giving small businesses better options than ACA-compliant
plans.
I thank all of our witnesses for being here today to
discuss these issues, and I yield the balance of my time.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to reiterate what I said an hour earlier, and that
is that we have, I guess, two bills that are the subject of a
hearing today and one of them, H.R. 3522, the Employee
Healthcare Protection Act, is already designated or noticed for
the full committee markup on Wednesday without even having been
marked up in subcommittee. So, once again, I do want to object
to the fact--I know this isn't an issue where we can stop the
hearing, but I do want to object to the fact that we are
proceeding to mark up that bill in full committee without
regular order and having a subcommittee markup based on what
has been noticed.
But beyond that, today's hearing is nothing more than
another episode in a series of Republican attacks on the
Affordable Care Act and this time, it is even harder to take
seriously the words the GOP have chosen to include in the title
include illegal bailouts. It is quite ironic, that, because the
provisions of the ACA that are being attacked today are the
very same policies Republicans have supported in the past.
Of course, no one is surprised, since the passage of the
ACA, Republicans have reversed course on so many ideas that
were once the foundation of their health agenda. Remember that
the individual mandate, that was a Republican idea as well. And
as we get close to the election, we are going to hear more and
more about how the ACA must be repealed and replaced, but I am
still waiting for the alternative and I haven't heard one from
the other side of the aisle. Risk corridors specifically are
not some made up policy the Democrats decided to use to give a
handout to insurance companies. Trust me, no Democrat is
interested in bailing out the insurance company. But these
policies are in place for legitimate reason and only because
they are in the ACA are they controversial and considered in
this negative light by the GOP.
And let's recap the importance of risk corridors in order
for insurance pools to keep premiums stable and costs low, it
is critical to spread out risk. These types of risk-sharing
mechanisms are not a new phenomena. They are used in all types
of function insurance system. One great example is the use in
the Medicare Part D program. In fact, the provisions of the ACA
were modelled after the Part D program, which, of course, was
authored by the GOP. If Republicans had their way, they would
repeal this program and would effectively create chaos in the
marketplace.
So, Mr. Chairman, there is a new study, published in the
New England Journal of Medicine last week, that estimated that
10.3 million uninsured adults gained healthcare coverage
following the first open enrollment period in the health
insurance marketplace. The uninsured rate for adults ages 18 to
64 fell from 21 percent in September 2013 to 16.3 percent in
April 2014. And these results do not include the more than 3
million young adults who gained health insurance coverage
through their parents' plan. So we have done something pretty
remarkable here with the ACA. These millions of people aren't
just a number. They are actual people who can now see a doctor.
They can now treat an illness that was otherwise going
untreated or better yet, they can remain healthy and prevent
illness in the future. Women no longer will be charged more men
for insurance. Insurance companies must offer robust health
coverage, so that when you do get sick or you are hospitalized,
you aren't left with thousands of dollars in debt. If
Republicans had their way, we would go back to the days when
insurance companies could drop someone for a preexisting
condition.
Almost all of the ACA's key reforms and policies are now in
place, and the Affordable Care Act is working. It is not
perfect, but gutting the law's insurance provisions is not a
way to perfect it. It is a way to score political points. So I
am going to urge my Republican colleagues one more time to stop
their political stunts, stop trying to dismantle the ACA's
success, and come together with Democrats to strengthen and
improve its historic benefits and protections. Am I going to
yield to any of my colleagues, or--did you want some time?
I will yield to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank my ranking member for the time. I was hoping,
over the last few months, we had a kind of vacation from
efforts to attack the Affordable Care Act, and we were actually
legislating and doing things I think our committee could work
across party lines. These bills today it seems like it is--we
are back to the, you know, how many times do we need to try to
repeal the Affordable Care Act? I know it is probably 50 or so.
But, you know, maybe it is just election fodder that we need to
have. But I don't mind. There is a lot of successes over the
last few months because of the Affordable Care Act, and we are
seeing it every day. And I would hope us not to throw a
roadblock up in front of it.
And I appreciate you yielding me your time.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Waxman, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
We have three bills before us today. We have a hearing on
them. But all three bills are intended to undermine the
Affordable Care Act. That is exactly what they would do. And I
just want to point out that we have had over 50 votes on the
House floor to repeal or undermine, effectively repealing, the
Affordable Care Act. Don't we have anything better to do?
We were promised by the Republicans that they would come up
with a replacement, and they were going to do that in 2011.
Then we heard it would come in 2012. Then it was sometime in
2013. Then it was supposed to be early 2014. And then we were
assured there would be a vote this summer. Well, then it was
the fall. And now we hear we may not see a replacement until
2015 or 2017.
It is clear to me that they don't have any productive ideas
of their own to offer. It appears that they have decided to add
to their 50 votes to repeal or undermine the ACA. They
certainly are working hard to secure their place in history as
the least productive Congress in the history of this Nation. I
oppose all three of these bills before us today. The first
bill, H.R. 3522, says that any group health insurance plan on
the market in 2013 can be sold in perpetuity. They don't have
to change it. Now, they wouldn't have to adopt all of the key
protections for consumers in the Affordable Care Act,
protections that went into place this year, such as a ban on
annual limits. Insurance companies used to do that. They put a
limit at how much you can spend each year, and then after that
limit, you pay for it all. Well, they want to go back and
continue those plans that have those limits. They want to
continue to allow plans that would charge a small business a
higher premium because an employee has a preexisting condition.
Those were changes we intended to make and did make in the
Affordable Care Act. We said, if you want to keep your plan,
you could keep it and we provided for grandfathering in
existing individual insurance plans that were for sale when the
law passed. And if they liked that coverage, they could keep
it, even though that insurance might be inadequate by not
covering all of the things that were required under the
Affordable Care Act. And earlier this year, the President went
a step further and said, well, if a small business had changed
plans or purchased a new plan after the law passed, they could
keep that new coverage unchanged into 2016.
Now, that is supposed to be going into the affordable care
options and choosing an insurance plan that protects the
consumers and that is offering a rate consistent with
competition by other insurance plans that have to meet all of
those protections.
The other two bills before us today relate to a premium
stabilization program in the ACA, known as risk corridors. This
is modelled after a nearly identical program in Medicare Part D
that redistributes a portion of profits and losses between
insurance companies. This was drafted by the Republicans on
this committee as part of their Part D legislation. They and
the Bush administration praised it repeatedly. It helped keep
Part D premiums stable, and it has saved taxpayers money. But
now that it is being used by the plans under the Affordable
Care Act, oh, we can't continue these risk corridors. Let's
repeal them.
Before the administration announced that they would
implement the risk corridors in a budget-neutral fashion, the
CBO said that program would save taxpayers $8 billion in just 3
years. The provision in the law makes sense. It will keep
premiums stable. We should not repeal it or tie the
administration's hands in implementing it.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I think what we are seeing is more
politics. Maybe it is the stuff that saves you in primaries
from the extremists and the so-called Tea Party voters, or
whatever. But we ought to do something worthwhile in this
committee instead of passing bills that just undermine the ACA.
It is working finally. Millions of people now have insurance.
We ought to leave it alone. If it ain't broke, don't fix it.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The chairman
thanks the gentleman.
As usual, all members' written opening statements will be
made part of the record.
I ask unanimous consent to insert the following into the
record, a memo from the Congressional Research Service to the
committee, an article from the L.A. Times, and an article from
Bloomberg BNA.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. On our panel today, we have three witnesses.
Let me introduce them in the order that they will testify.
First, Dr. Stan Veuger, Resident Scholar, American Enterprise
Institute; Dr. John Hoadley, Research Professor, Georgetown
University; and Mr. Edmund Haislmaier, Senior Research Fellow
at the Heritage Foundation.
Thank you very much for coming. We appreciate your time
very much. Your written statements will be made a part of
record. You will each have 5 minutes to summarize your
testimony.
And Mr. Veuger, we will start with you. You are recognized
for 5 minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF STAN VEUGER, RESIDENT SCHOLAR, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE; JACK HOADLEY, RESEARCH PROFESSOR,
GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY; AND EDMUND F. HAISLMAIER, SENIOR
RESEARCH FELLOW, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION

STATEMENT OF STAN VEUGER

Mr. Veuger. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, members of
the committee, first of all, I would like to thank you for
giving me the opportunity today to discuss health insurance
plan cancellations and material changes pursuant to the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act.
When Obamacare became law 4 years ago, a central claim made
by proponents of this--informative insurance reform was not
just, it would make some better off through redistribution of
resources and more stringent regulation, but would do so
without harming others, except perhaps through new forms of
income and capital taxation. This claim was presented to the
public by President Obama, by many other prominent Members of
the Democratic party, by the full committee's ranking member
just now, in colloquial terms, such as, if you like your plan,
you can keep it; if you like your doctor, you can keep him,
period. The problem with that promise was that it is not true,
and I will discuss a few of the sort of more salient
consequences of the legislation that undermine the veracity of
that claim.
Upfront in a certain sense, no one has been able to keep
its 2010 plan, even if he or she liked it. Health insurance
policies are no longer allowed to contain limits on lifetime
reimbursements, for example. That may be a popular provision,
but of course, it drives up the cost of health insurance
policies. To say, in a very narrow sense, the claim ``you could
keep your plan if you liked it'' is completely false.
More central to the discussion today, I think, are plans
that have incorporated some of the sort of more popular
provisions, you know, a ban on adjusting for preexisting
conditions, or the lifetime reimbursements, the annual limits,
but it is about mostly the plans that are still being used and
paid for.
First, what I want to note is, by now, I think everyone
realizes that in the individual market, millions of people who
started out buying insurance there received cancellation
notices announcing the ends of their current plans last year,
and it may well be as many as 9 million people end up losing
the plans they had before the Affordable Care Act passed.
It doesn't stop there, though. A much larger group of
Americans enjoy employer-based health insurance, a total of
about 170 million people. And many of those plans will change
or disappear as well. Of these plans, there are about--of these
covered workers, about 18 percent were for firms that were
smaller than 50 employees and will not be subject to the
employer mandate to purchase health insurance when it kicks in,
if it ever kicks in. In total, there is about 35 to 40 million
covered workers who work for firms with fewer than 100
employees. They are in so-called small groups plans. The
remaining 130 to 135 million covered workers work for larger
employers, and many of those self-insure.
All of those plans are affected in different ways by the
new Obamacare regulations. The most obvious way in which that
happens is very similar to what happened in the individual
market. Many fully insured plans that have changed a little bit
since the law was passed no longer enjoy grandfather status,
and so the firms that used to offer them will now be forced to
purchase plans that are subject to new requirements regarding
benefits and premiums. The plan covers some 30 million workers
in the small group market, about 75 percent of workers in
medium-sized firms, and some 20 percent of large firms. In
total that is about 45, 50 million people. How large a change
is introduced here is hard to assess on an aggregate basis
because all of these plans are different, and it is unclear to
what extent they will be materially affected by the new
requirements.
What we do know, as I said, is that there are--only very
few plans are shielded from new rules and regulations due to
their grandfathered status. There are other less direct reasons
why, even in large firms that self-insure, workers will be
affected. For example, even at those firms, the cost of plans
will increase due to new taxes like the reinsurance fee, and
the Cadillac tax when that arrives. So even though when
millions of people receive their cancellation notices from the
individual market, the administration claims that that will be
it, you know; it is a small, tiny portion of the population,
and everyone else is shielded. That is certainly not true, and
there will be dozens of millions, if not more, people who will
see their plans change whether they like it or not. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Veuger follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Now the Chair recognize Dr. Hoadley 5 minutes
for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JACK HOADLEY

Mr. Hoadley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member, members of the committee.
My name is Jack Hoadley I am a research professor at
Georgetown University's Health Policy Institute, and I do
appreciate the opportunity to speak to the committee on issues
relating to risk corridors in the Affordable Care Act. There
have been two times in recent history when Congress has
introduced new health insurance programs.
In 2003, the Medicare Modernization Act created the
Medicare Part D prescription drug program. In 2010, the
Affordable Care Act created the program of health insurance
exchanges that operates as part of a broader initiative to
extend health insurance coverage. In both cases, Congress was
building a new kind of insurance program not previously in
operation. Also, in both cases, policymakers were uncertain
about how many plans would choose to participate in the new
program and how many Americans would sign up for coverage
offered by these plans. Specifically, policymakers were
concerned that plans would be less likely to participate when
they were unsure of how many enrollees they might attract and
of the health status of the enrollees that they did obtain. If
the plans did participate, they would likely set higher
premiums to reflect these uncertainties.
To address these uncertainties the Congress in both the
Medicare Modernization Act and the Affordable Care Act included
a set of risk mitigation measures, risk adjustment,
reinsurance, and risk corridors, sometimes called the 3Rs.
These measures were designed to help the new markets run more
predictably, by encouraging entry of insurers in the new
insurance markets and stabilizing premiums as the programs got
started.
Here is a quick review of the 3Rs. Risk adjustment is a way
to adjust payments to plans based on the health status of the
individual enrollees of each plan. The idea is to make sure
plans and their enrollees are not penalized if enrollees are
sicker than average or rewarded if healthier than an average
enrollees coming into the program. Effective risk adjustment
also deters plans from trying to avoid being chosen by people
with more health risk.
Reinsurance is a means of insuring the insurers by
providing extra payments of an excessive number of their
enrollees incurring usually high cost, such as having more
accidents, or more cancer diagnoses than the average plan. As
with risk adjustment, the intent is to make sure plans are not
penalized or rewarded based on how many high-class people they
enroll and reduce incentives to avoid high-cost individuals.
Risk corridors, sometimes referred to as risk sharing,
involves creation of a fund so that plans with unusually high
gains pay back some of those gains and those with unusually
high losses are partially compensated. The idea is to keep
premiums affordable and to reduce the risk base by plans during
the first years of a program, as the plans learn from
experience about how to price themselves accurately.
The risk corridors in both programs are designed on a two-
sided basis to limit both health plan losses and gains. If
plans underestimate cost, they receive payments from the
Government to reduce but not eliminate the loss. If they
overestimate cost, they make payments to the Government to
reduce, but again, not to eliminate the gain. Thus, all plans
maintain a share of the risk for any losses and retain an
incentive to set premiums as accurately as possible.
These risk mitigation measures have been in use for Part D
for 9 years now. So have they worked in Part D where we have
had time to look at the data? The best measure of their success
is that participation by both health plans and Medicare
beneficiaries is still robust in the program's ninth year and
the program is popular with both plans and enrollees. Among the
stand-alone Part D plans in 2011, risk adjustment scores range
from 72 percent to 146 percent of the average plan score.
Without risk adjustment, the plans at the high end would have
either suffered significant loses or been forced to charge much
higher premiums. The opposite would have been true on the low
end.
Reinsurance payments for Part D plans averaged about $40
per member per month in 2012. As such, they helped discourage
plans from trying to avoid enrollees with unusually high drug
costs.
In contrast to the idea that risk corridors are bailing out
plans, the experience of Part D suggests they have actually
protected taxpayers. In each of the program's first 7 years,
plans made net payments back to the Government as a result of
greater profits than expected from their bids as opposed to
receiving payments from the Government. In 2012, the most
recent year for which data are available, Part D plans paid a
total of $1.1 billion back to the Government. And in 2012,
three-fourths of all Part D plan sponsors made payments back to
the Government. In fact, and perhaps contrary to what some
expected, the risk corridors in Part D have been protecting the
Government from excessive profits by health plans as opposed to
protecting health plans against pricing too low.
The 3Rs continue to operate in Part D. In the Affordable
Care Act, two of them risk corridors and reinsurance, are
designed as short-term measures that will go away after 2016.
Although one could argue that the role of risk corridors in
reinsurance could be reduced or eliminated in Part D after 9
years, we can make a good case for the significant role they
have played in establishing a functional, sustainable, and
robust market. The Part D experience also demonstrates that
risk corridors protect the program from uncertainly both in the
first years and beyond.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hoadley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Now the Chair recognizes Mr. Haislmaier, 5
minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF EDMUND F. HAISLMAIER

Mr. Haislmaier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Edmund Haislmaier. I am a senior research fellow
in health policy at the Heritage Foundation, and thank you for
the opportunity to testify before you and the committee today.
The comments are my own and not reflecting any institutional
position.
As I addressed in my prepared testimony, I think what we
need to do is step back for a minute and look at these three
programs, and understand that these are different tools for
different purposes. If you have a mechanic or a builder who is
doing work for you, they are going to have a toolbox full of
things, you know, hammer, screw driver, pliers. They will use
different tools depending on what the job is. And so I would
like to follow up on Dr. Hoadley's comments by simply
clarifying for the committee what I see as the different tasks
that each of these three are designed to address.
The reinsurance provision is essentially designed to
address the kind of risk that we might call market selection
risk. In other words, you have a choice between markets. This
is true of people who are insured and uninsured. I won't go
into great length, but suffice it to say that it is premised on
the idea that the way this legislation is designed and works,
there is an expectation that more people in poorer health
status will gravitate towards this market, and therefore, it
taxes the existing market, principally the employer market, and
transfers the funds to subsidize the new individual or the
expanded individual market on that market selection risk
expectation.
The second program, risk adjustment is, as Dr. Hoadley
pointed out, really about individual selection risk. I mean,
everything could be fine with the market otherwise, but we
still don't know when people have the ability to pick and
choose a plan, as all of you do, in the Federal employee
program, who is going to pick what kind of coverage. There are
a lot of things that might influence people's decision, and the
concern is, you don't want insurers to try to avoid people who
are sicker and whatnot. So there is a risk adjustment
mechanism. This is not new. This is, as Dr. Hoadley points out,
has been around before elsewhere.
The third, and the one that is the subject really of your
hearing, is the risk corridor program. And the question that I
would ask is, well, what is the risk that this is designed to
address? Because it was observed that this was designed to hold
down premiums. Well, no, it is not really designed to hold down
premiums, necessarily. It is not designed to make the market
balance out. It is not designed to spread the risk evenly
across the market. That is what the other two are there for.
What is this one here for? Well, this is a profit and loss
risk. This is saying we don't know, and neither do you, the
insurers, what the real price for this product is going to be,
and we could be--and we are paying for most of it, and that was
the significance of Part D--they were paying for three-quarters
of it. We and you could be wildly off the mark. So what they do
is the Government, which is paying three-quarters of it, in
effect, has a profit and loss sharing arrangement through risk
corridors with the insurers.
Now, did that make sense in Part D? I think it did. Why?
Because it was an entirely new product, providing comprehensive
prescription drug coverage on a standalone basis had not been
done before. There was no really relevant or suitable example
for insurers to work off of, because yes, there was
prescription drug coverage in the employer group market but
that was integrated. It wasn't standalone, and non-elderly
people consume drugs at one-fifth the rate that elderly do. So
there was a lot of uncertainty surrounding that.
Now, when we look at this, Dr. Hoadley is right, that was a
new program, but my point is, Part D was also a new product.
When we look at this, we see that it is a new program, but the
product is a very old one. It is just being tweaked. So, at the
end of the day, I am not sure that there is really a rationale
for this kind of profit and loss sharing, when in fact, it is
not hard for the insurers to get within a tolerable rate.
Finally, I would point out that given that the transfer of
funds that is going on in the reinsurance program is more than
adequate to cover even some very egregious over-underestimation
of premiums. If you look at the magnitude of the funds being
transferred relative to the size of the market, you are looking
at a market that, in 2014, was $28 billion and you are going to
dump another $10 billion potentially into it in 2014 in
reinsurance programs. That is a huge amount of money relative
to the size of the market, even if you assume that the PPACA
doubles that market, it is still pretty substantial.
So I think that those programs, the other two programs, are
more than adequate for the risks that are in the new program,
and that it really isn't necessary to have the risk corridor
program. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and thanks all of
the witnesses for their testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Haislmaier follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. I will begin the questioning, and recognize
myself 5 minutes for that purpose.
Mr. Haislmaier, should taxpayers be concerned that they
will be liable for some insurance company losses under the ACA
risk corridor program, and please explain?
Mr. Haislmaier. Well, the issue, Mr. Chairman, is that,
unlike the risk reinsurance program, which is a definitive set
amount of money, or the risk transfer program, which is
required to operate on a neutral basis, meaning it doesn't
spend more than it takes in or it doesn't transfer more than it
takes in, this program is not explicitly required to operate on
that basis, and therefore, yes, that is a concern that the
taxpayers should have.
Mr. Pitts. The Congressional Research Services, American
Law Division, issued a memo questioning the ability of the
administration to make payments under the risk corridor program
for lack of quote, ``valid appropriation,'' end quote. Now,
since it is Congress' job to make law and the President's job
to implement law, and if the law needs to be changed, it is our
job to change it, not his. Given that the administration has
tried to rewrite the healthcare law over dozens of times
through regulations and Executive Orders, and delays, and so
forth, should taxpayers be concerned that the administration
will once again ignore the rule of law to prop up the
President's healthcare law?
Mr. Haislmaier. Well, I think the administration has taken
different positions at different times on this particular
provision. I believe at one point, they said they would operate
on a budget-neutral basis, and then said they wouldn't. So yes,
if there is ambiguity then, yes, Mr. Chairman, you know, that
is Congress' job to clarify the ambiguity.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Dr. Veuger, at the end of 2013, millions of Americans
received notices from health insurers that they would be unable
to renew their health coverage under the ACA. Many supporters
of the law implied that this problem was restricted only to the
individual market and would not affect employer-sponsored
coverage. Would you clarify for us whether American workers
could be subject to nonrenewals by employer-sponsored plans,
often known as plan cancellations, under the Affordable Care
Act?
Mr. Veuger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, yes. Many American
workers will indeed be subject to nonrenewals, as I described
with a bit more detail in my written testimony. There will be
tens of millions of workers in small group plans that will see
those plans being phased out, as very few of them, actually,
will continue to have grandfather status by the time the
employer mandate kicks in.
The administration sort of mid-range estimate was that, by
2016, 88 percent of all insurance small employer plans will
have lost grandfather status, so all of those plans would in
principle receive the same treatment that individual market
plans received last year. So they will be canceled. The process
would go through the employer, not the individual, so it may be
slightly less salient, but it would certainly be the same fate
that so many plans in the individual market had. And I find it
surprising, honestly, that so many supporters of the law after
being caught not being able to live up to the, ``if you like
your plan, you can keep your plan'' promise on the individual
side decided to continue with the same story for these plans
that will ultimately suffer the same fate.
Mr. Pitts. Some advocates of the ACA said they were
surprised about the plan cancellation issue at the end of 2013.
Wasn't a central feature of the ACA to impose Federal
requirements that many plans simply did not meet? So should
anyone have been surprised about the plan cancellation issues
on the ACA?
Mr. Veuger. Certainly not, because, to some extent, beyond
a lot of income redistribution, one of the central goals of the
legislation was precisely to impose new requirements on as many
plans as possible. Some of those requirements are very popular
among the general public. Some of the community rating
features, for example, much less so. But it was definitely
always the intention of the imposed new rules and regulations,
and to some extent, it shows how insincere the promise was.
Mr. Pitts. My time is expired. The Chair now recognizes the
ranking member, Mr. Pallone 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to say at the outset that risk corridors are
mechanisms used in all kinds of insurance systems, and this
wouldn't even be controversial if it wasn't part of the ACA. So
it just bothers me that any time anything that is part of the
ACA, no matter how normal it is, it just becomes controversial
in an effort by the Republicans to destroy the ACA.
The driving principle behind the risk corridor bills we are
considering today is that they will cost taxpayers more or cost
taxpayers money. Republicans don't have any evidence though
that this will happen, but they figure if they can scream
``bailout'' enough times, it must just seem true. But the
Congressional Budget Office and the experience of Part D show
just how silly the claims are. When the Congressional Budget
Office looked at risk corridors recently, they said the
collections from insurers would be $8 billion greater than
payouts from the Government. And that means that the program
would save taxpayers $8 billion in just 3 years, and that is
not even counting the savings on premiums and premium tax
credits. The administration has since made clear that they will
implement the program in a budget-neutral fashion, and CBO has
since confirmed that the program will be budget neutral.
So I just want to ask Dr. Hoadley, were there concerns that
the Medicare Part D risk corridors would cost taxpayers money,
and what can you tell us about their actual impact on
taxpayers? And what does that tell us about the impact of the
ACA risk corridors?
Mr. Hoadley. The experience in Part D, I think when the law
was originally drafted, it was done as a symmetric kind of
thing. If the ability of plans to estimate premiums accurately
could be wrong in either direction, the experience in fact, as
I mentioned in my testimony, is that every single year for
which we now have data, which is the first 7 years of the
program, plans have actually paid--made payments back to the
Government. And I think if you add up all of those figures
across the 7 years, we are talking about a total of about $8
billion that have been made from plans back to the Government.
So it really has represented a protection to the taxpayer in
the way it has played out in Part D.
Mr. Pallone. And again, you know, that is why I think this
Republican bailout argument is just flat wrong, and it is a
waste of this committee's time. And the Republicans just don't
have the facts on their side.
Dr. Hoadley, the ACA and the Medicare Part D both have risk
corridor programs. They seem very similar to me, but again, my
Republican friends seem to hate the ACA program and love the
Part D program, which seems so inconsistent. They claim that
the ACA risk corridors are a bailout, but the Part D risk
corridors have actually made the Government money, and they are
more generous to insurers than the ACA program is. And of
course, the Part D risk corridors are permanent; whereas the
ACA risk corridors will only last for 3 years. I mean, all of
this, again, to the point that this is something that would not
be controversial at all if it wasn't part of the ACA.
Can you say more about the similarities and differences
between the ACA and the Part D risk corridors, and are these
programs fundamentally different?
Mr. Hoadley. No, I think you have really highlighted the
different ways in which they are similar. The biggest
difference probably is that the risk corridor program in the
ACA is time limited, and it is only designed to operate for 3
years. And Part D, it was set up for an initial--I think, it
was 3 years at a fairly broad corridor, then it was tightened
down to be a little bit of a narrower corridor for the next 3
years, and then CMS has had the authority to eliminate the risk
corridors after 6 years, but has chosen to keep them in
operation; felt that they were still proving a value, and you
can kind of see the value even potentially right now with some
of the uncertainties around some of the new drugs that are on
the market. And it is that kind of uncertainty that those risk
corridors are designed to do.
The same system really applies in the ACA. As long as we
have a lot of uncertainty about how the program might operate,
there is an interest in protecting, in both directions,
protecting the Government from errors made in one direction in
setting premiums, protect the plans in the other direction if
that is the way it works out.
Mr. Pallone. Yes, the Republicans claim that the ACA risk
corridors are not just bad policy; they say they are illegal.
And I suppose it is not a surprise, since they are currently
wasting taxpayer dollars to sue the President, and they seem to
have designs on impeaching him as well. The Department of
Health and Human Services has provided the committee with
specific answers to questions about its legal authority to
implement the risk corridor program. The law authorizes the
collection and payment of user fees to and from health insurers
to operate the risk corridor program that aligns with OMB and
GAO guidance. Bottom line is, the ACA is the law of the land,
and this should not be a controversial program, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair
thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I am the sponsor of the legislation to repeal risk
corridors, and I do this because I believe it is bad public
policy. And I certainly do not do it as a matter of some sort
of intellectual exercise. And I am deeply concerned about it.
Mr. Haislmaier, would you go into a little greater detail
as to why you believe there is a difference between this
program and the program designed roughly a decade ago for
Medicare Part D.
Mr. Haislmaier. Well, essentially, the risk corridor
program is a deal between the Government and the insurer that
says we share the profits and we share the losses. It is, you
know, you see commercial deals like that between two parties
all the time as a joint venture. The question in my mind is, is
that appropriate in each of these cases? I think a stronger
argument can be made that that is appropriate in the case of
Medicare Part D than can be made here. And I base it on the
following: In Medicare Part D, the insurers were being asked to
do something they had never done before in a market they didn't
understand, with a totally new product. It was not only a new
market; it was a new product. The customers had never bought
anything like that, et cetera. That is a very different world
than the world in which these were applied in the PPACA, where
you essentially are making some adjustments to a market that
has been around for decades, the individual coverage market,
and yes, the Government is adding some subsidies for some
people to that. But this really isn't a huge departure from
business that the insurers have been in for years. And so the
question is, should the taxpayer be at that point involved in
profit and loss on that market, or is that just a normal level,
albeit maybe somewhat elevated, but a normal level of profit
and loss risk that private actors bear all the time? And I
think that is the latter.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
And certainly, I am willing to give the other panelists
time to respond to my question.
Dr. Hoadley.
Mr. Hoadley. I mean, I would actually argue that the
uncertainty in some ways was greater in the Affordable Care Act
than in the health insurance marketplaces. In the Medicare Part
D program, the insurance was over prescription drugs. People's
use of prescription drugs from one time period to the next is
rather stable, rather predictable in most cases, whereas the
need for a broader health insurance is much more volatile.
This was also a market in the ACA that was with some of the
same questions we had in Part D: Who will enroll? Will the
number of people we think will enroll, will that actually be
the set of people? Will there be pent-up demand? Are there
people who have been, in the case of Part D, you know, going
without certain prescription drugs who are now going to start
taking them? Are there people, in the ACA case, who have been
going without treatment now who are going to come in for
treatment? It is those kinds of uncertainties that make it hard
for an insurance company to set premiums, and the value of
having a reinsurance----
Mr. Lance. My own view on that is that this is similar to
what existed at a prior time. I suppose that is debatable. But
it is only for a limited period of time, and there may be, if I
am understanding what you are saying, a volatility for some
time. I agree with what Mr. Haislmaier, has said. Obviously,
significant legislation is to be debated, and I respect the
views of all who are interested in it.
I do want to assure the public that my sponsorship of this
legislation is based upon my deeply held beliefs that risk
corridors should not be permitted in this situation.
Now, regarding the appropriations issue. Medicare Part D
includes the risk corridor program, and it includes a source of
funds for the program. But as I read the healthcare
legislation, that is not the case. And based on a lack of
appropriation, it is my legal judgment that the administration
cannot make payments to cover insurance company losses under
the risk corridor program. This issue is further explained by a
recent memorandum compiled by the Congressional Research
Service, and I would like to submit it for the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. I only have 15 seconds. Let me say
that, in December, I asked the Secretary of Health and Human
Services whether it was legal to make subsidies to the Federal
exchanges as opposed to the State exchanges, and she did not
answer the question. That is not the topic of discussion this
afternoon, but we have now had a split in the circuits on that
significant issue and I trust the Supreme Court of the United
States will eventually address this issue. And I would hope
that the courts might eventually address the fact that, in my
judgment, there is a lack of statutory law to move forward with
an appropriation that has not occurred regarding this risk
corridor program.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
having this hearing.
Dr. Hoadley, I know you have answered about the affordable
care market and the senior prescription drug program. The ACA
significantly reforms the individual insurance market so that
the products insurers are offering in the marketplace are
fundamentally different than they were sold before. Insurers
can no longer discriminate based on preexisting conditions.
They can no longer charge women more for the same coverage. And
they can no longer offer what a lot of us would consider junk
coverage that doesn't cover hospitalizations or disappears
whenever consumers need it the most.
Because of financial assistance the law makes available,
tens of millions of new customers are entering the market for
the first time, and this means that insurance has significant
uncertainty when pricing for a market coverage in the early
years of the ACA. Can you go into more detail about that the
risk corridors are necessary in Part D and why they are also
necessary for the Affordable Care Act?
Mr. Hoadley. I mean, one of the things that I think is
striking about the notion of a risk corridor, is that if it is
not needed, if it turns out that plans are able to estimate
their premiums pretty accurately, then no payments will need to
be made. If a plan's experience is very similar to what their
estimates, then there is no cost in either direction. In the
case of the ACA, there is a 3 percent corridor around which
plans are at full risk for going higher or lower, and if they
stay within that estimate in either program, you know, they
will be fine.
I think the other point is that there is a learning
process. You could make the argument that the risk corridors
for the Part D program aren't needed anymore. We are well into
that program, and they could be phased out. So far, CMS has
chosen that there is legislative authority to make a decision
for CMS to decide whether or not to extend that further. For
the moment, that has been extended. In the case of the ACA, the
decision was in the law, was to have it last just for the 3
years.
But there really are ways in both programs to try to
protect both the taxpayer and the plans against the kind of
uncertainty in setting premiums.
Mr. Green. I would like to take the remainder of my time to
highlight a report on the Medicare's Program Board of Trustees.
It was just released today. In 2009, the trustees project that
the Hospital Insurance Trust Fund would be unable to pay its
bills in 2017, only 3 years from now. However, today's report
now puts this date at 2030, 13 years later than that was
projected. The report goes on to explain that this improvement
is thanks to the part of the reforms in the Affordable Care
Act.
While today's report focuses on Medicare, it reflects
broader trends in healthcare systems through a much slower
growth costs through 2014. Over the 50 months since enactment
of the Affordable Care Act, healthcare prices have risen at
slower rate than any other comparable period in 50 years. There
are many reports about the positive impact this law is having
on coverage of the uninsured and underinsured, better benefits
and lower growth in healthcare cost.
And in my time left, Dr. Hoadley, would you comment on the
ACA and that impact on Medicare?
Mr. Hoadley. Yes, and I think you have hit the point very
accurately. And one of the things that, you know, we can take
from that lesson that has come out in today's trustees report
is on that lower growth rate, is if that turns out to be true
for the broader healthcare system as well, that is one of the
reasons why plans may turn out making payments back to the
Government under the risk corridor program in the ACA. So there
is really a linkage between the savings that we are seeing in
healthcare costs generally and the potential to protect the
taxpayer by making sure the taxpayer benefits from that lower
cost trend rather than that benefit going solely to the plans.
Mr. Green. OK, I want to reiterate though that over the 50
months since the enactment of the Affordable Care Act, health
prices have risen at a slower rate than they have for the last
50 years. Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back my time, but I
am hoping that we can actually work on legislation. If there
are problems with the Affordable Care Act, let's fix it. Let's
don't strangle it after we are seeing some of the success after
only 50 months of the law.
So I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
And now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Bilirakis, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Haislmaier, under the recently issued regulations, any
payment shortfall in year 1 would be made up in year 2 or 3.
However, if by year 3, the receipts are less than total
payments owed in the risk corridor, the administration has
stated, and I quote, ``We will establish in new and future
guidance or rulemaking how we will calculate risk corridors
payments if risk corridors collections do not match risk
corridors payments ... in the final year of the program.''
Will extra funds come from taxpayer funds, in your opinion?
Where is HHS going to find it?
Mr. Haislmaier. Well, that is a good question. I don't know
where they are going to find the money. It will either come out
of--to the extent that they are able to, maybe transferring
from some other accounts. There are some revenues that HHS
receives directly into the operating account for user fees for
like clinical laboratory user fees and things like that. So
maybe they can make that. But you would have to ask them. I
don't know where they will get the money.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK, next question. When the rules for the
risk corridor were published in 2011, the administration was
willing to pay more in risk corridors than they collected. They
have subsequently changed to a budget-neutral position. Is
there anything in the law that prevents HHS from reinterpreting
risk corridors, yet again, to not keep it budget neutral?
Mr. Haislmaier. No, I mean, I think that is why you have
this issue. There isn't anything that I can see in the law that
prevents them, at least in the authorizing statute. There is an
appropriations question, which I am not an expert on, but in
the authorizing statute, they do not explicitly have to have
this budget neutral in the authorizing statute.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Does the President's healthcare
law require HHS to pay the full risk corridor amount owed,
regardless of any shortfall, yes or no?
Mr. Haislmaier. I am sorry, I don't understand.
Mr. Bilirakis. Let me repeat the question. I am sorry. Does
the President's healthcare law require HHS to pay the full risk
corridor amount owed regardless of any shortfall?
Mr. Haislmaier. It could be interpreted that way, yes, sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. Does the risk corridor incentivize plans to
underbid their premiums as a means to capture insurance market
share in your opinion?
Mr. Haislmaier. Well, that would be one scenario whereby
you could see losses in the program on balance, net losses in
the program as if you had significant underbidding. And I think
that the concern is that the administration's pressure on
carriers to keep premiums down might lead to some of that
underbidding, yes.
Mr. Bilirakis. The administration has claimed that the risk
corridor is nothing more than a user fee. In your opinion, is
this program a user fee?
Mr. Haislmaier. No, that is something different. A user fee
is a different animal, and that is governed by a different
statute that is already----
Mr. Bilirakis. Define user fee.
Mr. Haislmaier. A user fee is a fee charged for some
service that the Government provides to the user that is not
otherwise generally provided to the public, so the example
which you all are probably most familiar with is when companies
go before the Food and Drug Administration to get a drug or a
device or something approved, you know, they are getting the
benefit of that regulatory approval. I mean, it has certain
benefits because they can say in court, Hey, it is FDA
approved. So they charge a user fee.
There is a general user fee statute on the books, that
allows and encourages agencies to do that sort of thing. And
that is how the Department of Health and Human Services has
come up with funding for the federally facilitated exchange for
which there is no operating funding. They are charging a user
fee. It at 3.5 percent. But this does not, in my view--I am not
an expert on that, but from what I can see, this doesn't seem
to fit any of the criteria on the Federal user fee statute.
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, I tend to agree.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith,
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would say that when we talk about the rates on the
Affordable Care Act, they may be growing, the insurance
increases may be growing slower, they may be growing faster, we
will have to see what happens this fall, but that certainly
they are growing, and it is not the reduction that was promised
when this bill was passed of $2,500 per family, per average
family, in the United States. So it is yet another promise that
was made that has not been kept by the Affordable Care Act.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield the
remainder of my time to Dr. Cassidy of Louisiana.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you, Mr. Griffith.
Several things to go over. First, the legal aspect of it. I
noticed that Mr. Pallone mentioned that initially CBO estimated
this would return $8 billion to the Treasury and then glossed
over the fact that now it is not going to return money to the
Treasury, but rather it will be, quote, ``budget-neutral,''
except as subject to appropriations, we don't know from whence
they come. That is a far cry from being $8 billion to the
Government.
And CBO, in their writings, I will note, said that the
reason that they initially called it $8 billion--because, Dr.
Hoadley, as you mentioned, in the Medicare Part D, there were
payments back. But as it turns out, not only is it, I guess,
now not going to be money back to the Treasury, but I am told
that before Mr. Issa's committee, it is now estimated that
insurers are going to request over a billion dollars more than
they anticipate paying into the program. So, far from returning
$8 billion back, now they are going to require a billion
dollars more, and it is not clear where that money comes from.
And as regards the memo, the memo which supposedly HHS
justifies with, it is interesting. They say that they are going
to call this a fee, but in the President's budget he doesn't
call this a fee. Additionally, it is also of interest that
never in the legislation is this called a fee but now it is
being called a fee, and a fee which goes into a revolving fund
which is not being set up.
So there is no subject of a revolving fund in the
legislation, nor is there comment of a fee, but now we are
being told that it is a fee going into a revolving fund that
heretofore did not exist but has been manufactured through a
legal opinion of HHS.
Now, if the other side of the aisle is quite willing to do
away with Congress' prerogative, prerogative both to
appropriate and to designate what shall be a revolving fund,
that shall be up to the other side of the aisle to do away with
prerogative. I suppose that comes from being loyal to one's
President. Shame, shame.
However, I say I will be loyal to the Constitution and
support the Lance-Cassidy bill, which requires an appropriation
if this is to be the case and requires that there be a specific
statutory authority for a revolving fund, which the ACA
specifically does not include.
Now, just for that kind of, you know, setting the record
straight, if you will, let me just now conclude with another
statement, if you will. And, again, going to the bill I am
sponsoring, Mr. Veuger--did I pronounce that correctly?
``Veuger''? I am sorry. Dr. V, I am sorry, Dr. V.
You know, it is interesting, the President and my
congressional colleagues promised many times over the debate of
the healthcare law that if you like your health plan you can
keep your health plan. This last year, 93,000 Louisianians in
the individual markets lost the plan they had specifically
because of Obamacare. Clearly the President's promise was, to
put it euphemistically, inaccurate.
Now, in order to provide relief to the individuals losing
their health coverage, the House passed the Keep Your Health
Plan Act, allowing plans available on the individual market
before Obamacare to continue to be offered. The House must now
act to provide the same relief to businesses and employees now
by passing my bill, the Employee Health Care Protection Act,
which would allow the millions of workers in the group market
to keep the health plan they like. I thank the committee for
conducting this plan.
Again, I thank Mr. Lance, my colleague, for working with me
to introduce the Lance-Cassidy risk-corridor bill. While it is
important to allow risk-mitigation mechanisms for companies in
the private market, it is important that we ask the
administration to follow the Constitution.
The administration has decided to once more ignore the law
as written by Congress and make payments to insurance companies
without congressional approval. The Lance-Cassidy bill ensures
the risk-corridor program does not become a vehicle for
ignoring the Constitution by the administration.
With that, I thank my colleague, and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the vice chairman of the full committee,
Ms. Blackburn, 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here.
And I thank the chairman for making time for us to have
this hearing. And I am so pleased that Mr. Lance and Dr.
Cassidy have brought this bill forward.
You know, it is amazing to me, as we have lived through the
legislative process for Obamacare and then the launch of
Obamacare, the failed rollout of Obamacare, and now we get to
the implementation and where the cost is going to be.
And as Dr. Cassidy was mentioning, we now are hearing,
well, it is not really a tax, this is going to be a fee; well,
this fee is going to go to a fund. Well, it seems as if what
they are doing is trying to convolute the issue to the point
that all people know that their insurance cost is going up but
they are not sure who to blame and how to blame.
And I find it so interesting, one of the biggest complaints
we get in our district is about insurance costs, access, narrow
networks, and everything is costing more. And then people will
say, ``And now we hear the insurance companies want you to bail
them out. Don't you dare bail them out.''
So if you were with me in my district, that is what you
would hear. And much of it is based on the experience
Tennesseeans had with a failed program called TennCare. And I
know, Mr. Haislmaier, that you all at Heritage have looked at
that program and the failings of TennCare and the reasons it
did not work.
And I know it thrills Mr. Pallone that I am sitting here
and saying ``TennCare.'' He has probably grown weary of hearing
me talk about the failure of that program.
And, by the way, it was a Democrat Governor that took it
down because it was too expensive to afford. It was one of the
first examples of ``too expensive to afford.''
So, Mr. Haislmaier, you know, who eventually pays all these
taxes and fees? Our regulation taxes, our access fees, who
eventually pays all of this?
Mr. Haislmaier. Well, the consumer does, obviously----
Mrs. Blackburn. Absolutely.
Mr. Haislmaier [continuing]. Either directly when they
purchase something or indirectly through their tax bill.
Mrs. Blackburn. And do you have States that you are
researching that are showing that their insurance cost to the
consumer is going to be reduced $2,500 a consumer? Are you all
finding this anywhere in your research?
Mr. Haislmaier. My colleague published a paper, and we are
going to be updating it now in 2015 with new data on this.
As expected, the only States where you actually saw any
measurable decrease in premiums were States that had already
made a worse mess of their market before PPACA was enacted. So
New York is the prime example. So when you have actually made
things worse, I guess doing this is an improvement. But, by and
large, everybody else was seeing increases.
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes. I know in Tennessee we had had cost
estimates from one of our large insurers of 18 percent. And, as
you can imagine, on a weekend in Tennessee, where we are busy
with festivals and farmers markets and out and about a good
bit, people are not happy with that at all.
Talk for just a minute on the record--Mr. Hoadley mentioned
Medicare Part D, and I was here when we did the MMA. And I
would like for you to talk for the record just a moment about
the difference in the risk corridors for Medicare Part D and
for PPACA.
Mr. Haislmaier. You are asking me?
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes.
Mr. Haislmaier. Yes. Well, the mechanism is very similar.
The issue that I pointed out is simply whether it was an
appropriate thing, whether it was appropriate for the
Government to, in effect, be underwriting profit or loss risk
in this market, whereas one could make the case that, given
that Medicare was a three-quarters Government-funded program,
that it was a totally new venture, that the insurers wouldn't
doing this if the Government wasn't asking them to do this,
that you could make the case that underwriting the profit and
loss risk through risk corridors might make some sense there.
That is essentially the question.
I think, really, frankly, the problem here is there are so
many ways in this legislation where subsidies are hidden or
things are done through the back door, there is so little trust
of the administration in its actually implementing this
legislation, that I think a lot of people are, with some degree
of legitimacy, concerned that this could become another way for
a back-door deal.
I mean, look at how the legislation sets up additional
payments to insurers for reducing the copays and deductibles
for specific individuals. And that is not transparent, and it
is not accountable. So I can see where the suspicion is coming
from.
I think the safest thing to do is you simply make it
budget-neutral by statute, because there is ambiguity. And as
Dr. Hoadley points out, you know, if it is needed, they will
use it, and if it isn't, they won't.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you.
Yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy,
5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Cassidy. Dr. V., now, go through once more how the ACA
treats small businesses and workers differently than those who
self-insure.
Mr. Veuger. Small businesses that insure their employees
buy plans from insurance companies, and they have to go into a
marketplace and buy them. Larger companies that self-insure,
well, as the term suggests, protect themselves from the risk
that comes from----
Mr. Cassidy. So they protect themselves from the risk; you
imply that there is a risk of going into the regulated market.
Your testimony emphasizes the increased cost that comes with
going into the ACA-regulated market. Fair statement?
Mr. Veuger. Well, there will be cost increases on both
sides. If you are self-insuring, there will be cost increases
under the Affordable Care Act, as well. There is a reinsurance
fee, there is----
Mr. Cassidy. There are the taxes, the trillion dollars in
taxes----
Mr. Veuger. Yes. For sure.
Mr. Cassidy [continuing]. Coming with an individual policy.
Mr. Veuger. Yes.
Mr. Cassidy. But it seems, it strikes me that, in general,
the cost increases under the mandated benefits, et cetera, in
the non-ACA market, if you will----
Mr. Veuger. Will be more limited.
Mr. Cassidy. Yes.
Mr. Veuger. Yes. I think that is fair.
Mr. Cassidy. So, if you will, the cost increases will be
greater upon the smaller employer, the one who is not self-
insuring.
Mr. Veuger. I think that is certainly fair to say.
Mr. Cassidy. So the smaller employer, who typically--let's
face it, they are smaller, they are trying to get big--they are
the ones getting hammered the most. Isn't that crazy?
Mr. Veuger. Yes. Perhaps with the exception of microbrews
that want to stay small for some reason, I think that is also
fair to say.
Mr. Cassidy. Yes. So, if you will, it is interesting, the
CBO recently put out a study saying that they have lowered the
cost of coverage because there will be wage reductions under
Obamacare so, therefore, fewer will be on subsidies and more
will be on Medicaid. You almost wonder if this was by design.
Again, you don't have to comment on that. That was CBO
reporting that.
Mr. Haislmaier, one more time, can you tell us the amount
of money which is available through the reinsurance program
relative to the size of the market that is going to be in the
exchanges?
Mr. Haislmaier. The reinsurance program makes available as
much as $10 billion this year. If it is not all used, it can be
carried forward----
Mr. Cassidy. Ten billion with a ``B.''
Mr. Haislmaier. Ten billion with a ``B.'' The 2013, the
aggregate premium for the individual major medical market was
about $28 billion.
Mr. Cassidy. So it is a $28 billion market, and you have a
$10 billion subsidy already going.
Mr. Haislmaier. Right. So, you know, if you make various
assumptions about increased costs and increased enrollment, you
know, OK, let's say you double that market, you know, you get a
$40 billion, $50 billion market. That is if lots of people sign
up and----
Mr. Cassidy. So you have 20 percent of the potential loss--

Mr. Haislmaier. Yes.
Mr. Cassidy [continuing]. Already being covered just
through the reinsurance----
Mr. Haislmaier. Yes, that is my point, is if you are
looking at a situation where there is this uncertainty--as Dr.
Hoadley and I and others have pointed out, there is this
uncertainty that insurers didn't know how many people and how
sick they would be and things like that. My point is simply
that there is an appropriation already in there. It is, in
effect, designated to that market, because it is going to that
individual----
Mr. Cassidy. And it would actually be allocated in a
constitutional fashion as opposed to pushing the envelope.
Dr. V, I am sorry, I messed up. I didn't finish with my
conclusion.
Mr. Veuger. Uh-huh.
Mr. Cassidy. If we are going to say that the problem with
the ACA is that it disproportionally increases cost on smaller
firms, the ones that we hope grow to be bigger firms, doesn't
it seem a reasonable remedy that we allow them to keep their
policy if they like? If it is cheaper for their bottom line,
they can stay on the policy which they previously had; if not,
they can go onto the regulated market.
Mr. Veuger. I think there is certainly something to be said
for that, especially given the promises that were made to them
when this legislation was presented and when it was approved
and when it hadn't been rolled out yet.
Mr. Cassidy. Yes.
Mr. Veuger. So, yes.
Mr. Cassidy. So if only to ask the President to keep his
word that you can keep your policy if you like it, that would
be a reasonable way to go.
Mr. Veuger. I think that is fair to say.
Mr. Cassidy. Yes. OK.
Well, I inefficiently asked my questions, so I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Dr. Gingrey, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, it is my understanding, in regard to some of
the questions that the ranking member asked just a few minutes
ago, that we actually invited the general counsel of Health and
Human Services to be a witness at this hearing, maybe to
address some of those issues, but that he declined the
invitation to be part of the panel.
Dr. Veuger, do you think that it should have been obvious
to Members of Congress that many Americans who liked their
healthcare plan would not be able to keep it under the
Affordable Care Act?
Mr. Veuger. Well, so it never really ended up becoming
clear to me whether all Members of Congress had read the bill
before they voted on it. And I think it is hard to--and, you
know, it is a long document. Plus, there are all kinds of
related regulations and rules. I would imagine that most of the
people most closely involved in drafting the bill would have
been aware and partially----
Mr. Gingrey. Yes. Well, listen, let me interrupt you just
for a second for a follow-up on that because it is a great
segue, your comment.
Under the Democratic majority in 2009 and 2010, there was
no subcommittee markup of the House-passed version of PPACA,
the Affordable Care Act. There was also no legislative hearing,
no subcommittee markup or full committee markup of the Senate
bill.
Do you think that it was responsible for Washington
Democrats to ignore regular order on something of this
magnitude, the Affordable Care Act? And could it have helped
Members realize that the law would end up leading to plan
cancellations for millions of Americans if we had just followed
regular order?
Mr. Veuger. I think it is--I mean, in a sense, I think it
was reasonable for them to do if they really wanted to pass
this kind of legislation, which I think--I don't think it would
have passed otherwise. If you are married to the idea of
passing it, I think going through regular order would have kept
you from doing that. So, in that sense, it is reasonable.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, of course, as we all know, you know, the
41st Senator from Massachusetts required them to invoke
reconciliation, which was never done before, has never been
done before or since, thank God.
So, you know, if we had done things in the right way,
whether every Member of Congress had read every single word,
every single line, every single page of the 2,700-page bill, I
think we would have been more likely to have gotten it right.
Dr. Hoadley, based on the data that insurers have reported,
health insurance companies in the exchange expect net payments
through the risk-corridor program of a billion dollars from the
American taxpayer.
Isn't it true that, while both the Affordable Care Act and
Medicare Part D program that you talked about in your testimony
contain risk-corridor programs, that it is much more likely
that taxpayers will have to pay for some insurance company
losses under the Affordable Care Act risk-corridor program as
compared to the Medicare Modernization and Prescription Drug
Act of 10 years ago?
Mr. Hoadley. I actually think it is too early to draw any
such conclusion. The information that insurers, even
themselves, have after just a few months of operation is far
too short to really have realistic estimates of whether they
are going to get payments back from the Government or make
payments to the Government. I think it just remains to be seen.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, you told us in your testimony, I think,
that under the Medicare Modernization and Part D, the
prescription drug risk-corridor program, that the taxpayers
have essentially benefited--did you say to the tune of $8
billion over a 10-year period?
Mr. Hoadley. Over 7 years--I haven't done the exact
arithmetic, but I think it is somewhere in the range of about
$8 billion paid back to the Government over 7 years.
Mr. Gingrey. But, as I say, it is predicted and reported by
health insurance companies in the exchange, they expect that
they will get net payments--that is, from the taxpayer--of at
least a billion dollars.
So, you know, I think it is very appropriate. This is a
great legislative hearing and opportunity to talk about some of
these bills that my colleagues, Representative Cassidy and
Lance and others, have in regard to whether we eliminate this
risk-corridor program or we modify it. Certainly, we need to do
something about assuring that if you like your health insurance
plan, you can keep it, period, no exceptions.
So that bill to say that, yes, in the small group market
and the individual market, those 2013 policies, the people that
like them can keep them, that is a very appropriate
legislation. And I hope that we will pass it in both the House
and Senate and hope that President Obama will sign it into law.
And I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentlelady from North Carolina, Mrs.
Ellmers, 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Hoadley, I want to go back to some of your testimony
and the exchange you had with one of my colleagues from across
the aisle on the differences between Medicare Part D and the
Affordable Care Act.
Is the Affordable Care Act something--is it mandatory or
not mandatory?
Mr. Hoadley. For people to sign up for insurance?
Mrs. Ellmers. For people to sign up.
Mr. Hoadley. There is an insurance mandate, yes.
Mrs. Ellmers. It is a mandate. Is Medicare Part D a
mandate?
Mr. Hoadley. It does not have a mandate. It instead has a
late-enrollment penalty that creates the incentive for people
to sign up.
Mrs. Ellmers. OK, but it is not a mandate. It is----
Mr. Hoadley. Not a mandate.
Mrs. Ellmers [continuing]. A personal choice that every
individual, every senior on Medicare can take, correct?
I do want to go back to--also, you had pointed out that
initially the risk corridor was temporary. It was a 3-year
temporary risk corridor when Medicare Part D was put together.
Is that correct?
Mr. Hoadley. No. Actually, it was set up as a permanent
part of the program. It was set at a different width. The
amount of potential payments in or out was greater in the first
3 years, stepped back in the second 3 years----
Mrs. Ellmers. OK.
Mr. Hoadley [continuing]. And then left the Department with
the option of what to do with it thereafter.
Mrs. Ellmers. And then CMS, at that point, continued it. Is
that correct?
Mr. Hoadley. Right.
Mrs. Ellmers. So, you know, in your opinion--and, of
course, this is your opinion--can you see the same thing
happening with the Affordable Care Act, considering that it is
at this point supposedly temporary?
Mr. Hoadley. So, in the Affordable Care Act, it is very
specific in the law that it is good for just the 3 years, so
there is no option----
Mrs. Ellmers. But CMS could make that change if they so
chose.
Mr. Hoadley. No, they could not.
Mrs. Ellmers. OK. Well, I want to point something out to
you along that line. Today, the House Oversight and Government
Reform Committee's chairman, Darrell Issa, released a report:
``ObamaCare's Taxpayer Bailout of Health Insurers and the White
House's Involvement to Increase Bailout Size.''
The report includes email correspondence showing that
senior advisor to President Obama Valerie Jarrett directly
intervened in response to an insurance company CEO's threat to
increase premiums unless the White House acted to expand
Obamacare's taxpayer bailout of insurance companies.
Mr. Chairman, to this I would like to add this exchange,
this email, and this report from Oversight and Investigation to
our report today.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, I haven't seen this report, so I
reserve----
Mrs. Ellmers. Well, there again, I would like to submit it.
Mr. Pallone. Well----
Mrs. Ellmers [continuing]. If possible, and----
Mr. Pallone. Well, sure, you can. But I would like to
reserve, you know, the opportunity to object to it. I would
have to see it.
Mrs. Ellmers. OK.
Mr. Pitts. We will wait until it comes down.
Mrs. Ellmers. Great. OK, wonderful.
Well, to that, I guess my point is that this is all subject
to change based on how the program is going.
And, to that, Mr. Haislmaier, I have a question for you. As
far as the risk corridor goes, do you see this as--you know, I
know you had mentioned some of the risks because of, you know,
back-door deals. You know, we are trying to keep this budget-
neutral, as happened with Medicare Part D in a program that
worked very well.
Do you see this as just an effort politically to keep
premium costs down in order to move forward on this? I mean,
could this be, this risk corridor?
Mr. Haislmaier. Well, I think that is a very legitimate
concern, ma'am. And I think what animates a lot of the concern
is, clearly, the administration in many ways has been trying to
keep premiums down, and this would be an avenue for them to
make up some of that money. That is the concern that is here.
And the way the statute is written, at least for the first
3 years, they could exploit the ambiguity in the statute to do
that. So that is, I think, why you are having the hearing here,
is to say, well, we have to either get rid of it or make sure
that it is clear that that can't be done by being budget-
neutral.
Mrs. Ellmers. Uh-huh.
Mr. Haislmaier. Clearly, that potential is there, though.
We don't know yet until we see the results for the first year
of actual premiums.
Mrs. Ellmers. And to that point, you know, we have Medicare
Part D, and we can look back on Medicare Part D and we can
watch the way that it played out. We are still, you know,
waiting to see how the----
Mr. Haislmaier. We are in mid-process----
Mrs. Ellmers. Lastly, Mr. Veuger, in the 25 seconds that I
have, I guess just a ``yes'' or a ``no'' answer. I know we were
talking with Dr. Cassidy about, you know, what Members of
Congress may or may not have known, whether or not individuals
would be able to keep their healthcare plan. Do you believe
that the President knew that they would not be able to keep
their insurance plan?
Mr. Veuger. I don't know, but I would hope that he knew.
Mrs. Ellmers. OK. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Has the staff been able to get the report that you referred
to? You have it? Can you--have you given it to the----
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, the problem that I have is that
my understanding is that Chairman Issa hasn't made these
reports public. And so that is one of the reasons I am
objecting at this time until we have an opportunity to see it.
Mr. Pitts. Go ahead. Go ahead. It was released today.
Mr. Cassidy. It was released today. I can forward a copy to
Mr. Pallone.
Mr. Pallone. Oh, why don't you just--we will reserve our
objection until we see it. You give it to us, and we will take
a look. Until today, he hadn't made them public. I didn't even
know he made it public today, but I believe you, but I just
haven't seen it.
Mr. Pitts. All right. We will get it to you today. And
then, without objection----
Mr. Pallone. No. We are objecting until we have seen it,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The report is coming. We will hold until the
report comes down.
OK. We still don't have the report here. We have 10 days to
get it to Mr. Pallone.
So if you will let us know------
Mr. Pallone. Sure.
Mr. Pitts [continuing]. Once you get to see the report, and
then, without objection, we will enter it into the record.
[The information is available at http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF14/20140728/102551/HHRG-113-IF14-20140728-
SD006.pdf.]
Mr. Pitts. All right. I remind Members they have 10 days,
10 business days, to submit questions for the record.
And I am sure the Members will have follow-up questions for
the witnesses, so we will submit those to you. We ask that you
please respond promptly.
And so Members should submit their questions by the close
of business on Monday, August 11th.
Thank you very much for your testimony.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:26 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
