- CYBER THREATS AND SECURITY SOLUTIONS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CYBER THREATS AND SECURITY SOLUTIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 21, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-45

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
82-197                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          LOIS CAPPS, California
Vice Chairman                      MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JERRY McNERNEY, California
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   152

Witnesses

Patrick D. Gallagher, Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards
and Technology, and Director, National Institute of Standards
and Technology.................................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Answers to submitted questions...............................   153
Dave McCurdy, President and CEO, American Gas Association, and
Former Chairman of the House Intelligence Committee............    38
Prepared statement...........................................    41
Answers to submitted questions...............................   157
John M. (Mike) McConnell, Vice Chairman, Booz Allen Hamilton, and
Former Director of National Intelligence.......................    55
Prepared statement...........................................    56
Answers to submitted questions...............................   160
R. James Woolsey, Chairman, Woolsey Partners LLC, and Former
Director of Central Intelligence...............................    72
Prepared statement...........................................    74
Answers to submitted questions...............................   162
Michael Papay, Vice President and Chief Information Security
Officer, Northrop Grumman Information Systems..................    79
Prepared statement...........................................    81
Answers to submitted questions...............................   164
Phyllis Schneck, Vice President and Chief Technology Officer,
Global Public Sector, McAfee, Inc..............................    88
Prepared statement...........................................    90
Charles Blauner, Global Head of Information Security, Citigroup,
Inc., on Behalf of the American Bankers Association............    99
Prepared statement...........................................   101
Answers to submitted questions...............................   167
Duane Highley, President and CEO, Arkansas Electric Cooperative
Corporation, on Behalf of the National Rural Electric
Cooperative Association........................................   112
Prepared statement...........................................   114
Answers to submitted questions...............................   169
Robert Mayer, Vice President, Industry and State Affairs, United
States Telecom Association.....................................   121
Prepared statement...........................................   123
Answers to submitted questions...............................   171

CYBER THREATS AND SECURITY SOLUTIONS

----------

TUESDAY, MAY 21, 2013

House of Representatives,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in room
2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Marsha
Blackburn (vice chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Blackburn, Shimkus, Pitts, Walden,
Terry, Rogers, Murphy, Burgess, Scalise, Latta, Harper, Lance,
Cassidy, Olson, McKinley, Gardner, Pompeo, Kinzinger, Griffith,
Bilirakis, Johnson, Long, Ellmers, Dingell, Rush, Eshoo, Green,
DeGette, Capps, Doyle, Schakowsky, Matheson, Butterfield,
Barrow, Matsui, Castor, McNerney, Braley, Tonko, and Waxman (ex
officio).
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Clerk; Carl
Anderson, Counsel, Oversight; Gary Andres, Staff Director;
Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Ray Baum, Senior Policy
Advisor/Director of Coalitions; Mike Bloomquist, General
Counsel; Matt Bravo, Professional Staff Member; Patrick
Currier, Counsel, Energy and Power; Neil Fried, Chief Counsel,
Communications and Technology; Brad Grantz, Policy Coordinator,
Oversight and Investigations; Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Andrew Powaleny, Deputy
Press Secretary; David Redl, Counsel, Telecom; Krista
Rosenthall, Counsel to Chairman Emeritus; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment and the Economy; Peter Spencer,
Professional Staff Member, Oversight; Dan Tyrrell, Counsel,
Oversight; Lyn Walker, Coordinator, Admin/Human Resources; Phil
Barnett, Democratic Staff Director; Jeff Baron, Democratic
Senior Counsel; Shawn Chang, Democratic Senior Counsel; Patrick
Donovan, FCC Detailee; Margaret McCarthy, Democratic Staff;
Roger Sherman, Democratic Chief Counsel; and Kara van Stralen,
Democratic Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. The subcommittee will come to order. As we
open our hearing today, I am certain we all are mindful and
remembering and are prayerful for those in Oklahoma, and our
former colleague, Governor Mary Fallin, who is addressing that
tragedy today with the storms there in Oklahoma. I recognize
myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
American companies, the U.S. government and private
citizens are facing new challenges in the fight to protect our
Nation's security, economy, intellectual property and critical
infrastructure from cyber attacks.
Today the Energy and Commerce Committee is exploring how
the private sector and our government are responding. We will
also review the implementation of the President's Cybersecurity
Executive Order 13636.
Cyber attacks have grown in scope and sophistication to
include nearly every industry and asset that makes America
work. That is why this committee is well positioned to lead,
oversee and review policies and solutions to these wide-ranging
and evolving threats. Last year an al-Qaeda video surfaced
calling for a covert cyber jihad against the United States. On
Sunday, the New York Times reported that hackers sponsored by
China's People's Liberation Army have resumed attacks on U.S.
targets. According to the GAO, the number of cyber incidents
reported by federal agencies to U.S. Computer Emergency
Readiness Teams has increased by 782 percent over 6 years.
As vice chairman of the full committee, I offered a
discussion framework, the SECURE IT Act, to provide our
government, business community and citizens with the tools and
resources needed to protect themselves from those who wish us
harm. The five major components that make up the Secure IT Act
are, number one, allow the government and the private sector to
share cyber threat information in a more transparent fashion;
number two, reform how our government protects its own
information systems; number three, create new deterrents for
cyber criminals; number four, prioritize research and
development for cybersecurity initiatives; and number five,
streamline consumers' ability to be notified when they are at
risk of identity theft and financial harm.
One of the things we know is that cybersecurity is uniquely
ill suited for federal regulation. Rapid changes in technology
guarantee the failure of static, prescriptive approaches. Our
focus should be on developing consensus public policy that puts
American businesses in the driver's seat and allows cooperation
and collaboration, not top-down and one-size-fits all mandates.
NIST's written testimony on implementing the framework of
the Executive order states, ``Any efforts to better protect
critical infrastructure need to be supported and implemented by
the owners and operators of this infrastructure. It also
reflects the reality that many in the private sector are
already doing the right things to protect their systems and
should not be diverted from those efforts through new
requirements.'' Private solutions--not government
presumptions--offer the best prospect for our future cyber
defenses.
As we explore ways to incentivize the private sector to
diminish our exposure to cyber threats, we must ensure the
Executive order stays true to a voluntary, cooperative
standard. Likewise, Congress and the executive branch should
refrain from further exploring legislative regulatory proposals
giving DHS authority to impose critical infrastructure
requirements as our government is purportedly already in the
midst of working with the private sector to draft a voluntary
cybersecurity framework.
I look forward to the testimony and appreciate each and
every one of our nine witnesses' thoughtful answers to our
questions this morning.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Blackburn follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Marsha Blackburn

American companies, the U.S. government, and private
citizens are facing new challenges in the fight to protect our
nation's security, economy, intellectual property, and critical
infrastructure from cyber attacks.
Today the Energy and Commerce Committee is exploring how
the private sector and our government are responding. We will
also review the implementation of the President's Cybersecurity
Executive Order 13636.
Cyber attacks have grown in scope and sophistication to
include nearly every industry and asset that makes America
work. That is why this committee is well-positioned to lead,
oversee, and review policies and solutions to these wide-
ranging and evolving threats. Last year an al-Qaeda video
surfaced calling for a covert cyber jihad against the United
States. On Sunday the New York Times reported that hackers
sponsored by China's People's Liberation Army have resumed
attacks on U.S. targets. According to the GAO, the number of
cyber incidents reported by federal agencies to US Computer
Emergency Readiness Team has increased by 782 percent over 6
years.
As vice chairman of the full committee, I offered a
discussion framework--the SECURE IT Act--to provide our
government, business community, and citizens with the tools and
resources needed to protect themselves from those who wish us
harm. The five major components that make up the Secure IT Act
are: 1) allow the government and the private sector to share
cyber threat information in a more transparent fashion; 2)
reform how our government protects its own information systems;
3) create new deterrents for cyber criminals; 4) prioritize
research and development for cybersecurity initiatives; and 5)
streamline consumers' ability to be notified when they are at
risk of identity theft and financial harm.
One of the things we know is that cybersecurity is uniquely
ill-suited for federal regulation. Rapid changes in technology
guarantee the failure of static, prescriptive approaches. Our
focus should be on developing consensus public policy that puts
American businesses in the driver's seat and allows cooperation
and collaboration, not top-down and one-size-fits-all mandates.
NIST's written testimony on implementing the framework of
the Executive order states, ``Any efforts to better protect
critical infrastructure need to be supported and implemented by
the owners and operators of this infrastructure. It also
reflects the reality that many in the private sector are
already doing the right things to protect their systems and
should not be diverted from those efforts through new
requirements.'' Private solutions--not government
presumptions--offer the best prospect for our future cyber
defenses.
As we explore ways to incentivize the private sector to
diminish our exposure to cyber threats, we must ensure the
Executive order stays true to a voluntary, cooperative
standard. Likewise, Congress and the executive branch should
refrain from further exploring legislative regulatory proposals
giving DHS authority to impose critical infrastructure
requirements as our government is purportedly already in the
midst of working with the private sector to draft a voluntary
cybersecurity framework.
I look forward to the testimony and appreciate all nine of
our witnesses' thoughtful answers to our questions this
morning.

#  #  #

Mrs. Blackburn. At this time, is there any member seeking
the remainder of the time? I yield back my time, and Mr.
Waxman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, for holding
this hearing today on cyber threats to the Nation's critical
infrastructure.
Cybersecurity is a vital concern for sectors that span the
committee's jurisdiction, from the electric grid and natural
gas pipelines to telecommunications networks and health care.
Our committee should be playing a key role in developing
policies to enhance the cybersecurity of the infrastructure we
depend on every day for power, drinking water, communications
and medical care. All of these sectors are essential to the
daily operation of our economy and our government, but I want
to focus on one in particular: the electric grid.
The Nation's critical infrastructure and defense
installations simply cannot function without electricity. The
committee has a special responsibility to ensure that the
electric grid is properly defended from cyber and physical
attacks. The Executive order we are examining today is a step
in the right direction but we also need new legislation.
In January, Representative Ed Markey and I wrote to more
than 150 electric utilities to ask about their efforts to
protect the electric grid from cyber attacks, physical attacks
and geomagnetic storms. We received responses from over 60
percent of those utilities.
Today, we are releasing a report analyzing the responses we
received. The findings are sobering. Many utilities reported
that the electric grid is a target of daily cyber attacks. Some
utilities explained that they are under a ``constant state of
attack.'' One utility reported that it was the target of
approximately 10,000 attempted cyber attacks each month. The
utilities did not report any damage from these attacks to date,
but the threat is growing.
An industry organization called the North American Electric
Reliability Corporation, or NERC, develops mandatory
reliability standards for the electric grid through a
protracted consensus-based process. NERC also recommends
voluntary actions to utilities. Our report finds that most
utilities comply only with the mandatory cyber security
standards, which mostly focus on general procedures. They have
not implemented the voluntary NERC recommendations, which are
targeted at specific threats. For example, only 21 percent of
investor-owned utilities reported implementing NERC's
recommended actions to protect against the Stuxnet virus.
The failure of utilities to heed the advice of their own
industry-controlled reliability organization raises serious
questions about whether the grid will be adequately protected
by a voluntary approach to cybersecurity. When specific threats
arise, prompt action is needed, but utilities are apparently
not responding to the alerts from this organization.
We also asked utilities about geomagnetic storms, which can
interfere with the operation of the electric grid and damage
large electric transformers. Most utilities have not taken
concrete steps to reduce the vulnerability of the grid to
geomagnetic storms. Only one-third of investor-owned utilities
and one-fifth of municipal utilities or rural electric co-ops
reported taking specific mitigation measures, such as hardening
their equipment. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission is
aware of this vulnerability to geomagnetic storms. Last week,
it directed NERC to address the issue. Yet FERC lacks the
authority to make sure that NERC's actions are sufficient.
In 2010, Congressman Fred Upton and Congressman Ed Markey
introduced the bipartisan GRID Act to provide FERC with
authority to address cyber threats and vulnerabilities. The
legislation also provided FERC with the authority to protect
the grid against physical attacks, electromagnetic pulses and
geomagnetic storms. There was a bipartisan consensus that
national security required us to act. That bill was reported
out of this committee by a vote of 47 to nothing, and then it
passed the full House by voice vote. However, the Senate did
not act on the legislation.
Madam Chair, we need to work together in a bipartisan way
to protect the electric grid. Nothing in the executive order we
are examining today will address the regulatory gaps that
prevent FERC from acting decisively to tackle these dangers. I
hope that today's hearing will be the first step in rebuilding
the bipartisan consensus we had on the need for legislative
action. Thank you, Madam Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Waxman follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Henry A. Waxman

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding today's hearing on
cyber threats to the nation's critical infrastructure. Cyber
security is a vital concern for sectors that span the
Committee's jurisdiction--from the electric grid and natural
gas pipelines to telecommunications networks and health care.
Our Committee should be playing a key role in developing
policies to enhance the cyber security of the infrastructure we
depend on every day for power, drinking water, communications,
and medical care.
All of these sectors are essential to the daily operation
of our economy and our government, but I want to focus on one
in particular: the electric grid. The nation's critical
infrastructure and defense installations simply cannot function
without electricity.
The Committee has a special responsibility to ensure that
the electric grid is properly defended from cyber and physical
attacks. The Executive order we are examining today is a step
in the right direction. But we also need new legislation.
In January, Ed Markey and I wrote to more than 150 electric
utilities to ask about their efforts to protect the electric
grid from cyber attacks, physical attacks, and geomagnetic
storms. We received responses from over 60% of those utilities.
Today, we are releasing a report analyzing the responses we
received. The findings are sobering. Many utilities reported
that the electric grid is the target of daily cyber attacks.
Some utilities explained that they are under a ``constant state
of attack.'' One utility reported that it was the target of
approximately 10,000 attempted cyber attacks each month.
The utilities did not report any damage from these attacks
to date. But the threat is growing.
An industry organization called the North American Electric
Reliability Corporation, or NERC, develops mandatory
reliability standards for the electric grid through a
protracted, consensus-based process. NERC also recommends
voluntary actions to utilities. Our report finds that most
utilities comply only with the mandatory cyber security
standards, which mostly focus on general procedures. They have
not implemented the voluntary NERC recommendations, which are
targeted at specific threats. For example, only 21% of
investor-owned utilities reported implementing NERC's
recommended actions to protect against the Stuxnet virus.
The failure of utilities to heed the advice of their own
industry-controlled reliability organization raises serious
questions about whether the grid will be adequately protected
by a voluntary approach to cyber security. When specific
threats arise, prompt action is needed. But utilities are
apparently not responding to the alerts from NERC.
We also asked utilities about geomagnetic storms, which can
interfere with the operation of the electric grid and damage
large electric transformers. Most utilities have not taken
concrete steps to reduce the vulnerability of the grid to
geomagnetic storms. Only one-third of investor-owned utilities
and one-fifth of municipal utilities or rural electric co-ops
reported taking specific mitigation measures, such as hardening
their equipment.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission is aware of this
vulnerability to geomagnetic storms. Last week, it directed
NERC to address the issue. Yet FERC lacks the authority to make
sure that NERC's actions are sufficient.
In 2010, Fred Upton and Ed Markey introduced the bipartisan
GRID Act to provide FERC with authority to address cyber
threats and vulnerabilities. The legislation also provided FERC
with authority to protect the grid against physical attacks,
electromagnetic pulses, and geomagnetic storms. There was a
bipartisan consensus that national security required us to act.
That bill was reported out of this Committee by a vote of 47 to
zero. And then it passed the full House by voice vote. However,
the Senate did not act on the legislation.
Mr. Chairman, we need to work together in a bipartisan way
to protect the electric grid. Nothing in the executive order we
are examining today will address the regulatory gaps that
prevent FERC from acting decisively to tackle these dangers.
I hope that today's hearing will be the first step in
rebuilding the bipartisan consensus we had on the need for
legislative action.

Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back, and I would like
to welcome and recognize our first witness today. Dr. Gallagher
is the Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology
and Director of the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, or NIST. And everyone knows, Mr. Waxman had all of
his acronyms. There is an app for that. You can get an app and
follow all of these acronyms. Dr. Gallagher, we are delighted
you are here, and you are recognized for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.
Mr. Waxman. Madam Chair, can I just ask a question? Is the
app able to tell us what a NERC and a FERC is for jerks? Oh,
bad joke.
Mrs. Blackburn. Dr. Gallagher, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF DR. PATRICK D. GALLAGHER, UNDER SECRETARY OF
COMMERCE FOR STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY, AND DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Gallagher. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member
Waxman. I want to thank you and the members of this committee
for this opportunity to testify today. My task this morning is
to briefly summarize NIST's role and our responsibility
specifically to develop a framework to reduce cyber risk to
critical infrastructure.
It may be a surprise to some that an agency of the U.S.
Department of Commerce has a key role in cybersecurity, but in
fact, NIST has a long history in this area. We have provided
technical support to cybersecurity for over 50 years working
closely with our federal partners. Also because NIST is a
technical but non-regulatory agency, we provide a unique
interface with industry to support their technical and
standards efforts. Today NIST has programs in a wide variety of
cybersecurity areas including cryptography, network security,
security automation, hardware roots of trust, identify
management and cybersecurity education.
As directed in the Executive order, NIST will work with
industry to develop a cybersecurity framework. This is in
essence a collection of industry-developed standards and best
practices to reduce cyber risk to critical infrastructure. The
Department of Homeland Security in coordination with sector-
specific agencies will then support the adoption of the
cybersecurity framework by owners and operators of critical
infrastructure and other interested entities through a
voluntary program.
To be successful, two major elements have to be part of
this approach. First, it will require an effective partnership
across government to ensure that our work with industry for the
cybersecurity framework is fully integrated with the mission of
a diverse set of agencies. This will enable a more holistic
approach to addressing the complex nature of this challenge.
Secondly, the cybersecurity framework must be developed
through a process that is industry led and open and transparent
to all stakeholders. By having industry develop their own
practices that are responsive to the performance goals, this
process will ensure a robust technical basis but also one
aligned with business interests. This approach has many
benefits. It does not dictate a specific solution to industry
but it promotes industry offering its own solutions. It
provides solutions that are compatible with the market and
other business conditions, and by leveraging industry's own
capacity, it brings more talent and expertise to the table to
develop the solutions.
This is not a new or novel approach for NIST. We have
utilized very similar approaches in the recent past to address
other pressing national priorities, most notably on the
development of a nationwide end-to-end interoperable smart
grid, and in the area of cloud computing technologies. We
believe we know how to do this.
Since this is industry's framework, the NIST role will be
to lend its technical expertise and to support their efforts.
We will act as a convener, a contributor, and we will work
closely with our federal partners to ensure that the effort is
relevant and contributes to their missions to protect the
public.
So what is in this framework? In short, whatever is needed
to achieve good cybersecurity performance. In practice, we
expect that the framework will include standards,
methodologies, procedures and processes that can align
business, policy and technological approaches to address cyber
critical infrastructure.
Let me touch quickly on the topic of standards and their
importance to the success of this effort. By ``standards,'' I
am using the term as industry does. These are agreed-upon best
practices or specifications, norms, if you will, that allow
compatibility of efforts to meet a goal. These are not the same
thing as regulation. Industry standards are developed through a
multi-stakeholder voluntary consensus process, and it is this
process that gives standards their considerable power, that is,
their broad acceptance around the world. These standards are
not static. They can be changed to meet technological advances
and new performance requirements. Performance-based standards
promote innovation by allowing new products and services to
come to the market in a way that is not a tradeoff with good
security.
Madam Chair, I appreciate the challenge before us. The
Executive order requires the framework to be developed within
one year. A preliminary framework is due already within 8
months, and we have already begun to work on this. We have
issued a request for information to gather relevant input from
industry and other stakeholders, and we are actively inviting
stakeholders to participate in the cybersecurity framework
process. The early response from industry has been very
gratifying. Over the next few months, we will convene a series
of deep dive workshops and use these workshops to develop the
framework. This forum allows the needed collaboration and
engagement. The first workshop was held in early April to start
organizing the process, and next week will be our first full
workshop.
Last week, we released the initial findings from an early
analysis of the responses to the request for information. These
responses range from individuals to large corporations and
trade association from a few sentences on particular topics to
comprehensive responses that ran well over 100 pages. Next week
at the workshop hosted by Carnegie Mellon University in
Pittsburgh, we will work with the stakeholder community to
discuss the foundations of the framework and this initial
analysis, and this will mark the transition to actually
developing the framework.
In a related note, in June the Departments of Commerce,
Homeland Security, and Treasury will submit reports regarding
incentives designed to increase participation with the
voluntary program. At 8 months we will have an initial draft
framework including initial list of standards, guidelines and
best practices, but even after a year the work will only have
begun. Adoption and use of this framework will raise new issues
that we need to address. The goal at the end of this process
will be for industry to take and update the cybersecurity
framework themselves, creating a continuous process to enhance
cybersecurity.
The President's Executive order lays out an urgent and
ambitious agenda but it is designed around an active
collaboration between the public and private sectors. I believe
that this partnership provides the needed capacity to meet the
agenda and effectively will give us the tools to manage the
cyber risk we face
I really appreciate the committee holding this hearing. We
have a lot of work ahead of us, and I look forward to working
with you to address these challenges. I am looking forward to
answering any questions you may have.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Gallagher follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.006

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. The gentleman yields back, ran a
little bit over time there but that is OK. At this time I will
begin the questioning, and I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I want to talk with you first about what you are doing with
this framework. Because I think all of us caught, it came to
our attention that Secretary Napolitano in congressional
testimony earlier this year was still seeking legislation
giving DHS the authority to impose the critical infrastructure
requirements, and it probably struck many of us odd--I know it
did me--that you all are working on this and are looking at a
voluntary cybersecurity framework. So shouldn't the
Administration wait to see whether your process creates an
effective cybersecurity framework before asking for new
statutory authority to impose regulations?
Dr. Gallagher. So I think the Executive order lays out a
clear goal of a voluntary-based system. We agree that the first
priority is to allow the market to attempt to address this
needed level of cybersecurity performance. That being said, the
Executive order lays out sort of two goals once the framework
is in place. One is a program to promote adoption of the
framework, this voluntary framework by industry, and the other
is a recognition that some of these sectors are already
regulated, so we would like to see the framework used as a way
to harmonize this. I think it would be a mistake if we do all
this work on a broad, multi-sector framework for cybersecurity
and then not have those practices embraced by those existing
regulatory entities. So it really contains both of those
pieces.
Mrs. Blackburn. Well, let me ask you this then. Why do you
think the Administration issued the Executive order if they
knew that you were already working and trying to create the
framework, and do you think that there is going to be any
further push for legislation? If you have got a year, you are
going to meet a deadline within a year, you say you are 8
months away from delivering a product. You are holding your
workshops, the multi-stakeholder workshops, you are bringing
people to the table. So why are they bothering to issue the
Executive order and then ask for legislation?
Dr. Gallagher. So the Executive order serves to basically
align roles and responsibilities across the existing agencies,
and you see that in the Executive order, that it choreographs
the role of Homeland Security, NIST and other players in a
process within our existing authorities. So you are correct:
what we are doing now doesn't require any legislation. My
personal view is that the primary need for legislation is going
to become more important as we look at the implementation and
the adoption of the framework. The real win in a framework
process is that cybersecurity--good cybersecurity--is good
business, and I think what we are going to be looking at is,
what are the obstacles that get in the way of adoption of this
framework, where are the areas where these practices require
incentives and other--or maybe removing barriers to adoption,
and so I think the ongoing discussion that has been happening
with Congress will likely continue. The Administration looks
forward to working with Congress on this, but I think industry
won't need our help developing the framework but they may need
our help looking at areas where there are barriers to putting
this into meaningful use.
Mrs. Blackburn. Well, and I think that what we are hearing
from industry is that good cybersecurity, solid cybersecurity
steps are an imperative. They are not something that is just
good business but they are something that are an imperative
every single day, whether it is financial networks, whether it
is the grid, as Mr. Waxman referenced, whether it is some of
our health IT organizations. When you look at the number of
attacks and the step-up in that such as the PLA attacks, you
know that it is an imperative.
With that, Mr. Waxman, I yield you 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I agree with
your last statement. This is an imperative issue.
Dr. Gallagher, the President's Executive order of
Cybersecurity applies to all of the critical infrastructure
sectors. I want to ask you about the one that I talked about in
my opening statement, and that is the electric grid, because
our Nation's critical infrastructure and defense installations
are almost entirely dependent on the grid for electricity and
they simply can't function without it. When Ed Markey and I
wrote to the utilities asking them about cybersecurity, they
reported that they feel they are under a constant state of
attack. They are targets of daily cybersecurity attacks.
Because the grid is so critical and is the target of so many
cyber attacks, I think we need to make sure that we are
adequately protected. The current industry-controlled approach
of issuing mandatory electric reliability standards through
protracted and consensus-based process has a poor track record.
When it does issue standards, they are at least enforceable,
but voluntary standards are not enforceable.
Dr. Gallagher, the cybersecurity framework envisioned by
the Executive order would be voluntary. Isn't that right?
Dr. Gallagher. That is correct.
Mr. Waxman. And because there is no way for a federal
agency to ensure compliance with voluntary standards, isn't
that a correct statement that there is no way they can enforce
it?
Dr. Gallagher. That is correct, from a regulatory or legal
perspective.
Mr. Waxman. You can provide incentives for the private
sector to adopt standards, but there is no actual enforcement.
Isn't that right?
Dr. Gallagher. That is correct.
Mr. Waxman. The problem is that recommended voluntary
cybersecurity measures have not been adopted by most utilities.
I mentioned that in my opening statement, even to the point
where compliance with voluntary measures to protect against the
Stuxnet computer worm have not been taken, and that is the
virus that destroyed uranium enrichment centrifuges in Iran. So
I don't find these numbers that we have received from voluntary
reporting by the industry encouraging.
The Executive order directs federal agencies to assess
whether the cybersecurity regulations governing each sector are
sufficient. If they are not adequate, the agencies are supposed
to issue new regulations to mitigate the cyber risk, but that
raises the question of whether agencies have the necessary
statutory authority to issue such regulations. Under the
Federal Power Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
lacks authority to issue regulations to protect the electric
grid. Even if they see that it is necessary, they can't do it.
Dr. Gallagher, the Executive order doesn't address this gap
in authority, does it?
Dr. Gallagher. It does not address that specific issue,
correct.
Mr. Waxman. So a voluntary approach to cybersecurity may
make sense for some sectors but experience has shown that it
cannot be relied upon to protect the electric grid. The FERC
should have the authority to address cyber threats to the
electric grid. That requires legislation from Congress. I hope
we will work together on a bipartisan approach, I hope a
consensus on the need for that legislation. This is a national
security issue and I believe all of us want to work together.
That is why we are here today, and we are all expressing our
concern about this issue.
Madam Chair, I will follow your lead and yield back a big
chunk of my time.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Waxman. At this time,
Chairman Walden is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. I thank the chairwoman. Thank you very much,
and Dr. Gallagher, thanks for being here.
Dr. Gallagher, networks are obviously very complex and
interconnected and themselves rely heavily on information
technology products and consumer information technology
services. How clear is the delineation? You have the so-called
IT exception, and how will that be applied?
Dr. Gallagher. So as I understand it, the IT exemption that
is discussed in the Executive order pertains to whether the IT
equipment and components are identified themselves as a
critical infrastructure. In the framework process, they are
clearly dependencies. So if we are talking about the energy
sector or any other critical infrastructure that is depending
on IT--this is about cybersecurity, after all--they will depend
on the performance networks and the performance of IT-based
equipment. And so the IT sector, the IT companies are already
deeply involved with this process. I think the exemption
applies to whether they are being specifically identified as a
critical infrastructure. I don't think it means they are not
involved deeply in the framework.
Mr. Walden. So you think they will be then?
Dr. Gallagher. Yes, they already are.
Mr. Walden. And obviously, flexibility is critical in
engaging the private sector to respond to the very rapid
evolving cybersecurity threats, especially since networks are
themselves varied and rapidly evolving. I don't have to tell
you that. How will the framework incorporate such flexibility?
Dr. Gallagher. Well, I think the way it adopts
flexibilities by relying on the same process that industry
relies on to actually develop things like the network itself.
The Internet is actually a series of protocols and standards
that allow this widespread interoperability. So it has to be as
dynamic as the technology they are deploying. What we are
basically arguing in the framework is, we want to leverage the
same thing to address cybersecurity performance. So it is an
industry-controlled process with their own technical experts.
They can bring their own technologies to the table as part of
this multi-stakeholder process, and it can be as dynamic as the
technology is to address this.
Mr. Walden. As you may know, our Subcommittee on
Communications and Technology held several hearings on the
issue of cybersecurity and cyber threats, and I think every
single witness we had said be careful in this area to not
overregulate because if you do, the bad actors will know what
we have been instructed to do by statute, they will change up
faster than you will ever keep up from a statutory standpoint,
and that you will bind our hands and misallocate our capital
and the resources. Is that a view you share?
Dr. Gallagher. So I think the tension between regulation
and standards has always been there. Standards and regulation
interplay with each other all the time, and frankly, it leads
to a lot of confusion in this space. But they really serve
different purposes. I mean, I am not an expert in this area,
regulatory issues. We would have to work with Congress anyway.
We would want to do that. But very simply, in my view, a
regulation is needed when the market can't perform. In other
words, we are talking about infrastructure whose failure would
cause a catastrophic impact to the Nation, and so we don't want
that to happen. But the advantage of industry doing as much as
it can is self-evident because of what they bring to the table
and the fact that so much of this equipment is owned and
operated and managed by the private sector.
Mr. Walden. Well, I think that is the concern that we have.
Later today we have a hearing subcommittee hearing on supply
chain vulnerabilities, which, as you know, is a major national
and international issue, and I don't know if you have any
comments regarding some of those reports that have been in the
news. Certainly our colleague, Mr. Rogers, and his committee in
a bipartisan way have had some pretty important things to say
in this area.
Dr. Gallagher. Well, let me start by saying we would like
to work with you on that issue. I think supply chains are one
of these dependencies that we talk about. The markets for
equipment, the markets for software are global, they are
interconnected, and we need to understand how do we put
together resilient and secure systems out of potentially
unresilient, low-trustworthy parts and components, how do we
put trust into a system this heterogeneous and this diverse. It
is really a very important issue and it is one that has already
come up some level in the RFI process for the framework.
Mr. Walden. All right. My time is expired. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Dingell, you
are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Chairman, thank you. Welcome to you, Dr.
Gallagher. I would appreciate a yes or no response to the
questions if you please.
Dr. Gallagher, I note Section 7(e) of the Executive Order
13636 mandates you publish a final version of the cybersecurity
framework no later than February 2014. Will you be able to meet
that deadline? Yes or no.
Dr. Gallagher. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Dr. Gallagher, do you believe that in general
NIST has sufficient resources whether in terms of funding or
manpower with which to comply with Executive Order 13636? Yes
or no.
Dr. Gallagher. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Doctor, I note that Executive Order 13636 does
not grant agencies additional statutory authority with which to
address cybersecurity-related risks. Based on your
consultations so far in establishing the cybersecurity
framework, do you expect the Administration will request the
Congress to grant it additional cybersecurity-related statutory
authority? Yes or no.
Dr. Gallagher. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Dr. Gallagher, in general, do you believe
that the Administration should be granted additional statutory
authority to address cybersecurity-related risks? Yes or no.
Dr. Gallagher. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Doctor, do you believe that Executive Order
13636 alone is sufficient to adequately address the myriad
number of cybersecurity-related threats faced by industry and
the government? Yes or no.
Dr. Gallagher. No.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Doctor, a portion of your written
testimony is dedicated to explaining the role of standards in
Executive Order 13636. You state the standards are agreed-upon
best practices against which we can benchmark performance.
Thus, these are not regulations. Earlier in your testimony, you
stated, and I quote, ``Many in the private sector are already
doing the right things to protect their systems and should not
be diverted from these efforts through new requirements.'' Do
these statements mean that NIST and the Administration do not
support the establishment of mandatory cybersecurity
regulations? Yes or no.
Dr. Gallagher. Well, I think----
Mr. Dingell. And if you explain it--I think you are going
to have to--please do it briefly. Go ahead.
Dr. Gallagher. As I said, I think we strongly prefer a
private-sector-led solution. A voluntary industry-led consensus
process is going to be more dynamic. It is going to be
adoptable around the world. It can help shape the technology
and the markets in a way that would not be possible if we took
a regulatory approach. That being said, the final analysis we
have to protect critical infrastructure, and so the real test
is going to be as put into practice is it protective of
cybersecurity, and if it is not, then I think there is a
question for Congress and the Administration in terms of how
to----
Mr. Dingell. And I would assume that you expect that we are
going to run into many occasions where we are going to have to
figure out what we do and whether or not we are going to have
additional changes in the executive orders, regulations or
whether additional statutory authority is needed. Is that
right?
Dr. Gallagher. I would certainly anticipate this will be
part of an ongoing discussion, yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Doctor.
Now, Madam Chairman, I would like to note in closing that
Section 4 of the Executive order establishes a limited
information-sharing regime between the federal government and
industry. It is my hope that the committee will continue to
examine this issue. It is also my hope that we shall hear from
the Secretary of Homeland Security, who is important in the
implementing of Section 4 about the effectiveness of
information sharing as well as whether the Congress should
authorize the liability exemptions that industry claims are
necessary to making information sharing function well. I
anticipate considerable need for us to engage in active
oversight of these matters.
I thank you, Madam Chairman, for your courtesy. Doctor, I
appreciate your courtesy and your assistance. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. At this time,
Mr. Terry, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Terry. I waive.
Mrs. Blackburn. Mr. Terry waives. At this time, Mr. Rogers,
you are recognized, and you waive. OK. Mr. Murphy, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I want to go over with regards to
working with the private sector, and you had mentioned Carnegie
Mellon University in your testimony there, and I understand
there is a number of things that are classified in that process
as well. You stated also that many in the private sector are
already doing the right things. We would look at health policy
and financial institutions and agriculture and transportation,
et cetera, and we have a limited amount of time and resources
to spend on bolstering protections and not spent on burdensome
other requirements here. Can you assure us that the whole
cybersecurity framework required by Executive order is not
going to just be a bunch of regulations, it is going to allow
these groups to all work with each other as well and to
interconnect among them? So the universities, the private
institutions, et cetera.
Dr. Gallagher. Well, I can assure you that is our intent,
and the way we are trying to make sure that intent follows
through is by giving the pen, if you will, to develop the
framework to industry and these sectors themselves and then
supporting that effort. It is really essential that this be
their work product, that this reflects current best practice
from across these sectors that identify cross-cutting issues
because it is going to be a superior product. It is the only
way to do this in the time frame, and it also allows an answer
that can basically be driven into the market actually across
the entire world.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Ms. Eshoo is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Madam Chair. Good morning, Dr.
Gallagher. Thank you for being here. Thank you for your
leadership at NIST, and I want to thank NIST for being one of
the cosponsor of the first-ever hack-a-thon that took place in
my congressional district this weekend on public safety apps.
So I think some really important ideas are going to come out of
that and benefit our country.
My first question to you is, you have referred to a
critical infrastructure, as have members, and this whole issue
of regulation, light touch and/or regulation. What do you
consider to be critical infrastructure, number one?
Dr. Gallagher. Well, I don't read anything past what is is
in the Executive order itself, which is an operational
definition that defines it as something whose failure would
cause catastrophic harm to the country, and then there is a
process in the Executive order that allows for a more specific
identification process.
Ms. Eshoo. And how do you, as part of this framework, how
do you intend to address the integrity of the supply chain?
Chairman Walden raised this, and I wanted to go back to it.
Dr. Gallagher. So I think from our view, in supporting an
industry-led effort, it is going to basically look at how does
the market identify trust in software, in components and in
systems. We are talking about companies that will be buying
equipment, presumably from supply chains that may be around the
world that are going to integrate those into systems that
control and manage their critical infrastructure. So the
question is, how do we give them the tools to identify
trustworthy components and systems in the context of that
global market. It is one of these major dependencies that just
is part of this type of a system, and we already see that issue
coming up from our industry partners in the framework process.
Ms. Eshoo. Now, in this whole issue of cybersecurity, about
95 percent of it is private sector, 5 percent is the
government, roughly, and I am pleased that NIST has placed such
a prominent focus on public-private partnerships because they
are very important. But as you work with the private sector, I
think it is very important for you to hear not just from the
large companies or the largest companies in the country but
small and medium businesses because they offer a rather unique
perspective, and given that the congressional district that I
represent, people think, members, especially, that when they
come to my district they visit Google and Facebook and
Microsoft and that they have covered the entire ground. They
haven't. I am proud that they are there and that I get to
represent them but there is a lot more to it. So how will you
ensure that the input of these small and medium sized
businesses are incorporated into NIST's cybersecurity
framework? And if you could be specific about this, how you are
doing it.
Dr. Gallagher. In short, we are trying to do everything we
can to ensure that companies of all sizes--it is not just the
big companies, as you know. Small companies tend to be leading
innovators in many cases. It would be a real problem if they
were excluded from the process. But even as owner/operators of
critical infrastructure, there are companies of all sizes that
do that. What we tried to do is make sure that our engagement
with the private sector through this process is not just in one
mode. In other words, we have the major workshops where we----
Ms. Eshoo. But do you go to them? I mean, where do you go?
Do you invite everybody to come to Washington?
Dr. Gallagher. No. In fact, we are going to be holding----
Mr. Eshoo. These small startups can't. They don't have time
or money to come here.
Dr. Gallagher. That is correct, so we have done input that
can be done electronically. The request-for-information process
was completely virtual. And our workshops are going to be
across the country, the first one in Pittsburgh, the second we
anticipate in southern California, and then the third one is
still being worked out. So we do recognize the limitations that
smaller companies have to do this, and we are trying to design
the process so that there is few of barriers as possible to
their participation.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentlelady yields back. Dr. Burgess,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the chair, and Dr. Gallagher, thank
you so much for spending time with us this morning.
On the information that you provided to us, you talk about
developing the framework and developing the standards that will
be used, voluntary compliance by the industries involved, and
one of the panelists we are going to hear from on the second
panel, former CIA Director, Mr. Woolsey, talks about the danger
from an electromagnetic pulse and talks about the need for
surge arrestors to be built into infrastructure. Are you
similarly developing the standards for those arrestors and
resistors that will be built into the infrastructure for
protecting our electrical grid and other systems?
Dr. Gallagher. So while remembering, in the United States,
NIST does not write the standards. By law, federal agencies
look to private-sector standards organizations for their needs.
So we ourselves would not be developing the standards.
The framework process, since it is specific to
cybersecurity, will probably not have within its scope sector-
specific resiliency measures like electromagnetic pulse or
geostorm or what have you. However, NIST does support those
efforts directly. So in the case of a geomagnetic storms, a lot
of the electrical measurement equipment and technology that is
needed by the electrical utilities to provide that protective
service is work that we do support from our laboratories.
Mr. Burgess. That is the point I was going to make. Many of
us remember the day in the late 1990s or maybe the early 2000s
when our little card readers at the gasoline pumps stopped
working because of some sort of solar event that had interfered
with satellite technology, and so you have that ongoing work in
process at NIST. Is that not correct?
Dr. Gallagher. That is correct. We think of ourselves as
industry's national lab, so as these technical issues come up
in their standards process where they want resilient equipment
and services, our job is to work on that technology and support
their efforts.
Mr. Burgess. Well, again, we are going to hear a great deal
more of this from a witness on our second panel but it just
seems that it stands to reason as you build that or as you
develop the voluntary compliance standards for that
infrastructure that you would build this protection in so that
industry and the private sector would be not only aware of the
necessity but have a place to go. So often we get into these
things and you get overwhelmed by vendors and you don't really
know which is the best practice or the best technologies. So
that is where I see NIST as really being able to provide some
of that direction and some of that leadership in going forward
in this. Is that a fair assessment?
Dr. Gallagher. Yes. I think it is ironic that the diversity
of our approach in the United States, which is one of its
strengths, also makes it complicated at times, but that is
certainly a role that we would be happy to take on to help
facilitate, provide some clarity, particularly in this area.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the chair. In the interest of time, I
am going to yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Green, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mr. Gallagher, thank you for appearing before our committee
today, and it is important that any framework established
through the Executive order be truly voluntary. Mandated
regulations could quickly become outdated due to a rapidly
changing cyber threat landscape and may result in increasing
uniformity that may inadvertently add vulnerabilities to
intricate systems tailored to specific company operations and
risk profiles. How will NIST ensure the framework remains a
truly voluntary program?
Dr. Gallagher. Well, the most straightforward way is, we
simply have no regulatory authority of any type that would make
it compulsory. Insofar as supporting industry's intent to have
this be something under their control, one of the things that I
think we can do is work with them through the framework process
to identify how this framework is muscular. I think one of the
problems we face is that people are equating the term
``voluntary'' with ``weak'', and that is not necessarily the
case. Most product safety standards in the United States, many
things are in fact fully managed by industry, and industry is
quite capable of putting in muscle--what we call conformity
assessment tools--to ensure that in business-to-business
interactions and so forth that they assure themselves, that
they are complying with their own standards and protocols. And
I think if that is done, it addresses the performance. I think
if what they do is protective of the critical infrastructure, I
think that is the best thing we can do to maintain this as a
voluntary industry-led process.
Mr. Green. As the framework takes shape, demonstrating
adherence to the framework should not require submission of
company audit results. Sharing of sensitive information with
third parties could greatly compromise cyber systems, so
specific information regarding cyber systems must remain
propriety to protect the information from the public and cyber
criminals. Has NIST developed a method to determine adherence
to the framework, and will they take into consideration the
sensitive information that different companies and plants may
provide?
Dr. Gallagher. So NIST itself would not play a role in
assessing compliance with the framework. Our preference would
be for industry to develop as part of the framework the vehicle
by which they would determine the compliance mechanism. What we
can do is share a number of best practices and models where
that has occurred in other areas including smart grid and cloud
computing and show them the pros and cons of these different
models. It addresses many of the concerns you just raised,
which is in the business environment, they can set this up so
that they are not sharing competitively sensitive information
and propriety information in a way that they don't want to. In
other words, the conformance assessment program can be
compatible with their business needs.
Mr. Green. I appreciate that. I know a lot of us represent
different entities who have a big stake in this, and they are
already doing a lot of things. In my area, my refineries,
chemical plants, of course, all of us have utility plants, that
this cybersecurity threat is being addressed now and they are
standards being developed, sometimes by companies, sometimes by
industry, and that is my concern, that we make sure that we
don't get in the way of some of the innovations that literally
can be found out every day.
So Madam Chairman, I appreciate the time. Thank you. I
yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Scalise, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate you
holding this hearing. Dr. Gallagher, thank you for being with
us today.
You mentioned in your testimony that regulatory agencies
will review the cybersecurity framework to determine if any
requirements, if the current requirements are sufficient but
also if there would be any proposed new types of actions. When
I look at that and I see words like ``requirements'' and
``actions,'' is that something that is synonymous with
regulations?
Dr. Gallagher. Not to me, but you are not the first person
that has noticed the connection.
Mr. Scalise. So there are no proposals right now to come
out with actual regulations when you talk about requirements or
actions?
Dr. Gallagher. So in my experience, here is what I have
learned when you are dealing with standard setting that
potentially touches regulatory agencies. So some of these
sectors are currently regulated. It would be a mistake for the
framework to not be germane to what the regulators are doing.
Then it wouldn't be addressing the underlying need to protect
those sectors in this case. On the other hand, you don't want
so close of a relationship that the standard setting is
effectively a regulatory process.
Mr. Scalise. I know you are familiar with legislation that
we have moved through the House to expand the ability for the
private sector to share information with the government to find
out about threats but all on a voluntary basis where private
information would be protected, where if a private entity
didn't want to go and talk to DOD about maybe things that they
are seeing from China or Russia or some other country or
entity, they don't have to do that, but then there would be the
ability for them to do it if that benefits them in looking at
breaches that are maybe coming their way. And so voluntary is
very different than new requirements that would be mandatory.
You understand the difference that we are looking at there?
Dr. Gallagher. Yes. The intent of the framework is not to
drive the establishment of new requirements. That portion of
the Executive order, to my understanding, is a harmonization
issue, which is we want any existing regulatory agency to
consider the framework when it is complete. It may be something
they can harmonize against, which would remove duplicative
requirements to those companies. It could very well be that it
addresses the underlying need, and they could actually lighten
any specific regulatory requirements. But in our view, it would
be a mistake for them not to consider the framework in light of
what they were doing before the framework was there.
Mr. Scalise. So when you talk about the Executive order
that would establish this framework, you also talked about
incentivizing private companies, other entities that have
critical infrastructure to adopt this new framework that you
are developing at NIST. What types of incentives are you
talking about?
Dr. Gallagher. So I think at this point we don't know what
the specific incentives are, so the Executive order actually
asks a number of agencies to contribute reports identifying
potential areas. We have done this through a public comment
period and we are distilling those comments now. I think the
way to understand this is that we want the framework adoption
to be tantamount to good business. In other words, good
cybersecurity is good business. They are compatible functions
within these companies, and I think the best way to view the
incentives question is to what extent are there barriers or, in
some cases, you know, counterincentives to doing the right
thing. Those are the things I think we will work with you
together to make sure that we align business interests with
doing good cybersecurity.
Mr. Scalise. Right, and again, in our legislation, we have
some liability protections. We don't want somebody to feel like
if they are coming to the government to work together in a
partnership that that is not going to expose them to some other
kind of liability if their intent is to protect their network
and ultimately all of the users. I mean, my constituents,
everybody's constituents that are out there that give personal
information to various Web sites, they do it under agreements.
If you are on Facebook or any other Web site, you have got an
agreement. You know that there are agreements that your
personal information is going to be protected. Of course, if
some other country, some entity is trying to break through a
firewall, then they are also trying to get your personal
information. So you want that to be protected. So I am just
trying to find out, does NIST have some definition of incentive
when you are trying to get this?
Dr. Gallagher. At this time NIST does not but what I can
share with you is a preliminary look at some of the comments
coming in from the RFI to the Commerce Department. They include
things like liability protections, exploring the establishment
of insurance markets where the risk can be monetized in
business-to-business relationships, procurement preferences for
companies that are supporting the framework to offer high-
quality products and services. It is things of that type.
Mr. Scalise. And I would just ask--I know my time has run
out--I would just ask if you could share that with the
committee as you are developing those definitions of
incentives, if you could just share that with us along the way
and some of the things like the liability protections are
things we have already hashed out and embedded here. Maybe you
could look at those things that we have already identified as
well.
Thanks a lot, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. McNerney for
5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Thanks, Dr. Gallagher, for your work on this issue, and you
clearly have a good grasp of it and you are sharing the wealth
so it is understandable.
One of the things that you mentioned and I think comes up
often is the idea of performance-based standards, and I would
like for you to just talk a little bit about what that means,
maybe give an example, and also give an example of a non-
performance-based standard so we will have a clear idea of what
we are talking about here.
Dr. Gallagher. So simply, a performance-based standard is
one where the standard addresses a given level of performance
and it is less prescriptive about how you get it done. So an
example would be this smartphone needs to talk to this network.
That is a performance requirement for interoperability in that
case but it doesn't prescribe the exact data format, electrical
format that would happen. What a performance requirement then
does is allow a diversity of technical solutions that can
achieve the same performance level, and that is why these are
preferred. They give companies, particularly in technology
fast-moving areas, the flexibility and latitude to continue to
innovate and perhaps even meet the performance requirement in
improved ways.
Mr. McNerney. Well, what would a performance-based standard
in cyber look like or sound like?
Dr. Gallagher. Well, I think that is the exact question we
are going to be putting in front of the industry groups through
the framework process. You know, measuring and assessing good
cybersecurity performance, and I am saying this as head of a
measurement agency, is actually a challenging problem. You
know, coming up with the right way of characterizing this, and
I think it is probably going to be a diverse set of metrics
that they look at. Some of these are going to be looking at
best practices in terms of removing vulnerabilities. That would
be one type, known vulnerabilities and minimizing that threat
surface, if you will, in companies. And the other part is going
to be this adaptive part of cybersecurity, which is, do you
have the intrinsic capability to take new threat information
and to adjust the protective measures you are taking within the
company. So I wish I could give you an easy, straightforward
answer to that one but I think that is going to be one of the
issues that the entire framework community is going to be
dealing with.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I spent some time developing standards
in the mechanical engineering fields, and it is long, it is
painstaking, and often it gets watered down so much that it is
not very useful, and I am worried about that in this sort of a
framework. Do we have the chance of ending up with something
that is so watered down that it is not useful?
Dr. Gallagher. So consensus, of course, doesn't mean
unanimity, as you know from that experience, and I think you
are exactly right. One of the threats you face in a multi-
stakeholder process is that in an effort to achieve agreement,
you go to the lowest common denominator. And that is why the
performance goal of having high-performance cybersecurity is
going to be so important to this. I think what we are striving
for here is a framework that reflects best possible achievement
at commercial levels of performance. That would allow
additional support, for example, in the public-private space
where support from our intelligence agencies and operational
agencies can support the private sector but not asking them to
carry out that role. But it also reflects that we can't race to
the bottom and just find the lowest common denominator of
technical performance and call that adequate.
Mr. McNerney. Now, are you going to be including foreign
companies in this collaborative process?
Dr. Gallagher. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. It would be hard not to because----
Dr. Gallagher. I would hope they do, actually. One of the
interesting parts of this is, by doing this through the market,
and the market in fact is global, what we can do is end up with
a baseline level of performance that is reflected in products
and services sold around the world. In fact, if we had taken a
regulatory approach first, that would be unlikely to happen
because as soon as a U.S. regulatory agency said this is the
requirement, it becomes a counterincentive to any adoption in
other countries, where if this is coming from industry, very
naturally I think one of the real strengths here is that we can
drive this base level of performance into the global
marketplace. That doesn't preclude governments from adding any
additional requirements on top of that but I think it best for
companies because it lets them sell their goods and services
around the world, and it is good for us because the Internet is
itself a global infrastructure, and I think if we can drive
this intrinsic security performance up, that is better for all
of us.
Mr. McNerney. I think this is an opportunity for real, true
bipartisan work. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Latta, 5
minutes.
Mr. Latta. I thank the chairlady, and I appreciate you all
being here today. This is a topic that is not just on
everyone's mind here in Washington but back home. You know, in
the last 24 hours before I came back, there was an article in
the New York Times, China back to hacking United States
alleges, experts say agencies, firms battling new attacks.
There was a front-page story yesterday also in the Washington
Post about Chinese hackers, and it is a real issue, and I
represent 60,000 manufacturing jobs back home and a lot of
businesses that are very concerned with this. One of the things
that I started doing with the cybersecurity with the FBI in
Ohio, we have done cybersecurity events in the district, we are
doing one next week, to get the FBI in to really explain to
people how serious things are out there. So I really appreciate
you all being here because it is a topic that is on top of
everybody's mind.
In your testimony, on page 4, if I can just ask you a
couple questions about that, it says that your request for
information under the RFI this past February, you know, you
have received 224 responses so far. Have you been able to
analyze any of those responses and are you seeing any kind of a
trend right now, and who has been responding? Is it overall in
the industry or is it a broad section?
Dr. Gallagher. It is actually remarkably broad. As I said,
we have heard from some of the largest companies and industry
associations. I think in the next panel you will hear that many
of the participants there, their companies have participated in
the process. It crosses all the sectors. We did publish last
week, and it is posted on the NIST Web site, a preliminary
analysis of the responses. In fact, we chart out and tabulate
the areas that are represented and the types of issues that
were coming up through the public comment period. That is part
of the homework assignment that has been given to the framework
participants for their first workshop in Pittsburgh next week.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, and also, you know, just maybe
to sum up, because in the interests of time, that, you know,
one of the things, you commented in your testimony and also I
have heard over and over from folks out there that one size
does not fit all, that we can't create one thing here in
Washington because, again, on the industry side, things are
moving so quickly on theirs that we try to do something here,
and we will be just three, four, five steps behind.
The other term that I always know that worries people back
home is the word ``voluntary'' and they want to make sure that
anything that is done is always voluntary, and as my colleague
from Louisiana just mentioned in a question about incentives,
incentivizing, those are terms that also we want to really make
sure that we know what is going on. So Madam Chair, in the
interest of time, I yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Tonko, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Madam Chair, and let me thank Chair
Upton and Ranking Member Waxman for arranging today's very
important hearing. Critical infrastructure represents a wide
range of industries, and interestingly, many fall under the
jurisdiction of E&C. So we need to take a serious look at how
to improve these industries' resiliency from cyber threats.
Let me welcome you, Dr. Gallagher. I know that you have an
awesome task assigned your way, but I also appreciated your
recent visit to the core of my district. It was well received.
And I commend NIST on its leadership in implementing some very
important guidelines here. NIST has received tremendous
feedback from stakeholders, and it appears that NIST has
recognized that cybersecurity can best be addressed through a
cooperative public-private partnership. So it is clear that
this has been a collaborative effort, and I am grateful that
you appear before this committee today.
President Obama expressed concerns with the cyber
legislation recently considered in the House because of privacy
and civil liberties issues. His Executive order makes promoting
these rights an explicit priority. Many of the testimonies we
will hear today will make mention of that importance. Has NIST
or DHS's Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties been in
discussion with privacy and civil liberties groups while
working on implementation?
Dr. Gallagher. So in the case of the framework process,
which is fairly new, I am not specifically aware of any
discussions, but prior to that, through Commerce Department
efforts looking at both privacy and non-critical
infrastructure, we interacted quite extensively with those
groups. I think from a framework perspective, it comes up in
two areas. One is privacy is about sharing the appropriate
information you want to share and nothing else. That is a
technically enabled capability, and so at the technical level,
the capacity to implement privacy is in fact a deep part of
cybersecurity and will be part of the framework process. The
other part of the Executive order where this is obviously is in
the information sharing and coming to terms with what
information is needed to share to carry out the protective
function.
Mr. Tonko. And according to your testimony, next month we
are expecting reports about the potential incentives designed
to increase participation in the framework program. Aside from
liability protection, which was considered in the House as
cyber legislation, and I think demanded by industry, what types
of incentives are possible? Which of these will need
legislation perhaps to implement and which can be done right
away?
Dr. Gallagher. So what we are seeing in the RFI process
includes a broad range of incentives. Some would absolutely
require legislative action to occur. Those are things like
liability protection, supporting reinsurance markets and how
does that work. Looking at tax incentives potentially to
support some of the capital investments to upgrade
cybersecurity performance including, in some cases, supporting
grant programs for promoting innovation, some of the R&D
activities related to promoting good cybersecurity. Other areas
appear to fall within existing authorities, and that would be
things like alignment, do you create procurement preferences in
the federal government that would support the adoption of the
framework. In some cases, things were proposed that would not
be a good idea and so I think the report will be very useful in
particular to Congress as it considers this continuing question
about how do you promote industry's work to do the right thing
on cybersecurity and eliminate barriers and support adoption.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And 150 of the 244 responses to
NIST's request for information discuss the workforce's cyber
capabilities. We obviously have to recognize this workforce
will be a vital and growing contributor to our economy in the
future. It is not hard to imagine the need for constant
training. So what types of education, training and research
opportunities can we invest in to ensure that the private
sector has access to the highly skilled personnel necessary to
implement and maintain some rigorous cybersecurity standards?
Dr. Gallagher. I think this is going to continue to be an
area that we will have to work on aggressively. So outside of
the framework process, NIST was asked to be an interagency
coordinator, if you will, on interagency efforts to look at
cybersecurity education across the federal government, and it
basically has three broad approaches. One is promoting
widespread cybersecurity awareness to the public--very
important because they are interacting with this infrastructure
as well. The other one is promoting interest in those that
would elect to take this direction as a career, so that is, do
we have the cadre of talented people moving in this direction
who would see cybersecurity as a place where they can
contribute and have a worthwhile career. And then the final
piece is for somebody who has made that decision, can they get
the appropriate education and workforce-specific training where
they can contribute by the way both federal and non-federal, so
we have worked with a lot of outside stakeholders.
When you have those three pillars, there is a pretty broad
range of activities. Some are awareness campaigns and some are
looking at working with leading universities. In fact, NSA and
DHS have played a leading role in that space working with
universities to accredit cybersecurity education, and in the
middle that promoting interests are some of the things that are
being done in high schools and middle schools trying to promote
broader interest in cybersecurity and the roles that some of
the career possibilities that are there for folks at that
formative period of time.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much, Dr. Gallagher, and with
that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Lance, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. I waive.
Mrs. Blackburn. Mr. Lance waives. Mr. Cassidy is gone. Mr.
Olson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you, Dr.
Gallagher, for being here this morning.
Cybersecurity is very important to my home district,
Houston, Texas. Obviously we are the energy capital of the
world. We have the world's largest petrochemical complex lining
the 15-mile-plus Houston ship channel, which serves the Port of
Galveston, the Port of Texas City, the Bayport Container
Terminal and the Port of Houston. We have a massive pipeline
infrastructure which supports that petrochemical industry. We
have two nuclear reactors 90 miles away down in Bay City,
Texas. We are about to become the third largest city in terms
of population. Sorry to my colleagues from Chicago, but those
are the facts.
So my point is, lots of damage can be done to America in
terms of dollars to our economy, in terms of lives by cyber
attacks in Houston, Texas, and as we know, one of the most
important ways to combat cyber attacks is for companies and the
federal government to work together to combat cyber attacks
through robust information sharing, and that is why I voted for
the Cyber Information Sharing and Protection Act last month
because, as you know, the information-sharing process
authorized by CISPA is completely voluntary, only ones and
zeros, binary code, if my degree from Rice from 1985 in
computer science is still relevant. No personally identified
information will be exchanged between the private sector and
the federal government. The House has done its job, and that is
why I am encouraged by the Administration's commitment to a
voluntary process that solicits input from industry to create
the cybersecurity framework.
My question is, as you know, cyber attackers adapt quickly
with new attack methods almost overnight. How does the
Administration and NIST plan to balance any additional
regulatory requirements with the need for industries to remain
flexible and be able to adapt to the changing cybersecurity
environment?
Dr. Gallagher. Well, one specific example I can give to
that is something that you have probably heard quite a bit,
which is the response capability for IT systems has to become
quicker. In essence, we have to fully automate a lot of this
response. It has to move at the speed of computation rather
than human speed, and that in some sense is a policy issue. A
lot of the information-sharing debate is around that, how do we
enable that flow of signatures and key information to enable
that, and some of that is the underlying technology. If I
receive that threat information and I am a system operator, how
do I deploy that automatically? And so NIST has been working
with industry on developing security automation tools and
protocols that can be deployed and can be used within their
systems and can provide an interoperability between different
vendors of software and different vendors of IT equipment to
enable share of cybersecurity-specific information across these
platforms. So we are trying to support what I think is going to
be a movement towards full-scale automation of a large amount
of the cybersecurity activity.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Ms. Matsui, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, and I would like to
welcome Dr. Gallagher here. Cybersecurity is both a national
and economic security issue, and I believe that industry and
government must be partners in addressing our Nation's cyber
threats. It is not a one-way street, and I believe the
Administration's Executive order was a good first step but more
will need to be done.
Last October, I wrote to the White House urging them to
consider the implications of including interactive computer
services such as search engines and social networking
platforms. I believe the Executive order got it right and made
it clear that there is a fundamental difference between
networks that manage infrastructure critical to public safety
and those that provide digital goods and services to the
public.
Dr. Gallagher, how should federal agencies ensure that any
sector-specific cybersecurity standards required under the
cybersecurity framework are not imposed on non-critical
infrastructure?
Dr. Gallagher. Well, as I said, I believe the question of
imposition is going to be one that largely falls to Congress
and, you know, those agencies with sector-specific
responsibilities. I actually view this almost in reverse, which
is the actions we are taking to work with this broad collection
of companies and interests to develop a set of general
practices for cybersecurity performance may in fact be usable,
in fact, cost-effectively usable, very broadly, in fact, maybe
in areas outside of the specific critical infrastructure. So it
could very well be that companies that are in media and other
areas would now find it easier to buy secure equipment and
secure software and lower vulnerability. This would be, in my
view, a win. So without imposing any requirement, we still get
the benefit of improved security performance.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Now, how will the Executive order and the
cybersecurity framework assist federal agencies in enabling
more uniform security measures across all government-operated
data centers?
Dr. Gallagher. So this is part of the discussion that we
have been working on pretty actively very recently, which is,
how do we get the federal agencies to align to this framework
process. I think if the private sector is going to go to all
this trouble in developing this high-performance cybersecurity
baseline, then I think the federal government should leverage
that for a number of reasons. One is, it will be a high-
performing platform to use that as a baseline for any
additional requirements that it would have internally, and also
it helps achieve market scale. In other words, some of the
government procurement now becomes supportive of helping the
companies drive adoption.
Ms. Matsui. OK. That is good.
Dr. Gallagher. So I don't think we have any answers to that
yet but that is certainly something we are actively discussing
right now.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Now, with the electricity subsector already
subject to mandatory and enforceable cybersecurity standards,
how is NIST working to ensure that the framework will include
these existing standards?
Dr. Gallagher. Well, what we have done is, we have invited
those entities in from the beginning. So in fact, in the case
of the electricity sector, that is fairly straightforward
because in fact we are modeling a lot of this effort after the
interaction we have had with that sector in smart grid. So we
have well-established relationships with those companies, with
those regulators, with those industry associations, and we have
in fact not only invited them into the process but suggested
that they, like other high-performing sectors, put their
practices on the table as best practices for consideration
under the framework.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Now, another topic I would like to raise is
securing the cloud. I am pleased that the Administration
continues to pursue its Cloud First policy and is adopting
cloud technologies to make the federal government more
efficient and effective. Now, most government agencies are now
adopting these cloud services. What kind of cyber protections
and threats and what kinds of challenges do you foresee as the
government continues to adopt cloud services?
Dr. Gallagher. So in the case of government adoption of
cloud, almost more than the technological challenges of dealing
with this are that cloud in some sense breaks policy.
Government-used policy for IT is based on the assumption that
we are the owner/operators, that this is an enterprise system
within our agencies and we manage and configure and control all
of these assets. Cloud changes that because many of these
assets now are provided via contract; they are services. And
that shift now creates a challenge, which is, how do I meet my
responsibilities as an agency head to protect my IT systems
when my relationship with those that are operating that
equipment or holding my data or running my applications has
evolved. And so what we have been trying to do is work with a
process where the cloud community, the companies and cloud
service providers, are working with the CIOs from across the
federal government and basically mapping out the different use
cases, very specific use cases where we can take a government
application, expose the requirements that those agencies have
to meet, and then turn to the business community and say how do
you help us ensure that we meet those requirements in this new
space. So that is leading to a pretty robust process where some
of the more straightforward areas we have been able to be early
adopters. Some of the more challenging areas, at least we have
identified the specific things we have to work on if we are
going to go there.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Thank you. I see my time is up. Thank you.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentlelady yields back. Mr. McKinley,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Dr. Gallagher, you may or may not be familiar. In West
Virginia in the Fairmont area on that I-79 corridor, there is a
consortium of about 50 different firms that are very much
involved called the West Virginia High Technology Consortium.
This issue is probably one of the most important issues facing
them, so as a personal privilege, I am asking if we can get
someone from Commerce to come sit down and talk to them about
this because it is by far one of the most important issues
other than perhaps sequestration.
Dr. Gallagher. We would be happy to.
Mr. McKinley. We got a few questions from some of them, and
I would like to share that. One was, what is the percentage of
industry that should be represented as a minimum to ensure that
these initiatives have been successful?
Dr. Gallagher. So I frankly haven't approached this from
what fraction have to be involved in the development process.
In the normal industry-led consensus process, you often don't
get high penetration where the majority of companies are
involved. But those that have key technology and key drivers,
the question is making sure that the standards aren't shaped
without having the right ideas around the room. I think the
more important test for success is at the other end, which is
what is the level of adoption. If these are really useful, if
these are aligned with business practices and if these are
high-performance, good cybersecurity practices and we don't see
widespread adoption, that will be something I worry about.
Mr. McKinley. I guess as an engineer, I always like the
metrics. I want to see how the metrics work. I know under
Section 2, it defines from a 30,000-foot elevation what the
definition of critical infrastructure, but down where you and I
are on the ground, who is actually going to make those calls?
What encompasses critical infrastructure?
Dr. Gallagher. I believe in the Executive order, that
decision is made by the Department of Homeland Security. I know
it is not NIST. And I believe it is based on determination
under that operational definition that is given early in the
Executive order. That determination is basically for purposes
of supporting participation in the voluntary program.
Mr. McKinley. And then in the Executive order, there is
what is called the greatest risk list. That is interesting.
Given all the discussion here in Washington lately about lists,
who is going to be maintaining that list and following up with
that list and who is going to be implementing based on that
list?
Dr. Gallagher. I am not an expert on the list but my
understanding is, that is Department of Homeland Security
responsibility and it is to assist them in prioritizing in a
risk-based fashion, so if they are going to be taking risk-
based actions, they are trying to conform themselves of what
would be the highest risk from industry so they can
appropriately prioritize. But I would have to couch with that,
you should double-check that with the Department of Homeland
Security.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much. I do hope that we will
see you at the high-tech foundation where we can all get
together and see if we can put to rest some of their concerns.
When you are talking about 50 firms, probably as many as 50
firms all interacting, it is very much of a concern how much is
their exposure.
Dr. Gallagher. One of the great things we don't have to
worry about here is the companies not being behind this. They,
I think, understand more than anyone how critically important
this is, and that is probably our biggest ally in this entire
effort.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much. Madam Chairman, I yield
back the balance of my time.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Ms. Schakowsky,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Dr. Gallagher. I am trying to
understand how the framework interfaces with the CISPA
legislation. You know, there were some of us including the
White House who felt that there were some deficiencies in the
bill as it was voted on in the House, particularly dealing with
reasonable efforts on the part of the companies, which of
course we want to voluntarily comply, but in making sure that
personally identifiable information wasn't shared among each
other or with the federal government, and actually at the time
when we were holding hearings in the Intelligence Committee,
Paul Smoker from the Financial Services Roundtable argued that
companies should be responsible for minimization, stating,
``The provider of the information is in the best position to
anonymize it,'' and then there was also a question of John
Engler, President of the Business Roundtable, if he thought it
was too much of a burden to ask the private sector to ``take
reasonable steps where reasonable steps can be taken'' to
minimize information, and Engler replied, ``No, I think it's
reasonable. I think it's exactly fine.'' So that was one of the
issues that raised in the SAP, the statement recommending a
veto of the legislation, and the other was the broad immunity
provision that was given. Is the framework consistent with what
the White House has said about CISPA? Is it different? If you
could explain that?
Dr. Gallagher. So the way I understand it, of course,
nobody is in disagreement that we have to enable information
sharing. So the debate about CISPA in some ways are technical
issues about how do you appropriately limit the scope of the
information that is being shared, and the scope of the
liability protection, and I leave that to the experts. What the
framework does is in some ways enable that information sharing.
In other words, if you receive threat information through
information sharing, can you act on it, how do you deploy that
protection through your system. In some ways, the framework may
provide an answer to this question of cost-effectiveness of
some of the things like minimization. If it is costly now for a
smaller company to minimize information, it could very well be
that through the framework process, we identify some technical
means that are embedded in the technology that are supportive
of this. So I think it is not that the framework depends on
compatibility with CISPA or with the Administration position
but it is related to information sharing in the sense that the
adaptive part of cybersecurity, taking new threat information
and being able to act on it, is a key part of the performance
level we need to have. Hopefully the framework can provide some
technical assistance in that as it goes forward, and it will be
nice because that technology assistance will be coming directly
from the industries that have to put it into practice.
Ms. Schakowsky. I thank you for that, and I yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentlelady yields back. Mr. Griffith, 5
minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you.
I appreciate you being here today, and obviously we are all
trying to struggle through some concerns about privacy and
appropriateness and when the government should be looking and
when they shouldn't. But I think most of those questions you
have already answered, and so I am willing to yield back, Madam
Chair.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Rush, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Madam Chairman, and some of
these questions may have been asked and answered already, but I
think I have a different kind of slant on it.
The Department of Homeland Security, nothing that cyber
attacks against federal agencies increased 782 percent between
2006 and 2012 for 48,562 separate incidents reported in 2012
alone, and a number of experts have estimated that the economic
impact from cyber crime to be in the billions of dollars each
and every year, and we know that here in the United States, our
most critical infrastructure including the electric grid, oil
pipelines, communications networks and financial institutions,
all are vulnerable to manipulation or attack by malicious
actors who use technology in all parts of the world, and my
constituents are as alarmed as most of America is about it. So
are you confident that NIST has all the tools and the authority
it needs to successfully implement cybersecurity framework in
order to minimize and mitigate the risks of attack on the
digital infrastructure?
Dr. Gallagher. I think if the responsibility fell solely on
our shoulders, my answer would be absolutely not. I would not
believe we would have the capacity. But the approach we have
taken is to actually get behind an industry-led effort. And so
since so much of the capacity and the know-how and the
expertise and the technology and the leadership comes from
industry, and our role is to convene and support that effort, I
am quite comfortable that we can do that.
Mr. Rush. So this alliance of industry, are you satisfied
with the level of participation and the level of concrete
outcomes so as to prevent organized cyber attack?
Dr. Gallagher. I am in fact very satisfied. My biggest
concern when the Executive order process was announced was,
would the concerns over potential regulation later, which has
been part of the public debate, basically result in companies
electing not to participate in the framework process. That de
facto boycott would have been devastating. That would have been
a failure of this entire process. And in fact, the opposite has
happened. I would say there has been a very strong tipping-in
effect. Companies, I think, have fully appreciated that letting
them drive this process and own it and run it at market scale
has enormous advantages, and I have been gratified, and I think
the origin of any optimism I have here is based on the fact
that we have so many leading companies participating in this
effort. It is going to make all the difference.
Mr. Rush. I don't know of anything that I can think of that
doesn't have challenges, and what are the challenges that this
framework faces and what are some of the challenges that NIST
faces?
Dr. Gallagher. I would agree. In fact, the sign of maturity
that you should look for in a couple months is that we are up
to our eyeballs in challenges. That means that this has become
very real. I think there is going to be lots of them. At the
very highest level, I think the challenge I am most interested
to see how to resolve is the integration of cybersecurity into
the business practices of these entities. This can't be a bolt-
on, add-on activity that companies do. It has to be embedded in
what they do, and that means integration with the risk
management that they do, with their business functions, with
their costs. It has got to be good business to do good
cybersecurity, and I think that is going to raise a number of
interesting challenges. Some of those may touch on the
incentive discussions that we have already had. But I think
that among what will certainly be a long list of technical
challenges and areas where we just have to do better and find
better solutions.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Johnson, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair. First of all, thank
you, Dr. Gallagher, for being here today. I don't really have
any questions but just a brief comment.
I spent nearly 30 years of my professional career in
information technology, and I certainly understand the
challenges that we face with cybersecurity. There are those
that will always be out there that because they can, some of
them for no other reason than that, try to wreak havoc and
disrupt our networks. Some have a much more malicious intent in
stealing information that doesn't belong to them, taking down
our capabilities and so forth. So I am grateful to be serving
on a committee here that takes this issue very, very seriously
because I think it is indeed a very, very serious issue and I
look forward to working with my colleagues and the
Administration to make sure that we do the right things, and
with that, Madam Chair, I will yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Chairman Pitts?
Mr. Pitts. I will waive.
Mrs. Blackburn. The chairman waives. Mr. Harper?
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Dr. Gallagher,
thank you taking the time. You can see by the attendance in
here, this is a very important subject, and we appreciate your
insight today.
I am blessed to have a great university in my congressional
district, Mississippi State University, which is designated as
a National Center of Academic Excellence by the National
Security Agency and the Department of Homeland Security in
information assurance education. So my question is, what has
academia's role been in the formulation of cybersecurity
framework, and do you see that role expanding?
Dr. Gallagher. I do, and I think that it is going to draw
on the two great strengths of academia. I think on one hand it
is the education of our youth and providing the knowledge base
and the talent and the expertise to address this. This is not
an easy thing, and it is going to need our best and brightest
minds on it. And the other area is actually in the research
function of our universities. I think we don't have all the
answers. I think there is areas where the technology can do
better, and I think we count on them to come up with those
breakthrough ideas that will make this all a much more
addressable problem. So I think it is going to draw on their
two core strengths.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Dr. Gallagher, and with that, I
yield back, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back, and Dr.
Gallagher, that concludes our questioning for today. You have
been very patient, and it will conclude our first panel, but
before you go, I have to tell you, you mentioned for your
workshops, you have said southern California and Pittsburgh.
Nashville, it ought to be on that list. We would appreciate
that. And we will go into recess for a moment while we set the
second panel.
[Recess.]
Mrs. Blackburn. At this time we are ready to begin our
second panel. I thank you all for moving quickly into your
spots so that we can move forward. We welcome our second panel:
Mr. Dave McCurdy, President and CEO of the American Gas
Association; Mr. John McConnell, Vice Chairman of Booz Allen
Hamilton and former Director of National Intelligence;
Ambassador James Woolsey, Chairman of Woolsey Partners and
former Director of Central Intelligence; Mr. Mike Papay, the
Chief Information Security Officer and Vice President for Cyber
Initiatives at Northrop Grumman; Dr. Phyllis Schneck, Vice
President and Chief Technology Officer, Global Public Sector
for McAfee. And I yield to Mr. Lance for the next brief
introduction.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Madam Chair. I have the honor of
introducing Charles Blauner from Citi, who is the head of
information security for that great company, and he has
extensive experience in both New York and London, and he is a
resident of the district that I serve. He lives in Basking
Ridge, Bernards Township, Somerset County, New Jersey. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back, and we continue
with Mr. Duane Highley, the President and CEO of Arkansas
Electric Cooperative Corporation. Mr. Highley is appearing on
behalf of the National Rural Electric Cooperative Association.
And Mr. Robert Mayer, the VP of Industry and State Affairs at
the United States Telecom Association. You all sound like the
cast of characters in a sci-fi movie, and we are delighted that
you all are here. Mr. McCurdy, we begin with you for 5 minutes
of testimony to summarize.

STATEMENTS OF HON. DAVE MCCURDY, PRESIDENT AND CEO, AMERICAN
GAS ASSOCIATION, AND FORMER CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE INTELLIGENCE
COMMITTEE; JOHN M. (MIKE) MCCONNELL, VICE CHAIRMAN, BOOZ ALLEN
HAMILTON, AND FORMER DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE;
AMBASSADOR R. JAMES WOOLSEY, CHAIRMAN, WOOLSEY PARTNERS LLC,
AND FORMER DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE; DR. MICHAEL PAPAY,
VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER, NORTHROP
GRUMMAN INFORMATION SYSTEMS; DR. PHYLLIS SCHNECK, VICE
PRESIDENT AND CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, GLOBAL PUBLIC SECTOR,
MCAFEE, INC.; CHARLES BLAUNER, GLOBAL HEAD OF INFORMATION
SECURITY, CITIGROUP, INC., ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN BANKERS
ASSOCIATION; DUANE HIGHLEY, PRESIDENT AND CEO, ARKANSAS
ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE CORPORATION, ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL
RURAL ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATION; AND ROBERT MAYER, VICE
PRESIDENT, INDUSTRY AND STATE AFFAIRS, UNITED STATES TELECOM
ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF DAVE MCCURDY

Mr. McCurdy. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank the ranking
member as well for the opportunity to be here. I am Dave
McCurdy, President and CEO of the American Gas Association, and
also relevant to this hearing, I am a former chairman of the
House Intelligence Committee in this body, and just to start
off, thank you for your comments earlier about Moore, Oklahoma,
which was in my district as well years ago.
AGA represents over 200 local gas companies that deliver
natural gas to more than 71 million U.S. residential,
commercial, and industrial gas customers. AGA is an advocate
for local natural gas utility companies and provides a range of
programs to natural gas pipelines, marketers, gatherers and
industry associates. Natural gas is the foundation fuel for a
clean and secure energy future, providing benefits for the
economy, our environment and our energy security.
Alongside the economic and environmental opportunity
natural gas offers comes a responsibility to protect its
distribution pipeline systems from cyber attacks. Web-based
tools have made natural gas utilities more cost-effective,
safer and better able to serve our customers. However, the
opportunity costs of a more connected industry is that we have
become a target for sophisticated cyber terrorists. This said,
natural gas utilities are meeting the threat daily via skilled
personnel, a commitment to security, and the cybersecurity
partnership with the federal government.
This government-private partnership in cybersecurity
management is critical for us. Our utilities deliver and our
systems are the safest energy delivery system in the world.
This said, industry operators recognize there are cyber
vulnerabilities with employing web-based applications for
industrial control and business operating systems. Because of
this, gas utilities adhere to myriad cybersecurity standards
and participate in an array of cybersecurity initiatives.
However, the industry's leading cybersecurity tool is a
longstanding cybersecurity information-sharing partnership with
the federal government. Natural gas utilities work with
government at every level to detect and mitigate cyber attacks,
in particular, AGA members with the Transportation Security
Administration, Pipeline Security Division of TSA, the agency
tasked with overseeing distribution pipeline cybersecurity. In
addition, gas utilities collaborate with ICS-CERT on
cybersecurity awareness, detection and mitigation programs.
Simply put, TSA and ICS-CERT understand cyber threats, natural
gas utilities understand their operations, and we work together
to protect critical infrastructure.
AGA's perspective in this is that since the Executive
order's impact on gas utility cybersecurity could be
significant, we participated on the Executive order's cyber
dependent infrastructure identification, cybersecurity
framework collaboration, and the incentive working groups. In
addition, AGA chairs the Cybersecurity Working Group of the Oil
and Natural Gas Pipeline and Chemical Sector Coordinating
Council, a panel established to address Executive order
activities, and if I could, Madam Chair, in response to the
questions from the committee make just a couple quick
observations.
Clearly, there is certain disagreement within sector-
specific agencies about whether natural gas facilities should
be considered critical cyber dependent, cyber dependent being
the word infrastructure. For natural gas entities which answer
to multiple federal agencies, this uncertainty is unsettling.
Regardless of the ultimate answer, we hope that the
Infrastructure Identification Working Group will decide this
question in an open and collaborative fashion.
With regard to Dr. Gallagher's testimony on the NIST
cybersecurity framework, at present the NIST cybersecurity
framework development process appears headed in the proper
direction. This said, natural gas utilities have some general
concerns. First, the framework development process could
benefit from more consideration of existing cybersecurity
standards, including TSA standards applicable to gas utilities.
In addition, framework provisions must be flexible and not
morph into regulations, which will quickly become outdated due
to an ever-changing cyber threat landscape. And finally, the
framework must be flexible enough to allow companies to tailor
cybersecurity systems to their own operational needs. And
third, the Executive order directs DHS to help develop
incentives that will spur industry adoption of the NIST
framework. However, most of the proposed incentives put forth
so far are little more than government services like enhanced
cybersecurity support that in fact should be in any
cybersecurity program. The fact is, absent new statutory
authority to provide meaningful incentives like information
safe harbors and cybersecurity liability protections, the
government is limited in what it can do to entice
participation. Industry would be better served via reinforced
support for federal programs that provide training, onsite
cybersecurity evaluations and system compromise support.
And lastly, Madam Chair, the case for cybersecurity
legislation or CISPA, ultimately AGA does believe there is a
role for cybersecurity legislation to help counter cyber
attacks and protect networks against future incursions,
critical infrastructure needs, government to help identify,
block and/or eliminate cyber threats. Harnessing the
cybersecurity capabilities of the government intelligence
community, so my colleagues, former colleagues on my left here,
on behalf of the private sector and networks will go a long way
towards overall network security. AGA supports----
Mrs. Blackburn. Mr. McCurdy, please sum up.
Mr. McCurdy. AGA supports the recently passed legislation
and urges the Senate to follow suit, and we thank you for the
opportunity to testify and will answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McCurdy follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.020

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you.
Mr. McConnell, you are recognized for 5 minutes, and as a
reminder, you have the timers in front of you.

STATEMENT OF JOHN M. (MIKE) MCCONNELL

Mr. McConnell. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I want to first
of all make the point that I am speaking as a citizen. I do not
represent any company or organization.
I have one main point to make to the committee. Legislation
is required. Legislation is required. If we don't have it, we
will not solve this problem. Now, the debate will be whether
you incentivize participation by the private sector or you
compel. That is something that Congress will have to debate.
I have four main points to make. The government produces
unique information. That is the community that I come from,
unique information. It is not produced anywhere else in the
world inside the United States. It is code breaking, it is
intelligence, it is understanding threats before they happen.
We must determine a way to share the information with the
private sector. That means we have to change the rules. That is
a requirement that will only be achieved through legislation.
The second point I would make is, we must establish
cybersecurity standards. They must be able to evolve and they
must be dynamic. That will give us two choices to make: do you
incentivize, as discussed earlier in the first panel, or do you
compel. That is going to be a decision that this Congress will
have to wrestle with, but one way or the other, we must have
those standards. We also must finally address the privacy
concerns, and I have fingerprints over a bill called FISA,
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. So the congressional
record will show the 2-year debate, actually 3 years--I was
only involved for 2 years--to get that to closure. The issue
is, we must be able to do the intelligence mission of the
country while protecting the privacy and civil liberties of our
citizens. I have a single recommendation: put it in law what
you don't want to happen, and the community will react to that
law because we are a nation of laws. It is the responsibility
of the Congress to oversee and ensure that that law is complied
with.
Now, the debate will be, is screening traffic coming in
through an international gateway for malware, is that reading a
citizen's mail. That will be the debate. You will have to
wrestle with that question to get it resolved because today the
Chinese, because they are clumsy and because they have a policy
of building cyber tools for warfare but they have a policy of
economic espionage, they are stealing the intellectual
lifeblood of this country. We have to deal with that, and we
strip out that malware at the international gateway.
Fortunately for us, the Iranians, because they are hammering
U.S. banks with denial-of-service attacks, are causing the
Nation to focus on this issue. I have been focused on it for 20
years. We are finally getting to a point of addressing it. It
will require legislation. Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McConnell follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.088

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. McConnell.
Ambassador Woolsey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF R. JAMES WOOLSEY

Mr. Woolsey. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I am going to talk
about a little different kind of cyber than normally comes into
the picture. Congressman Burgess referred earlier to Dr. Peter
Pry's and my op-ed in the Wall Street Journal this morning on
this subject.
It has to do with electromagnetic pulse. We don't get to
define ourselves the problems we want to deal with and ignore
them because they don't fit into some bureaucratic category of
ours. Both Russia and China as well as North Korea and Iran
include the use of electromagnetic pulse against our
infrastructure as part of information warfare and cyber
warfare, and they are working hard at it.
Electromagnetic pulse may hit the world, the United States
and other parts of it, through solar activity, and some people
focus principally on this called coronal mass ejections. It is
essentially a huge solar storm, much better than anything we
normally experience. It happens about once every 100 years, and
we are somewhat overdue for one of these. These could have a
very, very powerful effect on our electric grid. But insofar as
we are talking about human activity, the basic problem is that
a detonation of even a relatively small blast nuclear weapon 30
kilometers or more above the United States, let us say on a
warhead that is in orbit or one that is carried aloft even by a
weather balloon, can seriously, very seriously damage and
indeed destroy a substantial share of the electricity
connections that hold together our electric grid. One estimate
from the report of the commission to assess the threat to the
United States of electromagnetic pulse, a congressional
commission that reported in 2004 and in 2008, is that with a
relatively low-level attack launched only by a weather balloon
could take out approximately 70 percent of the country's
electricity with a single blast.
What is going on here is that gamma rays are one of the
products of a nuclear detonation. We are all used to thinking
of nuclear detonations as being more powerful and more damaging
if there is a lot of blast because blast is what would be used
to attack a specific target on the ground--a military
installation, an ICBM silo or whatever. Electromagnetic pulse
is different. It is something that occurs because of the gamma
rays that are sent out by a nuclear detonation but an extremely
effective electromagnetic pulse weapon could have a lot of
radiation and very little blast--two, three, four single-digit
blast efforts coupled with a lot of gamma rays and nuclear
emanations of different kinds. What that produces, even if it
as high as several hundred kilometers, is three waves of
electromagnetic pulse, the first and third being the damaging
ones, the first one attacking essentially all electronic
connections, and the third one attacking the grid itself,
particularly the transformers and the long-range transfer
systems.
The Chinese leading theorist on this subject, Chang
Mengxiong, says that information war and traditional war have
one thing in common, namely that the country which possesses a
critical weapon such as atomic bombs will have first-strike
capabilities. As soon as its computer networks come under
attack and are destroyed, the country will slip into a state of
paralysis and the lives of its people will ground to a halt.
North Korea appears to be attempting to implement information
warfare doctrine with electromagnetic pulse. In December of
2012, it demonstrated that it had the capability to launch a
satellite on a polar orbit circling the earth at an altitude of
500 kilometers. That high, it is not entirely clear that we
would be able to destroy that satellite essentially carrying a
nuclear weapon in orbit. We have canceled all of our programs
dealing with boost-phase or space-based defensive systems, and
indeed, the Administration has not even requested any study
money for this type of system, which would potentially have a
substantial effect on this type of threat.
I would urge--and finally, I see the time is over--I would
urge that we not get bogged down in the issue of volunteerism
versus government order. On something like this, we have to
have a national policy and a national commander-in-chief,
presumably the President, but with someone reporting to him who
is in charge of dealing with this kind of threat. The taking
out of our electric grid takes out all 17 other critical
infrastructures. It takes out food, it takes out water, it
takes out natural gas, it takes out practically everything you
can think of. The casualty estimates for electromagnetic pulse
attack in the congressional report are up in the range of two-
thirds of the country dying under such an attack because there
would be after a very short period of time no food, no
electricity, no water, etc.
Mrs. Blackburn. Ambassador, if you would wrap up.
Mr. Woolsey. The North Koreans have already tested both
low-yield and we believe high-gamma-ray nuclear weapons. They
have tested satellites, put a satellite in orbit. The Iranians
have put three satellites in orbit and are in the process of
working very hard on having a nuclear weapon. We could well
within months have two rogue states who are capable of
launching this type of attack against the United States as part
of their information warfare cyber campaign.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Woolsey follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.028

Mrs. Blackburn. And thank you.
Dr. Papay for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL PAPAY

Mr. Papay. Madam Chair and other members of the committee,
Northrop Grumman appreciates the opportunity to discuss this
critically important topic with you today. I am Mike Papay. I
am the Chief Information Security Officer and Vice President
for Cyber Initiatives for Northrop Grumman. That means I cover
both the internal cyber business of Northrop Grumman as well as
the external cyber strategy.
Northrop Grumman is one of the leading cybersecurity
providers to the federal government and has expansive and in-
depth knowledge, experience and expertise in these critical
aspects of our Nation's technology framework. We build, supply
and manage cyber solutions for customers that include the
Department of Defense, intelligence communities, civilian
agencies, international governments, state and local
governments, and the private sector. Northrop Grumman is
honored to be trusted with the challenge of protecting some of
the world's most targeted systems.
The Defense Industrial Base's information sharing program
has demonstrated the benefits of industry-government
collaboration. Northrop Grumman was a founding member of this
groundbreaking framework. While this effort has demonstrated
that public-private information sharing can yield many
successes, we also learned that some of the toughest challenges
are not technological but cultural and legal. Northrop Grumman
was proud to announce last week that it will participate in the
next-generation government-private sector information-sharing
program, DHS's Enhanced Cybersecurity Services.
Given our experience, Northrop Grumman very much
appreciates the seriousness and urgency of the cyber threat. We
do believe that the President's Executive order is an important
step in the right direction, but the EO's ultimate success will
be determined by the effectiveness of the individual agencies'
efforts in implementing their assigned responsibilities. We
appreciate the government's ongoing outreach to industry, and
we recently actively engaged with NIST to support the
development of its cybersecurity framework. However, the EO
alone cannot address the full range of cybersecurity issues.
Legislation is still required to facilitate and encourage
companies to secure their own networks and break down the
barriers to sharing cyber threat information.
We applaud the House of Representatives' recent passage of
cybersecurity legislation, especially the strong bipartisan
vote in favor of the CISPA, which we hope will build momentum
towards bills passing both chambers.
Northrop Grumman is committed to utilizing our experience
to support the development of successful cyber policies. We
encourage legislation that improves the agility of the federal
acquisition process to address rapidly evolving cyber threats,
increases investments in cybersecurity technology and training
of our current workforce, and supports the development of the
next generation of scientists and engineers. We must be
mindful, however, that our Nation's cybersecurity cannot be
fixed with one law or policy change. Effective cybersecurity
policies should be risk-based and as adaptable as the threat
itself. These cyber efforts must also carefully balance civil
liberties and greater security. These are not mutually
exclusive goals. Indeed, if we do not strengthen our cyber
defenses, we imperil the civil liberties that we hold dear.
Please consider Northrop Grumman a resource. We look
forward to working with Members of Congress on both sides of
the aisle and the Administration to make our world safer and
more secure.
I look forward to answering any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Papay follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.035

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Dr. Papay.
Dr. Schneck, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PHYLLIS SCHNECK

Ms. Schneck. Good afternoon, and thank you, Vice Chairman
and other members of the committee, and thank you very much on
behalf of McAfee for the opportunity to testify here today.
I am the Vice President and Global Chief Technology Officer
for Public Sector for McAfee looking at how our products adapt
to protect global government, federal, State and local, and
critical infrastructure, and I also have the honor of vice
chairing the Information Security and Privacy Advisory Board
that reports up to this committee. So thank you very much for
that.
McAfee protects 160 million points of presence across the
world, global cybersecurity products, largest peer placed
security company on the planet, wholly owned subsidiary of the
Intel Corporation with headquarters in Santa Clara, Plano,
Texas, as well as our large labs operation in Oregon.
I want to start in the spirit of this testimony with an
anecdote of the attack called Night Dragon on February of 2011
that McAfee led an investigation where we saw five oil and gas
companies lose their oil exploration diagrams, all that
intellectual property in a matter of weeks, and it was sent off
to another country, and overnight as we put the whole story
together, worked with our partners to share that information,
worked with other companies, wanted to warn the sector, legal
counsel came out in the middle of the night and said please
don't, and they were deeply concerned at that point that if the
stock prices of those companies affected and others throughout
the sector dropped the next morning, McAfee would be liable. At
the same night, I got an angry phone call from a high-ranking
official in law enforcement very upset that we didn't share the
information with him sooner. This is a position that we are all
in at some time, and this is what we need to fix. We should
never have to choose between protecting a sector, protecting
our country versus legal liabilities. So in that spirit, I want
to talk about two things, the science and policy, that I
believe that we can use to fix this.
First, culling one of many technologies because it pertains
so directly to the energy sector. The cybersecurity community
has evolved. Instead of what we call blacklisting or letting
everything in and then looking very carefully to figure out
what we think might be bad and trying to block it, we instead
what we now call whitelisting: only let in the things that we
know are good, only let instructions execute if we know that
they are good, and as a wholly owned subsidiary of Intel, I can
tell you that we can do that all the way to the chip at the
hardware. But going and evolving to that technology is
difficult, and I will explain why in a moment, but this
technology has expanded our ability to protect components as a
community of the electric grid, of the energy sector, and
across critical infrastructure.
The other piece is information sharing. We greatly applaud
the efforts of NIST, of DHS, looking at how we partner
together, public and private. We all see an enormous piece of
this picture but it is not enough until we put it together. We
all fight an adversary that is fast and loose, has no legal
boundaries and can execute on a moment's notice with all the
power in the world and all the money in the world. If we can
take our information and share it and put that puzzle together,
we regain the power of our electronic infrastructures. This is
what they cannot do. If you think about really sharing
information at light speed between machines, we call this
security connected at McAfee, but if you when block something,
you are able to instantly in milliseconds warn other components
around you and around the network and take their warnings, that
is golden. And between people, like what happened in Night
Dragon, we want to be able to share that, and we need the
protections to do so.
The key here is the small to medium businesses that were
mentioned earlier, over 99 percent of our business fabric, many
of those in the energy sector. We are missing not only not
being able to protect them--they are probably building the
next-gen engine--but we are missing the information we get from
that entire piece of the global business sector by not getting
that information back in, and that partnership with NIST and
with Homeland Security exemplifies the importance of global
standards to do this. And I want to highlight the financial
community, the financial sector, who has gone out and worked
with NIST and DHS to build those global standards to be able to
share, no matter what product you have to be able to share
mathematical indicators, preserving civil liberties and just
doing math on what might be dangerous coming toward you.
How do we do this? With positive incentives. First off,
driving by innovation. That whitelisting technology, our
customers begged for that in the CIP requirements but it was
mandated that they only use blacklisting, so for compliance so
they wouldn't get penalized, they used a weaker form and were
not as secure. Now 2 years later, because regulation moves so
slowly, we are finally looking at getting whitelisting in there
as an acceptable form of ``compliance.''
The other piece: liability protections. Help us share.
There is so much information we want to share, per previous
testimony, be able to get information from the government, give
information to the government and provide again that privacy,
that civil liberties that makes our country so unique. We have
to be able to do all this and we have to be able to get it
right. This is the agility and the alacrity that today is only
enjoyed by the cyber adversary. Today at 320 gigs per second on
the finest routing equipment in the world, bad people are
sending bad things to good infrastructure. This is our danger
to the energy infrastructure. You could risk intellectual
property theft. You could risk credential harvesting where
people pretend to be you and access our infrastructure and
effect negative change, and also of course destruction and the
things that we see in the movies. Insurance provisions, tax
provisions, all these other positive incentives help us drive
the innovation to put our information together and to improve
technology as fast as the adversary does to us.
Thank you very much for requesting McAfee's views on these
issues. I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schneck follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.044

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you.
Mr. Blauner for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES BLAUNER

Mr. Blauner. Chairman Blackburn, Ranking Members, members
of the committee, my name is Charles Blauner. I am the Global
Head of Information Security for Citi, and I set the
information security strategy for Citi. I am accountable for
the information security risk posture across all of our lines
of businesses, functions and regions. In addition, I serve as
the Chairman of the Financial Service Sector Coordinating
Council, also known as FSSCC, which coordinates protection of
critical financial services infrastructure focusing on
operational risks. I appreciate the opportunity to be here
today to testify on behalf of the ABA.
I would like to begin by commending the House for its
recent passage of the Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection
Act. This legislation, if enacted, will greatly facilitate
information sharing regarding the serious threats to our
Nation's critical infrastructures. We are also supportive of
the Administration's Executive order, which provides important
direction to both the public and private sector to enhance our
Nation's cybersecurity protections.
There are three key points I would like to highlight today.
First, the public and private partnership between government
and the financial services sector is critical to protecting
firms against cyber threats, and we pledge to continue this
collaboration to further our mutual goals. The most recent
example of our collaboration is a unified response to the cyber
attacks that have targeted the U.S. financial services sector
since September 2012. This partnership, facilitated by the FS-
ISAC, or the Financial Services Information Sharing and
Analysis Center, allows for real-time collaboration on measures
to mitigate the attacks and provides a forum to request and
acquire specific governmental technical assistance.
Second, the ABA believes that the development and
implementation of the NIST cybersecurity framework should
leverage existing standards, regulations or processes.
Financial institutions are already subject to significant
federal and state law and regulations that emanate from the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999. These requirements are
substantially similar to those developed by NIST, and it is
extremely important that the implementation of the NIST
cybersecurity framework be leveraged and complementary to the
existing audit and examination process. Otherwise we will end
up with redundant audit requirements that become a compliance
exercise and do absolutely nothing to enhance cybersecurity.
Third, the ABA also believes that timely cross-sector
information sharing is key to cybersecurity protection. While
the existing mechanisms play a vital role in incident response
coordination, improving and encouraging information sharing is
essential to protecting the financial services sector and the
Nation. It is of utmost importance to increase the volume,
timeliness and quality of threat information shared by federal
agencies, law enforcement and the U.S. intelligence community
with the private sector so they may better protect themselves
against cyber threats. Thus, we need our government partners to
expedite the processing of security clearances and to
declassify and more broadly disseminate threat information
critical to enhancing our Nation's ability to protect itself
from cyber threats.
It is important to note that a key factor in the success of
information sharing is trust, which takes years to develop. The
ABA, the FS-ISAC and FSSCC have worked hard to develop trust
between its members and public and private sector partners. We
can't afford to dismantle that trust, and we will continue to
develop trust and confidence now sharing efforts.
The ABA also believes that foundational work needs to be
done to share our goal of enhanced cybersecurity. The
development of technical capabilities relies on robust research
and development that can quickly yield new commercial products
to protect individual firms and critical shared infrastructure.
I would also like to note that these efforts, often supported
by the resources of banks like Citi and other large financial
firms, help create tools and defenses that help banks of all
size cope with cyber threats. Beyond technical capabilities,
the demand for skilled resources outstrips supply today. A
coordinated effort is required to develop a skilled worker
force as up to the task of defending us against today's and
tomorrow's cyber threats.
In conclusion, cybersecurity is top priority for banks and
other financial services companies. We have invested an
enormous amount of time, energy, and resource into placing the
highest level of security, and we are subject to stringent
regulatory requirements. We also look forward to continuing to
work with Congress and the Administration towards our mutual
goal of protecting our Nation's critical infrastructure.
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions you
might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Blauner follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.055

Mrs. Blackburn. We thank you.
Mr. Highley, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DUANE HIGHLEY

Mr. Highley. Thank you, Madam Chair, Ranking Member and
members of the committee. Thank you for the invitation to
testify today regarding the electric power sector's work on
cybersecurity. I serve as President and CEO of Arkansas
Electric Cooperative, which is a nonprofit power supply system
serving 17 distribution systems who in turn serve about 1
million Arkansans.
Like other cooperative managers, I report to a
democratically elected board representing the customers I
serve. Cooperatives work for the members we serve, and that
keeps us focused solely on their needs. The electric
cooperatives of Arkansas are members of the National Rural
Electric Cooperative Association, a service organization for
over 900 nonprofit electric utilities serving over 42 million
people in 47 states.
Today I am offering testimony on behalf of the Arkansas
cooperatives and the NRECA, but I am also sharing information
from an overall industry perspective based on my work with the
NERC Electric Subsector Coordinating Council and the National
Infrastructure Advisory Council.
Whether cooperative, investor-owned or public power,
electric providers agree on the need for robust and rapid
recovery from natural disasters, physical attacks and cyber
attacks. I think I can summarize my testimony in two
statements, each 10 words or less. First, NERC has it covered;
please don't mess it up. Second, we need to talk.
Now, on the first subject, we appreciate the Energy and
Commerce Committee's engagement on this topic. You played a
large role in the discussions that led to the creation of the
North American Electric Reliability Corporation, or NERC, and
its standards regime. Under that regime, the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission can order NERC today without any
additional legislation, FERC can order NERC to develop
mandatory, enforceable standards on any topic. NERC has
developed a number of standards for cybersecurity in electric
power systems, and can and does enforce these standards through
audits, inspections, and fines. The standards are developed in
a collaborative process with all stakeholders, which has
resulted in enforceable standards that have improved the
reliability of the North American electric grid.
To my knowledge, the electric power sector is the only
critical infrastructure sector with such a robust regulatory
framework, and I believe that this framework can serve as a
model for the other critical infrastructures. The grid is an
extremely complex machine, and changes to the way it operates
must be carefully coordinated with all stakeholders or
reliability will suffer. The NERC standard-setting process
provides a platform to vet all potential impacts with input
from those who understand the grid the best. Regulations issued
without consideration of these impacts run the risk of reducing
grid resiliency rather than enhancing it. We have already
developed a method that has been proven to work, so in summary,
NERC has it covered. Please don't mess it up.
On the second topic, we need to talk, we are glad to see
the Executive order's emphasis on information sharing. We have
recently begun a top-level dialog between utility CEOs and
government, as recommended by the National Infrastructure
Advisory Council. We very much appreciate the leadership shown
by many members of this committee in developing CISPA and
getting it passed overwhelmingly in the House.
This year we have seen some progress in getting security
clearances for key personnel in our industry. It is hard to
have a partnership when one party can't tell the other what is
going on, and our staff must be able to conduct honest
conversations with government representatives about the threat
environment. While relationships have developed over time, and
we do receive useful information through mechanisms such as the
ES-ISAC, we still know of instances where government is slow to
share information or has developed plans for our industry's
response to cyber events but yet has been classified as top
secret. So we welcome the continued dialog and hope that the
Senate will join in crafting mechanisms and law that will
ensure our owners and operators get timely, actionable
information. In summary, we need to talk.
Other witnesses have raised the issue of electromagnetic
pulse. Utilities can do a lot, but we cannot defend against
nuclear strikes from enemy nations or other terrorist
organizations. Electromagnetic pulse and its related
geomagnetic disturbance from solar storms are very real
threats, and FERC has just issued a rule directing NERC to
develop standards on geomagnetic disturbances within the next 6
months for phase I and 18 months for phase II, so action is
being taken. Experts outside the utility sector often
recommended untested technical solutions that really should
require detailed analysis and studies before installation to
ensure that grid reliability is not harmed. Some even propose
technology-specific solutions that could greatly reduce the
ability for utilities to use other useful products and
solutions. As I said before, the grid is very complex and one-
size-fits-all fixes are generally not appropriate and may
actually reduce grid reliability. That is why we support the
continuance of the NERC standard-setting process. It brings
together all stakeholders, including government and industry
experts, to design practicable, buildable and cost-effective
solutions.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Highley follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.062

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you.
Mr. Mayer.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT MAYER

Mr. Mayer. Thank you, Chairman Blackburn and members of the
committee for giving me the opportunity to appear before you
today. My name is Robert Mayer, and I serve as Vice President
of Industry and State Affairs at the United States Telecom
Association. I have had the privilege in the past of sharing
the communications sector coordinating council through which
the Department of Homeland Security works to coordinate the
infrastructure protection activities of our industry sector
with those of the federal, state, local, territorial and tribal
governments. Currently, I chair our sector coordinating
council's cybersecurity committee.
USTelecom member companies, indeed, our entire sector,
including wireless and cable broadband providers, stand on the
front lines of cybersecurity. Protecting our networks and our
customers from cyber threats is our highest priority and
requires our members to innovate literally every single day to
meet the challenges posed by increasingly sophisticated
adversaries.
In our industry's view, the single most important policy
step that can be taken to combat this scourge is giving
appropriately cleared personnel in our companies access to
real-time actionable cyber threat information. USTelecom
supported passage of the Cyber Intelligence Sharing and
Protection Act, or CISPA, because voluntary, real-time sharing
of threat information will provide both the private sector and
the government with the essential tools needed to address
malicious cyber activity. We especially appreciate the effort
to balance the many factors necessary to gain overwhelming
bipartisan passage of CISPA, including providing necessary
liability protections while at the same time ensuring
appropriate safeguards for privacy and civil liberties. We
commend and thank Chairman Mike Rogers, Ranking Member Dutch
Ruppersberger, the authors of several helpful Floor amendments,
as well as all of those who voted for the bill.
Turning to the President's February 12th Executive order,
we are pleased that the Order reaffirms the importance of the
public-private partnership in assessing and combating threats
and that it envisions a voluntary and collaborative framework
for achieving its goals. USTelecom believes that the government
can encourage private sector acceptance and adoption of that
framework by ensuring, among other things, that it remains a
true partnership among all parties at all levels with the
flexibility that rapidly changing technological threats require
and with strong legal protections and incentives for
participation.
I want to express our industry's hope and optimism that the
process of implementing the Executive order will turn out well
and will lead to widespread acceptance and adoption. We have
been working constructively to date with NIST, DHS and the FCC,
and hope those good relationships will continue. But do we want
to bring to the committee's attention Sections 9 and 10 of the
Order, because the manner in which they are ultimately
interpreted and implemented may spell the difference between
the success and failure of this effort.
Section 9 relates to the identification of critical
infrastructure ``at greatest risk.'' Overly expansive
designations of critical infrastructure may harm innovation by
leading to predictability and stagnation. Conversely, Section 9
may preemptively exempt a major portion of the Internet
ecosystem from even being considered as critical
infrastructure, a similarly problematic starting point for
effective cybersecurity strategy. We are watching the
implementation of Section 9 closely.
Section 10 requires federal agencies to review the
preliminary framework and determine whether their own current
cybersecurity regulatory requirements are sufficient. While
this section contains language that would encourage agencies to
reduce ineffective regulation, it arguably also serves as a
hunting license to regulate, the very thing that would
undermine the purported goal of the Order: a partnership with
government to make its citizens safer. We do not believe that
regulatory proceedings are compatible with addressing
cybersecurity threats which emerge and evolve at lightning
speeds.
Likewise, with respect to the agency most closely
associated with our industry, the Federal Communications
Commission, we appreciate and value the contributions it makes
to the areas of public safety and emergency communications,
including the work of the Communications Security, Reliability
and Interoperability Council, or CSRIC, in which we
participate. A voluntary and consensus-driven approach, as
contrasted with a regulatory approach, is what has made the
CSRIC process productive and worthwhile.
In closing, thank you for holding this timely hearing. We
are of course on guard against the kind of potential regulatory
overreach that would slow our response to cyber attacks or
result in static, Maginot Line-type defenses that our opponents
will easily bypass. Implemented prudently, however, the
Executive order may enhance our ability to respond to cyber
threats and represent the triumph of government-private sector
cooperation. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mayer follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.075

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Mayer. I thank each of you
for your testimony, and I yield myself 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Mayer, I am going to begin with you. Let us talk for
just a second about what you just mentioned, and I want to hear
just a little bit more from you on why you think that the
interpretation and implementation of Sections 9 and 10 of the
Executive order may spell--what was your statement there?--
spell the difference between success and failure of the effort.
So just another couple of sentences on that?
Mr. Mayer. OK. Sure. So the vast body of the Executive
order governing critical infrastructure under Section 2 is
under a voluntary framework. Section 9 carves out what is
determined to be critical infrastructure at greatest risk, and
there is a process right now where DHS is working with industry
and others to determine what is on that list of critical
infrastructure. To the extent that that list becomes overly
expansive, it will overcome, so to speak, the nature and
usefulness from our perspective of the voluntary framework, and
I think it was interesting that Secretary Gallagher mentioned
as a concern that that very provision might operate to be a
disincentive for folks who participate in the voluntary
framework. We are going forward with the presumption that it is
all going to turn out well and that the voluntary framework
will dominate and that there will be----
Mrs. Blackburn. So the fear is overreach and uncertainty
basically?
Mr. Mayer. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Mr. Highley, I want to come to you. I
will just work right down the line. Listening to Mr. Waxman, it
made it sound like our electric utilities are just getting
bombarded every day, and my understanding was, these attacks
are really fairly rare for you all, and more often than not, it
is an attack on the consumer-facing side like most businesses.
So I just want to be certain, don't you already have mandatory
standards that are governing how you should protect your
operations?
Mr. Highley. Yes. The answer is yes. The majority of those
attacks, while large in number, are the same attacks that every
business receives to their Internet portal, and those are on
the public-facing sides of the business. They are all stopped
at the gate, and the supervisory control and data acquisition
systems have mandatory enforceable standards for how you
interface to those. We don't have significant problems with
attacks to those today.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Let me just very quickly, a show of
hands, how many of you prefer staying with standards, the
voluntary standards as opposed to going to regulation? How many
of you prefer standards? OK. All right. I just was curious
about that. And then I would like to have one statement from
each of you. As we look at the cybersecurity framework and the
plans that are in place for implementation, I would like to
know what your primary concern is, and Mr. McCurdy, I would
like to start with you and just work down the line, and then I
will yield my time.
Mr. McCurdy. Thank you, Madam Chair. I think our primary
concern is that when you are developing the risk profile and
the definitions of what is critical infrastructure, that they
look at existing tools that DHS has used and TSA, we work
through those. We have a lot of self-assessment tools that
companies run. So that experience should inform a lot in this
process.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. So you kind of match up with Mr. Mayer
on the concerns?
Mr. McCurdy. Yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Mr. McConnell?
Mr. McConnell. My primary concern is it does not have the
effect of law and so therefore it cannot grant liability
protection as an incentive to industry to comply with these
standards.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Ambassador?
Mr. Woolsey. I believe that we are at war without wanting
to be so, and whether it is North Korea or Iran, they believe
they are at war with us. They have the hardware to do us huge
damage in various ways but particularly through electromagnetic
pulse, and trying to defend against them with 3,500 generals--
the utilities--each commanding essentially its own force is
going to fail.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Dr. Papay?
Mr. Papay. Madam Chair, I think it is important for
businesses to have that ability to break down barriers to
sharing information. I will go along with what Dr. Schneck was
saying earlier. It has got to be as easy as possible for us to
share that critical cybersecurity information with each other,
and the EO is getting there but we need legislation to follow
it up.
Mrs. Blackburn. Great. Dr. Schneck?
Ms. Schneck. I completely agree with Dr. Papay. I will add
more, and that is on the technology front, right tool for the
right job. We have so many technologies as a community all over
the world. I mentioned one that many people provide, a
whitelisting concept. We have to have a framework that allows
people to very quickly not only build on those and innovate but
assign the right technology to the right job for what the
attacker is doing today.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. I am running over time but I want to
finish the panel. Mr. Blauner?
Mr. Blauner. Since everyone already mentioned information
sharing, to us, I would say the most critical thing is, we are
already a regulated environment, which is why I didn't raise my
hand earlier. We just don't need extra complexity added into
that and having another agency come in and try to regulate us a
second time.
Mrs. Blackburn. Mr. Highley?
Mr. Highley. For electric utilities, I would say don't
short-circuit the existing regulatory framework we have where
FERC can order NERC to write standards as needed.
Mrs. Blackburn. I am going to have to get you that app. Mr.
Mayer?
Mr. Mayer. With the exception of Section 9 in the context
of the voluntary framework, one of the primary concerns that we
have and I think Representative Eshoo mentioned this, is that
we can't have a one-size-fits-all solution, not only across the
sectors but even within the sectors because different companies
have different business models and different abilities to
recover for investment and security.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. I am way over my time. Mr.
McNerney for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Woolsey, very sobering testimony. Do you think that the
solution to the threat is hardware-based that you discuss in
EMP threat or do you think it is software-based? I mean, there
must be some way to protect the critical components from EMP.
Mr. Woolsey. There are various things. The surge arrestors
can help with one part of it, Faraday boxes for other
components. There are a number of things that can be done. They
overlap, some of them, with traditional cyber defenses; surge
arrestors are one example. Others do not. What will fail, I
think, disastrously is for 3,500 utilities each voluntarily
going off on its own because they don't want to be regulated
trying to figure out what to do about electromagnetic pulse.
They will lose. Anybody who is facing an enemy who is commanded
by somebody as shrewd as the senior leadership in Iran or, I am
afraid, probably also North Korea, who is focused on defeating
us, anybody who is facing an enemy like that with 3,500
generals all going off in different directions will lose. We
will lose.
Mr. McNerney. So you mentioned that some of the hardware
that we need is actually going to help provide protection at
the cyber level as well, so I appreciate that comment.
Now, Mr. Highley was talking about the NERC process
providing sufficient protection and us not messing it up. Do
you agree with that perspective?
Mr. Woolsey. Well, the first order after 9/11 that came out
of NERC in response to a query, as I understand it, or a
direction from FERC in total took 44 months, I believe. That
is--World War II took 3 years and 8 months for us. So if
response to one part of one problem is timely and useful when
it comes within the time that we went from Pearl Harbor to
accepting Japan's surrender, then OK. But I think that standard
for promptness and effectiveness of response in circumstances
in which you are dealing with an enemy is nuts. It is nuts to
suggest that that will be effective against an enemy, against
solar-based electromagnetic pulses. If we are lucky, maybe it
will work.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Ms. Schneck, you mentioned the
issue of legal liability and protection on that issue, but that
is a huge gift to a company to be given legal liability
protection. What would you be willing to give back in terms of
first of all protection to get that kind of legal liability
protection yourself?
Ms. Schneck. So to clarify, we would want the protection.
We work very hard in analytics, as does our community, all the
different companies.
Mr. McNerney. Right. You want legal liability protection
but personal information--I mean, what would you be willing to
trade to get that kind of gift from the federal government?
Ms. Schneck. To also clarify, we don't ever share personal
information. That is not what we do. We share cyber indicators.
A good example is the address of a machine that is sending
something bad to, say, 30,000 different places or feeding that
information to 30,000 different machines to form a botnet. Our
understanding is that a certain link goes to a site that will
feed you code to hook you up to steal your intellectual
property. That is the kind of information we want to share
between machines, and between humans, we want to be able to say
things like, if you are looking at a weather map, I see danger
there, or I see the same type of attack because we protect such
a wide part of the globe. If we see the same type of event
happening to some in the same sector, we want to be able to
tell that to the whole sector. We want to act in good faith,
which we do today. We certainly applaud CISPA and the work
there. We want to be able to share more with the community
without fearing we will get hurt.
Mr. McNerney. OK. I am going to ask a question similar to
what the chairwoman asked. If NIST develops performance-based
standards--and anyone can answer this--how would industry
cooperate in terms of implementing or compelling those
standards to be enforced?
Mr. McConnell. If you are going to grant industry liability
protection, you are going to have to have some audit that will
allow you to determine to verify that they had met the
standards. The way I think about this issue is, the set of
standards are established, businesses comply with those
standards, and then if there is a breach, they would have
liability protection against the fact of a cyber breach.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. I will yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. Chairman Walden for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Mr. Mayer and Ms. Schneck, Dr. Gallagher has emphasized
that the Executive order framework would remain voluntary. Are
you confident it will? Mr. Mayer, do you want to go first?
Mr. Mayer. I am confident that NIST in its current work has
every intention of developing a voluntary framework, and in
fact, it is their mandate as an organization to do that.
Mr. Walden. And you are confident it will stay voluntary? I
know nobody can really predict the future well but----
Mr. Mayer. The concern or the caution is around what
happens after framework is developed and when it moves toward
sector-specific available. When you combine that with the list
that we still do not have settled, it can morph into something
that, as I've indicated before, takes on a different quality,
and that would be problematic. But we are--from every
indication in talking with all of the key federal entities,
right now we are quite sanguine that it is going to be a
voluntary process.
Mr. Walden. Dr. Schneck?
Ms. Schneck. So thank you. We are very participatory in the
framework process as well. We have yet to fully finish studying
the Executive order as a whole, but at present we are very
supportive of the framework of the voluntary focus of the idea
that all different technologies could be explored, innovation
could be made more rapid. More cybersecurity jobs could come as
a result of that. Believing it would make us more secure, we
work in very close partnership with NIST. We have just signed
an MOU with their cybersecurity center to foster that
innovation even faster as have many other companies. So at
present, it does look optimistic and we have been very
supportive of that.
Mr. Walden. And again in your testimony, Dr. Schneck, you
highlight your security-connected products as comprehensive. Do
you believe that the Executive order's approach to
cybersecurity is comprehensive?
Ms. Schneck. I think that remains to be seen. We are in the
early stages. So far we have been working, again, in
partnership with NIST. A full response to the RFI focused a lot
on this need for private sector innovation to drive where
security can go because that adversary is so fast, the only way
to be out front ahead of those that wish to do us harm is to
band together, and I think thus far--again, we are not finished
studying the full effects of the EO.
Mr. Walden. All right. Mr. Highley, you are here
representing some of the electrical co-ops, right?
Mr. Highley. Yes.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Woolsey, who has extraordinary service in
the government, has indicated, if I am hearing him right, that
he has deep concerns about a more voluntary structure with so
many utilities and power suppliers. Can you comment on his
comments relative to FERC and the ability to enforce and your
organizations and others that you are representing today,
ability to protect the grid?
Mr. Highley. So on behalf of the trade association, the
National Rural Electric Cooperative Association, they are
engaged in discussions with NIST and with FERC and NERC on the
regulation to protect us from these issues. I agree, it is a
very serious concern. What we want to do is see that work
through a deliberate process that involves all the
stakeholders. That is why we support the NERC process. I also
agree with Mr. Woolsey that the process has been very slow in
the past and we are taking actions to improve the speed at
which that can move, and I think you saw in the recent FERC
order, they are asking for the geomagnetic disturbance actions
to be taken within 6 months. So we are trying to accelerate
that process in order to get actionable, enforceable standards
that utilities will meet.
Mr. Walden. All right. And Mr. Mayer, again, what sort of
industry best practices are most effective from your experience
in combating cyber threats and how can such practices be
identified, incorporated and encouraged under the Executive
order?
Mr. Mayer. So I think clearly I am biased, but I would say
that the communications sector is a leading sector in terms of
advanced cybersecurity capabilities. Not only do we have to
protect our networks because that is an ongoing business
against attacks, but we have to protect our customers, and many
of those customers are some of the largest corporations in the
United States and some of the largest government agencies. So
we have over the years invested significant amounts of money
and capabilities into innovating and developing all sorts of
preventative response, mitigation, technologies, tools,
practices. The interesting thing also is that many of our
companies compete in this space for services, so it is a very
active market that encourages innovation and then encourages
further investment, and you know, we are in constant
conversations either through the council or other mechanisms,
some business-to-business mechanisms, in which we talk about
these capabilities, and we will bring these capabilities to
discussions at NIST at these workshops and demonstrate some of
the things that we do, and much of the work that we have done
in developing best practices, for example, at the FCC through
CSRIC.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, and thanks for your generosity on
the time.
Mrs. Blackburn. Absolutely. Mr. Waxman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. We are
talking about cybersecurity for a range of critical
infrastructure sectors, but I want to focus on the electric
grid, as I did earlier, because it is the foundation for every
one of these sectors. Protecting the grid from cyber attacks
and other threats is essential to our economy.
Ambassador Woolsey, you touched on some of these issues but
I want to bring them out for the record. It is not just our
civilian infrastructure that depends on the grid. What about
our national security installations? Aren't they also largely
dependent on the electric grid?
Mr. Woolsey. Absolutely, Congressman Waxman. To the best of
my knowledge, there is one military base in the United States,
China Lake, which has its own water steam system, has a geyser
underneath it, essentially, and it sends electricity to Los
Angeles when it doesn't need it itself. Everybody else is on
the grid. So if the grid goes down, soldiers and sailors are as
hungry as everybody else.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much. We only have a limited
time so I want to get some more points in here. The problem is
that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, what we call
FERC, lacks authority to ensure that the grid is protected. The
industry-controlled North American Electric Reliability
Corporation, or NERC, issues the cyber and physical security
standards for the grid. Now, NERC operates by a consensus.
Standards have to be approved by a supermajority vote of the
utilities. It takes them years to develop a standard. The most
recent version of NERC's critical infrastructure protection
standards took 43 months to develop and they are still not in
effect, and these standards do not include measures to address
specific viruses or cyber threats. Once NERC submits a
standard, FERC cannot directly fix an inadequate standard. So
the process will start all over again.
Mr. Ambassador, what do you think of NERC's track record on
grid security threats? Is this the right regulatory model for
national security issues?
Mr. Woolsey. I don't believe it is the right model,
Congressman, and I think NERC's record on security against the
kinds of sophisticated threats we face today in traditional
cyber and electromagnetic pulse is virtually nonexistent.
Mr. Waxman. In 2010, Fred Upton, now a chair, and Ed
Markey, soon to be Senator from Massachusetts, had a bipartisan
grid security bill. It would have provided FERC with the
authority it needs to improve the security of the electric
grid. This committee passed that bill by a vote of 47 to
nothing. The House passed the bill by voice vote. Members
viewed it a national security issue.
Ambassador Woolsey, in April of 2010, you and several other
prominent national security experts, former national security
advisors and Secretaries of Defense and Homeland Security wrote
to the committee to strongly endorse the bipartisan GRID Act.
Do you still think that FERC needs additional authority to
protect the electric grid against threats and vulnerabilities?
Mr. Woolsey. Yes, I do, absolutely.
Mr. Waxman. The GRID Act also provided FERC with authority
to address the threat posed by electromagnetic pulses. How
worried should the committee be about this threat for which
there is no mandatory standard?
Mr. Woolsey. I think the committee should be quite
concerned and all Americans should. It is an extremely
dangerous situation we are in now, and we are where we were
yesterday.
Mr. Waxman. Well, I thank you for your testimony and your
answers to my questions. I just wanted to make it very, very
clear because you and I see this issue in the same way. We have
got to rely on clear regulatory authority to get this job done.
Mr. Woolsey. Thank you, Congressman. I think that NERC
could deal adequately with squirrels and tree branches, which
is what the main problem is for a lot of electricity
maintenance regular delivery, but North Korea and Iran, I
think, are quite beyond their competence.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you for your answers and thank you for
your service. I yield back the time.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Latta for 5
minutes.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Madam Chair, and again, thanks very
much to this panel for your very instructive information that
we have received this morning and this afternoon.
You know, as I was sitting here thinking that there is a
lot of folks, I would say a great majority of Americans, don't
understand the threat that we are under and how important it is
that we come to real grips in this country of the cybersecurity
that we have to have to protect ourselves, and if I could just
start with Mr. Papay. In your testimony, you talk about
Northrop Grumman's focus on internal cybersecurity awareness
training as part of your internal protection efforts and your
cyber academy. Can you share a few points about what kind of
training that people go through when they are at that?
Mr. Papay. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question. It is a
voluntary participation within the company for everybody to
sign up for at least a lower level of cybersecurity awareness
training to understand where the threats are coming from and
what they can do as an employee of the company to combat those
because, really, all of my 70,000 employees in the company are
really my first line of defense against incoming cyber threats
that they might get in their email or through a malicious Web
link. So above the basic cybersecurity awareness, it moves on
up the pyramid, as we call our cyber academy pyramid, to really
get to those certifications where somebody wants to go off and
advance their knowledge of cyber and move it on up all the way
up through penetration testing and forensics and secure coding
to where we have really got a set of experts within the company
because cybersecurity for us is not just about the defense of
our company but it is also the primary business that we are in.
So that is our cyber academy in a nutshell, sir.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. McConnell, if I could ask you a quick question, and I
really appreciate your knowledge of the severity of the cyber
threats that face our Nation. Do you have any estimates as to
what the economic espionage costs are to this country every
year?
Mr. McConnell. There is a huge debate about that issue now.
The community struggled with a National Intelligence estimate,
and they could not agree. I personally would put it in the cost
of billions of dollars and millions of jobs, and that is based
on my best guess at looking at all the information over the
past 20 years, billions of dollars and millions of jobs every
year.
Mr. Latta. Well, and one of the things again, like I said,
I have had a couple of informational meetings with the FBI in
my district. We are doing one again next week. How do we get
this information out? You know, a lot of the larger companies
out there are worried about the cybersecurity and it is getting
the folks back home in the smaller companies to say, you know
what, this could affect us because we might be the largest part
of the chain, the weakest link that they get into and move up
from there. But, you know, have you in your experience talked
with individuals out there, companies out there that might be
smaller in nature and expressed to them how serious
cybersecurity is for them?
Mr. McConnell. The answer is yes, quite a bit, but let me
make a point with regard to sharing the information. The rules
that we have were created in World War II and they served us
well in the Cold War, and both Ambassador Woolsey and I have
had the position of being responsible for protecting sources
and methods of the U.S. intelligence community. The rules are
in place. That community will not change, will not share unless
the rules change so they can share information with the private
sector. I have observed this over a long career, and the rules
must change. Therefore, we have a process for flowing
information to corporate America. The point is, why do we
collect this information, why do we analyze it? It is to
protect the Nation. So we have to then have a forcing function
to cause a bureaucratic organization that will not comply with
that process of sharing information unless they are compelled
to do so.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. And also, Mr. Mayer, if I could just
briefly, I am running out of time here. Again, I thank you for
being here today. You know, in your testimony you highlight the
number of your member companies, the entire communications
industry on the front of cybersecurity, and when you are
looking at the overall picture, given that USTelecom represents
a large range of companies from small rural providers to some
of the largest in the country, what would be the effect of
labeling some of these businesses and networks as critical
infrastructure?
Mr. Mayer. I didn't hear the last part, sir.
Mr. Latta. What would be the effect of labeling these
businesses and networks as critical infrastructure?
Mr. Mayer. Well, there are criteria that are being
established to define what critical infrastructure is under
Section 9. Under Section 2, it is vague, and I think there is
an assumption that the broad sector is determined to be
critical infrastructure under that element. So the question
becomes, to what extent can different companies of different
sizes have incidents that result in catastrophic situations,
and the truth is, not very substantially. Obviously, the
greater the footprint, the different customers that are served,
the concentration of facilities in an area, all will make a
difference. But for purposes of the voluntary framework under
Section 2, the entire sector is captured as critical
infrastructure.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Madam Chair, my time is expired and I
yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Ms. Eshoo for 5
minutes.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to thank the
entire panel. This is a panel with enormous depth and breadth
of expertise, and a special welcome to our former colleague,
Dave McCurdy, who served as the chairman of the House
Intelligence Committee, to Admiral McConnell, who served our
Nation as a Director of National Intelligence, and to
Ambassador Woolsey, who served as the Director of the CIA. With
your collective presence, but most especially from this end of
the table, this is a confirmation that this is a national
security issue, period. It is a national security issue. It is
not an ``and'' or an ``or.'' We can't be squishy about it. I
mean, we really have to put the pedal to the metal, and I know
that probably all of you and just about all of us have been
asked to give speeches on cyber attacks and cybersecurity over
the last several years.
These attacks are really the new normal. They are the new
normal, and I don't think there is any question about that. I
don't know what day I pick up the newspaper that there isn't
some article about who is doing what to our country. So it is a
question about how we are going to handle this. Now, what is
very interesting to me today is our grid, and I want to go to
Ambassador Woolsey, and I heard Dr. Gallagher from NIST talking
about a lot of voluntary cooperative measures, and I think
there is a place for it, but I have to tell you from what I
think we are all experiencing, I don't think our national grid
should be left up to that. So can you just spend a moment--and
I have a couple of other questions if I have time--but I think
when there is only one defense operation in our Nation that can
rely on its own energy so that this doesn't occur to them, I
think we are leaving ourselves absolutely wide open. I mean, it
is like here we are, come get us.
Mr. Woolsey. Congresswoman, I completely agree with you. I
have been very concerned and speaking and writing about this
issue for some years. I think that the problem is that our grid
grew up in the beginning of the late 19th century and it is
still growing, but mainly in the 20th century. During the
period of time in which the only time we had to worry about
security inside the country at all was really right after Pearl
Harbor with Japanese and German submarines off the coast. Yes,
in the Cold War, we and the Soviets deterred one another but
generally speaking, the only time Americans were really worried
somebody might be coming ashore, might go after, you know, a
utility or something like that was from 1941 to around 1946. I
think that that mentality has meant that we have put together
an electric grid that is designed for openness, for ease of
access, for being cheap, providing electricity as cheaply as
possible, and without a single thought being given to security
except for nuclear power plants, and even the nuclear power
plants, most of the time their transformers are outside the
fence, even though the plant itself may have great guards and
so forth, and----
Ms. Eshoo. Do you believe, if I might, I would appreciate
this, and we are going to have a working group and I think that
I would like to have you come back to be instructive to us, but
do you think that this deserves a different kind of set of
approaches because it is what it is? And, you know, God forbid
that this goes down, we are cooked.
Mr. Woolsey. Technology has caught up with us. At the same
time we were doing the Y2K fixes in the late 1990s, the Web was
coming heavily into use and everybody decided hey, what could
go wrong if we put the control systems for the electric grid on
the Web and the SCADA systems, some of them, Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition systems. So you have a situation
now where our control systems for our electricity are open to
hackers. That wasn't the case some years ago. So we have not
only ignored security, we have done really, really dumb things
without thinking about security, and we are now faced with a
situation with the grid in which we have to make some very
substantial changes very quickly because of really serious
dangers, and a lot of people want to put the blinders on and
say gee, that is tough, we don't want to deal with that. I am
delighted to help in any way I can.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, I think it gets into a debate of whether
the government should regulate or not in this area. That is
really where the rub comes. But I think that we really have to
scrub this with the seriousness that needs to be brought to it
because this is an enormous vulnerability for our country. It
is a very serious one, and I appreciate your work. I have so
many questions that I want to ask. I wish I were the only one
here and could just go on and on, but I will submit my
questions to you, and thank you to all of you for testifying,
and for those of you that spent considerable time serving our
government, thank you.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentlelady yields back. Mr. Lance, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Madam Chair, and it is an honor to
meet all of you, and this is certainly among the most
distinguished panels I have heard as a member of the committee.
Regarding cybersecurity, I usually think of challenges from
China and Iran and from Russia, and to the distinguished
members of the panel, and I would start with you, Ambassador
Woolsey, and also Admiral McConnell, I have heard several times
this morning North Korea. Might you go into a little more
detail regarding your belief in the threat from North Korea?
Mr. Woolsey. Yes, Congressman, not particularly cyber,
although they do some cyber attacking. Mike would know more
about that than I. The problem is that one way to launch an
electromagnetic pulse attack against the United States, and
this is, by the way, in my op-ed in the Wall Street Journal
this morning too, is to use what is called a fractional orbital
bombardment system, FOBS, which was invented by the Soviets. It
is essentially a way to bypass all of our defenses by launching
a satellite into orbit, usually relatively low Earth orbit, and
launching it toward the south because our detection systems,
our radars and so forth, are focused north, and the one North
Korean satellite and the two, or now three, I think, Iranian
satellites have all been launched toward the south and they
have all been launched at an altitude to have an orbit over us
that would be pretty optimal with respect to the detonation of
a nuclear weapon and the creation of an electromagnetic pulse.
All you really need for that is a nuclear weapon. You can make
it more effective with more gamma rays if you design it that
way. It does not have to have a high yield. It can be two,
three, four, five kilotons, it doesn't matter. It is not the
blast that matters, it is the generation of the gamma rays from
space. If that is done, it is a relatively simple task. You
don't need heat shields. You don't need accuracy. You are not
trying to hit anything on the ground. You are just detonating
up there at several hundred kilometers. And that means that
that type of capability could be in the hands of the North
Koreans, and as the President said a few months ago, even
within this year, in the hands of the Iranians.
Now, that is a very different situation than their having
to come at us to attack American bases, to engage us where our
military forces are or anything like that, or even attack South
Korea with American troops helping defend South Korea. To
simply put a satellite into orbit at a few hundred kilometers
and detonate a simple nuclear weapon is, I am afraid, not that
hard if you already have the weapon and you already have the
launch vehicle, the ballistic missile. So that is why I talk
about North Korea as well. Iran doesn't have a nuclear weapon
yet but it may well in relatively short order. So those two
countries, especially since they hate us so much, or at least
their governments do, and in the case of North Korea, they
issue extremely strident statements about destroying the United
States. Putting those things together, I take them at their
word, they would like to do that, and then we have to find some
way to keep them from doing it.
Former Secretary of Defense Bill Perry and current Deputy
Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter in the Washington Post back
in 2006 urged President Bush not to let the North Koreans test
their medium-range missile, which is the same thing that had
been used for the launch vehicle, but to attack their launching
pad with conventional weapons if they ever hold one of these
ballistic missiles out to launch. They have now done that
several times, and I think Bill and Ash were right and
President Bush was unwise not to follow their advice, and now
we are in a situation where both countries have the launch
vehicles but only one has a nuclear weapon so far.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Admiral McConnell, your thoughts?
Mr. McConnell. On a scale of one to 10, 10 being the best,
the best in the world, the Russians and Chinese are probably a
seven. The Iranians are probably a four. The issue is, about 80
percent of what is out there is from the Chinese. They have a
policy of economic espionage. They have 100,000 just in the
military, probably another 100,000 scattered throughout, and
they are after economic advantage, competitive advantage. So
that is what we are facing.
I didn't mention terrorist groups. On a scale of one to 10,
they are pretty low. But the Chinese and others are producing
thousands of these malware attack tools. These are exploitation
attack. How long is it before some extremist group who wants to
change the world order gets their hands on some of these
weapons and then they go after something like a critical
infrastructure, for example, the grid.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. My time is expired. Thank you very
much.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Doyle for 5
minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to all our
witnesses here today. It has been very interesting testimony.
Like many of my colleagues on this committee, I have been
engaged in this issue for quite some time now, and there are
many aspects of this debate that we have weighed in on, most
specifically the importance of protecting consumer privacy, but
today I want to address the ways we can successfully develop a
cybersecurity framework that protects and defends our critical
infrastructure while being nimble enough to adapt to new and
emerging threats.
I come from Pennsylvania. We have a complex electric and
telecommunications distribution network, miles and miles of new
natural gas pipeline being built every day and several large
nuclear power plants. So protecting our critical infrastructure
in my State and across the country is of the utmost urgency.
I can see that everyone here today agrees with the urgency
and the seriousness of the task, and as NIST develops its
cybersecurity framework, I am hopeful that the testimony at
this hearing today will be considered. A lot of that testimony
deals with the need for voluntary standards that aren't
prescriptive, and while I agree that codifying prescriptive
standards this month that could be out of date by next month
isn't the best approach. I am not convinced, however, that
voluntary incentive-based standards will properly protect our
critical infrastructure.
So I mentioned in Pennsylvania, we have several nuclear
power plants including the Beaver Valley plant, which sits just
outside my district. Now, you are all probably aware that the
NRC issued its cybersecurity regulations after September 11.
The regulations they developed for nuclear power plants were
performance-based standards that once approved were
incorporated into a plant's operating license giving it proper
enforcement mechanisms.
So I would like to ask Ambassador Woolsey and Admiral
McConnell, do you think it makes sense to develop performance-
based cybersecurity standards for our critical infrastructure
sectors?
Mr. McConnell. I think performance-based standards are what
we should strive for. The reason for that is they have to be
dynamic. The question will be, how do you get compliance with
those standards. So the argument will come down to, do you
incentivize industry to allow them to get some reward for
following the standards or do you compel it, so that will be
the debate that Congress will have to wrestle with.
Mr. Doyle. Ambassador?
Mr. Woolsey. I think that is a good idea, but the problem
is, if one expects innovation to come from utilities, it is not
where it is going to come from. Just former Deputy Director of
the Advanced Research Projects Agency for DOE, ARPA-E, told me
about 3 or 4 weeks ago that he had just done the calculation
and that the 3,500 utilities in the United States spend less on
research and development than the American dog food industry. I
don't know what those totals are. I haven't looked up the dog
food industry's total yet. There are some fine institutions,
the Edison Electric Institute and so forth, that do some R&D
work, but we have not designed our system so that the electric
grid demands, takes advantage of or is a mecca for security
measures, and something has to drive that and drive it really
hard within that framework. If one can figure out a way to use
performance-based standards, yes, but if one just hopes that
performance is going to be met, I don't see anything that is
going to improve the current situation, which I think is really
very bad.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Ambassador. Dave?
Mr. McCurdy. Congressman, thank you. I want to put
something in context here, and I have dealt with this issue as
well for quit some time, and part of my indoctrination or
introduction to the cyber level was in your home district in
Pittsburgh. I was on the board of the Software Engineering
Institute at Carnegie Mellon, and there, they develop the best
practices and understanding of cybersecurity, and it was their
CERT, which is now the basis of the U.S. CERT, because the
government, when they formed DHS after 2001, you know, used
that expertise. It has evolved. In fact, as a founder of the
Internet Security Alliance, I was in Tokyo on 9/11 talking to
the OECD about the role of board directors and corporate
leadership in raising the awareness of the importance of
cybersecurity, then we called it Internet security. It has
evolved. And even though we can talk about the extreme cases,
and it is true, and I spent seven terms across the hall in the
Armed Services Committee, which is a lot of conversation that
we have gotten into, don't just assume that the worst case here
is applying in the cyber arena. First of all, these attacks
that occur, a number of them are repelled at the border. We
have to assume that many are going to penetrate, but that is
why we have also gone to other layers of defense where we have
penetration, understanding, detection capability and in
mitigation. That is working with this entire array of
government agencies and outside contractors, et cetera, that
are raising the level of protection. So I just wanted to get
that on the record, Madam Chair, because I think we have
perhaps gotten a little on one extreme of the severity as
opposed to likelihood of occurrence and what actually happens
on a daily basis.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you. Dr. Olson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chairwoman, and welcome to our
witnesses, and before I ask my questions, I want to let
Congressman McCurdy know that the people back home in Texas 22
have the people of Moore, Oklahoma, in our hearts and in our
prayers. I know that is your old district. And Mary Fallin, my
former colleague, is doing a great job. But if you all need
some help, just ask. We will swim across the Red River. God
bless the people of Moore, Oklahoma, and everybody impacted by
those terrible tornados.
As you know, we are having an energy renaissance right here
in America because of new technology: hydraulic fracturing and
directional so-called horizontal drilling. The Administration
just this last week said the Barnett shale play has twice the
oil and gas they thought they had up there just 6 months ago.
The Barnett shale play in the Dallas-Fort Worth area is still
going strong. The Permian Basin in West Texas is booming again
and the Eagle Ford shale play is off the charts. With all this
new energy, thousands of miles of pipelines have to be built
including the Keystone XL pipeline that is actually being built
right now from Port Arthur to the Port of Houston up to
Cushing, Oklahoma, your home State, and with that NASA-like
automation of modern pipelines, that makes them safer but
obviously it opens them to cyber attacks. So I know that your
membership takes these threats seriously. Could you expand on
what steps the industry is taking to protect itself from cyber
attacks from malicious actors who might attempt to alter the
operations of pipelines themselves? What are you doing as an
agency or as an association?
Mr. McCurdy. Well, thank you, Congressman. First of all,
safety is the number one priority of our sector, and there are
2.4 million miles of natural gas pipeline in this country,
which is the envy of the world, and coincident with the comment
I just made to Congressman Doyle, this has to start at the top,
the awareness of the importance of cybersecurity. Our current
chairman is the CEO of Questar in Utah. He as an engineer was
working on cybersecurity issues post 9/11 and has made it very
clear that during his term as chairman of AGA, this is a top
concern. So we have established not only task forces working,
we chair a number of coordinating committees within the
framework but also in the oil and gas sector. In fact, Mr.
Jibson and Questar, there is a tool that DH uses called CSAT,
which is an evaluation tool that takes multiple weeks to
actually run to assess your own security, and he not only had
that run several times but he also had reported to his board of
directors the outcomes so that they could prioritize their
investments, and ultimately, it is making sure that the utility
commissions that not only regulate but they also approve the
rate mechanisms, rate recoveries, understand the importance. So
there is a whole panoply of action that is occurring, not only
at the technical level--we have technical experts meeting every
day--we had FBI walk into us and talk about risks. We had DHS.
We have met with DOE, met with NSA. So there is a good, you
know, kind of information flow. However, the gist of this
hearing is, how do you improve information exchange, and that
goes from making sure that the clearances are there for
industry and potential protection because of this kind of
litigious society that we belong to so that there is a free
flow of information and it is relevant and it is timely. When
they come to us and they say here is a perceived threat, they
have also identified not only the nature of the threat but also
some actions that can be taken to mitigate it or defeat it.
That is an important flow of information and exchange.
Mr. Olson. In your opening comments, you said the
cybersecurity framework is ``headed in the right direction.''
So my question for you is, headed in the right direction, that
is a good thing--that is not a great thing but a good thing. So
my question is, what do you hope to see out of this framework
and what do you not want to see out of this framework? One on
each category.
Mr. McCurdy. There was a question earlier about are they
confident that NIST was going to maintain the voluntary nature,
and I think NIST on its own would. We work with NIST and other
organizations I have worked with, there are standards
developing. They work with industry. I think given that
background and that direction, they will build a consensus and
it would be a voluntary set of incentives and guidelines and
the like. It is beyond that. So what happens in the
Administration that says maybe that is not enough. So in the
hands of NIST and the current framework, I think it is a good
step.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my time.
Thank you so much, and again, we have the people in Moore,
Oklahoma, in our thoughts and prayers. God bless you, sir.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Griffith for
5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Madam Chair. This is a question
for Mr. McConnell. Softbank, a Japanese company, has offered to
purchase Sprint. My understanding is, the National Security
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States has a
review ongoing. Do you have any concerns about placing a major
infrastructure provider like Sprint, which has some security
issues for our national security, under the control of
Softbank?
Mr. McConnell. Yes, I do. If you are in the intelligence
business, as I was and some would argue still am, the one thing
you would love to do is to run the infrastructure of some other
country if you considered them a potential adversary. So having
a foreign country own and control the telecommunications
industry inside the United States, I would not be in favor of.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate that.
I do want to get back to, because I found it very
interesting, and I am very concerned about the electromagnetic
pulse issue, but I do want to give Mr. Highley an opportunity
to respond. There have been some comments that the current
structure won't work. Do you agree or disagree?
Mr. Highley. I disagree.
Mr. Griffith. Tell me why.
Mr. Highley. There is a item called the Electric Subsector
Information Sharing and Analysis Center, which is part of NERC,
and it was stated earlier that NERC can't respond quickly
enough to developing threats, but the whole purpose of this
center is to disseminate developing threats as soon as they are
released by government or the information sharing work that is
done. As soon as they can declassify a threat, whether it is
physical or cyber, that is sent out to the utilities, and
believe me, we respond when we get those actionable-threat
updates. Recently the CFOs met with a number of Cabinet-level
officials to discuss threats to the electric system, and EMP
was not raised as a top priority, top concern, but I guarantee
you that when we are informed of that, we will respond.
Mr. Griffith. But let me say, don't you think that should
be a major concern? I mean, we do have two enemies, and of
course, then there are natural causes as well that might cause
this problem. Don't you think it should have been discussed and
shouldn't it be on the list?
Mr. Highley. Absolutely. It is of great concern.
Mr. Griffith. Let me go back to you, if I might, Ambassador
Woolsey, because I do find this very interesting, and in his
whole discussion we have talked about launching south. Who else
gets affected? Because obviously it is not just going to be the
United States if you release that magnetic pulse out there. If
you launch south from either Iran or North Korea, what other
countries are going to be impacted? I guess what I am asking
also is, are they going to be impacted or can they launch it
such a way that it doesn't affect them as well?
Mr. Woolsey. It depends on the altitude that the detonation
occurs at and where it is. The lower the altitude, the less you
get of at least one of the three types of electromagnetic pulse
effects, because some of the effect is line of sight and others
of the effects travel along the transmission lines and so
forth. So it is kind of a complicated question. You are
probably OK on the other side of the earth from the detonation
but it would certainly be the case that if the heart of the
United States was taken out of the electric grid by something
like this, certainly Canada would be in very serious trouble
and the like.
It would also be pretty difficult, I think, although
perhaps not impossible to detonate at appropriate altitude to
only affect a relatively small country. So I think a better
witness on this than me is Peter Pry, who is sitting behind me,
who worked on both of the electromagnetic pulse commissions.
Mr. Griffith. Maybe they can steer us to some information
that we can look at on that issue.
Mr. Woolsey. I would be glad to.
Mr. Griffith. And then you made a comment earlier that it
was less likely, understandable because they are our enemies
but there was also the threat of the solar-based impulse. Can
you explain that a little bit, and when was ht last time we had
one strong enough to take out the electric grid?
Mr. Woolsey. The huge one was in 1859, and most of the
physicists and people who study the sun and work on these
things think that the big ones occur about once a century, and
we are about 150 years, so we are about 50 years overdue, but
these things don't occur with real regularity. There have been
several since at a much lower level than the one that occurred
in 1859.
Mr. Griffith. Let me stop you there, because another one of
my questions that I am interested in is, doesn't that also have
impacts on our weather conditions, and what happened in 1859
with the weather?
Mr. Woolsey. I don't know that, but solar events of all
different kinds including much, much smaller ones than this
have substantial effects sometimes on weather and climate. But
you need somebody up here who----
Mr. Griffith. I understand. You go on back to what you do
know. I appreciate that. And go ahead and tell me some more
about what--well, I am out of time anyway. Maybe we can have
this discussion another time or at a later date. I appreciate
it, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Mrs. Blackburn. The gentleman yields back, and I will
remind all of our members that you have 10 business days to
submit additional questions. Indeed, as you all can see, there
will be some more questions coming your direction, and that
would put the deadline for questions at June 5th. I would ask
that our witnesses, as patient as you have been with us today,
that you please respond promptly to the questions where a
written answer is requested, and without objection, this
hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:24 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today's hearing continues the Energy & Commerce Committee's
oversight of a topic of great national significance--
cybersecurity. The committee continues to closely monitor the
cybersecurity protection and mitigation efforts of those vital
sectors within the committee's jurisdiction, including oil and
gas pipelines, the electric grid, nuclear energy, chemical
facilities, sewer and water, and telecommunications.
As the nation becomes more reliant on digital
communications technology, we also increase our exposure to
cyber threats. Indeed, cyber risks to our nation's critical
infrastructure have increased significantly in recent years,
including multiple high-profile cyber incidents that have
confirmed the steady rise in cyberattacks.
But combatting such threats requires a cybersecurity regime
that provides ample flexibility to afford owners and operators
of critical infrastructure the ability to protect against and
respond to rapidly evolving threats. A one-size-fits-all
approach to cybersecurity is ill-suited for the diverse range
of critical infrastructure sectors, each of which has its own
complex characteristics. Owners and operators know best how to
protect their own systems, and it is nearly impossible for the
speed of bureaucracy to keep pace with ever changing threats.
Undertaking certain reasonable actions in the short-term
can have a marked improvement in protecting critical assets.
These actions include enhanced information sharing between the
federal government and the private sector, greater emphasis on
public-private partnerships, and improved cross-sector
collaboration. Regarding information sharing, we continue to
support Intelligence Committee Chairman Rogers's legislation,
which passed the House last month.
I believe that the best approach to improving cybersecurity
is for existing regulators to work with industry stakeholders,
and for robust information sharing between government and
stakeholders. In contrast, I continue to be skeptical of
continued calls for a top-down, command-and-control regulatory
approach centralized at the Department of Homeland Security or
any other federal agency. Along those lines, the committee will
continue to monitor with great interest implementation of the
President's Executive order on cybersecurity.

#  #  #

----------

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 82197.108


