- THE FISCAL YEAR 2015 DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY BUDGET

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FISCAL YEAR 2015 DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 3, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-135

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

90-823 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  GENE GREEN, Texas
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                      JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            Islands
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PAUL TONKO, New York
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               PAUL TONKO, New York
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                LOIS CAPPS, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN BARROW, Georgia
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      Islands
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     7

Witnesses

Ernest J. Moniz, Secretary, Department of Energy.................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Reply to Mr. Tonko...........................................    47
Reply to Mr. Burgess.........................................    63
Reply to Mr. Kinzinger.......................................    73
Reply to Mr. Johnson.........................................    83
Answers to submitted questions...............................    88

Submitted Material

Slide, DOE Budget for Applied Energy and ARPA-E, submitted by Mr.
Burgess........................................................    61

THE FISCAL YEAR 2015 DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY BUDGET

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 3, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:06 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Scalise, Hall,
Shimkus, Terry, Burgess, Latta, Cassidy, Olson, McKinley,
Gardner, Pompeo, Kinzinger, Griffith, Barton, Upton (ex
officio), Rush, McNerney, Tonko, Engel, Green, Capps, Doyle,
Barrow, Matsui, Christensen, and Waxman (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Johnson.
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Clerk; Gary
Andres, Staff Director; Charlotte Baker, Deputy Communications
Director; Mike Bloomquist, General Counsel; Sean Bonyun,
Communications Director; Matt Bravo, Professional Staff Member;
Allison Busbee, Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Annie
Caputo, Professional Staff Member; Patrick Currier, Counsel,
Energy and Power; Tom Hassenboehler; Chief Counsel, Energy and
Power; Jason Knox, Counsel, Energy and Power; Brandon Mooney,
Professional Staff Member; Mary Neumayr, Senior Energy Counsel;
Peter Spencer, Professional Staff Member, Oversight; Tom
Wilbur, Digital Media Advisor; Jeff Baran, Democratic Senior
Counsel; Greg Dotson, Democratic Staff Director, Energy and
Environment; Caitlin Haberman, Democratic Policy Analyst; and
Bruce Ho, Democratic Counsel.
Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this morning. And today, we are going to be looking at the
fiscal year 2015 budget for the United States Department of
Energy. And of course, we are delighted that Secretary Moniz is
with us this morning. I know he has been very busy on the Hill
and the Senate side as well. And we really look forward to his
testimony today and to the opportunity to ask questions
regarding next year's Department of Energy's budget request.
At this time, I would like to recognize myself for 5
minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

DOE of course is tasked with developing and implementing a
coordinated national energy policy, one that should further an
all-of-the-above energy strategy. It should also be fostering
private sector competition and innovation of advanced energy
technologies. And national energy policy should also continue
to support job creation in our manufacturing renaissance by
providing regulatory certainty rather than overreaching
regulations so that we can maintain access to affordable,
abundant and reliable energy supplies.
I noticed that the DOE fiscal year 2015 budget request $9.8
billion for DOE Science and Energy programs that DOE states
will play a key role in achieving the President's Climate
Action Plan. In other words, over a third of the entire $28
billion budget is being allocated to the President's climate
agenda. This budget affirms the DOE is putting the President's
climate change agenda ahead of the interest of a balanced
national energy policy. Now, we can debate that, but it is
quite clear that the President's climate change agenda is right
at the top of the mission of the DOE at this time. This mission
is further evidenced by the fact that the DOE's budget once
again overwhelmingly favors the Office of Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy, which houses all of the President's favorite
green energy programs. And in fact, the 2.3 billion requests
there is more than the combined budget requests for the Offices
of Electricity, Fossil Energy, Nuclear Energy and ARPA-E. In my
humble opinion, we have seen the Obama administration waste too
much money on green energy projects that have failed. Many have
gone into bankruptcy at the expense to the taxpayer.
Another issue that is of concern to me and many others in
the proposed is the substantially reduced funding for the mixed
oxide fuel fabrication facility, MOX, currently under
construction at Savannah River Site in South Carolina. In the
case of the MOX plant, DOE has decided to abandon construction
of the facility being built to eliminate 34 tons of surplus
weapons plutonium, a project that was initiated in the Clinton
administration. At this point, $4 billion has already been
spent, and the facility is 60 percent complete. Yet, the
Department has decided to shut down construction. And it
appears, without any record of decision or any proposed
alternative, or any analysis of the ramifications. Now, maybe
they are there, but maybe we just haven't seen them yet.
Congress appropriated funds for the construction. But it is my
understanding that DOE does intend to use those funds instead
to shut down the project, resulting in 1,800 people at risk of
being laid off at their job. And it is disturbing because of
what had happened at Yucca Mountain; the money that was spent
at Yucca Mountain, that was stopped, the lawsuits that were
filed as a result of that, and the liability of the Federal
Government under those lawsuits. People who are concerned about
our debt are genuinely concerned about wasting that amount of
money.
I want to thank Secretary Moniz for appearing with us today
on this budget. And as I said in the beginning, he has been a
real energetic Secretary of Energy. He is willing to engage on
these issues at any point. And it is good to have open
discussion with him. And I want to commend him for that. We
look forward to hearing his testimony and asking him question
about the budget.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

This morning's hearing will focus on the proposed Fiscal
Year 2015 budget for the Department of Energy. Welcome,
Secretary Moniz. We're very pleased to have you here today to
share your views on the Department of Energy's FY 2015 budget.
DOE is tasked with developing and implementing a
coordinated national energy policy, one that should further an
``all-of-the-above'' strategy that promotes greater production
of all of America's resources. It should foster private sector
competition and innovation of advanced energy technologies. A
national energy policy should also continue to support job
creation and our manufacturing renaissance by providing
regulatory certainty, rather than overreaching regulations, so
we can maintain access to lowcost energy supplies.
But the DOE budget before us today, I am disappointed to
say, is not reflective of a true national energy policy.
Rather, it contributes to the lending of taxpayer support to
the President's Climate Action Plan. To be sure, the DOE FY
2015 budget request includes $9.8 billion for DOE science and
energy programs that DOE states ``will play a key role in
achieving [the President's Climate Action Plan] goals.'' In
other words, over a third of DOE's entire $28 billion budget is
being allocated to the President's climate agenda.
This budget affirms that DOE is all-too-willing to
acquiesce to EPA's anti-energy agenda rather than affirmatively
assert its own pro-energy agenda. This budget further creates
additional concerns in my mind that DOE is blatantly putting
the President's climate change agenda ahead of the interests of
a balanced national energy policy and the interests of the
American people. This mission is further evidenced by the fact
that DOE's budget once again overwhelming favors the Office of
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE), which houses all
of the President's favored green energy programs. In fact,
EERE's $2.3 billion budget request is more than the combined
budgets of the Offices of Electricity, Fossil Energy, Nuclear
Energy, and ARPA-E.
We've seen the Obama administration waste too much money on
green energy pet projects that have failed, and we owe it to
the taxpayers not to repeat those mistakes. That is why I am
disappointed to see yet another DOE budget pursuing the same
failed policies in pursuit of a climate agenda that has
repeatedly been rejected. The fact that the President and DOE
continue to circumvent Congress to unilaterally pursue policies
that are not supported by the American people is an affront to
the democratic process.
DOE instead should be taking a much more balanced approach
that reflects current energy and economic realities. For
example, America's abundant energy resources--including coal,
oil and natural gas--holds tremendous potential for energy
affordability and security, for job creation, for export
opportunities, and for strengthening America's standing in the
world. But it also poses implementation and innovation
challenges for which DOE can play a role. DOE should be out in
front of this effort, but the proposed budget does not reflect
this need.
Another issue that is of great concern to me in the
proposed budget is the substantially reduced funding for the
Mixed Oxide Fuel Fabrication Facility (MOX) currently under
construction at Savannah River Site (SRS) in South Carolina. In
the case of the MOX plant, DOE has decided to abandon
construction of the facility being built to eliminate 34 tons
of surplus weapons plutonium, a project initiated by the
Clinton administration. At this point, $4 billion has been
spent and the facility is 60 percent complete, yet DOE has
decided to shutdown construction apparently without any Record
of Decision, any proposed alternative, or any analysis of the
ramifications. Congress appropriated funds for construction,
but it is my understanding that DOE intends to use those funds
instead to shut down the project resulting in 1800 people at
risk for layoffs.
It seems to me that if DOE is going to abandon a $4 billion
investment, the taxpayers and those at risk of losing their
jobs deserve a thorough basis for it. I would urge DOE to use
the funds for construction of the facility as originally
appropriated by Congress.
Again, I want to thank Secretary Moniz for appearing before
us today on DOE's FY2015 budget proposal. I look forward to
hearing his testimony and asking him questions on issues before
the Department of Energy.

Mr. Whitfield. And at this time, I would like to recognize
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, for his 5-minute opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
thank you, Secretary Moniz, for being here today to discuss
DOE's fiscal year 2015 budget.
Secretary Moniz, I would like to commend you for
establishing the minority's and energy's initiative at DOE.
Following discussions where I express my strong and overriding
desire to increase minority participation and involvement
within all sectors of the energy industry. While I believe that
this is a first--a good first step, I have some serious
concerns regarding the amount of resources the Agency is
actually investing in this initiative, as evidenced by your own
budget proposal.
Mr. Secretary, to me, DOE's budget is a moral statement of
principles and a covenant with the American people. Mr.
Secretary, when I speak to my constituents about this new
initiative, one of the very first questions that they want to
know is how committed is DOE to this program, and how much of
the Department's vast resources is the Agency willing to invest
to ensure that this initiative achieves overwhelming success?
Mr. Secretary, I am sure that you understand that in
minority communities around the country, there is always
skepticism when new programs or new policies are announced
supposing to help increase opportunity when the resources to
help make them successful are not included. So when members who
represent these communities, such as myself and many, many
others see a lack of investment in programs designed to assist
minorities, it is our duty to hold the administration and the
Agencies responsible in order to rectify the situation. For
instance, Mr. Secretary, I am not impressed with the investment
in the minority and energy initiative as it currently stands.
And I want to work with you to make sure that we are not
shortchanging these communities who are looking for
opportunities to improve their livelihood, as so many others
have already been afforded.
And, Mr. Secretary, we know that these opportunities are
out there. In fact, we have come a long way since I first
inquired--first started inquiring into the levels of
participation of minorities in all different sectors of the
energy industry. And now we have the administration, the
industry, schools, universities, and all--they are all talking
about the concept of increasing the number of minorities in
energy. As you know, I have a bill that will provide a pass way
to energy jobs by reaching out to minority communities and
informing them of mostly opportunities available within the
energy sector, as well as the skills, training and
certifications needed to take advantage of these opportunities.
My office is actively reaching out to members on both sides of
the aisle who understand the need for better preparing all
Americans for energy jobs in the present and the future. And I
will continue to work with any and all stakeholders who are of
the same mind.
This is my hope, Mr. Chairman, that we can hold a hearing
on this very important topic of minority participation in the
energy sector in order to make up for the shortfall of workers
who will be retiring and exiting the workforce, leaving behind
a shortage of talented and skilled workers in their wing. And
the fact of the matter is that increasing the number of skilled
and trained workers will in fact be a win for the industry, a
win for the minority communities and a win for the entire
American economy as a whole. So I look forward to working with
you, Mr. Secretary, as well as members on both sides of the
aisle to make this a real commitment on the part of the
administration and----
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time, I
recognize the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Upton, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, Mr. Secretary, welcome back to the
committee. I for one do appreciate your thoughtful insight and
friendship. And when I look at DOE's current energy policies,
as well as its budget for fiscal year 2015, I must confess that
I see an agency that is still struggling a bit to keep up with
a changing energy landscape. The old assumptions of energy
scarcity are somewhat pervasive, and it is time for DOE to
adapt.
It does appear that DOE is ultra-cautious approach to
proving LNG Export's--you would expect us to say this today--to
non-free trade agreement trade agreement countries does not
reflect our newfound age of energy abundance. Projections from
the EIA, as well as DOE's own analysis, confirm that we have
more than enough natural gas to meet domestic needs affordably
while supporting export markets. And this surplus situation is
likely to last for many decades. The ramifications of DOE's
policy on exports can be measured not only in the thousands of
unrealized jobs that could be constructed at LNG Export
facilities and producing the extra natural gas for export, but
also in the billions in revenues that could be flowing into the
country and boosting the overall economy. Geo-political
opportunities are also at risk. The mere signal that the U.S.
is serious about entering export markets would have an
immediate effect on our allies in Eastern Europe who are
currently dependent on that--on Russia for natural gas. In
fact, reports earlier this week show that Russia upped the bill
by as much as 45 to 50 percent on our friends in Ukraine. That
is why I and so many others support Cory Gardner's bill, H.R.
6, bipartisan legislation, The Domestic Prosperity and Global
Freedom Act, which would help clear the backlog of export
applications currently at DOE.
LNG export facilities are just one part of the larger
infrastructure picture to make full use of our newfound energy
advantage in H.R. 6, is one bill that facilities building
these--this architecture of abundance. We are in the midst of a
continued and comprehensive effort to review and update energy
laws, many of which were written in a time of Jimmy Carter Era
price controls and scarcity. And whether it is legislation to
modernize and update transmission and distribution
infrastructure, legislation to maintain adverse electricity
portfolio generation with a continued role for coal and nuclear
renewables, or legislation seeking or ensure that we have the
tools in place to permit a new manufacturing renaissance, we
are building a record and exploring opportunities at every
level.
Now, I know that DOE is beginning a similar effort to look
comprehensively at our energy infrastructure and broader
strategy through the quadrennial energy review process, and I
welcome that broad look. However, I remain skeptical of the
Federal Government playing venture capitalist in making other
decisions best left to the marketplace. DOE may be talking
about the energy breakthroughs of the future, but the Agency is
still trying to get there with central planning approaches of
the past. In particular, the revival of the loan guarantee
program that backs Solyndra and several other projects that
went bust is of serious concern and will no doubt be a topic of
discussion of today.
I would like to conclude just by reminding you of DOE's
role in the Federal Government. Yesterday, this subcommittee
held its EPA budget hearing. And I couldn't help but notice the
extent to which EPA sets the energy policy agenda in the
administration, even though that Agency has no statutory
authority to do so. DOE should be the energy policy setting
body, but it seems as though it has relinquished that duty to a
degree. In past administrations, both Republican and
Democratic, DOE acted as a pro-energy counterweight to an EPA
whose tendency was to regulate every BTU that it encountered. I
know that we can restore DOE's mission to ensure a more
balanced approach to the energy policy. And I yield back the
balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Secretary Moniz, welcome back to the committee. When I look
at DOE's current energy policies as well as its budget for
Fiscal Year 2015, I see an agency that is struggling to keep up
with a changing energy landscape. The old assumptions of energy
scarcity are still pervasive and it is time for DOE to adapt.
For example, DOE's ultra-cautious approach to approving LNG
exports to non-Free Trade Agreement countries does not reflect
our newfound age of energy abundance. Projections from the
Energy Information Administration as well as DOE's own analysis
confirm we have more than enough natural gas to meet domestic
needs affordably while also supporting export markets. And this
surplus situation is likely to last for many decades.
The ramifications of DOE's sluggish policy on exports can
be measured not only in the thousands of unrealized jobs that
could be constructing LNG export facilities and producing the
extra natural gas for export, but also in the billions in
revenues that could be flowing into the country and boosting
the overall economy. Geopolitical opportunities are also at
risk. The mere signal that the U.S is serious about entering
export markets would have an immediate effect on our allies in
Eastern Europe who are currently dependent on Russia for
natural gas. That is why I and so many others support Cory
Gardner's bill, H.R. 6, ``The Domestic Prosperity and Global
Freedom Act,'' which would help clear the backlog of export
applications currently languishing at DOE.
LNG export facilities are just one part of the larger
infrastructure picture to make full use of our newfound energy
advantage, and H.R. 6 is just one bill that facilitates
building this architecture of abundance. We are in the midst of
a continued and comprehensive effort to review and update
energy laws, many of which were written in a time of Carter era
price controls and scarcity. Whether it is legislation to
modernize and update transmission and distribution
infrastructure, legislation to maintain a diverse electricity
portfolio generation with a continued role for coal, nuclear
and renewables, or legislation seeking to ensure we have the
tools in place to permit a new manufacturing renaissance, we
are building a record and exploring opportunities at every
level.
I know DOE is beginning a similar effort to look
comprehensively at our energy infrastructure and broader
strategy through its Quadrennial Energy Review process, and I
welcome this broad look. However, I remain highly skeptical of
the Federal Government playing venture capitalist and making
other decisions best left to the marketplace. DOE may be
talking about the energy breakthroughs of the future, but the
agency is still trying to get there with the central planning
approaches of the past. In particular, the revival of the loan-
guarantee program that backed Solyndra and several other
projects that went bust is of serious concern, and will no
doubt be a topic for discussion today.
I would like to conclude by reminding DOE of its role in
the Federal Government. Just yesterday, this subcommittee held
its EPA budget hearing, and I could not help but notice the
extent to which EPA sets the energy policy agenda in this
administration, even though that agency has no statutory
authority to do so. DOE should be the energy policy-setting
body, but it seems as though it has relinquished its duty. In
past administrations, both Democratic and Republican, DOE acted
as a pro-energy counterweight to an EPA whose tendency was to
regulate every BTU it encounters. I hope we can restore DOE's
mission to ensure a more balanced approach to energy policy.

Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Upton yields back the balance of his
time. At this time, I would like to recognize the gentleman
from California, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Secretary,
welcome back to our committee.
Last week, Geochemist James Lawrence Powell published a
study documenting the scientific consensus on climate change.
Dr. Powell, who, among other things, served on the National
Science Board under both Presidents Reagan and George H.W.
Bush, looked at all the peer-reviewed scientific articles
published on climate change in 2013. He found over 10,000
articles that agreed that climate change is real and caused by
man. And only 2 out of more than 10,000 that rejected human-
caused global warming. You can see his results on the screen.
Secretary Moniz, you may not know this, but we took a vote
on this issue earlier this year. Congresswoman Schakowsky
offered an amendment that said greenhouse gas emissions
threaten public health and welfare by disrupting the climate.
That was the statement. The Republican members of this
committee voted unanimously to reject that amendment. Just that
statement. I have been in Congress for 40 years. This is my
last year in Congress. And I have never seen just an
embarrassing and dangerous disconnect between what scientists
say and how this committee votes. On Monday, the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, or IPCC, told us
that climate change is happening today on ``all continents
across the oceans.'' The world's leading scientists explain
that unless we take significant steps to reduce carbon
pollution now, ``climate change impacts are projected to slow
down economic growth, make poverty reduction more difficult,
further erode food security, and prolong existing and create
new poverty traps.''
The science of climate change is settled. Climate change is
happening. It is caused by humans. And its impacts are both
serious and real. And it is time for us to listen to the
scientists and to act. I appreciate that we have a President
who does listen to the scientists and is acting to address
climate dangers. Under his Climate Action Plan, President Obama
has committed to reducing our carbon pollution by 17 percent by
2020 and has outlined a number of steps to do so. The President
has committed to bend the post-2020 global admissions
trajectory further still.
The Department of Energy has a key role to play under the
President's plan. The energy choices we make today will
determine whether we address this threat or leave our children
and grandchildren with a climate catastrophe.
That means, Secretary Moniz, that you have one of the most
important jobs in America. I view the paramount responsibility
of the Secretary of Energy as advancing the Nation's response
to the threat of climate change. That is your responsibility as
well as EPA's. And I don't think you ought to be fighting a
turf war with them, as some of our colleagues here suggest.
Under your leadership, the Department of Energy is working to
meet the climate challenge. DOE is developing the energy
efficiency standards we need to cut energy waste and save
people money. You are engaged in research, development,
demonstration and deployment of advanced renewable energy
technologies, cleaner vehicles, energy storage and a modern
electric grid that delivers reliable clean energy to power our
homes and businesses. And you are hard at work developing next
generation pollution control technologies for our fossil fuel
systems. These new clean energy technologies will protect our
environment, create new jobs and grow our economy.
Mr. Secretary, the latest IPCC report confirms that we have
a choice. We could listen to the scientists and invest in the
energy technologies we need for a prosperous clean energy
future, or we could ignore the climate problem and suffer dire
consequences. Mr. Secretary, I am confident that you will
continue to help us choose the right path to a clean energy
future. I look forward to your testimony and your continued
leadership on these issues. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time. At this time, having completed the opening statements,
Secretary Moniz, we are going to recognize you for your 5-
minute opening statement. And once again, thank you for being
with us.

STATEMENT OF ERNEST J. MONIZ, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Mr. Moniz. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And--I should say
chairmen Whitfield and Upton and ranking members Rush and
Waxman. Members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity
to come here to discuss our budget proposal for fiscal year
2015.
The President I think makes clear through this proposal
that the Department of Energy has significant responsibilities
in the advancing the Nation's security--especially by
maintaining a reliable nuclear deterrent and keeping nuclear
materials out of the hands of terrorists, and for advancing the
Nation's prosperity, in particular by supporting the
President's all-of-the-above approach to energy and by helping
to provide the foundation for the future of advanced
manufacturing in this country.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Secretary, if I may? I am sorry to
interrupt you. Would you move the microphone just a little bit
closer to you?
Mr. Moniz. Oh, closer?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Moniz. OK.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Moniz. Thank you. OK. So the Department of Energy's
top-line discretionary budget request is $27.9 billion, a 2.6
percent increase from fiscal year 2014. And in this constrained
budget environment, again, I think this reflects some of the
high-priority missions that we have responsibility for.
I will discuss very briefly a few points along DOE's three
major programmatic areas as we have organized them at the under
secretary level, science and energy, which I understand will be
the main focus of today's discussions, and a few words about
nuclear security, and management and performance.
On science and energy, the President's all-of-the-above
energy strategy is driving economic growth, creating jobs while
lowering carbon emissions. We are producing more natural gas in
the United States than ever before. And for the first time in
two decades, we are producing more oil at home than we import
from the rest of the world. In fact, just yesterday, the EIA
released some data showing that net energy imports in the
United States now, which is about 13 quads, is the same as in
1987, 30 years ago. So it has been a dramatic reduction. And in
fact, more than a 10 percent reduction just from 2012 to 2013.
We have also, at the same time, made remarkable progress in
clean and renewable energy. In the last 5 years, more than
doubled the amount of electricity from wind and solar, at the
same time making the investments that enable coal and nuclear
power to be competitive in a clean energy economy. We are
aggressively advancing energy efficiency, bringing economic
environmental and security benefits.
In the last few years, we have seen technologies like LED
lighting costs drop several fold, such that payback periods are
now approaching one year, and along with that, tens of millions
of units being deployed in the marketplace.
The budget request is 9.8 billion, as the chairman said,
for the science and energy activities, an increase of 5 percent
for, again, advancing the all the above energy strategy,
supporting the Climate Action Plan, continuing the quadrennial
energy review focusing on energy infrastructure, and
maintaining global scientific leadership.
There are significant increases in several important
applied programs. I will just say a couple words. In energy
efficiency renewable energy, a 22 percent increase is proposed
with focus areas in transportation, renewable technology,
efficiency, advanced manufacturing. Office of Electricity:
significant increase to support what we all see I think as
important modernization of the grid, an enhancement of its
resiliency in response to many threats that we are seeing. We
are also building a strengthened emergency response capability
as the lead agency for energy infrastructure under the
leadership of FEMA in case of severe events.
ARPE-E, which takes a unique entrepreneurial approach, we
propose for a 16 percent increase. We would note that in its
relatively brief existence so far there have been 24 startups
coming out of the ARPE-E programs, and many, many other
indicators of success. We also have created, as part of our
reorganization, the Office of Energy Policy and Systems
Analysis, mainly gathering policy elements from various program
offices, but with a particularly critical responsibility for
enhancing our analytical capacity and for advancing the
Quadrennial Energy Review, looking at this country's energy
infrastructure challenges.
DOE science programs really are the backbone of the
American research enterprise and the physical sciences, and we
have proposed $5.1 billion for science. As one example, in
conjunction with the NNSA, our National Security Agency, the
Office of Science will lead an initiative to develop exascale
computing platforms, the next stage in a historic DOE role for
keeping this country at the leadership edge of high performance
computing. And of course, the many facilities that science
supports, light sources, Spallation Neutron Source, the future
Facility for Rare Isotope Beams, all sustained nearly 30,000
scientists in this country with cutting-edge activities.
I mentioned cross cutting activities already, exascale, for
example, and grid. One other one is subsurface science and
engineering, where we find many energy issues involve
subsurface science and engineering. We want to pull those
together, make them more coherent, involve our laboratories as
a system.
In nuclear security, I will just end up by saying we have
asked for 11.9 billion. I would say a highpoint there is that
through an administration-wide process, we have firmly
committed to the nuclear posture review approach to our nuclear
deterrent, and that is stretched out a little bit because of
budget constraints, but it is committed to as our direction
there. In management performance, just emphasizing, and I think
this committee would agree that, without improving our
management performance, we will not be able to as effectively
for sure execute our energy science and security missions. So
this is a new focus under which we have moved environmental
management to be a specific responsibility of that under
secretary.
I will just mention maybe from the point of view of a news
item again, as you know we have had an issue at WIPP, our
facility in New Mexico. I just wanted to emphasize first that
there is no evidence of any significant exposures to people.
But, obviously, we are shut down at the moment. But yesterday,
two teams did enter the caverns, and we hope to move
expeditiously towards a reopening.
With that, I just want to thank you for your time and look
forward to questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moniz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary. Once again,
we appreciate you being here. At this time, I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes of questions. And while there are many
broader policy concerns that I have, I do want to focus
initially on the Paducah Gaseous Diffusion Plant, because there
is so many--it is going through a transition down there.
And one question I would like to ask you is this--of course
communication between the State of Kentucky, the City of
Paducah and the Department of Energy is vitally important. And
with all the changes taking place, the Paducah site has not
really had a director or a lead that is really focused on that
one area onsite. And we have had some previous discussions
about this. But could you share with us this morning whether or
not you all do intend to appoint a person that would be
responsible for that site and be responsible for good
communication with the community and the State?
Mr. Moniz. Yes. First of all, I appreciated also your
intersession in helping us with those communications with the
City and the State. My understanding is that we are in the
process of hiring that person. I will--why don't I get back and
check exactly on the status of that and get back to you
promptly?
Mr. Whitfield. But you do feel like----
Mr. Moniz. We do want to have a dedicated site manager at
Paducah.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. Now, the fiscal year 2014 budget
for the Paducah area, the cleanup and everything was around
$265 million. And it is my understanding that not all of that
money is going to be able to be spent this year. But it is my
understanding that the Department of Energy would have the
option of directing some of that additional money for cleanup.
And as you know, with USEC coming to an end, a lot of people
are losing their jobs down there. Could the Department of
Energy--or are you all considering funneling some of that money
for additional cleanup so that some of these people would be
able to retain those jobs?
Mr. Moniz. Well, Mr. Chairman, we are working to try to
speed up the contract discussions. Typically, these large
environmental management contracts, they are complicated. They
are very long-term. They have very, very large contract
amounts, are 12 to 14 months. We are hoping to get that down a
little bit shorter so that we can have that turnover early in
the fall, and we are working hard on that. That is I think the
reason why we anticipate having some carryover funds. We are
trying to exercise what we can this year. I understand the
concerns. But we will have carryover funds for sure. So I think
also in the context of our fiscal year 2015 request, I think we
will have a strong program.
Mr. Whitfield. You are referring to the IDIQ contract
that----
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. And did I understand you to say that in
September or did you----
Mr. Moniz. September is when we are trying to push to get
that contract concluded.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Well, of course, that remains a priority
for all of us involved with this issue. So we do appreciate
your focusing on it and expediting it as much as possible.
Mr. Moniz. We were able to beat the schedule last year on
another issue.
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Mr. Moniz. Hopefully, we can beat the schedule this year.
But we are trying.
Mr. Whitfield. And also, in the fiscal year 2015, there is
talk in the budget about transitioning the facility into a cold
and dark state. And of course, we don't want it to be a cold
and dark state, because we were more interested in
decontamination and decommissioning of the facility. But your
understanding, what is the definition of a cold and dark state
for a facility like----
Mr. Moniz. Well, I can't say that I have, to be honest,
really focused on that. But I would say that it means I think
we need to have the facility in a stable, safe condition
without compromising the eventual D&D activities.
Mr. Whitfield. Right.
Mr. Moniz. Those would be the objectives, at least. I can't
say that I could describe in technical detail what it means.
Mr. Whitfield. Right. Right. But it is the goal to
decontaminate and decommission rather than----
Mr. Moniz. Certainly. Oh, yes, it does. That is certainly a
requirement. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, Mr. Secretary, thank you for helping
clarify some of those issues. I appreciate that very much. And
I don't know how much time you have. We may go to a second
round if you have time. But at this time, I would like to
recognize the gentleman from Illinois for 5 minutes of
questions, Mr. Rush.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
I do have a lot of questions that I want to cover. And I know I
won't have the time to do it all this morning, so I will be
submitting questions for the record. And I would like the
Agency to get back to me as promptly as possible to an issue
that I want to discuss today on both the minorities and energy
initiative and also the publicly funded national research labs.
Of the Agency's $27.9 billion budget request, what is the
amount allocated to the Office of Economic Impact and
Diversity, which is the Agency primarily responsible for
enacting the Minorities and Energy Initiative both in terms of
dollars and also in terms of percentage? Do you feel that this
amount is adequately in terms of reflecting the priorities of
reaching out and engaging minorities in the energy sector for
both you and for President Obama, and can you do more? So those
are the three questions.
Mr. Moniz. Well, first of all, I think the budget for the
economic development and diversity office is approximately $6
million. I just want to clarify that in the budget, it shows a
decrease. But it is not actually a decrease, because two
functions were placed elsewhere. One is by law. We had to move
the OSDBU office--I forgot the name--office of small--it is a
small business office--I--the acronym, I have forgotten now
what it stands for. But by statute, it turned out we had to
move that outside and leave it as a coordinating office with
the ED office under Dot Harris. The second thing is that there
was a function placed in there, which the office was paying
for, for the department wide ombudsman, which was really
misplaced. So we put that in the management and administration
office as a better place. So the budget for that office really
has not been cut.
Mr. Rush. So in your best estimates, the budget has flat
lined to a degree--flat line----
Mr. Moniz. I believe it is flat.
Mr. Rush. Without increase--without an increase, is that
what you are saying?
Mr. Moniz. I believe it is flat. Yes. I think that is
correct. And if I go on to discuss the Minorities in Energy
Initiative, and by the way, I do want to say that, you know,
the birth of that was in a hearing here last June when you
raised the issue. I think it is off to a very, very successful
start with the ambassadors. You know that very well, Mr. Rush.
This is not on our budget, but, for example, the American
Petroleum Institute, because of the initiative--and its
director is one of the ambassadors--is having eight regional
meetings to attract minorities into the oil and gas industry
workforce. I personally went at the end of January to Hampton
University and recruited the president, Mr. Harvey, to an
ambassadorship. So we are promoting this, I think----
Mr. Rush. Mr. Secretary, can you do more?
Mr. Moniz. We can do more. And I would be happy to discuss
with you how we could do more.
Mr. Rush. All right. Moving on to the area of the public
funded national research labs. How many publicly funded
research labs are there, and are any of these labs managed by
or operated by a minority?
Mr. Moniz. We have 17 national laboratories. The----
Mr. Rush. Are any of them operated by a minority?
Mr. Moniz. Well, yes--I mean, they are operated by
organizations. Let me say that I am dissatisfied frankly with
the diversity in the upper-management ranks of these
laboratories. And that is something that we have taken up with
our lab policy counsels.
Mr. Rush. When you--yes, when you speak specifically about
Argonne and Fermi which are located in my home State--Argonne
and Fermi, which are located in my home State, what are the
percentage of minority engagements at Argonne and Fermi lab?
Mr. Moniz. Sir, I will have to get back to you with that
for the record, because I don't know those numbers.
Mr. Rush. Right. Do you have----
Mr. Moniz. I do know that the upper ranks of the
management--we have inadequate representation.
Mr. Rush. Do you have figures for any other of the other 17
labs across the country?
Mr. Moniz. No, but I would be happy to get you those
demographics.
Mr. Rush. Thank you very much.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time, I will recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Barton,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here. You are the only cabinet secretary
that goes longer between haircuts than me. So I appreciate
that.
Mr. Moniz. I didn't know I had to come here to get that
repeated. But anyway----
Mr. Barton. No. I need a haircut. So you make me look
sheared, so to speak. I know this is a budget hearing. And I
know we should be asking questions about the DOE budget. But I
want to ask you a few more questions about LNG Exports given
what has happened in the Ukraine and Crimea. This subcommittee
has done a number of forums where we have had almost a complete
panoply of forum representatives. And to a person, they have
all said that they want the United States to export LNG, and
they want to do it sooner rather than later. The situation in
the Ukraine obviously gives credence to that. I believe
President Obama, when he was in Europe last week or the week
before last, made some comments that said that we should do
that. Now, I don't want to say that in absolute certainty,
because I don't remember exactly what he said. Your Agency,
your Department is the Department that has to give the initial
approval. You just approved one on I think February the 29th.
So if that is possible, did we have a February the 29th this
year? Any--in any event----
Mr. Moniz. It was in March.
Mr. Barton. March.
Mr. Moniz. March.
Mr. Barton. March 29.
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. Barton. I knew you would correct me. So you are right.
March. March the 24th, actually. I was looking--any way, it is
my fault. So it looks like when we read the approval documents
that they are almost verbatim. And so my question is once you
found that it is in the public interest for one of these
projects, why does it keep taking so long to approve the next
one? There are still 24 in the queue. Why couldn't we just get
a big stamp and stamp them all approved and get on with it?
Mr. Moniz. Well, there are a number of issues there. First
of all, we do have these large dockets which do have specific
comments with regard to different proposals. Secondly of
course, as you know there is also the FERC process, which goes
through the NEPA process on a secondary basis.
Mr. Barton. I am aware of that.
Mr. Moniz. And----
Mr. Barton. You don't have to worry about that.
Mr. Moniz. And----
Mr. Barton. So that is not an excuse.
Mr. Moniz. Well, no. But it is a fact. And right now, we
have no proposals ready for that final declaration, because
they are still in the NEPA process. Third is that the----
Mr. Barton. But why would that impact the DOE process? I
don't understand that. Somebody is getting ready to run for
President in 2 years, but that doesn't impact my process of
running for Congress this year. I mean, I don't understand why
DOE going through----
Mr. Moniz. Well----
Mr. Barton. I mean, FERC going through the NEPA process
makes it more difficult for you to give approval or
disapproval.
Mr. Moniz. My understanding certainly is that we cannot act
on a final approval until the FERC process is complete.
Mr. Barton. But you can do whatever you have been doing,
this conditional approval?
Mr. Moniz. Yes, so the conditional approvals, we----
Mr. Barton. You have done 7, I think.
Mr. Moniz. We do prior to the--typically prior to the FERC
process, although I might say that now I think as the process
has rolled forward, we are seeing some proposers filing with
FERC prior to getting conditional approval. So this is an
evolution that is happening that is----
Mr. Barton. That is great information, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. Barton. But it is irrelevant to what your job is
supposed to be. You have got 24 of these. And I am not trying
to be argumentative. I happen to believe that you and I are on
the same page.
Mr. Moniz. Then----
Mr. Barton. All I want you to do is say I agree with you,
we are going to get on it, we need to do it more quickly, you
are right, Congressman.
Mr. Moniz. I----
Mr. Barton. That is all you have got to do, and we go on to
the next questioner.
Mr. Moniz. I agree that we are systematically working
through the applications. Right--the law requires us to do a
public interest determination. That public interest
determination has multiple features.
Mr. Barton. All right. My time has expired.
Mr. Moniz. It includes----
Mr. Barton. You have successfully filibustered the question
period. I want you to do me one--go back to your office this
afternoon. It is that big office in the corner on the top floor
of the Forrestal Building, unless you have moved it.
Mr. Moniz. No.
Mr. Barton. And read the seven applications that you have
approved. And give me a report on the--any wording
differentiation in any of those seven approvals. They are
almost verbatim.
Mr. Moniz. I would note for example in the last approval,
the Jordan Cove, you will see a rather different discussion of
international impacts in the public interest determination, for
example.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time, I would like to recognize the gentleman from California--
no, have you asked some questions yet?
Mr. Whitfield. Where is Mr. Waxman? Who is next?
Mr. Barton. Go to Mr. McNerney.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I will recognize the gentleman
from California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you for that reluctance, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for coming this morning. And I would
like to talk a little bit about fusion energy for a few
minutes, if you don't mind?
Fusion energy, as you know, consists of releasing energy by
fusing nuclei of small elements together. And fusion of--the
fuel for fusion energy would be virtually unlimited.
Radioactive waste produced by fusion reaction is less dangerous
than radioactive waste produced from nuclear power. And fusion
reactors would inherently be failsafe in their operation. Do
you agree with those statements?
Mr. Moniz. Well, failsafe in terms of certain kinds of
accidents. Obviously, they can have malfunctions.
Mr. McNerney. Right. OK. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, the DOE
budget for fusion research is $416 million a year. Now, on the
other hand, the fusion power supporters believe that fusion
power could be practical in 10 years with a $3 billion
investment per year. Do you believe that that is a realistic
assessment?
Mr. Moniz. I should probably insert at this point--so
just--I can answer that question but----
Mr. McNerney. Sure.
Mr. Moniz. I am recused from dealing with the fusion
program. So there may be some of these I will have to have my
science office get back to you. But in terms of the statement
just now in terms of a general objective, I think the 10-year
estimate would certainly be viewed as optimistic by most
scientists.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Well, so how long do you think it would
take then with the 400 and----
Mr. Moniz. I wouldn't speculate. But for example, what is
certainly part of the public discussion, again, I cannot make
decisional statements on fusion. I believe, you know, the major
international project currently going on doesn't even plan to
get to ignition in, I don't know, quite a few years from now,
at least a decade. And that would be many steps from that to a
commercial plant.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Fair enough.
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. Do you think it is a--that is a good
investment of American dollars in fusion research?
Mr. Moniz. Again, as a general statement, I think we
definitely should keep investing in fusion.
Mr. McNerney. OK. We have fallen behind some of the other
countries in that research area over the last decade or so.
Mr. Moniz. Well, again, I think as--I am just going to my
scientific background. I would say that we remain the leaders
in many aspects of fusion. I think certainly in the large scale
modeling and simulation of plasmas, I think we remain leaders.
We are building many of the big components in terms of big
magnets--superconducting magnets. So I think we are not so far
behind, I would say in terms of our capacity. Obviously, we
don't have a facility of the scale that is being built in
Europe.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Well, I am going to change the subject a
little bit, if you don't mind. Last week, the President
announced an interagency methane strategy to reduce emissions
of that potent greenhouse gas. DOE will play an important role,
along with the EPA and the Department of Interior. The strategy
document states that the DOE will sponsor roundtable
discussions with stakeholders about methane emissions. What
does the DOE hope to achieve in those roundtable discussions?
Mr. Moniz. I just might add for the agencies that U.S.--
that Agriculture is also a major player in that for different
sources of methane. The Department of Energy--our focus is on
data. And it is very much focused also on the kind of midstream
and downstream systems. We had in the first of the roundtables,
multiple constituencies, especially for that midstream and
downstream, including, you know, companies, labor,
environmental groups, et cetera. The big message for me in that
meeting was the surprising degree of agreement in terms of a
path forward and how much actually companies are already doing
in the context of renewing old infrastructure and
simultaneously addressing methane leaks.
Mr. McNerney. Are there particular technologies that the
DOE would want to support in this area?
Mr. Moniz. For example, we very much want to keep pushing--
and ARPE-E will be pursuing this--really high quality, lower
cost detectors and sensors so that we can know where the leaks
are.
Mr. McNerney. Performance based standards?
Mr. Moniz. Right.
Mr. McNerney. Very good.
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time, I
will recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Scalise, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, appreciate you having
the hearing. And, Secretary Moniz, appreciate you being here to
talk about the Department's budget and obviously the policies
that then go into the funding that would come from that budget.
When I look at your budget, you are requesting a $715 million
increase over where you currently are. And, obviously, we are
trying to get control over spending in Washington. Washington
is spending more than we take in. We are actually trying to go
department by department to actually start trying to get
Washington to live within its means, meaning to spend less than
it is taking in--less than it is spending right now, because it
spends more than it takes in. So when you ask for a $715
million increase, I know you look at some of the agencies, and
you have a 22 percent increase requesting for renewable energy.
And we are already spending a lot of money. It is not like
there is not money being spent on renewable energy. This
committee has had a lot of hearings on some of those
boondoggles things, like Solyndra and others. And when you look
at a request like this--and you are asking for 715 million
more. Somewhere in the neighborhood of 250 million or more of
that money is going to have to be borrowed from countries like
China. I mean, do you factor that in when you are asking us for
this kind of increase that a large portion of that is money
that is not just sitting around somewhere? It is literally
money that is going to be borrowed with that bill being sent to
our kids?
Mr. Moniz. Well, first of all, I do not subscribe to the
boondoggle. We can come back to that. But----
Mr. Scalise. It is the level of the expenditure----
Mr. Moniz. With regard to the budget--clearly, the
administration budget is consistent with the underlying budget.
So it obeys the cap. It is essentially flat dollars from fiscal
year 2014. Within that overall budget, the President chose to
give greater emphasis to some of our programs, both in energy
and in nuclear security.
Mr. Scalise. And I know we talked about this yesterday at a
separate hearing, but, you know, the Secretary of State had
made comments that global warming and this climate change
agenda is a bigger threat to American than terrorism. I would
dispute that. I don't know--I won't ask you for that reaction.
But I do want to ask you because you did touch on the
President's supposed all-of-the-above energy strategy, and I
know your Agency is tasked with coming up with the strategy for
the country. When we talk about the President's approach to
energy, you know, I know he talks about ``all of the above,''
but when you look at the numbers, it just doesn't back up what
he says.
And specifically, I want to talk about energy production on
Federal lands. I was able to get this information from the
American Enterprise Institute. They do some really good
research on a lot of fronts. But on energy production, they
actually have charted how--this is actual change in fossil fuel
production over the years. And so they are showing--you know,
especially when you look from 2009 to today, a dramatic
increase in production on State and private lands, which I know
the President likes taking credit for. But when it comes to
areas where the Federal Government actually has authority, on
Federal lands, you have a 15 percent decrease. So you have a
dramatic difference in how our energy portfolio is playing out
in the real world. You are seeing State and private land
production dramatically up. But--on Federal lands, because of
this administration's policies, you actually see a dramatic
decrease in energy production.
And so when the President talks about an all-of-the-above
strategy, he is not carrying that out in his policies. His
policies are actually hurting production on Federal lands.
Fortunately, we have got private lands in States that are
making up the difference. But the Federal Government is going
after them, too.
So I want to ask you, when it comes to this idea of an all-
of-the-above strategy, which I fully embrace, President Obama
does not embrace and the numbers back that up. But when you see
some of his other agencies, like EPA and Department of
Interior, de facto carrying out a different strategy, how much
interaction do you have, as Secretary of Energy, trying to push
for an energy strategy on one hand, but then having agencies
like the EPA trying to shut some of that production down? Do
you all try to coordinate and say hey, we want an all-of-the-
above strategy? And if you really mean it, are you going to
agencies like EPA and saying stop this war on coal that is
killing jobs, killing energy. Stop this war on--you know, they
are attempting to have a war on hydraulic fracturing to shut
some of that down. I mean, do you all have any interaction on
that?
Mr. Moniz. We certainly do. I would like to note first of
all that I feel we do have an all-of-the-above strategy. And it
is a very strong one. And if I----
Mr. Scalise. What do you say about these numbers though?
The numbers don't back it up.
Mr. Moniz. So if I may make two comments, sir?
Mr. Scalise. Sure.
Mr. Moniz. Respectfully. The first, the investments in
these different areas, it is not only these discretionary
numbers in the fiscal year 2015 budget. If you look at coal, we
have $6 billion in CCS projects that are coming on. We have an
$8 billion loan guarantee program for fossil energy across the
board. We just did a loan for nuclear. The----
Mr. Scalise. You are talking about money. But I am talking
about the results.
Mr. Moniz. And----
Mr. Scalise. The results are that production is down on
Federal lands.
Mr. Moniz. And----
Mr. Scalise. Do you dispute that?
Mr. Moniz. And if you look at that specific issue, I might
observe that a major driver of that is geology. The----
Mr. Scalise. Do you dispute that it is down, production is
down on Federal lands?
Mr. Moniz. No, those are data.
Mr. Scalise. Right. That is correct.
Mr. Moniz. However, unconventional reservoirs are not in
the traditional areas. The market has moved to the Marcellus
Shale, to the Eagle Ford, to the Bakken. So is the----
Mr. Scalise. And I know I am out of time. I appreciate
that. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I would like to recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Moniz, that
was an interesting line of questioning. It was more trying to
provoke you. Are we not following an all-of-the-above strategy?
It seems to me you were outlining a lot of different areas
where we are pursuing energy development. I assume that
development on public lands is just a small part of the overall
energy areas that we are concerned----
Mr. Moniz. Well, bottom line, yes. We are pursuing an all-
the-above strategy. And I think our energy system is showing
it, even as we have reduced carbon emissions at the same time.
Mr. Waxman. I tend to think that the Republicans don't want
an ``all of the above,'' they want a strategy to continue to
rely on fossil fuels, especially coal. And then we talk about a
war on coal. I just can't understand this argument, the war on
coal. Coal is losing out, not because of any Government
actions. It is losing out because of market forces. Utilities
are finding it less expensive to use natural gas. And even
though we subsidize coal, but not requiring them to pay for the
external costs of their use of cheap coal, they can't compete
at the present time. But they are also the leading source of
carbon emissions.
I mentioned in my opening statement the intergovernmental
panel on climate change. Their report should be a wakeup call.
Everyone is--the world's leading scientists are telling us
everyone is going to be impacted by climate change, no country
or region is immune. If we listen to our scientists and invest
in the clean energy technologies, that will put our country and
the world on the path to a sustainable and prosperous energy
future. That seems to be the course we should be taking, not
just no action which is what we hear more often than not from
the leadership on this committee.
As a scientist, I would like to ask you about the
consequences of inaction. Last year, DOE examined the impacts
of climate change and what it would mean for energy
infrastructure as a result of higher temperatures, drought, sea
level rise, extreme weather events. What did DOE find?
Mr. Moniz. I missed the last part.
Mr. Waxman. Well, I wanted to know what DOE found in terms
of the impact of climate change on energy infrastructure.
Mr. Moniz. Oh, I see. Um-hum. Um-hum. Yes. So the risks and
vulnerabilities report that you are referring to certainly lays
out rather dire consequences for our energy infrastructure. I
might add the President, in the Climate Action Plan, of course,
elevated adaptation and resilience of energy infrastructure to
a very high level, precisely anticipating what the report said
this week that we are seeing the consequences and they are
going to get worse.
Mr. Waxman. Um-hum.
Mr. Moniz. And prudence requires us both to try to mitigate
further consequences and to adapt as well.
Mr. Waxman. But let me ask you, if we have sea levels
rising and floods and storms and wildfires, I don't----
Mr. Moniz. Right.
Mr. Waxman. That is going to put coastal and inland energy
facilities at risk, among others. Droughts will impair power
plant cooling systems, increase the risk of shutdowns.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mr. Waxman. Higher temperatures will put stress on our
electricity systems and reduce the efficiency of generation and
transmission infrastructure. If all those things happen, aren't
we talking about an all-of-the-above strategy of ignoring
climate change at our own peril?
Mr. Moniz. Yes. And they have all happened already. We have
had power plants shut down because of warmer waters, for
example.
Mr. Waxman. In the west, climate change is expected to
decrease the amount of snow pack. And we are already seeing in
recent years in California a problem. What effect is that going
to have on water availability for energy generation,
agriculture and drinking water?
Mr. Moniz. It would be a tremendous impact. And, again, it
is already there. We are seeing it. The Colorado River, as you
know very well, is in a very difficult situation after years of
drought.
Mr. Waxman. Climate change is going to impact everyone, but
it won't impact everyone equally. Some in the coal industry are
engaged in a publicity campaign to convince Americans that the
key to addressing poverty in the world's poorest countries is
to get them to use coal. I find this deeply cynical. In fact,
Secretary Moniz, didn't the IPPC find that poor people and poor
countries will be hit hardest by climate change? And wouldn't
uncontrolled burning of coal exacerbate these impacts?
Mr. Moniz. Well, increased carbon emissions in general
would, of course. And you are certainly correct that the
poorest societies are the most vulnerable.
Mr. Waxman. Well, it just strikes me that we are whistling
past the graveyard when we hear people talking about how the
war on terrorism is something that we ought to pay more
attention to than climate change. You know, you got to pay
attention to problems. And the big, huge problem that is being
ignored on this committee is the problem of climate change. And
I hope that will change, because we do have a choice to make.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Moniz. I agree.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time, I will recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hall, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Hall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Secretary, I
thank you for being here. It is good to see you again.
Mr. Moniz. Good to see you.
Mr. Hall. I want to touch on what is going on in Russia and
the Ukraine a bit, and also a little bit from what we have been
talking about. But what--I know that crisis must have
influenced your decision in making with respect to LNG Exports.
And I understand Russia has recently raised the price of
natural gas to Ukraine by 40 percent. It seemed like the
chairman of Energy and Commerce touched on that a moment ago.
Do you think--at what point are delays going to deny the
private sector the ability to export LNG negatively? How does
that impact job creation here in our country?
Mr. Moniz. Well, sir, again, the public interest
determination that we are required to make by law has us
balancing various factors. The international situation is
certainly one of them. And that was noted in our last Jordan
Cove conditional approval. But also of course, very paramount
is the impact on domestic markets and manufacturing. And as you
know, many in the manufacturing community remain very concerned
not about having no exports, but about going too fast. So we
are in a situation of balancing that. We have to look at the
cumulative impacts of exports. I might add, you know, there is
this view of somehow not doing enough or something. But I might
add----
Mr. Hall. Are delays----
Mr. Moniz. But I might add that, so far, the conditional
approvals--again, we all know that gas will not flow for
several years yet, except for the first project. But the amount
of approval so far, 9.3 billion cubic feet per day, is almost
equal to the amount currently exported by the world's biggest
exporter by far, Qatar. So what we have approved already puts
us essentially at the top of the export list. So this is not a
small amount.
Mr. Hall. Well, I want to get back to offshore situation.
In December 2012, Congress passed, and our President signed
into law, the Deepwater Ports Act, containing authority for DOE
to create a similar and a simultaneous process for offshore
projects that would be permitted under the Department of
Transportation Maritime Administration, not for--and the land-
based projects would continue under FERC. But from what I have
been told, and I guess what I understand, the DOE is not
complying with the 2012 law change, allowing non-FERC offshore
projects. Is that true?
Mr. Moniz. Well, I don't believe so. But I will look into
this, Mr. Hall. Certainly, I know there it is a different
process using MARAD.
Mr. Hall. And if it is, what seems to be the holdup?
Mr. Moniz. My understanding is that--and, again, I will
have to get back to you on this in detail. I am sorry.
Mr. Hall. All right.
Mr. Moniz. But I think they address----
Mr. Hall. If you would----
Mr. Moniz. I will do that. Yes.
Mr. Hall. I don't know how much time--I can't see that sign
too good. But I have heard from companies that are ready for
their permits to be approved and would be able to export LNG
this year. They have global customers just waiting for these
projects to move forward, I am told. And the sooner we do this,
Mr. Secretary, the better it is going to be for our economy, I
think. And the faster we can provide stability in uneasy parts
of the world, like the Ukraine that I mentioned to start with,
I would appreciate you also looking into that and giving me
some information on it.
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. Hall. I yield back my time.
Mr. Moniz. Thank you. May I add one comment on that?
Mr. Hall. Yes, sir. Please.
Mr. Moniz. Just to note that in a certain sense, we have
already had some kind of shadow exports in the sense that as
you well know 5, 6 years ago, there was the expectation of
major LNG imports to the United States. Our not having those
imports has had those cargoes go elsewhere, including to
Europe.
Mr. Hall. And we have European allies that are losing their
bargaining power with Russia.
Mr. Moniz. Yes. Last week, in fact it was announced in
Europe--and Tuesday--Wednesday--what is today? Yesterday, there
as a meeting in Brussels. And we are going to have a meeting of
the G7 energy ministers to look at our collective energy
security.
Mr. Hall. All right. And I thank you. And I yield back, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time, I
will recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Secretary, thank you
for your tremendous leadership over at DOE. I am very pleased
to see the administration's request for an increase in the
energy efficiency renewable energy account. While I know you
were just criticized for that, I for one am very pleased with
that outcome for many reasons, including the promising
opportunities for clean energy, improvements in energy
efficiency, domestic manufacturing and certainly for
modernizing the grid and making it more secure and resilient.
One of the key technologies that will enable much of this
is of course energy storage. I firmly believe if we can make
better batteries and energy storage systems, we will advance in
many of the areas more expeditiously in those areas that I have
just mentioned.
I know this area of research and development is part of the
vehicles technology work at the Department of Energy and that
you are doing it very well. How close are we to getting energy
storage systems that will enable us to rely more heavily with
the opportunity for storage with our solar and wind power?
Mr. Moniz. Well, if I start with the vehicle storage that
you mentioned, we should note that costs per kilowatt of
storage have dropped by a factor of two in about 4 years, which
is very encouraging. We need another factor of two or three to
really get to the cost point of a major commercial market,
although we are seeing tremendous progress. We did have almost
100,000 plug-in hybrid sales last year, for example, double
2012. So that is looking very promising over the next, say, 10
years.
On utility scale storage, we produced a report. If you
haven't seen it, we would be happy to provide it, on utility
scale storage a few months ago. Let us get that to you if you
haven't see it. We have a ways to go to reach the cost points
that one will need. We did have a budget increase request for
fiscal year 2015.
Mr. Tonko. Right. And I know that GE in my district is
working on advanced battery manufacturing that will address
storage capacity for renewables.
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. Does DOE have some demonstration projects
underway with these systems?
Mr. Moniz. I am not personally aware, but I will check back
on that. I am just not aware, Mr. Tonko.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. OK. As you well know, the electric generation
and transmission systems that make up the grid are undergoing
tremendous changes due to many factors, including an increased
deployment of distributed generation, retirement of old
generating plants, shifts in the areas with electricity demand,
and certainly shifts in fuel mix, to name a few. I believe
energy storage could play an important role in a newly designed
grid that is more flexible, resilient and efficient. But these
developments will also challenge the traditional financing
model for utilities. Is the Department looking at both the
technical and non-technical barriers to deployment of clean
energy technologies, and the challenges that--the challenge
that is presented to our current grid infrastructure and
traditional financing models?
Mr. Moniz. Yes. That is a very important point. Thank you.
We are looking at this in a number of ways. In particular,
again, the Quadrennial Energy Review for this year, is entirely
focused on the transmission, storage and distribution of
energy, both electricity and fuels. It is a key issue. Clearly,
there is technology involved with the grid making phase or
measurements, et cetera. But a lot of it is policy, including
State policy as to how one does that. The other point I would
mention is--and again, you are completely on the mark as far as
I am concerned--is business models are challenged as we look
forward to distributed generation, smarter grids.
But also, I might add, the anticipation that we will
continue to have no or very, very modest demand growth as our
efficiency actions take hold. And so we are trying to think
through how do we see a transformation happening in a period
of, let us say, flat demand.
Mr. Tonko. Um-hum. In your testimony, you also talked about
the impact on the utilities with experiences like Hurricane
Sandy in New York. Given our recent experiences and the
prospect of more storms of this type as a result of climate
change, is this something the administration sees as a key
component of climate adaptation?
Mr. Moniz. Absolutely. And we have in our budge, in fact, a
proposals for increasing our emergency response capacity that
we exercise under FEMA. That would include, for example,
setting up an emergency response room for energy
infrastructure. And it also would be a good investment to have
a DOE person assigned to each of the FEMA regions so that the
energy issues are understood upfront, and that can cut time out
from any response to an emergency.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Moniz. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. And I thank you for your efforts. Mr. Chair, I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, on
July 31 of last year, you testified before this committee, and
you said, and I quote, ``We had made very clear we follow the
law. The law will be determined by this Court decision that we
are all awaiting. And if it directs the NRC to pick up the
license, we will do our job to support that, given
appropriations.'' Your quotation. On November 19 of last year,
the DC Circuit Court observed that the DOE is not following the
law, noting that DOE's current strategy, and I quote, ``is
based on assumptions directly contrary to the law.''
The Court ordered you to, and I quote, ``submit to Congress
a proposal to change the fee to zero until such a time as
either the Secretary''--that is you--``chooses to comply with
the Act as it is currently written, or until Congress''--that
is us--``enacts an alternative waste management plan.''
Does the administration have any plans to resume work on
Yucca Mountain and comply with the law, which is the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act, as it is currently written?
Mr. Moniz. Well, first, of course, we did submit the letter
to the Congress on I think January 3 on the--
Mr. Shimkus. Well, the question is, does the administration
have any plans to resume work on Yucca Mountain and comply with
the Nuclear Waste Policy Act as it is currently written--as it
is currently written?
Mr. Moniz. Yes. Secondly----
Mr. Shimkus. What is the answer?
Mr. Moniz. In terms of the Court decision with the NRC, of
course. They have resumed their activity. We are supporting
that as I said we would. So we will in fact probably have our
technical----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, I am going to follow through, because I
think we have got questions and testimony in your budget
submission that adequately will prove that you are not
complying and following with the law. The administration's
budget indicates the need for legislation to carry out your DOE
strategy for spent nuclear fuel management, especially
considering it is based on assumptions directly contrary to
law. Is the administration going to propose legislation?
Mr. Moniz. I would have to go consult with my colleagues on
that. I am not aware of anything at the moment.
Mr. Shimkus. So let me get this straight. The
administration doesn't like the existing law and is choosing
not to execute it. So the administration wants Congress to
write a new law that it might like better, but won't propose to
Congress what that new law should look like? And in the
meantime, you want to keep spending taxpayer's money on your
strategy, even after the DC Circuit Court noted that it is
based upon assumptions directly contrary to law, and has
directed DOE--that is you--to stop collecting the nuclear waste
fees from electricity consumers. If the administration won't
follow the law on the books, why should we have any confidence
that you will follow a new law?
Mr. Moniz. First, I would like to note that as was stated
publicly in a Senate hearing, I did in fact work with the
committee in terms of shaping a proposal----
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Secretary, this is a budget hearing----
Mr. Moniz. And----
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. And what we are trying to find
out is why you are not submitting money to comply with the law.
Mr. Moniz. And----
Mr. Shimkus. And by not submitting money in your proposed
budget, in conclusion, you are directing your Agency to not
follow the law.
Mr. Moniz. If I may add, I am also happy to work with this
body to formulate any bill. Secondly, we have more than
adequate funding right now to do all the responses that might
be called for from the NRC to support their process. As I said,
we expect our first report to be submitted very soon, probably
the end of this month. And, third, our budget request is for
all activities, which are authorized under the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act.
Mr. Shimkus. In the context of DOE's assurances that it
would follow the law, you, DOE, has repeatedly committed to
this committee that DOE would honor the NRC's November 19
Order, both in correspondence and in hearings, including your
testimony that I noted earlier. As recently as January 9 letter
to this committee, DOE stated it would honor NRC's request,
complete a groundwater supplement to Yucca Mountain EIS.
However, on February 28, you, DOE, notified NRC that it would
not prepare the EIS supplement. Why did DOE change its mind
over those seven weeks, and was your commitment to this
committee even a factor in that decision?
Mr. Moniz. Again, the core activity that we need to do for
NRC is updating the technical issues on groundwater. The--
Mr. Shimkus. I have 15 seconds. Let me just go to a
statement you have in your testimony.
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. You say, ``and a consent-based citing.'' Where
in the Nuclear Waste Policy Act is there a--any--the words
anywhere ``consent-based citing''? Where is it in the law?
Mr. Moniz. I would have to go back to my general counsel to
answer that question.
Mr. Shimkus. Oh, come on, Mr. Secretary, you know that
consent-based citing is not in the Nuclear Waste Policy Act.
And that is why your job is to comply with the laws of the
land, and you continually thwart doing that. I yield back my
time.
Mr. Moniz. Well, we believe we are complying.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time, I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Secretary Moniz,
welcome you back to our committee. I also want to thank you for
your recent trip to Houston and speaking to our Senator
conference there. The budget we are discussing today has a
significant impact on the activities you witnessed in Houston.
I want to start by asking you about pending LNG export
applications. On March the 24th, the DOE approved the seventh
non-FTA application for the Jordan Cove energy to be located on
the west coast. This approval came within six weeks after the
approval of the Cameron location from Louisiana. The--in
October of 2013, the Government was shut down for 17 days. The
Department repeatedly stated due to the shutdown, the
operations of the Agency significantly slowed down.
My first question is has the Department fully recovered and
staffed up from the delay, and does the fiscal year 2015 budget
include this?
Mr. Moniz. Well, yes. We are fully operational.
Mr. Green. OK. Does the six week approval of Jordan Cove
reflect this recovery?
Mr. Moniz. Well, each license is a little bit different in
terms of the timing. But I think if you look historically, you
can see what the timing has been post-shut down.
Mr. Green. OK. Will the Department continue to move at this
pace?
Mr. Moniz. Well, again, I cannot make a prediction on any
individual application. But our process, as you know, is well
known. It has been very transparent. Not everyone is happy with
it apparently, but it is a pretty transparent process. And we
have managed to now to get through--well, in my tenure, I think
5 of these licenses.
Mr. Green. Once FERC issues the environmental assessment,
what steps or analysis does the DOE take with respect to the
final issuance of the non-FTA's work permit?
Mr. Moniz. Well, when it comes back to the Department, then
we obviously look at the NEPA statement. There is a decision to
be made as to whether any other analysis is required. But that
is something that we haven't faced yet, at least I haven't
faced yet. But--so we are expecting to get some of these NEPA
analyses back from FERC this spring.
Mr. Green. Well, and you know the history of the--we first
thought we were going to import LNG in '05. And now we are
using that '05 law to export it. And there is I guess some
interest in expanding exporting, and there is legislation to
consider it.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mr. Green. But the Department is actually, you know,
approving these permits. And there will still be a--I think the
first one probably won't be able to export until sometime next
year, which is a Cheniere facility in----
Mr. Moniz. End of next year.
Mr. Green. End of next year.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mr. Green. So even if we approved all of these permits now,
that natural gas--that LNG probably wouldn't get to someone.
And my concern is yesterday I met with a number of German
industrialists who would like to buy our natural gas. The
problem is most of those permits that have been issued, and the
ones that are on the--in line are actually contracted to send
that LNG to Asia. And I asked them, I said if you all want to
get in line, you know, you don't build an LNG permit unless you
can have some customers for it. And I know a lot of these
companies would like to have the customers in Europe as well as
Asia. So--but any way, I appreciate that. So----
Mr. Moniz. May I just comment, if----
Mr. Green. Sure.
Mr. Moniz. That the first license that was granted, the
Cheniere project that you mentioned to export at end of next
year, they do have European companies. In fact, they just
announced one with a European company contracting for the
volumes. But I want to emphasize European companies does not
necessarily mean they will deliver the cargoes to Europe.
Mr. Green. Well----
Mr. Moniz. That is up to those companies to decide.
Mr. Green. That is true. Thank you. The carbon capture and
storage is constantly discussed in the context of use and the
possibility to be used as carbon control technology under EPA
rules for utilities and refiners. The problem is that it is
still too expensive commercially to be used. This year, the
Department's budget was reduced for carbon capture and storage
by 40 percent. Does this reduced funding level indicate
Department believes CCS is commercially viable?
Mr. Moniz. No, I wouldn't reach that conclusion or the
opposite conclusion, either. I mean, I think we are continuing
to move forward with these projects. All the technologies have
been used in a commercial context. Clearly, as with any of the
new technologies, renewables as well, our job is to continue to
work on cost reduction across the board.
Mr. Green. Well, and I think we probably disagree a little
bit on commercially, you know, cost effective. But I know we
would like to do it. Mr. Chairman, I have another question I
would like to submit on American manufacturing. And I support
that in the President's budget recommending a 69 percent
increase in advanced manufacturing funding. And I would hope we
could have a response from the Department. Thank you. And I
yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. That will be given to the Department for
response. At this time, I recognize the gentleman from
Nebraska, Mr. Terry, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here today. I noted in the budget that the
lowest sub-agency or department--lowest funded is the electric
delivery and energy reliability. And so could you give me
quickly the mission statement of that sub-agency, electric
delivery and energy reliability?
Mr. Moniz. It has two--I would say two principle roles. One
is to develop and--in the Recovery Act period, to also deploy
critical technologies for 21st century grid modernization. So
for example, they did a tremendous amount in terms of doing
phase measurements to understand stability of the grid, working
with the utilities and ISOs, actually. The second area is the
one that I did mention earlier on strengthening emergency
response capabilities. So the principle organization for our
work on emergency response under FEMA is in that office.
Mr. Terry. Can you tell me how this Department or DOE then,
on reliability and delivery, works with FERC and--I am sorry,
EPA, or do they?
Mr. Moniz. Well, obviously, we all have different
responsibilities. We certainly coordinate. As an example,
Acting Chairman LaFleur from FERC has come over twice for us to
discuss the risks that have been very prominent recently around
physical attacks on infrastructure.
Mr. Terry. Yes. And that is going to be my next question.
Mr. Moniz. OK. So----
Mr. Terry. But how about with EPA?
Mr. Moniz. And with EPA, we have many, many discussions.
Often, what we do is provide kind of technical--underpinning
technical support in areas that they are considering. We
collaborate on things like the interagency methane strategy, et
cetera.
Mr. Terry. Yes, the methane strategy is an interesting one,
too. Now, I will disagree slightly in part with Mr. Waxman on
market forces being simply prices, because sometimes energy
feed stock sources are regional. For example, Nebraska, being a
couple-hour train ride for Powder River Basin coal, and so
therefore Nebraska's heavily reliant on that level of coal. But
it appears that some of the rules that the EPA is promulgating
would force some of those smaller, older power--coal-fired
power plants to spend more than the building or facility is
worth to change to natural gas, or close. So I want to know if
the electric delivery and energy reliability department sub-
agency is working with EPA to figure out reliability when we
have large gaps in production electrical generation in States
like Nebraska if these rules become permanent?
Mr. Moniz. I would say that there are three places in the
Department that address these kinds of issues.
Mr. Terry. All right.
Mr. Moniz. I mean, one of course is EIA just on a purely
data basis.
Mr. Terry. Right.
Mr. Moniz. The Office of Electricity, as we mentioned. But
the third, and in some sense maybe the most active at the
moment in the way you are mentioning is the Energy Policy and
Systems Analysis Office, because in this Quadrennial Energy
Review, in which they play a key role, this whole question of
reliability and resilience of energy infrastructure is the
focus area for this year.
Mr. Terry. OK. And in that regard, and what happened in
California, the Department, do they do a risk assessment on the
vulnerability of the powered grid, either by an attack that
occurred out in California, or even at a higher level that
seems to be the rage in a lot of TV shows, EMPs?
Mr. Moniz. Well, on the first part, we have worked together
with Homeland Security and State agencies, the Deputy Secretary
in particular. We have had 13 regional meetings to address the
issues of physical security. We work with utilities very
closely. The utilities have done probably more than has been
acknowledged in the press already, but there is a ways to go.
The last of these meetings was just a week ago Friday, in fact,
in New York. That was the last of the 13 meetings. EMPs is on
the screen.
In our look at resiliency of infrastructure, both
electricity and fuels, we are trying to start an analysis based
on integrated sets of risks. So it is extreme weather. It is
cyber. It is physical. It is EMPs. And it is the
interdependencies of infrastructures as a risk in and of
itself.
Mr. Terry. Yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time, I will recognize the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Capps, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Moniz, for being here today for your testimony. I am
a longtime supporter of the Department of Energy's efforts to
develop clean, renewable energy technologies. And of the many
renewables out there, wind and solar are obviously the furthest
along. But there are some other promising renewables in the
works, including marine and hydrokinetic or MHK technologies.
As you know, Federal investments are crucial to advancing
these technologies to commercial viability. And I will quote
the DOE, as you stated in your 2015 budget justification. ``DOE
plays a critical role in MHK technologies because of their
nascent stage of development, which is similar to that of wind
and solar technologies 20 years ago.
I have three questions around this topic, pretty specific
or brief, if you will. Could you expand upon this point
briefly? Why is DOE's involvement so important for developing
these technologies at this early stage?
Mr. Moniz. Well, I think as you said, as with others, the
early stage is very hard to attract private sector funding, at
least if it is not leveraged with some public funding.
Mrs. Capps. You can recall that I--perhaps I can--that I
raised this issue with you last September during a hearing as
well. And you responded by saying that DOE was looking for ways
to increase support, just as you just did, for what you
referred to as these forgotten renewables, if you will. Given
this perspective, I was puzzled to see a 25 percent decrease
for MHK in DOE's budget request this year. This was
particularly troubling when compared to the 20 percent increase
for the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, EERE, office
overall. So what is with this divergence? Why did the
relatively small MHK budget get such a sharp reduction?
Mr. Moniz. Well, we did increase in terms of the other
renewables, geothermal and in water.
Mrs. Capps. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Moniz. Within water, what the program did was rebalance
because it was viewed as the relatively near term major micro-
hydro opportunity. So they rebalanced. But, you know, I have
said already I am happy to reexamine the balance of that with
Members who are interested.
Mrs. Capps. I appreciate that, because I would like to
question, you know, and say I like the old balance before. Some
of my research companies do as well. It wouldn't take much to
make a really big difference for these MHK industries right in
such a critical time, as you know, in their development.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mrs. Capps. I encourage the Department to make these
investments, if you can. But even with this limited funding, I
applaud you for making such good progress. In my district
alone, DOE has funded two promising ocean energy projects, a
local company called Aquantis is leveraging DOE investments to
develop a cutting edge turbine to harness energy from ocean
currents. And Cal Poly University in San Los Obispo in my
district received funding to start planning a promising wave
energy demonstration off--a project off the coast of
California--central coast. I am proud to say that Cal Poly is
one of only two projects selected in the country.
Now, I want to ask you if DOE plans to provide continued
support for these demonstration projects to help them get up
and running. Is that critical as we--you acknowledge and I
agree that what they call they dark phase of trying to attract
funding from the outside when you----
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mrs. Capps. But so much promise is held there in this area.
What are the next steps?
Mr. Moniz. Well, I can assure you, first of all, I will go
back and look at those projects. I am not up to the--on the
specifics. And will get back to you in terms how that looks
going forward.
Mrs. Capps. Excellent. I appreciate that.
Mr. Moniz. Right.
Mrs. Capps. Because I believe, as many of the folks who
have done the research in my district have demonstrated to me,
this holds great promise for the future. But it isn't yet to
that stage that solar and wind are now even.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum. Yes. It is longer term.
Mrs. Capps. That is right. And so I would encourage you to
explore in this direction. And I thank you very much for being
here.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady yields back the balance of
her time. Are you----
Mrs. Capps. Yes. Oh, I am sorry. I do. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. At this time, I recognize the gentleman
from Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Secretary,
thanks again for being with us today. And I know that I think
from the last time you were here, I mentioned this before, but
I think it is worth mentioning again because we all have to
look at who we represent. I represent about 60,000
manufacturing jobs in northwest and west central Ohio, and
recently I have heard from one of my constituent companies out
there--and it is a large manufacturer--that they are in a
voluntary curtailment contract with a local utility. In the
years past, the agreement with the utility has amounted to some
small savings for that company during these demands, during the
peak periods. But recently, the curtailments have often not
really given any savings, because they have been actually cut
back because we have had a pretty tough winter in Ohio and
utilities are asked to, you know, do what they could. So they
asked the companies. So it is important in these cases, because
the minor savings that they had enjoyed are gone now. And it is
also important that, because of that, they have lost production
time, which means that if folks aren't working, people aren't
bringing home a paycheck. And the employees of course got
reduced hours. And then of course when you put that in--when
people take their paychecks home with the increased electrical
bills and more expensive healthcare premiums and things like
that, it is pretty tough.
So my concern and the concern of the manufacturers that I
represent is that the problems today are only going to get
worse as more and more of our coal-powered generation units are
being retired as a result of the administration's regulations.
And it is also important to note, again, in Ohio that 78
percent of our energy in Ohio is coal based. And in some parts
of the State, particularly in my area, it is even greater than
that 78 percent.
So my first question is, What will DOE do, and you, to
ensure that this Nation's manufacturers have access to reliable
and affordable electricity going forward? And again, a lot of
my manufacturers are ones out there that really need that base
load capacity because they run forges and everything else. So
what can we expect in the future from the DOE?
Mr. Moniz. Well, basically, I would say ``all of the
above'' is part of addressing the electricity system, not only
the electricity but certainly in that area. The fact is I think
rates in general for consumers have come down with the natural
gas revolution. And of course, that has also stimulated more
manufacturing. Again, we have had perhaps $125 billion invested
in new manufacturing capacity directly associated with the
natural gas revolution. We will continue to work on the
technology side to drive costs down for all of the energy
sources and also, as was mentioned earlier, storage eventually
to help with variable sources. And we will continue to--in this
budget request, we will continue to have a major focus on
trying to develop the foundational technologies for our
advanced manufacturing future.
Mr. Latta. Well, and I agree that we are seeing an
explosion out there on the natural gas side, which is
tremendous for our country. But in Ohio, we are very fortunate.
In the eastern side of the State, we do have the Utica Shale.
And of course, in Pennsylvania, you have Marcellus. But we just
can't retrofit these plants. You know, the costs would almost
be the costs of building a new plant in the retrofits. So these
costs are going to be passed along to these manufacturers. So
don't you agree that our manufacturers out there, to stay
competitive across the world, have to have utility rates that
are competitive, not just here in this country but across the
world?
Mr. Moniz. Well, and I think that is what we are seeing. We
are seeing that the whole mentality internationally has changed
about now the United States being a kind of a manufacturing
center increasingly. And a large part of that is because of our
energy costs. So maintaining that edge is----
Mr. Latta. Let me ask this. I know my time has run out. I
just have one last question for you. If you would see that EPA
regulations out there are going to impair electricity
reliability and raise rates, would you raise those concerns
directly to the EPA?
Mr. Moniz. Well, again, obviously, we communicate. But
especially this year in this Quadrennial Energy Review, it will
be looking across the administration in an integrated way at
how we maintain and sustain and develop energy infrastructure
that serves the goals that you have stated.
Mr. Latta. Mr. Chairman, I see my time has expired, and I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time, I recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Doyle,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Secretary Moniz,
welcome to the committee. It is a pleasure to have you here.
Mr. Secretary, the National Energy Technology Lab budget is
something that I have a particular interest in. And as you may
know, my colleagues on both sides of the aisle have asked the
appropriators that the NETL be funded at 775.5 million for
fiscal year 2015. And of course, the President's budget has a
number that is much, much lower than that. I wonder if you
could elaborate on the administration's vision for the NETL as
it relates to the President's fiscal year 2015 budget request,
and could you hypothesize about the effects of the President's
proposed budget on both research and jobs in southwestern
Pennsylvania and West Virginia as it relates to the NETL?
Mr. Moniz. Well, NETL, as you well know, and Mr. McKinley
as well knows, is our lead fossil energy laboratory. It does
have an unusual structure compared to our other laboratories in
having Federal employees as opposed to contractor employees. I
certainly remain committed to, in particular, to be honest, try
to continue to build up the research and development activity
within the laboratory. I think that we have room to increase
that. And as one example in our budget submission this year, an
area where NETL certainly has an interest in and strength is in
something like methane hydrates where we proposed an increase I
think from 5 to 15 million dollars, you know, because this
could be--we don't know. But in a couple decades, this could be
the new shale gas going forward. So those are the things that I
will be looking at.
Mr. Doyle. Yes, thank you. And since Mr. McKinley is asking
questions next, I am sure he will follow-up on NETL. I would
like to move to CCS though. The Department's carbon capture and
storage roadmap, which is the blueprint for DOE CCS investments
notes that the Agency is developing the advanced technology
platforms needed to prove that CCS can be a viable climate
mitigation strategy.
Mr. Secretary, I would like to take this opportunity to
hear more about the current status of DOE CCS research
development and demonstration efforts. And in your view, if you
could tell us what role CCS technologies play in the future of
coal in this country and around the world? And also, while you
are addressing that, we know that EPA has proposed pollution
standards for new coal fired plants that would effectively
require such plants to use partial CCS. Some members of this
committee have asserted that CCS just isn't feasible for coal
fired plants at this time. Dr. Julio Friedmann from your
Department testified in an O&I Subcommittee that first
generation CCS technologies are proven and commercially
available for coal fired power plants right now. A plant owner
can go out and buy them today with performance. Can you tell me
first if you agree with that assessment, and then maybe
elaborate on the Department's efforts with CCS?
Mr. Moniz. Certainly. Again, the technologies are available
today. They have all been used in a number of venues. And as I
said earlier, as with all of our new technologies, we remain
focused on technology development for further cost reduction.
In terms of our program, we have right now eight major
projects. And I would note that most of them are actually CCUS
where the U is for utilization of the carbon dioxide, in this
case through enhanced oil recovery, which obviously then gives
you a monetary return for the CO
2
.
Mr. Doyle. But isn't it true that in certain parts of the
country, that is just not possible because--shared oil there?
Mr. Moniz. Correct. Sure. So that is not--in fact, in
particular it is no accident that, of the eight major projects
that we have, the two that do not have utilization are in
Illinois, where that is not such an attractive option.
Mr. Doyle. Yes.
Mr. Moniz. Although I might say there have been many
interesting discussions about if and when one goes to a system
with lots of capture plants around the country, including in
the Midwest and western Pennsylvania, et cetera, that there is
a lot of interest in building an infrastructure of
CO
2
that would go down to the Gulf and then over
towards the Rocky Mountains to have a major CO
2

infrastructure.
Mr. Doyle. Do you think----
Mr. Moniz. That is in the future.
Mr. Doyle. Do you think, though, that CCS technology in
areas like western Pennsylvania where there isn't oil to
recover--if there isn't a recovery part to help pay for the
costs that it is still economically and commercially viable in
those areas?
Mr. Moniz. Well, look. I think we are going to have to keep
working to, again, drive costs down. And besides the
demonstration projects today, which are using basically today's
technology, we also have--including in ARPE-E, et cetera,
programs to look at new technologies that can have
substantially lower costs. I think the research program for
these novel technologies, next-generation technologies, is in a
very early stage.
Mr. Doyle. Yes. Mr. Secretary, thank you. I think that CCS
is a key to the administration's all-of-the-above strategy if
we are going to have one.
Mr. Moniz. It is.
Mr. Doyle. And I would encourage you to keep the
investments going. Thank you.
Mr. Moniz. Yes. We will.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Dr. Burgess, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, thank
you so much for being here and your forbearance today. Let us
stay on the all-of-the-above strategy concept for just a
moment. I think we have a slide that shows the Office of Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy in comparison to other aspects
of the--of your energy budget.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. And it is--looking at the bar graph, it is
pretty--it is hard to read the writing. But ERE is the big one.
And everything else are the small ones. So ERE just absolutely
overwhelms like nuclear energy, more traditional fossil energy
and more traditional sources of energy. So it seems like the
Office of Nuclear Energy, Fossil Energy and Electricity would
have critical roles to play in shaping the future energy policy
of the United States. Would--is that a fair statement?
Mr. Moniz. It is. I could comment on the graph, however,
and note that EERE, we might think of as two programs,
efficiency and renewables.
Mr. Burgess. And I am glad you brought that up, because I
wished you would. And I believe in energy efficiency.
Mr. Moniz. Right.
Mr. Burgess. And sometimes coupling it with renewable
energy in fact distracts us from the validity and the
importance of energy efficiency.
Mr. Moniz. Right.
Mr. Burgess. No one of either political party is going to
run on a platform of wasting energy.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mr. Burgess. So energy efficiency is one of the things that
I should think we should put high on our list. So in fact for
future graphs, I would appreciate the ability to tease out what
is renewable energy and what are the gains that we can have
from expanded energy efficiency.
Mr. Moniz. And----
Mr. Burgess. You were starting to answer. I will let you
finish.
Mr. Moniz. And I want to let you know, I am just going to
add that in the budget request for fiscal year 2015, in fact,
energy efficiency is actually the largest of the proposed
increases.
Mr. Burgess. Let us--and will you be able to--can you
provide us those figures?
Mr. Moniz. Sure.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burgess. OK. Thank you. And we don't need to go into it
now, but if you could make that available? I think that would
be helpful. And I have got a series of questions that might in
fact then not be necessary looking at those numbers. I have got
some questions. The homebuilders back home are really
concerned. You have got energy building codes that were
developed by the Department of Energy and authorized to serve
as the technical advisor during the development of the codes.
Your role has expanded over time. And now, it has almost moved
into the point of advocacy. The Department of Energy
representatives even pursue what are very aggressive energy
goals that actually increase the cost of housing by having to
meet these requirements. Is that something that you are willing
to take a look at?
Mr. Moniz. I--yes. I am not familiar with that. I will look
at it.
Mr. Burgess. I can provide you information that has been
provided to me by homebuilders in north Texas.
Mr. Moniz. That would be----
Mr. Burgess. But apparently, it has been--the requirements
have been out there for some time. The world has changed around
them. But the net effect is we are expending a lot of money to
meet those requirements on technologies that aren't adding that
much to energy efficiency but really do drive the cost of
construction when other things might be a more reasonable
expenditure. So I will make that information available to your
office.
Mr. Moniz. Thank you.
Mr. Burgess. And I would appreciate your response on that.
Mr. Moniz. OK.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With that, I am going
to yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time, I
will recognize the gentlelady from the Virgin Islands, Dr.
Christensen, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, Mr.
Secretary. We are really excited to have you here to discuss
the 2015 budget for the Department of Energy.
In order to meet the President's clean energy targets by
2020, we must continue to support the development and the
deployment of new innovative clean energy technologies, but we
also much encourage initiatives that support families to make
any change that they can at the household level to make to
increase efficiency. So I am pleased to see that the
weatherization assistance program has been designated a 31
percent increase in funding. And I hope this continues to be a
priority item as it serves critical needs in my district where
residential rate pairs are charged over 51 cents per kilowatt
and commercial over 55 cents. And I know you have heard me say
that before.
The weatherization program allows our local energy office
to assist low-income families to reduce their energy costs by
providing new efficient refrigerators, solar water heaters, air
conditioning, different bulbs and similar improvements which
may seem small for some but go a long way in our small and
tightknit communities. It is also a great benefit to the local
vendors that provide the products and service for the program.
The State energy program is another key program that we
really depend on a lot to provide energy programs for the
general public, and we want to thank--I want to thank you for
your support of these two important programs.
I want to go back to climate change for a minute. And much
has been said about the intergovernmental panel on climate
change and their new report that was reported earlier this week
that described the impact of climate change on our natural
environment but also warns about the impacts on human health
and safety. The scientists identified several key risks. One is
risk of death, injury, ill-health or disruptive livelihoods in
low-lying coastal zones and small island developing States like
mine, and other small islands due to storm surges, coastal
flooding and sea level rise.
When I was here earlier, you talked about the threats to
utilities and water supplies. Mr. Secretary, would you agree
that the potential impacts of climate change pose a human
health and safety risk to people who live along coastal areas
or islands as well?
Mr. Moniz. Certainly. And islands of course are often quite
exposed. Um-hum.
Mrs. Christensen. Yes. Periods of extreme heat pose public
health risks, too. How worried should we be that heat waves
resulting from--about the heat waves resulting from unchecked
climate change?
Mr. Moniz. Well, again, I think what we see are more
extremes, both hot and cold. We also have the polar vortex, in
fact, recently.
Mrs. Christensen. Yes. And the IPPC report also warns that
extreme weather events, as you said, will become more frequent
as the climate warms, will damage infrastructure and critical
services. Given all of these potential impacts, would you
characterize climate change as also a critical public health
challenges, not only an environmental challenge?
Mr. Moniz. Yes, it is an environment, economy, health and
security challenge.
Mrs. Christensen. OK. A lot of times when we talk about,
you know, moving to a greener economy and renewable fuels, the
talk is about the cost and jobs and economic damage. But we
never take into account the public health cost. And so I just
wanted to focus on public health in my questioning.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. And thank you
for being here.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady yields back. At this time, I
will recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Moniz, how are
you?
Mr. Moniz. Hello.
Mr. Cassidy. Listen. In am following up with something that
Mr. Hall asked earlier regarding the offshore deep water port
facilities for liquefied natural gas. Now, as I am told--I was
in another meeting. I was told that you had mentioned kind of a
lack of familiarity with it, but you would look into it. Now,
my concern is that I have here a letter dated October the 18th,
2013, from Mr. Jonathan Levy, Deputy Chief of Staff of the
Office of the Secretary of the DOE, and he was requesting that
the--that there would be a parallel process to review these
offshore LNG terminals as opposed to the FERC terminals. Now,
since we are looking to see how we can expedite the approval of
these processes, and I gather in the FERC process, whichever
comes off next is the one that you review next, clearly, we
have something which is outside FERC. It is a parallel agency.
And this seems something that again the secretary suggested
that you all would set up the parallel process.
So with that introduction, it is kind of troubling to me
that you would not be familiar with it. It tells me that if the
letter came October 18--and it refers actually to another
letter from 2012--that this would not be a priority for your
agency. And if it is not a priority, it is probably not going
to happen. Can you reassure me regarding my concerns?
Mr. Moniz. And as I said to Mr. Hall, I think, I will
certainly go back and look at this whole issue of the MARAD
approvals in the queue.
Mr. Cassidy. Yes, if you could, because, frankly, it seems
like a parallel process is indicated, particularly if we are
trying to make export of LNG a priority. And, again, my
concern, the fact that it is kind of an unknown issue suggests
that it is not a priority. Those are jobs in my State.
Mr. Moniz. No. To clarify--I mean, I am certainly aware of
the issue of the MARAD approvals in lieu of FERC approvals for
that. I just have to go back and look at where we stand in that
discussion.
Mr. Cassidy. OK.
Mr. Moniz. I don't want to give misinformation.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. Thank you. Let me change gears to mixed
oxide fuel fabrication. Does that plant on the--in South
Carolina, I gather that the Department of Energy is seeking to
put in I would call it mothball. I think it is called cold
standby. Now, it is my understanding that this was not supposed
to be done because Congress had indicated that this process
should be created, that we are now 60 percent through with the
process and it is going to cost a certain amount of money to
put it in cold standby that actually could be used for the
completion of the project. So if--but again, I gather that it
is being shut down, if you will, because if your concerned
about the cost. Can you give us that cost analysis to put the
facility into the cold shutdown? How much will it cost to do
so?
Mr. Moniz. Oh, well, first of all, there are several
analyses about the large lifecycle cost, which are frankly all
converging to this $30 billion or so.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, I am told there is a----
Mr. Moniz. Like----
Mr. Cassidy. I am sorry. I don't--limited time. I am sorry.
I am told there is a GAO report that pegs it at 24 billion.
Mr. Moniz. Yes. So the GAO said 24 billion. But it
acknowledged that it had left things out and suggested it was
likely to be higher. And so I think I would put them and the
DOE analysis and the Army Corps of Engineers' analysis of the
facility are all consistent in terms----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, I am told that that Army Corps analysis
is not yet public. Are--is that going to be made public?
Mr. Moniz. I anticipate it will be. Yes. It was not full
lifecycle. That was for the capital facility.
Mr. Cassidy. Uh-huh.
Mr. Moniz. But on that part, it was in line--in fact, a
little bit higher than our estimate. So again, the approach was
that $30 billion lifecycle looks pretty hard to sustain. So we
felt that in the fiscal year 2015 budget, we proposed roughly
$220 million for an options analysis to make sure in the end
the administration and the Congress have to come together to
decide, you know, how are we going to dispose of this
plutonium. Is a $30 billion project the way to go? The
standby----
Mr. Cassidy. So is there--I am almost out of time. So if
there is an alternative, has the alternative been identified?
And if so, what would be the lifecycle cost of the alternative?
Mr. Moniz. There was a National Academy report in the 1990s
that identified 31 alternatives. We have restricted that to
four or five. Some are reactor alternatives. Some are non-
reactor alternatives. Our initial look suggests that some of
these are as expensive, but some may not be. So that is what we
need to work up and come to the Congress with in terms of the
path forward. We want to make sure that in the standby, nothing
is irreversible, because MOX remains an option in the suite.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. I am out of time. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. AT this time, the Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair. And welcome back, Secretary
Moniz.
Mr. Moniz. Thank you.
Mr. Olson. My questions today will focus on the nuclear
power workforce, grid challenges during disasters and, for a
change, LNG exports.
First, the energy nuclear power workforce. The South Texas
Project in Bay City, Texas, is key to the Gulf Coast grid. It
provides reliable, affordable power to the entire Houston area.
It has been doing that since 1988. However, STP is dealing with
an aging workforce. Workers are retiring, and there aren't
enough qualified replacements. Now, Wharton County Junior
College is stepping up to the challenge, led by the great
president, Betty McCrohan. Wharton has opened a fourth campus
in Bay City. And with the help of the Matagorda County Judge,
Nate McDonald, they are offering 2-year degrees, associate
degrees, in three nuclear power specialties. I would love to
have you come down and see that facility some time, if you are
going by the South Texas plant.
But nationally, nuclear power workers and STEM aren't as
exciting as 4-year liberal arts degrees. And that concerns me.
I am proud. I graduated from Rice University and from UT Law
School. But lawyers like me who never practice law and liberal
arts majors are great with pens and paper but terrible with
fixing combined cycle gas turbines. And so my question is, What
do you see when we look at our energy workforce? Is there
anything DOE can do in its budget relating to finding the next
generation of scientists, engineers or high-tech construction
workers?
Mr. Moniz. I think, you know, we do have somewhat limited
authorities in terms of direct educational programs. But I
think this issue of workforce in a number of areas is of
relevance to the Department's missions. It is a major
challenge. By the way, we have the same issue in some of our
laboratories in terms of the nuclear workforce. So we would
like to work to find ways to focus on core disciplines--core
areas of relevance to the energy space where we might look at
increasing things like internship programs, traineeship
programs, that kind of activity. Because I agree. In fact, Mr.
Rush mentioned earlier in terms of the Minorities in Energy--we
need more people coming into the workforce. And that is only
going to be helped if we work across the entire spectrum,
gender, race, et cetera. So I would be happy to work with you.
And----
Mr. Olson. By yourself or----
Mr. Moniz. I would send Pete Lyons up to see you.
Mr. Olson. There you go. Send him down there to Bay City,
Texas.
Mr. Moniz. Great.
Mr. Olson. My second question is about grid recovery and
disaster. The 2014 hurricane season starts June 1. My hometown
of Houston, the whole area is in Hurricane Alley. As we have
seen, the grid can be very vulnerable in severe weather.
Keeping lights and air conditioning on should be a top priority
for all of us. When Hurricane Ike hit in 2008, 2 million people
lost their power. DOE's budget has some priorities I think are
interesting. You want to spend five times the amount on wind
energy, $115 million, than on energy infrastructure security
and restoration, $22.6 million. Texans love wind. We are the
number one producers of wind in America. But we also remember
America's most disastrous hurricane, the Galveston Hurricane of
1900, when over 6,000 people, minimum, were killed. Should I be
concerned by DOE's priorities here?
Mr. Moniz. Well, I think frankly we are trying to ramp up
our emergency response capability, and also our what you might
call prevention possibility through looking at--to make our
infrastructure more resilient so that if something does happen,
it doesn't go down. Or if it goes down, it comes back faster.
So that is a big focus for us. Again, we have some specific
proposals in the fiscal year 2015 budget to amplify these
capacities. One is to have a dedicated energy infrastructure
response center. It is--I forget, it is a 6 or 8 million
dollars proposal to outfit a place where we can look at the
country's infrastructure and help us in directing Federal
assets to assist with recovery. We also propose to place one
person in each of the FEMA districts to understand the region
specific issues with regard to risks. And we feel that, you
know, that having a person embedded in that way, you really
understand the local situation, and you can understand who to
call quickly. Where there are problems, you could do training,
all kinds of things. So those are two specific initiatives on
emergency response. But in addition, in the Quadrennial Energy
Review, there are basically going to be two major focuses. One
is electricity system, and the other one is the fuels
infrastructure. And on the latter, for sure, we are going to do
region by region analyses of the resilient fuels
infrastructure, because we have seen different problems in all
different parts of the country. Just recently, the propane, for
example--especially in the upper Midwest, although it went to
other parts of the country as well.
So we really are building in this area. We think it is a
high priority.
Mr. Olson. Come see Wharton County Junior College, my
friend. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I recognize the gentleman from
West Virginia, Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you again,
Mr. Secretary, for appearing before us. I want to build off a
little bit of what Mr. Green----
Mr. Whitfield. Would the gentleman move the microphone up?
Yes. Thank you.
Mr. McKinley. I have to hold it, I guess. The--I want to
build off what Doyle and Green both talked about with NETL and
CCS. The back--so the backdrop of my question is going to have
to do with that. There are folks that will contend, and maybe
justifiably, that some of the climate change involves
CO
2
emissions. I am not going to disagree there is
climate change. The question I think is how much is manmade.
Are you with me on----
Mr. Moniz. Yes, I am trying--yes, I think it----
Mr. McKinley. How much of it is manmade? So I just--just
looking at a chart that we put together. Yes. Because the
variable is the amount produced by man.
And in this chart, you see that almost 70 percent comes
from fossil fuels of the energy produced. Now, the second chart
shows that.
The second chart shows that very little is being spent in
research in fossil fuels. And if that indeed is the problem--if
fossil fuels is the problem, I don't understand why there is a
disconnect between that and the research with that, because you
can look at it. The research dollars is only around 18 percent.
But more specifically, for NETL, the fossil energy research has
been cut by over 15 percent. And importantly, the comment that
was raised over there that carbon capture, one of the keys to
the future of using fossil fuels and under some of the
regulations that are being issued by the EPA, they have cut the
research money in carbon capture by 16 percent. They have cut
the--on carbon storage by 26 percent. If we are serious about
trying to include fossil fuels in our energy matrix, I think
someone is being disingenuous about their interest in ``all of
the above.'' And rather, there truly is this war on coal. So is
this--are we--do you think the President is deliberately trying
to discredit or diminish the use of coal in America?
Mr. Moniz. Again, in terms of the R&D numbers, for example,
I respectfully feel that this does not give the full picture. I
mean, this administration is unprecedented in its investments
in coal, CCS in particular--CCUS, with $6 billion.
Mr. McKinley. OK. Then why do we see cuts of 40 and 40-some
percent with NETL? That is----
Mr. Moniz. But $6 billion in CCUS. And right now, an active
loan program solicitation of $8 billion for fossil fuels
generally. I can't get into the specifics of some of the
initial proposals. There will be more proposals.
Mr. McKinley. Mr. Secretary----
Mr. Moniz. But there is coal----
Mr. McKinley. You can appreciate, we have that 5-minute
drill we have to--we have limited ability to ask enough
questions here. But the--my focus again is over NETL. It is
providing increase research dollars into NETL. And I think it
sends a message to the laboratories, both in Pennsylvania and
West Virginia, that we are serious about them, whether that is
a chemical loop, whether that is a fracking techniques, and all
the things that have been developed at NETL that they will
continue, that they can count on, that their employment is
secure.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mr. McKinley. I think it also sends a message if we split
the proper amount of money in NETL. We are sending a strong
message to the coalminers all across America in the coalfields
that their jobs are secure, that there is a future for
coalmining. And it just eliminates the uncertainty. I am--I use
that backdrop as--for NETL. But also if we continue this attack
on coal and fossil fuels, and not put the money into the
research, if we de-carbonize America, do you really think the
health of the world will improve that much if America alone, by
itself, were to not burn fossil fuels? Do you think the health
of the world would be better?
Mr. Moniz. Well, first, let me say, I will go back and look
at the NETL program specifically. Number two, as mentioned
earlier, things like methane hydrates, I think we tripled,
which will be a NETL interest.
Mr. McKinley. Sure.
Mr. Moniz. Third, on the last question, we all recognize
that obviously the United States alone cannot change the
trajectory. But what we do is very, very important. And I
think, and the President feels----
Mr. McKinley. But wouldn't the other nations----
Mr. Moniz. And we will share leadership here.
Mr. McKinley. But, Mr. Secretary, the other nations aren't
following us. Germany is building more coal fire power houses.
So my message is until we get a global unanimous effort to try
to do this, why do we continue to attack our coal industry and
diminish it and cause uncertainty with it? I am past my time. I
am sorry. And I would go back to----
Mr. Moniz. Again, I would just say that we are making
unprecedented investments in coal, huge in scale.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time, I will recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Engel. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Secretary. I just want to first say that overall I am
satisfied with the President's fiscal year 2015 budget, the
Department of Energy. At a time of significant alarm over
climate change, I am encouraged that the budget request offers
a 2.6 increase above fiscal year 2014. And I am particularly
interested in the budgeting for alternative transportation
fuels. I want to commend you and the President for proposing a
2 billion set aside for an energy security trust, as well as
other investments in alternative fuels and energy efficiency.
For many years, I have introduced the Open Fuel Standard
Act just recently with my colleague from Florida, Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen. I have done this for the past several years with
bipartisan support from this committee. And I do believe that
this legislation will drive--help drive domestic production of
all types of alternative fuels, while decreasing our reliance
on foreign oil from hostile regimes. And it has also been the
goal of my oil and national security caucus, which is focused
on ways to reduce our dependence on foreign oil while making
the U.S. energy independent.
So, Mr. Secretary, in the past, you have mentioned electric
vehicles. Can you expand on what other types of alternative
fuels you foresee being developed and funded through the energy
security trust?
Mr. Moniz. Well, I think first of all, with regard to
vehicles, let us say very broadly, I think there are three
major thrusts on what we are trying to accomplish. One is
efficiency vehicles. Second is alternative fuels. The open fuel
standard would fit in there, of course. And third,
electrification. And we think they are all important
directions, and in fact can work together. So on the electric
vehicles, if you want to focus on that first, we of course are
continuing the battery research. But issues such as light-
weighting have very, very important implications for electric
vehicles because of range issues, et cetera. So we are pushing
on that. And yesterday, we had a discussion with the auto
suppliers of the United States in terms of the advanced vehicle
technology program at DOE. And they are noted that much of
the--almost any plug-in hybrid sold anywhere has some DOE
driven technology in it. And this provides new opportunities
for our suppliers.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. I want to just make a couple of
statements about some things pertaining to New York. And you
could submit it to me, because we only have 5 minutes. I know
there is not time. But, obviously, about Hurricane Sandy is
something that we are still feeling the pangs of in the
northeast. During that hurricane or super storm, significant
fuel supply shortages in New York City area were caused by
damages to supply train components in New Jersey. And the City
and State have no authority--regulatory authority to intervene,
and it has caused problems. I am told New York City requested
that DOE and the National Petroleum Counsel to convene a
regional working group to develop a strategy for securing
physical infrastructure like pipelines, refineries and
terminals. So I am wondering if you could submit to me--you
don't have to do it now--an update on the status of the working
group and its findings. And I also would like to ask you to
have the Agency follow-up with my office and the City to
discuss the findings, and to address some of the jurisdictional
concerns that took place after the storm.
Mr. Moniz. Certainly. I charged the National Petroleum
Counsel last October to do this fuel resiliency studies. And it
will involve as well these issues of authorities and seams in
gaps of authorities. So that is very important. And we will get
back to you--to your office.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. And, finally, I just want to mention
the whole issue of fracking and with the difficulties we are
having with Russia bullying all the neighboring countries,
whether the United States should export natural gas and other
such things. Can you address what steps DOE is taking to deal
with environmental concerns that are a result of fracking, such
as methane leaks and groundwater contamination? People in my
district get very nervous about it. I have spoken with the
people that do this. And they, you know, assure me. I have been
to Alberta. I have been to North Dakota. And they assure us
that there is no damage of any contamination. Can you tell us
what your observations are?
Mr. Moniz. Well, we have been consistently stating that the
environmental--the footprint issues of production, they are
challenging but they are manageable. The issue is you have to
manage them. And we still think there are ways to go. For
example, our Secretary of Energy Advisory Board just last
Friday, I think it was, finalized a report called FracFocus,
looking at the issues of disclosures of chemicals, et cetera,
et cetera. And while, you know, it gave some credit for
progress, it also pointed out many areas of possible
improvement. So what we are doing is, whether it is research or
it is on issues like this where we are trying to push for a
continuous improvement, best practices is absolutely critical
in all cases. So, obviously, it has been a big boom to our
economy. It will continue to be one. But we need to keep
working on the footprint. And we have an interagency methane
strategy where again we will have a lot of responsibilities,
not only in production but in things like mid and downstream
gas transportation.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I will recognize the gentleman
from Illinois, Mr. Kinzinger, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
thank you for being here, and thanks for serving your country.
In 2010, the National Insulation Association, in
conjunction with the Department of Energy, estimated that the
simple maintenance of mechanical insulation in industrial and
manufacturing plants could deliver 3.7 billion in energy
savings every year. In today's budget climate, would you agree
that it makes sense to pursue cost saving measures such as the
increase use and maintenance of mechanical insulation in
Federal buildings and facilities to help save hard-working-
taxpayer dollars and overall energy consumption?
Mr. Moniz. Absolutely. Efficiency of buildings is a major
opportunity.
Mr. Kinzinger. Has your Agency, through its Federal Energy
Management Program or any other program, ever evaluated the
potential energy savings available to Federal agencies through
the greater utilization or upgrading to mechanical insulation
in Federal facilities?
Mr. Moniz. I don't know the answer to that question, but I
will find it.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK.
Mr. Moniz. If I could get back to you----
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, would you commit to evaluating the
potential source, the energy savings?
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kinzinger. Mr. Secretary, as we have seen in this
committee and others, Russia has been wielding its energy
prowess on the world stage for some time now. Not only do they
supply the majority of natural gas to our European allies, but
they are also exporting their nuclear technology at a rapid
pace. In fact, I was recently in Hungary. And they signed
another agreement with the Russians in terms of nuclear
production. In fact, Russia has either built or is in the
process of building 36 reactors around the world. The last time
we had a chance to talk on this subcommittee, I expressed my
concerns that a vacuum of U.S. nuclear energy exports would
occur in the very near future if your Agency did not set out
clear and concise guidelines to push forward an effective
nuclear energy policy. I believe the U.S. should be the leader
in the realm of nuclear expertise. But Russia's influence in
nuclear energy exports, and therefore their geopolitical
influence, seems to be expanding beyond ours. What are you
doing, and your Agency doing, to reestablish our
competitiveness in this area?
Mr. Moniz. Well, it is a whole variety of things. One is we
did provide a loan guarantee for the new AP1000 construction
reactors in Georgia. We are pursuing of course R&D. But in
addition to that, I might say on a very different vein, when
sanctioned by the Government, we have been very active in
promoting U.S. technology abroad, including quite recently
the--I think there is a lot of promise for both Westinghouse
and GE technologies right now abroad. The fact that we are
building in this country makes a huge difference in terms of
being able to promote the technology. China is building a whole
bunch of Westinghouse reactors. But just one comment, Russia--
you mentioned Russia. I would just note that in some cases,
they do something that we can't do----
Mr. Kinzinger. Right.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. Which is essentially provide the
financing and make it a turnkey operation.
Mr. Kinzinger. Yes, and I appreciate that. And I think that
is a conversation as a Congress we have to have, and with the
administration in terms of that. Because, obviously, the
Russians are providing this financial support for a reason, for
a geopolitical advantage. So when we don't do things like that,
or we are not competitive in this arena, I think it affects us
geopolitically.
As the chairman noted earlier, and it was mentioned
earlier, I also have concerns with your decision to stop the
construction of the MOX plan in South Carolina. Beyond the
concerns I have with the decision with taxpayer money sitting
dormant on a project that is nearly 60 percent complete, I have
concerns with the impact that this will have in the realm of
non-proliferation with Russia. I have seen comments from a
former Russian official who said the decision to stop
construction of this plant is a breach of the U.S./Russian
agreement on this issue, and that Russia may decide to go their
own way since the U.S. is not following through with its end of
the deal. Did you consider the ramifications when you made this
decision? If so, why? If not, why? And if so, do you believe
this is still the correct path forward?
Mr. Moniz. First of all, those issues were very much a part
of the discussion. And I do want to emphasize, we have not
canceled the MOX project. The----
Mr. Kinzinger. The Russians think we have. So----
Mr. Moniz. Well, I would just say discussions with Russia
have changed in character over the last couple of months.
Mr. Kinzinger. Understood.
Mr. Moniz. So I did discuss this with Mr. Kirienko, head of
Rosatom, twice, as I saw the costs going up, just saying look,
this is just a heads up kind of thing. I don't know where we
are going with that yet. But what I want to emphasize is that,
as I said earlier, I think the lifecycle cost estimates are
pretty much converging to this kind of $30 billion number.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK.
Mr. Moniz. And that is a big number. And I think it is a
collective decision about what we can do.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you. And I will just end with this,
over the past decade, the EEU has pursued a broad range of
climate policies, including renewable energy subsidies for wind
and solar power. Those climate policies have led to high energy
costs in Europe. In fact, I had some interesting conversation
with some CEOs of European companies. And they are threatening
the competitiveness of many of Europe's energy intensive
industries. I just want to say in closing, I hope that raises
red flags with you, and you take a look at kind of the European
experience versus ours and act accordingly. Thank you for your
time and being here, and I yield back.
Mr. Moniz. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time, I
recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Thank you so much for being here, Mr. Secretary.
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 authorized the Clean Coal
Technology Program and certain tax credits to assist
development of the next generation clean coal technology,
including carbon capture and sequestration. My understanding of
what your discussion was earlier this morning with Congressman
Doyle was that the DOE believes these projects on carbon
capture and sequestration that are currently ongoing reflect
technology that is already in or demonstrated as viable for
commercial service in coal power plants. Is that--am I correct
in my understanding of your previous testimony?
Mr. Moniz. Yes, they are mainly using solvent technologies
that have been used before.
Mr. Griffith. So here is the Catch 22. I am not sure I
agree with you, because also, as Congressman Doyle pointed out,
unless you happen to be like the Mississippi facility right
down the road from the oil well where you are going to use the
carbon to push up the oil that they may not be commercially
viable. But the Catch 22 is that if that is accurate, the
statute makes it clear that you are not supposed to be giving
them money anymore. If they are commercially viable now, they
don't need the support from the tax credits. But you are still
giving them the tax credits, are you not?
Mr. Moniz. The issue is that this is a system integration
issue pursuing a new deployment of the whole system. So it is I
would say quite eligible.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I mean the problem is it says that this
technology has to be well beyond the level therein commercial
service or have been demonstrated as viable for commercial
service. So you are in a Catch 22 because if they are in fact
viable for commercial service, as both you and the EPA submit--
--
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. I happen to disagree they are
not eligible for the money. If they are commercially viable,
they are not eligible for the money. And so I would submit that
you all need to figure that one out, either cut the money off
or--and say that they are commercially viable, or admit that
they aren't commercially viable.
Mr. Moniz. Well----
Mr. Griffith. And I don't know that there is an answer
necessary for that. But that is the dilemma that we have is
that if you are following the code, which I always think is the
right thing to do--that is why we have a Congress. That is why
we pass laws.
Mr. Moniz. Agreed.
Mr. Griffith. This is why we have a Senate and a House that
pass them, and a President that signs them.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mr. Griffith. Is because we actually mean for people to
follow them.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mr. Griffith. If we follow the law, you can't have it both
ways. You can't say they are commercially viable, therefore
these new regs come into effect, or they aren't commercially
viable, therefore they are eligible for the tax credits. I
submit they are eligible for the tax credits, but that the EPA
has got the cart before the horse and that you need to probably
call their hand on it. That being said, let me move on because
you can't respond. And I appreciate that. And I understand
that. I am not offended by that.
The EIA has reported in February that the number of coal
fired power plant retirements will be higher than originally
anticipated, and that an estimated 60 gigawatts of coal fired
capacity will retire by 2020. Notably, EIA expects 90 percent
of the coal fired capacity retirements to occur by 2016. Now,
this means nearly 18 percent of all coal fired generation in
the United States will retire in the next 2 years due to new
regulations. Are you concerned--is the DOE concerned that the
loss of these critical generation facilities in such a short
timeframe will make it increasingly difficult to meet
electricity demands as we move forward, putting reliability at
risk?
Mr. Moniz. First, I would just comment that I think, you
know, the market forces with gas cannot also be dismissed in
terms of what is happening with coal. But the analyses that I
have seen suggest that reliability will certainly be preserved
if this is what happens over these next years.
Mr. Griffith. Well, and my concern is that I recognize that
at some point, because of the regulations, gas is going to
surpass coal. I may not like that, but that is where we are
headed. And I also recognize that someday coal--gas may be able
to take up that slack. What I am concerned about is between
today and that time period. I am concerned that next year, or
in the winter of 2016, that we will see some real problems with
this many coal plants being reduced. And I think that DOE ought
to be concerned about that as well.
Also, with all that new expenditure, closing down
facilities--in fact, there are two different facilities--three
different generators, but two facilities in my district alone
that will be closing down. One of the ones that will close
down, which is a third one I didn't--or a fourth one, depending
on how you count them--that I didn't mention is converting to
natural gas. But with all those expenditures having to be made
by the power companies, it is reasonably expected that costs
will go up as the power companies recoup their expenditures.
Isn't that true?
Mr. Moniz. I assume. I don't know the details of the rate
case. But I assume that that would be the case.
Mr. Griffith. And let me make an assumption, and you
correct me if I am wrong. I would assume that you all are
talking with EPA about any concerns related to reliability
between the present and whenever natural gas can pick up the
slack? But if we are going to lose 18 percent over the next 2
years, that is a pretty significant cliff----
Mr. Moniz. And----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. For the power companies to
adjust to, is it not?
Mr. Moniz. And with FERC.
Mr. Griffith. And with FERC. Sure. But that is a big--that
is a steep cliff, is it not? Eighteen percent of coal being
gone when it is about 40 percent?
Mr. Moniz. Well, 60 gigawatts to 2020 would be a
substantial amount. But again, analyses that have been done
suggest that reliability will be preserved. That is also at the
ISO level a lot, those calculations.
Mr. Griffith. I hope you are right. I yield back.
Mr. Moniz. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired. At this
time, I recognize the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Gardner, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to you,
Mr. Secretary. And I join my colleagues in thanking you for
your service as well.
I have just a couple of questions for you. In May of last
year, President Obama was quoted as saying he has to make an
executive decision broadly about whether or not we export
liquefied natural gas at all. What discussions have you had
with President Obama regarding the issue of LNG exports?
Mr. Moniz. Well, and we have discussed this, including
recently obviously in the context of the situation in Europe at
the moment. And at this stage, we are carrying through with the
process and the strategy as has been practiced. And again, as I
noted earlier, one should not dismiss the scale of what has
already been at least conditionally approved prior to the FERC
approval, because the 9.3 BCF per day is already essentially
equal to the exports to Qatar, the world's largest LNG
exporter.
Mr. Gardner. But has the crisis involving Russia and the
Ukraine influenced your decision making or your timeframe at
all with respect to LNG exports?
Mr. Moniz. A major issue there is if you look at our last
Order, the Jordon Cove Order of last week, I think it was, or
the week before, there is a discussion of the international
markets and putting LNG into international markets. But the
major thing right now is we are going to have, as was
announced--well, really announced--last week and discussed
again in Brussels yesterday, we are going to have, under the G7
umbrella, an energy minister's process that was going to look
at our collective energy security.
Mr. Gardner. So we are exporting our energy security to
other nations to make that decision?
Mr. Moniz. No, no, no, no. Quite the contrary. Obviously--
--
Mr. Gardner. So the G7 will make decisions on whether or
not we expedite LNG exports?
Mr. Moniz. No. We are going to have a meeting to discuss
our collective interest in energy security. Now, obviously, the
risks----
Mr. Gardner. So we are waiting for the G7 to get back to us
on whether or not we expedite LNG permitting?
Mr. Moniz. Look, obviously, we are evaluating this
ourselves----
Mr. Gardner. But is--so are we waiting for G7 signoff?
Mr. Moniz. The process we are talking about--there was a
meeting already yesterday. And----
Mr. Gardner. Of the G7?
Mr. Moniz. No. There was a meeting yesterday of ESEU
Secretary Kerry and DOE Deputy Secretary Poneman. And we will
very soon be having a G7 process----
Mr. Gardner. Let me just ask this, because I have a number
of other questions, including whether or not you have taken the
time to look at H.R. 6 in the House and whether or not you
support the legislation making it easier to export. But I want
to make this clear, so we are asking the G7 whether or not it
is in the world's interest to export LNG from the United
States?
Mr. Moniz. No. I did not say that. We will be having a
discussion around the whole set of issues of energy security,
what it means for us, what it means for them.
Mr. Gardner. And permitting----
Mr. Moniz. It is not----
Mr. Gardner. Do you see issues coming out of that?
Mr. Moniz. It is not an LNG export caucus.
Mr. Gardner. Well, let me just ask you this then, are you
basing determinations on LNG exports in part on those
discussions with the G7 nations?
Mr. Moniz. I would use that as an input going forward. Of
course.
Mr. Gardner. So is it the President's--is it the
administration's opinion that we will wait for G7 discussions
before we approve further DOE permits?
Mr. Moniz. No, I did not say that. No.
Mr. Gardner. Well, I would like to know more about this,
because I think it is alarming that we would wait for G7
nations for approval to export LNG.
Mr. Moniz. Which is why I did not say we would wait.
Mr. Gardner. You just said that part of your determinations
would be made on discussions with G7.
Mr. Moniz. As we go down the road, we--this is a long
process.
Mr. Gardner. To approve the permits is a long process?
Mr. Moniz. Well, look, we have a public interest
determination by law.
Mr. Gardner. Should we or should we not expedite LNG
permitting in this country?
Mr. Moniz. We have been working expeditiously on a case by
case basis, based upon substantial----
Mr. Gardner. Could we do it faster than we already are?
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. And making a public interest
determination that we are required to make by law. If the law
changes, we will follow the law.
Mr. Gardner. Will the public interest determination weigh
in part on the G7 discussions?
Mr. Moniz. Not directly. That is our responsibility to do
that.
Mr. Gardner. But indirectly, the G7 discussions will weigh
on a U.S. public interest determination?
Mr. Moniz. Geopolitical issues have always been on the list
of issues to address in the public interest determination. They
are there. Now, obviously, discussing with our friends and
allies energy security issues is part of a geopolitical
consideration.
Mr. Gardner. Is there any----
Mr. Moniz. Which is balanced against things like domestic
market considerations.
Mr. Gardner. Is there anything in the law right now
preventing DOE from a decision to approve all pending permits?
Mr. Moniz. First of all, we cannot give approval until, at
a minimum, the NEPA process is completed, which is at FERC.
Mr. Gardner. DOE is waiting on FERC first before you make a
decision? That is not what you mean?
Mr. Moniz. Yes. The current approach is that we give a
conditional--just to clarify: We have issued one final and six
conditional approvals. There is only one final approval. That
is the Sabine Pass Project in Louisiana. And they will start
exporting in 2015. The additional six--and I have approved five
of those--are conditional.
Mr. Gardner. Conditionally--conditional.
Mr. Moniz. Conditional approvals. They must also get NEPA
process approval through FERC, although earlier----
Mr. Gardner. But DOE--for your side, you don't wait for
FERC to make their determination for your side to approve? You
are saying that?
Mr. Moniz. No. We have to wait. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. OK.
Mr. Moniz. By law, we----
Mr. Gardner. Right.
Mr. Moniz. WE must have the environmental--the NEPA
approval.
Mr. Gardner. Right.
Mr. Moniz. And just to clarify, because two other members
mentioned this earlier, the one distinction is that there are
now some applicants for deep water LNG. So that would not be
FERC, but there would be an analogous MARAD determination that
we would need to have on the environmental side.
Mr. Gardner. I am running out of time here. In fact, I
think I have run out of time. But another question, H.R. 6, the
bill that we mentioned was in the House would provide expedited
approval to World Trade Organization member nations. Wouldn't
this bill make your job easier and reduce the time required to
wait for DOE, and indeed improve our geopolitical security
around the world?
Mr. Moniz. I think the choice is to Congress whether it
wants to or not want to emphasize the public interest
determination.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Time has expired. At this time, I recognize
the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Secretary,
good to see you again.
Mr. Moniz. Good to see you.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you for being here. I would like to ask
a few questions about the American centrifuge program in
Piketon, Ohio, which I think you know is a couple of frog jumps
away from my district border, just across the county line. I
first want to ask you--and I think I know the answer to this,
because I asked you this the last time you were with us. Do you
still believe the U.S.--the United States needs a domestic
enrichment capacity for national security purposes?
Mr. Moniz. For national security purposes, we need an
American technology capacity for enrichment.
Mr. Johnson. OK. I think so, too. Over the last 2 years,
the Department has invested 280 million to build, install and
test the centrifuge machines needed to address this very
critical national security purpose. Your Department actually
owns the centrifuge machines and the support equipment. And
testing over the past year has demonstrated its technical
readiness. I understand that yesterday, when you testified
before Energy and Water Development Subcommittee, you indicated
that the Department was looking to use the transfer authority
provided in the omnibus to fund the continued activities after
the RD&D program concludes on April 15.
Mr. Moniz. Correct.
Mr. Johnson. This would avoid the major disruptions from
job losses, industrial demobilization and operational stoppage,
and will likely save the taxpayers money in the long run. I
want to commend you for that--for pursuing this course of
action. I do have a couple of questions though about the
timing. First, the language in the omnibus states that before
the Department can transfer the 56.65 million, DOE must first
submit a cost benefit report on all the options for securing
the low enriched uranium fuel needed for national security
purposes and your preference. And most importantly, that report
must cite--or must sit with the two relevant appropriation
subcommittees for 30 days and receive their approval before you
can initiate the transfer. So the clock must run for at least
30 days, but the current funding for the enrichment activities
expires April 15. So you can see mine and others concerns with
regards to the timing. First, how are you going to fund the
continued operations after April 15 until the report has made
it through the appropriations subcommittees?
Mr. Moniz. We are working that assiduously at the moment.
We think we can get through this.
Mr. Johnson. But you are determined to get through it?
Mr. Moniz. That is absolutely the intent.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Second, I know that yesterday you said
your Department was working to expeditiously work to finish the
report. But can you give us any more precise timeline on when
the Department's cost benefit report and reprogramming request
might be sent to Congress?
Mr. Moniz. I would prefer to check back with the people and
get--I can get back to you shortly after this----
Mr. Johnson. Can you get back to me on----
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you. Finally, I understand that
there is about 10 million of funding that remains available for
you to use from the 62 million that Congress appropriated in
the fiscal year 2014 omnibus. Are you prepared to utilize those
funds to continue operations and avoid a major disruption in
the program to cover the gap until the transfer authority is
received?
Mr. Moniz. As I said, I think we have ways of getting
through this period.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right.
Mr. Moniz. Right.
Mr. Johnson. Well, as you can imagine, I have some
concerned constituents that have received warn notices
recently, and only want to ensure that we don't have any work
stoppages. Anything that I can do to help move this process
along, I want you to know that I stand ready to help.
Mr. Moniz. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. I thank you for your leadership on this issue.
Not only does this program support jobs for my constituents,
but, as we discussed, it is vitally important for our national
security. And I look forward to working with you on it.
Mr. Moniz. I would just add that again, we are committed to
preserving the technology and the IP. The management structure,
for obvious reasons, may be transitioning.
Mr. Johnson. Sure.
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. Now, shifting gears just a little bit, going
back to the LNG export issue. You and I have discussed LNG
exports. I co-chair the LNG export working group here in the
House. Some report--some press reports have indicated that
there has been potentially some kind of deal struck between
your Department and Senator Stabenow. You know, she was opposed
to liquid natural gas exports. She was putting a hold on one of
your committee's nominees coming through the Senate. And but
now she has said hey, I am now more comfortable with what the
Department is doing. Has there been some kind of deal struck
between you and Senator Stabenow that we need to know about?
Mr. Moniz. No, we--um-hum----
Mr. Johnson. Because quite honestly, Mr. Secretary, and I
love the work that you are doing, you and I have a very
different definition of expeditiously, especially with all of
the opportunities for job creation and energy independence.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mr. Johnson. I just--I still fail to understand why it is
taking so long to get these permits approved.
Mr. Moniz. First, let me say, Senator Stabenow, of course,
is by no means the only member of Congress who is concerned
about the ramp rate of LNG exports. No one to my knowledge is--
well, almost no one at least is arguing against LNG exports. It
is this whole question of pace and cumulative impacts as it
might have in terms of domestic prices for consumers and----
Mr. Johnson. So has there been any kind of deal made
between----
Mr. Moniz. No.
Mr. Johnson. I see.
Mr. Moniz. So we have had--with her and with others, we
have had discussions about what our process is and what the
role is for cumulative impacts on the economy.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, sir. And I am going to have some
concluding remarks that I want to make. Maybe there will be a
question or two in there. And then if you want to respond to
it, you are free to do so. And certainly, Mr. Rush, as well.
But I just wanted to comment on your response to Cory
Gardner's question about his legislation, H.R. 6, conjured up
in my mind what I am getting ready to say. You answered him by
saying, you know, that is a legislative decision about whether
or not the Congress will pass this legislation or not. And part
of the animosity that is developed in the Congress with the
President of the United States particularly has related to
climate change. And particularly, when he has emphatically made
it very clear that, ``If Congress does not act in a way that I
want it to act, then I am going to do what I want to do
anyway.'' And the point that I would make is that Congress did
act, in my view. Congress did not pass the Cap and Trade Bill.
It was a Democratic-controlled Senate that did not pass the Cap
and Trade Bill.
The House, last week, passed legislation. That was the
first time ever that Congress gave EPA the authority to
regulate greenhouse gases, CO
2
emissions. Now, I am
not going to get into the court--Supreme Court decision. But
this legislation passed Congress giving EPA the authority. And
we cannot get the administration to focus on it. The President
said he would veto that bill. So I take it from that that if we
don't do precisely what he wants on global--on climate change,
that, as he said, he will go it alone. And many people in his
administration have said the same thing.
And so when I look at the--and he is doing that by
executive order, by executive actions. And when I look at the
budget here, electric delivery and energy reliability, $180
million. Renewable energy alone, $1.3 billion. And then when
you look at the original legislation establishing the
Department of Energy, it says the mission is to promote the
interest of consumers through the provision of an adequate and
reliable supply of energy at the lowest reasonable cost. And so
many agencies of the Federal Government are totally focused on
climate change. That is why so much money is going into that,
even though it is contrary to the original mission statute.
And the bottom line of it turns out to be this: When the
EPA issued that greenhouse gas regulation, which in effect
makes it impossible to build a new coal plant in America--and I
agree with you, Mr. Secretary, no one is getting ready to build
a coal plant in America, because the natural gas prices are so
low. But what if we find ourselves the way Europe has found
themselves? The gas coming from Russia is so expensive that
last year, Europe imported 53 percent of our coal exports, and
they are building coal plants. So if our natural gas prices
start going up, we don't have the option.
And then next year, 2015, they are going to be coming out
with a regulation on existing coal-fired plants, in addition to
the utility MAC, in addition to the new. So we have genuine
concerns about our ability to compete in the global
marketplace. And we are moving so fast. The President's pushing
so hard. I agree with Professor Turlington over at George
Washington University who said the President is becoming a
government into himself. So I just want to make that comment.
And you may not agree with me on this, Bobby.
Mr. Rush. I certainly don't agree with that.
Mr. Whitfield. But let me just conclude by saying thank you
for being with us. We look forward to continued work this you
on a lot of issues affecting our country. And we appreciate
your being available all the time.
Mr. Moniz. Thank you.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I just want to say, I don't agree
with you on this. And I very rarely agree with you. So it is
not out of the question that I don't agree with you right--at
this present time. I think your characterization of the
President is totally inadequate. And--so but we have had
disagreements for a long time now. And I don't think either one
of us is going to change our opinion about our President.
Mr. Secretary, one area that DOE can have a direct impact
in helping to increase minority engagement is in the 17
publicly funded national research labs, and in areas of
contracting and management and operations, technology
transfers. I am finding that most of these labs are mostly
failing in their outreach and partnerships with historically
black colleges and universities, minority serving institutions,
as well as minority contractors and entrepreneurial and in the
whole are of minority engagement, they are willfully lacking
in. I mean, almost heartbreakingly lacking you look at them--
you look at the lineup and you visit these places and you see
no diversity at all. And having seen diversity therein in
decades, and some of them never had any diverse top level
staffing and leadership. And I think that, as you indicated
earlier, maybe the problem is a lack of minorities in key
leadership positions, most--at the labs and maybe even at the
Department itself. What do you think are some of the obstacles
that we are--that we must overcome, some of the prohibitions?
And is your Department sufficiently diverse to--in the decision
making process to allow for more diversity in leadership--not
only in the Department but in these labs? I mean, these labs
are just enormous public taxpayer dollars. And some of them
have--don't even remotely reflect any attempt at diversity. And
I am really concerned about that. So can you give me some idea
about how you--what you--how you view the problem? And I know
we have had this discussion many times, you know, but I want to
just refresh the discussion.
Mr. Moniz. First of all, I think it is important that it is
clearly understood that the Secretary considers this a
priority. And we are promulgating this. We have raised it with
the lab directors. And they have responded enthusiastically.
Now, we have to do something about it. But frankly, when I
raised this at the laboratory policy counsel, the reaction of
the lab directors was, ``God, you are right. We just have to do
this.'' So that is a good start. But that is only a start.
Number two, we have just in the last month, by the way,
including at Argonne, in your neck of the woods, appointed lab
directors. In each case, we went through very carefully the
nature of the search, its openness, et cetera. And, frankly,
while those appointed themselves did not increase the
diversity, each one of the three made very, very strong
commitments to look at this.
I think that is what has been missing--and I am talking in
the laboratory system. And the lab directors have responded
very positively on this. It is not that it is totally missing,
but we are not up to snuff in terms of what I would call
leadership development programs. That it is not only for
diverse candidates but includes a focus on diversity of
understanding--I think as many corporations do extremely well.
You are always looking at how you develop the leaders in the
organization so that you have people who can come up. So that
is a focus that we are going to advance, and we have started.
But we have a long way to go.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Secretary, I really look forward to working
with you and see--as you well know, I am very passionate about
this issue. I--and so I look forward to working with you on
this issue.
Mr. Moniz. Great.
Mr. Rush. And, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to us having a
discussion in terms of having a hearing on these and other
matters.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes. Yes, and we are going to be setting
down the next couple of days on your legislation, because our
staff has been working together. But--well, that concludes
today's hearing. Mr. Secretary, thank you once again. And thank
you for your staff and all of your time and availability.
Mr. Moniz. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. And the record will remain open for 10 days.
And with that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:55 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
