- 21ST CENTURY CURES: THE PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL OF ADVISORS ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (PCAST) REPORT ON DRUG INNOVATION

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

21ST CENTURY CURES: THE PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL
OF ADVISORS ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(PCAST) REPORT ON DRUG INNOVATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 20, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-145

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
91-548 PDF                          WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  GENE GREEN, Texas
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                      JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            Islands
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PAUL TONKO, New York
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

7_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                  Islands
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................    13
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    13
Hon. Gene Green, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    15
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................    15
Prepared statement...........................................    16
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    17
Hon. Diane DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado, opening statement.................................    18

Witnesses

Garry A. Neil, Global Head of Research and Development,
Medgenics, Inc.................................................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Answers to submitted questions...............................   153
Sara Radcliffe, Executive Vice President for Health,
Biotechnology Industry Organization............................    35
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Answers to submitted questions...............................   161
Frank J. Sasinowski, Director, Hyman, Phelps & McNamara, P.C.....    48
Prepared statement...........................................    50
Additional material \1\
Answers to submitted questions...............................   169
Jeff Allen, Executive Director, Friends of Cancer Research.......    75
Prepared statement...........................................    77
Answers to submitted questions...............................   176
Sean R. Tunis, President and Chief Executive Officer, Center for
Medical Technology Policy......................................    89
Prepared statement...........................................    91
Answers to submitted questions \2\...........................   185

Submitted Material

Statement of May 20, 2014, from Raymond L. Woosley, President,
AZCERT, submitted by Mr. Pitts.................................     4
Report of May 20, 2014, ``Progress on the 2012 Drug Innovation
Report by PCAST (President's Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology),'' by Janet Woodcock, submitted by Mr. Pitts.......     9

----------
\1\ Supporting documents submitted by Mr. Sasinowski are available at
http://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=102237.
\2\ Mr. Tunis did not answer submitted questions for the record by the
time of printing.
Article of May 16, 2014, ```Right to Try' laws spur debate over
dying patients' access to experimental drugs,'' by Brady Dennis
and Ariana Eunjung Cha, The Washington Post, submitted by Mr.
Shimkus........................................................   120
Article of April 5, 2014, ``Even Small Medical Advances Can Mean
Big Jumps in Bills,'' by Elisabeth Rosenthal, The New York
Times, submitted by Mr. Waxman.................................   127

21ST CENTURY CURES: THE PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL OF ADVISORS ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY (PCAST) REPORT ON DRUG INNOVATION

----------

TUESDAY, MAY 20, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R.
Pitts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Shimkus,
Blackburn, McMorris Rodgers, Lance, Cassidy, Griffith,
Bilirakis, Ellmers, Barton, Upton (ex officio), Pallone, Engel,
Schakowsky, Green, Barrow, Sarbanes, and Waxman (ex officio).
Also present: Representative DeGette.
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Chief Counsel, Health; Gary
Andres, Staff Director; Mike Bloomquist, General Counsel; Matt
Bravo, Professional Staff Member; Noelle Clemente, Press
Secretary; Paul Edattel, Professional Staff Member, Health;
Sydne Harwick, Legislative Clerk; Robert Horne, Professional
Staff Member, Health; Carly McWilliams, Professional Staff
Member, Health; Katie Novaria, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Krista Rosenthall, Counsel to Chairman Emeritus; Chris
Sarley, Policy Coordinator, Environment and the Economy; Heidi
Stirrup, Policy Coordinator, Health; John Stone, Counsel,
Health; Ziky Ababiya, Democratic Staff Assistant; Phil Barnett,
Democratic Staff Director; Eric Flamm, Democratic FDA Detailee;
Elizabeth Letter, Democratic Press Secretary; Karen Lightfoot,
Democratic Communications Director and Senior Policy Advisor;
Karen Nelson, Democratic Deputy Committee Staff Director,
Health; Anne Morris Reid, Democratic Senior Professional Staff
Member; and Rachel Sher, Democratic Senior Counsel.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The Chair
will recognize himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Today's hearing relates to the 21st Century Cures
Initiative announced by the Energy and Commerce Committee on
April 30, 2014. This Cures effort is envisioned to explore ways
to accelerate the discovery, development and delivery cycle for
new medical breakthroughs. Through this effort, Congress hopes
to clear a path to find more cures and treatments, while also
creating jobs, and keeping America as the innovation center of
the world.
Shortly following the announcement of the Cures Initiative,
the committee issued a white paper on May 1, 2014, entitled
21st Century Cures: Call for Action, which more fully discusses
the ideas behind the Cures project and issues of call to
action, call for ideas. The first goal of this project is to
solicit ideas. Congress does not have all the answers, but we
do have a role to play in ensuring our Nation's laws and
regulations, keep pace and compliment the biomedical research
and innovation that is happening at lightning speed.
Earlier this month, we heard from the NIH, FDA, patient
advocates, university leaders, and other scientific pioneers
about their ideas, challenges and successes. Today, we will
hear from experts who contributed to the President's Council of
Advisor on Science and Technology, PCAST, report on propelling
innovation in drug discovery, development and evaluation. This
important report hits on a number of topics that we will have
to explore if we are to truly advance Cures. These ideas
include, among others, making sure incentives are in place to
ensure capital is flowing towards research and development of
new cures, and designing clinical trials to the appropriate
size and scale, given the growth of targeted personalized
medicine.
Today, we hope to learn more about these proposals and
others put forth by PCAST, and determine which ideas or
recommendations could potentially advance the 21st Century
Cures Initiative.
Excitingly, the fight for faster cures in the 21st century
will not only foster medical innovations, but it can also make
our healthcare system more efficient, and can save lives.
I want to welcome our witnesses today. I look forward to
learning more about the advancements in biomedical research and
innovation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

Today's hearing relates to the 21st Century Cures
Initiative announced by the Energy and Commerce Committee on
April 30, 2014. This Cures effort is envisioned to explore ways
to accelerate the discovery, development, and delivery cycle
for new medical breakthroughs. Through this effort, Congress
hopes to clear a path to find more cures and treatments while
also creating jobs and keeping America as the innovation center
of the world.
Shortly following the announcement of the Cures initiative,
the committee issued a white paper on May 1, 2014 entitled
``21st Century Cures: A Call to Action'' which more fully
discusses the ideas behind the Cures project and issues a call
to action--a call for ideas.
The first goal of this project is to solicit ideas.
Congress does not have all the answers, but we do have a role
to play in ensuring our Nation's laws and regulations keep pace
and complement the biomedical research and innovation that is
happening at lightning speed.
Earlier this month, we heard from the NIH, FDA, patient
advocates, university leaders and other scientific pioneers
about their ideas, challenges and successes. Today, we will
hear from experts who contributed to the President's Council of
Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) report on Propelling
Innovation in Drug Discovery, Development, and Evaluation.
This important report hits on a number of topics that we
will have to explore if we are to truly advance cures. These
ideas include, among others, making sure incentives are in
place to ensure capital is flowing toward research and
development of new cures and designing clinical trials to the
appropriate size and scale given the growth of targeted,
personalized medicine.
Today we hope to learn more about these proposals and
others put forth by PCAST, and determine which ideas or
recommendations could potentially advance the 21st Century
Cures Initiative. Excitingly, the fight for faster cures in the
21st century will not only foster medical innovations, but it
can also make our health care system more efficient, and can
save lives.
I want to welcome our witnesses today and look forward to
learning more about the advancements in biomedical research and
innovation.

Mr. Pitts. And I ask for unanimous consent to include the
following statements for today's hearing record from Dr.
Raymond Woosley, former president of the Critical Path
Institute and one of the experts that participated in the
development of the PCAST report, and Dr. Janet Woodcock,
Director of FDA Center for Drug Evaluation Research Blog Post,
``Progress on the 2012 Drug Innovation report by PCAST'' from
May 20, 2014.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Thank you. I yield the remainder of my time to
Dr. Burgess.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
yielding. Thank you for having this hearing, and especially
thanks to the chairman and ranking member of the full committee
for pursuing the 21st Century Cures Agenda.
So this is an accompanying bipartisan effort to listen to
you, the scientists, to listen to doctors, listen to
researchers, listen to patients, and, yes, we will listen to
government agencies to find out how we can continue to lead the
world in scientific discovery that ultimately leads to cures,
treatments, medical devices that will improve human health,
and, most importantly, alleviate human suffering.
In September 2012, the President's Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology issued a report to the President on
propelling innovation in drug discovery, development and
evaluation. The report provided recommendations on how to
ensure we are doing everything we can to capture the
significant amount of knowledge that has been gained in the
last few decades, and to ensure that the knowledge is
translated into cures and actually make it into the lives of
patients. The report found many of the same themes that we have
heard for the last 10 years in this committee. While our
scientific knowledge has significantly grown, the promise of
that knowledge has not been realized. The recommendations of
the President's council also mirror familiar suggestions,
including building off existing authorities to accelerate
therapeutics and ensure management of regulatory agencies
appropriately balances the benefits and risk. With this--when
this effort was launched, we said we wanted to hear from
everyone, and I am pleased that we are evaluating the advice
that is being given to the President in this area.
I certainly look forward to this hearing. I look forward to
your testimony. I look forward to all of the participation of
our witnesses.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, 5 minutes
for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, and thank you for
calling this hearing.
I wanted to initially ask unanimous consent to enter into
the record a--an article on the progress of the 2012 Drug
Innovation report by PCAST, if I could. I believe you have it,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Yes, we just did that.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thank you.
Let me also thank Chairman Upton for convening the 21st
Century Cures Initiative, and also Ms. DeGette, who was very
much involved with that.
We all agree that the Federal Government and Congress can
play a role to help accelerate the discovery, development and
delivery of promising new treatments to patients, and the
question remains how to best advance those goals. I look
forward to engaging this process as we meet with stakeholders,
and gather ideas and input from experts on what, if any,
policies Congress can consider moving forward. And most
importantly, I look forward to working with my colleagues in a
bipartisan way to ensure that promising new medicines get to
patients in a timely manner, and they are safe and effective.
The committee already has a great record on that effort,
most recently with the passage of the FDA Safety and Innovation
Act of 2012, or FDASIA. That law reformed and revitalized many
FDA programs to improve its regulatory scheme, to facilitate a
more efficient and predictable review process. Specifically, we
updated the regulatory pathways under which FDA provides for
expedited reviews of drugs. WE also aided for the first time
the breakthrough therapy, Pathway, and all of these programs
served a goal of helping drug sponsors and the FDA work
together to cut development time.
In addition, I am currently working with Chairman Pitts on
a Bill that would streamline the DEA's scheduling process as it
relates to improved drug therapies. If we are going to have a
comprehensive discussion about how to promote innovation and
medical advancements, we can't simply focus on the FDA. The
work being done at NIH and through the country at research
universities like my hometown school of Rutgers University, has
to be properly funded. Discovering cures and developing
effective treatments are complex, difficult and expensive
endeavors. NIH is the premiere biomedical research institution
in the world, and I hope this committee can find ways to ensure
that NEH--NIH has the necessary tools to maintain that
designation.
When we talk about the delivery of therapies, we have got
to address access. Medical advances and cures at the earliest
possible time is our shared goal, but we all must work together
to ensure that when discovered, those cures can get to all
patients, and not just those who can afford them.
So, Mr. Chairman, based on your comments and actions to
date, I am hopeful we will have these conversations as we move
forward. Today, the committee will examine the President's
Council of Advisor on Science and Technology, or PCAST, Report
on Drug Innovation. That report issued in September of 2012,
only a couple of months following the passage of FDASIA, puts
forth a number of proposals across a large spectrum of
policies, from funding basic biomedical research, to developing
economic initiatives. And there are a number of ideas in this
report, so I look forward to flushing out their relevance, and
thank everyone for their input today in moving forward.
And I have about a minute and a half. I would like to yield
to my colleague from Texas, Mr. Green.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Green. Thank you to our ranking member and the Chair
for having this hearing, and our witnesses for testifying, and
yielding the time.
I applaud the committee for its 21st Century Cures
Initiative to examine what steps are needed to harness
scientific knowledge, and accelerate the pace of the new Cures.
The--in 2012, this committee took an important first step in
addressing the lack of new drug development to treat drug-
resistant infections. Our committee colleague, Congressman
Gingrey, and I were the lead sponsors of that legislation,
along with a number of our other colleagues on the committee,
but I fear our work is far from finished. According to the
report recently by the WHO last month, the antibiotic crisis is
bigger and more urgent than the AIDS epidemic of the 1980s, and
without swift and significant action, the implications will be
devastating. The GAIN Act was an important step to address--
addressing a lack of new drug development, but it must not be
the last. Weekly reports of new global threats and cases
identified here at home are a stark reminder our ability to
meet this threat relies in no small part upon a robust pipeline
and new therapies. PCAST, scientists, physicians and global
health leaders have sounded the alarm. We need new incentives
and approaches to continue fighting drug-resistant bacteria and
build on the work of getting it started. It would be wrong to
let this opportunity for action pass us by.
I urge the committee to address this crisis head-on, and
encourage meaningful development in the antibiotic space. I
stand ready to work with you to achieve this worthy goal, and
we do not have a moment to waste.
And I yield back my time. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the chairman of the full committee, Mr.
Upton, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So today marks our first 21st Century Cures hearing at the
Health Subcommittee. We launched this bipartisan initiative
earlier this month with one primary goal: accelerate the pace
of the discovery, development and delivery cycle so that we can
get innovative new cures and treatments to patients more
quickly.
Today, we continue this important conversation with several
of the distinguished experts who contributed to the President's
Council of Advisors on Science and Tech Report on Drug
Innovation. The President, in soliciting recommendations on
this very important topic, decided propelling drug innovation
is a policy worthy of exploring and advancing, and I couldn't
agree more.
In their report, the President's advisors found that the
Nation's biomedical innovation ecosystem is under significant
stress, citing the patient--citing the patent cliff facing the
pharmaceutical industry, declining investment from venture
capital, and decreasing research and development in critical
area, including Alzheimer's. We have heard similar concern in
our discussion with patients, innovators and thought leaders.
So in order to address these issues facing our biomedical
innovation ecosystem, the experts who contributed to the report
recommended closing scientific knowledge gaps, addressing
inefficiencies in clinical trials, considering more economic
initiatives to decrease investment--to increase investment, and
encouraging even more innovation at the FDA. The President's
advisors put forth the following goal for our Nation. ``Double
the current annual output of innovative new medicines for
patients with important unmet medical needs, while increasing
drug efficacy and safety, through industry academia and
Government working together to double the efficiency of drug
development by decreasing clinical failure, clinical trial
cost, time to market, and regulatory uncertainty.'' I know that
we can all agree to join the President and his advisors to meet
that goal.
As the President's advisors so rightly said, we must work
together to achieve the goal. This has to be a collaborative
effort.
The committee recently put out a call for feedback on the
PCAST report. We also asked for input from our Nation's
patients on the discovery of treatment and cures for their
diseases. The 21st Century Cures Initiative ultimately touches
everybody, every family, patients, doctors, loved ones,
researchers, thought leaders, everyone, and we want input from
all of those involved. Folks can email their ideas to

[email protected]
, and contribute to the conversation on
Twitter and Facebook using hashtag #Pathtocures. Together, I
know that we can provide hope to patients and families across
our great country, and keep America at the forefront of
innovation, and, by the way, create lots more jobs too.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today marks our first 21st Century Cures hearing at the
Health Subcommittee. We launched this bipartisan initiative
earlier this month with one primary goal: accelerate the pace
of the discovery, development, and delivery cycle so we can get
innovative new cures and treatments to patients more quickly.
Today, we continue this important conversation with several of
the distinguished experts who contributed to the President's
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology report on drug
innovation.
The President, in soliciting recommendations on this
important topic, decided propelling drug innovation is a policy
worthy of exploring and advancing. I could not agree more.
In their report, the President's advisors found that the
Nation's biomedical innovation ecosystem is under significant
stress, citing the patent cliff facing the pharmaceutical
industry, declining investment from venture capital and
decreasing research and development in critical areas,
including Alzheimer's. We have heard similar concerns in our
discussions with patients, innovators, and thoughts leaders.
In order to address these issues facing our biomedical
innovation ecosystem, the experts who contributed to the report
recommended closing scientific knowledge gaps, addressing
inefficiencies in clinical trials, considering new economic
incentives to increase investment, and encouraging even more
innovation at the Food and Drug Administration.
The President's advisors put forth the following goal for
our Nation:
``Double the current annual output of innovative new
medicines forpatients with important unmet medical needs, while
increasing drug efficacy and safety, through industry,
academia, and Government working together to double the
efficiency of drug development, by decreasing clinical failure,
clinical trial costs, time to market, and regulatory
uncertainty.''
I think we can all agree to join the President and his
advisors in meeting this goal.
As the President's advisors so rightly said, we must work
together to achieve this goal. This must be a collaborative
effort. The committee recently put out a call for feedback on
the PCAST report. We also asked for input from our Nation's
patients on the discovery of treatments and cures for their
diseases. The 21st Century Cures Initiative ultimately touches
everyone--patients, doctors, loved ones, researchers, thought
leaders--and we want input from all those involved. Email your
ideas to
[email protected]
and contribute to the
conversation on Twitter and Facebook using the hashtag
#Path2Cures. Together we can provide hope to patients and
families all across the country and keep America at the
forefront of innovation.

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Waxman, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today, we continue our work on the 21st Century Cures
Initiative. These hearings are important. We need to ensure
that patients gain access to new treatment and cures at the
earliest possible time. At the same time, we need to recognize
the strengths of our current system which has led to enormous
breakthroughs in drugs and devices. FDA reviews and approves
drugs faster than any other regulatory agency in the world. NIH
and FDA are world leaders in clinical trial design, and in
integrating the newest science into their policies and
approaches, and our system protects the health of patients.
It is critical that we avoid any attempt to fix things that
aren't broken, and, in the process, do harm to a system that is
already working very well. We should create policies that
foster scientific advances, but we should do so in a way that
does not jeopardize public health.
Across the board, when we have an informal meeting,
participants at the roundtable 2 weeks ago said that we need to
assure that NIH has the resources necessary to maintain its
national and international leadership in biomedical research,
and I would welcome an opportunity to work with Chairman Upton,
and all of our colleagues on both sides of the aisle, on
accomplishing that goal.
The participants at that roundtable also indicated that FDA
was generally excelling in drug and device oversight, and I was
glad to hear that investment in the life sciences was booming.
Mr. Left, one of the people there, attributed that success, at
least in part, to some of the reforms we put into place in the
2012 FDA Safety and Innovation Act.
The PCAST report makes several recommendations relating to
FDA. There are two I would particularly like to learn more
about. One is the recommendation that FDA or Congress develop
new voluntary pathway to facilitate the approval of drugs for
special medical uses based on smaller clinical trials that
would be needed for broader uses. A bipartisan Bill is
introduced that would create such a pathway for antibiotics for
serious or life-threatening infections for which there are few,
if any other, options. This is an area of increasingly dire
need, and I think this Bill warrants serious consideration. As
written, however, it does not achieve what PCAST described as
an essential component of the pathway that the drug's labeling
send a clear and effective signal that it should be reserved
for use in the specific subgroup of patients for which it was
approved. I would be interested in our witnesses telling us
their views on this issue.
The other recommendation is the FDA undertake pilot
projects to explore certain kinds of provisional approval
pathways. These so-called adaptive approval pathways shift more
of the data requirements to post-market studies, however, PCAST
recommended that Congress not legislate in this area yet
because serious questions still need to be addressed. These
include appropriate evidentiary standards, protection of
patients, and the ability to ensure that drugs are withdrawn if
their effectiveness is not subsequently demonstrated. I would
like to hear more about that.
I was disappointed that FDA and NIH were not invited to
participate in today's hearing. I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman,
that you entered the FDA blog into the record. It shows the
significant progress FDA has made in meeting the
recommendations of the PCAST report.
And I would like to now yield the balance of my time to our
colleague, Ms. DeGette, from the State of Colorado.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANE DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Waxman. And thanks,
Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing on the President's
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology Report on Drug
Innovation.
As has been mentioned, I joined with Chairman Upton to
launch the 21st Century Cures Initiative about a month ago. We
had a very successful kickoff roundtable with other members of
this committee, where we heard from a number of experts, top
leaders from the administration, academia, research and
industry, to dig deep into how we can effectively and
efficiently tackle some of the more complex challenges in
medicine.
As the next step in this endeavor, it was important to
consider what types of recommendations relating to research and
innovation have already been proposed. The report that we will
discuss today, as has been mentioned, provides 8
recommendations, ranging from Federal funding for basic
biomedical research, to improved drug evaluation. The report
also highlighted what can happen when lawmakers work together
on a bipartisan basis to pass legislation that addresses
emerging medical needs.
There are several Bills that I support, which have been
mentioned both by the witnesses in their testimony, as well as
the other Members today. A couple of them that have not been
mentioned are the Antibiotic Development to Advance Patient
Treatment, or ADAPT Act, and the Regenerative Medicine
Promotion Act of 2014, of which I am the prime sponsor.
So there is a lot going on. I think the testimony today
will be a good step along our path to figure out how we can
work together toward improving research and innovation.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
That concludes the opening statements, but opening
statement of all the other Members will be made a part of the
record.
We have one panel with us today, five witnesses, and I will
introduce them in the order that they speak.
Dr. Garry Neil, Global Head of Research and Development for
Medgenics; Ms. Sara Radcliffe, Executive Vice President,
Biotechnology Industry Organiation; Mr. Frank Sasinowski,
Director, Hyman, Phelps and McNamara; Mr. Jeff Allen, Executive
Director, Friends of Cancer Research; Dr. Sean Tunis, Found and
CEO, Center for Medical Technology Policy.
Thank you for coming. Your written testimony will be made a
part of the record. You will be each given 5 minutes to
summarize your testimony.
And, Dr. Neil, we will start with you. You are recognized
for 5 minutes for your opening statement. Push the button, yes.

STATEMENTS OF GARRY A. NEIL, GLOBAL HEAD OF RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT, MEDGENICS, INC.; SARA RADCLIFFE, EXECUTIVE VICE
PRESIDENT FOR HEALTH, BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY ORGANIZATION;
FRANK J. SASINOWSKI, DIRECTOR, HYMAN, PHELPS & MCNAMARA, P.C.,
ON BEHALF OF NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR RARE DISORDERS; JEFF
ALLEN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, FRIENDS OF CANCER RESEARCH; AND SEAN
R. TUNIS, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, CENTER FOR
MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY POLICY

STATEMENT OF GARRY A. NEIL

Mr. Neil. Sorry. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone,
Ranking Member Waxman, and Members of the committee, thank you
for the opportunity to testify before you this morning.
My name is Garry Neil and I head research and development
in Medgenics, a small biotechnology company in Wayne,
Pennsylvania, with operations in the U.S. and in Israel. My
colleagues and I are working to bring novel ex vivo gene
therapies to patients with serious, rare and orphan diseases. I
am a physician, and have spent the past 30 years in biomedical
research and academia in industry, where I have worked in both
large and small companies. I have also spent time in venture
capital, and I have been engaged with a number of nonprofit
organizations in support of the missions of FDA, NIH, and
industrial research and development, and these include the
Foundation for the NIH, the Reagan-Udall Foundation for the
FDA, the Biomarkers Consortium, and TranCelerate Biomedical, an
industry collaboration I helped found in 2012. I provided
expert input into the 2012 PCAST report, and I am here today
representing myself.
The American Biomedical Research and Development Ecosystem
remains the envy of the world. Its value is immense, and I am
sure that all of us in this room have benefitted from medical
innovation driven by that system in some way or other.
Biomedical innovation employs nearly 1 million people in the
U.S., and exports from the biopharmaceutical industry reached
nearly $47 billion in 2010, but beyond the economic impact, it
provides increasingly effective treatments and hope for
patients everywhere.
The PCAST report identified a series of challenges and
obstacles that continue to raise cost, lengthen timelines, and
increase risk, including difficulties in translating basic
scientific discoveries into therapies, inefficiency of clinical
trials, and the need to streamline the regulatory process, as
well as the need to ensure that appropriate incentives are in
place to encourage investment in U.S. biomedical research. But
since the release of that report, a number of important
developments have occurred demonstrating the resilience of the
system. The FDA Safety and Innovation Act of 2012 expanded the
use of accelerated approval, and introduced a new breakthrough
designation, both very helpful. TranCelerate Biomedical, as I
mentioned, was launched as an industry collaboration to improve
the efficiency of clinical trials. It currently has 16 member
companies, and has embarked on a number of projects aimed at
reducing operational bottlenecks faced by all sponsors. Early
results are extremely encouraging. The accelerating medicines
partnership, a public-private partnership between NIH, the
pharmaceutical industry and patient advocacy groups, was
established and will address Alzheimer's Disease, diabetes and
others.
At the Reagan-Udall Foundation, a public-private
partnership created by Congress to support regulatory science,
post-marketing safety surveillance is being advanced by the
Innovation in Medical Evidence Development and Surveillance
Project. And as Mr. Waxman noted, venture capital investment of
biomedical research has started to increase again.
Biotechnology investment dollars rose 8 percent in 2013 to $4.5
billion. These are encouraging signs, but much more needs to be
done if we are going to reach the ambitious goals set in the
PCAST report, and maintain our global leadership and life
sciences, as well as address the healthcare challenges that
confront the country now.
Additional help and leadership from Congress on this would
be tremendously beneficial, and areas for Congress to target
include facilitating the creation of clinical trial networks,
investing in new biomarkers and clinical trial endpoints,
increasing and sustaining funding for both FDA and NIH,
expansion of public-private partnerships to support the
scientific missions of both FDA and NIH, providing FDA with
increased flexibility to accelerate programs for lifesaving
medicines, and examining existing incentives for capital
investment of biomedical research.
Our company, like hundreds of other small innovative
companies, faces many of these challenges every day. Our
scientists, like virtually all industry scientists, are
incredibly dedicated, driven and focused. Their ingenuity and
problem-solving amazes me every day, and we are making rapid
progress. We rely heavily upon collaboration with academic
scientists who advise us, and also upon the regulators who help
us to find the path forward. We also rely upon our investors.
They risk their capital because they believe we will succeed.
Clearly, there is no time or resource to spare. We lay every
decision, every experiment with the utmost care. We understand
the implications for our people, our investors, the country,
but most importantly for the patients and their parents who are
desperately waiting for cures.
I applaud the committee for undertaking this effort, and
the sincere belief that it can result in positive change.
Enlightened, science-driven policy will allow companies like
Medgenics to succeed, put the next generation of
transformational therapies in the hands of caregivers around
the world, and increase the competitiveness and prosperity of
our country. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Neil follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize Ms. Radcliffe, 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF SARA RADCLIFFE

Ms. Radcliffe. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone, and
Members of the committee, my name is Sara Radcliffe, and I am
the executive vice president for health of the Biotechnology
Industry Organization, BIO. I thank you for the opportunity to
testify here today.
BIO is the world's largest trade association, representing
over 1,000 biotechnology companies, academic institutions, and
State biotechnology centers across the United States. BIO
applauds Chairman Upton, Representative Diana DeGette, and the
committee members for undertaking the 21st Century Cures
Initiative to examine what steps Congress can take to
accelerate the pace of discovering and developing cures. We are
excited to work with you to keep America the innovation capital
of the world.
We also applaud the committee for holding a hearing on the
PCAST report on drug innovation. It is critical that even in an
environment of budgetary constraint, we do not yield to global
competition and lose the next generation of discoveries that
could treat or cure the myriad of chronic and life-threatening
diseases. From an emotional point of view, we have a duty to
work to end the suffering these diseases cause. From an
economic point of view, the U.S. can't afford to lose these
advancements. Medicare spent over $100 billion in 2012 caring
for individuals suffering from Alzheimer's Disease, and the
expense is only going to increase. By 2030, almost one out of
every five Americans, some 72 million people, will be 65 years
or older. If we could delay the onset of Alzheimer's by just 5
years, we would save $50 billion per year. We have a national
imperative to find new solutions, and this can only be
accomplished if we all work together to create and defend
policies that protect intellectual property, empower regulatory
agencies to keep pace with science, encourage the development
and adoption of modern approaches to drug development, promote
a robust reimbursement environment, and continue to incentivize
investment in scientific research.
The PCAST report noted that the overall efficiency of
pharmaceutical R&D efforts has been declining steadily for more
than 50 years. While there are many contributing factors, it is
widely recognized that increasing timelines and costs
associated with clinical trials are key issues. More efficient
clinical trials will reduce barriers to market for safe,
innovative medicines.
In 2012, BIO launched our clinical modernization initiative
to address four priority clinical research-related issues, some
of which were also highlighted in the PCAST report. First, the
use of centralized institutional review boards to promote
greater efficiency, consistency and qualify of ethical
oversight for multicenter clinical trials. Next, improving the
FDA qualification process for drug development tools, including
biomarkers. Additionally, advancing efforts by patient advocacy
networks, medical centers, healthcare providers and other
stakeholders to develop clinical trial networks and
collaborative partnerships that could realize greater
efficiency, consistency and quality in the conduct of clinical
research. Finally, implementing a risk-based approach to
clinical trial monitoring that leverages centralized data
monitoring through electronic data capture systems can lead to
significant efficiencies for clinical trial sponsors.
We would also like to applaud Congress for already having
taken action of several of the PCAST recommendations with the
passage of the Food and Drug Safety Innovation Act, FDASIA. For
example, PCAST urged the FDA to expand the use of the
accelerated approval pathway beyond the traditional areas of
HIV, AIDS and oncology, and to be more open to the use of
surrogate endpoints and intermediate clinical endpoints that
are reasonably likely to predict clinical benefit, and that can
be measured earlier in drug development, pending post-market
confirmation. FDASIA encourages FDA to utilize the accelerated
approval program more broadly, which may result in fewer,
smaller or shorter clinical trials without compromising or
altering the high standards of the FDA for the approval of
drugs.
FDA's draft guidance on expedited programs will be very
useful to sponsors, however, we encourage the Agency to further
clarify the process for validating a novel endpoint, and for
FDA to--and sponsors to discuss potential surrogate or clinical
endpoints earlier in drug development. The PCAST report notes
the drug developers have expressed frustration that it is
difficult to get clear and timely answers concerning the
accessibility of specific predictors for accelerated approval.
Without such clarity, the risk of employing such predictors
during the lengthy drug development process is often too great
to justify a significant investment.
Finally, there has been interest in an expedited approval
process for medicines used for small populations. We look
forward to continuing discussions with the committee on this
issue.
Thank you for the opportunity to share with you our ideas.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Radcliffe follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Now recognizes Mr. Sasinowski, 5 minutes for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF FRANK J. SASINOWSKI

Mr. Sasinowski. Thank you for inviting me to testify.
I would like to introduce my colleagues, Alex Verone and
James Valentine, who helped me prepare this testimony.
My testimony draws on 31 years of aiding new medicines get
to patients in need. My career started at FDA in 1983, and I
have a special passion for helping on therapies for rare
diseases, because both my son and I have rare diseases. And I
have been on the Board of Directors of NORD for the past 14
years. I am here today representing both myself and NORD. NORD,
for over 40 years, has been the voice for the 30 million
Americans with rare diseases.
I will be presenting 4 proposals for you to consider. My
first proposal is for FDA to adopt a practice of considering
the appropriateness of accelerated approval for each new
therapy. Both PCAST and FDASIA exhort FDA to use its
accelerated approval authority more. Last September, Alex
Verone and I submitted to FDA our 65-page analysis of FDA's
accelerated approvals. Our analysis shows that FDA knows how to
use this authority, and even how to use it flexibly, creatively
and nimbly. In my view, what is needed now is simply to give
this accelerated approval pathway greater visibility, so that
it will be used more frequently for the benefit of patients, as
was recommended by both PCAST and FDASIA.
So my first proposal is for this committee to encourage FDA
to consider whether accelerated approval is appropriate for
every new drug therapy that is brought by sponsors to the FDA.
My second proposal is for sponsors and FDA to use
intermediate clinical endpoints, also known by its acronym of
ICE, more often to secure accelerated approval. Alex and I
analyzed the FDA accelerated approval precedents according to
the 3 major factors that FDA described in the document that Ms.
Radcliffe just mentioned, its June 2013 FDA guidance on
expedited approvals. We analyzed the FDA approvals according to
these three factors, and we found that two of these three
factors are far less relevant to accelerated approvals, when
accelerated approvals based on intermediate clinical endpoints
or ICE, rather than surrogate endpoints. Therefore, the
quantity of evidence that sponsors must acquire and present to
FDA, and that FDA then must review, may be substantially
reduced if more accelerated approvals are based on intermediate
clinical endpoints or ICE.
So to get more medicines to patients faster, this committee
should encourage both sponsors and FDA simply to use more ICE.
My third proposal is to tap into the statutory authority
for approving drugs that Congress created and gave to FDA in
the 1997 FDAMA Law. This authority stated that FDA could
approve a drug based on a single study with confirmatory
evidence. Congress created this as an alternative to the
standard Congress created in 1962, which has generally been
interpreted to require two studies. This 1997 alternatives
authority has been almost universally overlooked by all
stakeholders, academia, sponsors, patients and even largely by
the FDA as well.
I now ask my colleagues to hold up a chart. This chart is
in my written testimony in greater detail, but this committee
could propose that this simple chart be used at FDA Advisory
Committee, and other FDA sponsor meetings and at other forums
to ensure that all the existing authorities are considered by
every stakeholder for every new drug. Notice that the second
line identifies that 1997 statutory authority or standard of a
single study with confirmatory evidence, and the fourth line
ensures that all recognize the potential of accelerated
approval. So this one simple chart could help accomplish both
of my first and third proposals.
Thank you, James and Alex.
My fourth proposal is for the committee to encourage FDA to
issue guidance on cumulative distribution analyses of clinical
study results. This could help understand the clinical
meaningfulness of a new therapy. PCAST recommended that FDA
issue more guidances to communicate innovative advances and
regulatory science just like this one of cumulative
distribution analyses.
So I am deeply honored by you to have been asked to appear
before you today. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sasinowski follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Supporting documents submitted by Mr. Sasinowski are
available at http://docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/
ByEvent.aspx?EventID=102237.]
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize Mr. Allen, 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JEFF ALLEN

Mr. Allen. Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member
Pallone, and members of the subcommittee.
I am Jeff Allen, Executive Director of Friends of Cancer
Research, a think-tank and advocacy organization dedicated to
accelerating science and technology from bench to bedside.
It is an honor to be here, and I would also like to thank
our founder and driving force, Ellen Sigal, who is here today
as well.
Today, I would like to focus on a few of the key items
identified within the report to the President, by describing
areas in which there has been significant progress, and areas
to which the committee might turn its attention and resources.
One key challenge that the working group explored was
improving drug regulation at FDA. The authority and tools to
fill FDA's monumental responsibility continues to evolve to
keep pace with current science. I would like to provide a few
examples that demonstrate this.
In collaboration with our expert colleagues from FDA, NIH,
patient advocacy industry, and academia, we at Friends of
Cancer Research proposed a series of approaches of how clinical
testing could be modified to expedite the development of new
targeted therapies that show dramatic clinical activity early
in development. With the leadership of this committee, and your
colleagues in the Senate, the creation of the new FDA program
called the Breakthrough Therapies Designation was codified into
law as part of the FDA Safety and Innovation Act.
FDA has been rapidly implementing the program in many
serious disease settings, and, Mr. Chairman, I am happy to
report that in just 2 years, 178 requests for breakthrough
designation have been submitted, 44 have been granted, and 6
breakthrough therapies have been approved.
It has been estimated by some of the sponsors of the drugs
that the breakthrough therapy program accelerated the
development process by several years, without compromising the
long-held standards for safety and efficacy. The all-hands-on-
deck approach demonstrates the importance of the public-private
collaboration that the designation brings to enhanced science-
based regulation, translating to reduced development times,
increased investment in the biotech sector, and the improved
health of patients that previously had few treatment options.
This is an incredible example of Congress putting partisan
politics aside, and acting deliberately to address one of our
country's most pressing health issues.
Another key component of the report to the President
explored ways of addressing inefficiencies in clinical trial
conduct. There is no doubt that our antiquated patchwork
clinical trial system makes developing new treatments a
cumbersome, expensive and protracted process.
To being to address this issue directly, and truly change
the course of how trials are done, Friends of Cancer Research
is spearheading a project working with a large diverse set of
partners from academia, industry, Government and advocacy, to
develop a modern-day clinical trial as innovative as the
therapies it seeks to test. In this project, called Lung Map, a
master protocol will govern how multiple drugs, each targeting
a different biomarker, will be tested as a potential treatment
for lung cancer. Each arm of the study will test a different
drug, and utilize cutting-edge screening technology to identify
which patient is a molecular match to each arm. This will
create a rapidly evolving infrastructure that can
simultaneously examine the safety and efficacy of multiple new
drugs. Lung Map has the ability to reinvigorate the research
enterprise, and rapidly facilitate the development of
molecularly targeted medicine. This approach has the ability to
improve enrollment, enhance consistency, increase efficiency,
reduce cost, and most importantly, improve patient lives.
One way that the FDA communicates to researchers and
developers about new approaches or changes to current policy is
through guidance documents, an interchange that is vital to
modernizing the enterprise. The report recommends that external
partnerships could be beneficial in providing input on
scientific subjects that would be fit for guidance. Neutral
public venues that can facilitate the exchange of ideas can
greatly inform the topics and approaches that FDA may take when
considering best practices and guidance development. Much like
FDA benefits from hearing the challenges faced by the research
community, the external community gains from hearing from FDA.
Processes and adequate funding levels need to be established to
increase FDA's ability to gain external input and develop new
guidance. This has the ability to greatly enhance the success
of research endeavors, encourage innovation--innovative
collaborations, and can inform by the legislation.
In addition to the elements raised in the report, we at
Friends of Cancer Research believe that consideration should
also be given to opportunities in the development of companion
diagnostics. Building on the foundation that FDA has provided
through recent guidance, this committee could facilitate new
policies to advance how novel technologies can inform the use
of new drugs to ensure that the right patients have access to
the right treatments at the right time.
The examples that I have provided today are case studies
that can be learned from, and are steppingstones upon which
more work can be done. Innovation is incremental, but with
better understanding of the disease processes, these
incremental steps toward improving health can and will be
transformational. The regulatory framework has been put into
place, and enhanced collaborations will be needed to uncover
new breakthroughs and alleviate inefficiencies. Aligning
policies with the current state of science can enhance
biomedical research and improve the lives of patients. The 21st
Center Cures Initiative can be the next step toward that goal.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Allen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognizes Dr. Tunis, 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF SEAN R. TUNIS

Mr. Tunis. Well, I would also like to thank Chairman Pitts,
Mr. Pallone, and the members of the subcommittee for the chance
to testify today.
Again, my name is Sean Tunis, and I am currently the CEO
for the Center for Medical Technology Policy. It is a nonprofit
that works on bringing together stakeholders to improve the
quality and efficiency of clinical research.
I did serve as one of the invited experts to the PCAST
council members and staff, and because of my former role as
chief medical officer for the Medicare Program, I thought it
would be most useful to reflect on these recommendations in the
report from the perspective of the payer and the health system.
It wasn't directly addressed in the report, but a number of the
recommendations have implications for the health delivery
system that I think need to be thought through more carefully
in order to ensure that the recommendations can be implemented
successful.
And I really think the--kind of the key message I wanted to
deliver and what it comes down to is that because many of the
recommendations in the report essentially shift evidence
requirements and data development from the pre-market space to
the post-market space, in other words, the delivery system, it
is going to be important to think about how it is going to be
possible to efficiently conduct clinical research in the post-
market environment, in other words, how do we embed the
evidence development that is not generated preapproval in the
context of delivering clinical care. And so I am going to offer
3 recommendations or suggestions about how that kind of
evidence can be produced.
Just to briefly highlight the recommendations in the PCAST
report that sort of have this effect, essentially, of shifting
clinical research and evidence development to the post-market
space, of course, there is the increased use of accelerated
approval, depends more on intermediate and surrogate markers,
and, therefore, the expectation is that more of the evidence of
safety, effectiveness and even value are going to be generated
while these products are in use in the delivery system. The
special medical use as well as the adaptive licensing
mechanisms also have the same effect, which is, again, to
require the ability to do efficient clinical research and data
collection in the post-market space.
So in order for the PCAST recommendations, I think, to have
the desired impact, which is to speed innovation, and to do
that in a way that doesn't in some way compromise the
expectation of safe, effective and high-value medications in
clinical use, we are going to need, again, to think about how
do we get that kind of data out of the delivery system.
As members of the subcommittee know very well, what is
simultaneously going on to these innovation discussions is a
lot of health systems reform that is increasingly pushing
payers and the health systems to be looking for improved
effectiveness, real-world effectiveness, and even the value of
new medications. So at the same time as we are hoping to
introduce new drugs into the healthcare system with less
information about safety and efficacy, we are also putting
pressure on payers and providers and health systems to demand
more evidence of comparative effectiveness and value in order
to be able to deliver high quality and efficient care. So we
have got some tension between what we are trying to do on each
ends of this policy spectrum.
So, again, I think the solution to this is to think about
ways in which we can be more efficient about data development
in post-market studies. And basically, I will mention three
kinds of components that I think are important to this. The
first one is developing more clarity about what constitutes
adequate evidence of effectiveness and value from the
perspective of payers, clinicians and patients. And what I
really mean by this is, in the same way that regulators produce
guidance to explain what kinds of studies are necessary to
achieve regulatory approval, there is currently nothing that
provides guidance to product developers on what meets
expectations of real-world effectiveness and value. And so, in
a sense, the whole world of regulatory science, which is all
about giving product developers clear guidance on clinical
development, I think needs to be kind of mirrored in something
you might call reimbursement science, which is how do you
develop evidence for reimbursement decisions.
The second recommendation is, and some people might think
reimbursement science is an oxymoron, but, you know, possibly
we will make some progress.
The second and third recommendation, since I am running out
of time, is--one is that we need to build infrastructure in the
healthcare system to do better research. The NIH is working on
that. And, finally, we are going to need to find reimbursement
mechanisms that are actually conditional on collecting
additional data. Medicare has used coverage with evidence
development. There are other forms, but if we are actually
going to be shifting these data collection requirements to
post-approval, we need the payers to be willing to pay for
things while they are being evaluated, much like the FDA has
post-approval authority. I think the payers need to implement
post-reimbursement authorities for--to collect the additional
data on safety and effectiveness.
So thanks again for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tunis follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. Thanks all the
witnesses for their prepared testimony. We will now begin
questions and answers. I will begin the questioning and
recognize myself 5 minutes for that purpose.
Dr. Neil, the PCAST report notes that the pharmaceutical
industry is facing the largest patent cliff in its history. As
a result, many companies are adopting more conservative
approaches to research and development, particularly in areas
with growing healthcare and economic burden, such as
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and psychiatric
diseases. What role could additional economic incentives play
in driving R&D into these areas where there is a critical
public health need, Dr. Neil?
Mr. Neil. I think they could be extremely valuable in
helping to offset some of the cost associated with the risk,
and the length of time these programs require. I do think
though that it may be as productive or more productive to
invest additional resources in things like endpoints,
intermediate clinical endpoints, clinical endpoints. Often, we
have found that as we try to study some of these
neurodegenerative diseases, they--it is a very long time
between onset and ultimate disability, and if that is what
needs to be used as an endpoint, it makes the feasibility of
these trials much lower. So we haven't done enough to really
invest, I think, in creating such endpoints, and I am thinking
about Alzheimer's Disease, I am thinking about stroke as a
couple of those, but there are many others, and some of the
rarer neurodegenerative diseases have been inadequately studied
with respect to their natural history as well. So I think some
targeted efforts there would also be very helpful, as well as
accelerating the pace of discovery work where diseases like
schizophrenia, we have been out of really promising targets for
some time.
Mr. Pitts. OK. Ms. Radcliffe, what challenges do drug
sponsors and the FDA face today in the use of surrogate
endpoints and biomarkers, and what are the current barriers to
their more widespread adoption and use? And maybe you want to,
just for the general public, tell us what biomarkers,
endpoints, define them for us too briefly.
Ms. Radcliffe. Sure. Absolutely. So biomarkers, and the
terms biomarkers and endpoints are used in various different
ways in the scientific community, so I am going to tell you the
way in which I urge that we understand those terms. A biomarker
is really a signal of--it is a biological signal of another
biological process. It is really that simple. A biomarker can
be used in many different ways in research and development. For
it to be used in the regulatory context, all parties have to
have a great confidence in the relationship between the
biological signal and the biological process that it is
signaling. An endpoint in regulatory terms, a clinical
endpoint, is something that affects how a patient feels,
functions or survives. So in relatively simple terms, it is
something that the patient will actually recognize. A surrogate
endpoint is a marker that can point toward the ultimate
clinical benefit for a patient. So an example of that would be
viral load is a surrogate endpoint for a treatment effect for
HIV and AIDS drugs. An intermediate clinical endpoint is a
clinical endpoint that can be measured earlier on in the
disease process. And so an example of an intermediate clinical
endpoint would be something that is called forced vital
capacity, that is the ability for a patient to expel a large
amount of air, and it can be a good marker of progression and
possibly treatment effect in neurodegenerative disorders. And
so the use of intermediate clinical endpoints can expedite drug
development because you are now working toward treatment of an
endpoint that you are seeing earlier on in the disease process,
and that may enable you to ward off further--effects further
down the line in the disease process. So why is it important
for our companies? The use of surrogate endpoints and
intermediate clinical endpoints can expedite drug development,
and enable us to get a product to patients earlier with smaller
and shorter clinical trials. In terms of the obstacles that we
face, as I said, there is not the kind of clarity that we would
like around what FDA will accept as a surrogate endpoint, and
what FDA will accept as an intermediate clinical endpoint. The
evidentiary standards that FDA is likely to require at this
time really require a lot more discussion with the Agency, and
also just in terms of process, as I said in my testimony, there
isn't at this time a good practice of companies and sponsors
talking about intermediate clinical endpoints earlier on in the
drug development process, so that you can really work toward
the use of those endpoints as you develop your submission to
the FDA.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
My time has expired. Recognize the ranking member 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to explore in some detail one of the
recommendations from the PCAST report, specifically,
recommendation number three, which states that FDA should
expand the use of its existing authorities for accelerated
approval, and for confirmatory evidence. And as I understand
it, there are already a few pathways in the current law and
regulations for the expedited review of drugs, including fast
track, breakthrough therapy, accelerated approval and priority
review, and the goal of all these pathways is to speed the
development and availability of new treatments to patients at
the earliest possible time. Just a couple of years ago in the
2012 FDA Safety Innovation Act, we updated the fast track
approval mechanism and established the breakthrough therapy
path. And then, of course, the 21st Century Cures Initiative
seems to have been promoted at least in part by what has been
described as a regulatory system that is a relic of the past,
but this is confusing to me because we just finished updating
the system, and providing FDA with new tools. So I also didn't
hear anyone at this--the first roundtable with the 21st Century
Cures Initiative who would describe FDA's drug regulatory
program as somehow out-of-date.
So I would like to hear more from our experts here today on
how effectively FDA has been using these current authorities,
and where there might be room for improvement.
First, let me ask Dr. Allen. Your testimony describes FDA's
use of the breakthrough therapy pathway, which sounds like it
has been a real success. Can you say a little more about that,
and describe how FDA has used any of the other expedited review
authorities with respect to cancer drugs, and have you
identified any problems or issues in its application of these
authorities?
Mr. Allen. Sure. Well, I again want to thank the committee
for their leadership in creating such a designation.
The tools that FDA currently has, based on the 2012 law and
others, have been widely used in cancer. I think well over a
third of all anticancer drugs have utilized the accelerated
approval process, for example. So it certainly is valuable. The
purpose of the breakthrough therapy designation was to, as you
say, Mr. Pallone, too, advance and give the flexibility for FDA
to respond to the current state of science, because what we are
seeing in oncology and many other genetically driven diseases
is the ability to target different genetic alterations, and
stop the progression of the disease. And this calls for a
different way of doing business, and we believe that is what
the FDA is doing, and they have robustly implemented the new
breakthrough therapies provision and are excising it regularly.
I think it is worth noting the resource intensity of this
program. It certainly is serving its purpose of getting the
most promising therapies to patients, but the resources
required to do so are not insignificant, and I know there is a
hearing elsewhere today considering the funding for FDA, and I
would encourage them to do what they can to support that.
I think the historic basis of speaking to those regulations
is because there were laws in 1960 that established the safety
and efficacy standard, and those are extremely important that
we continue to optimize regulation and drug development within
those important standards.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thanks.
Mr. Sasinowski, your testimony also describes the ways in
which FDA has used these authorities over the years, and it
sounds like you would also say that FDA uses them frequently
and prudently. Is that correct?
Mr. Sasinowski. Mr. Pallone, prudently but not frequently.
The analysis that my colleague, Alex Verone, and I did, we
looked at all of the FDA accelerated approvals for therapies
other than cancer, and Mr. Allen is right, it is often used in
cancer. I was at FDA during the AIDS crisis, and so I was part
of the group that helped create Subpart H, which was very
useful for stemming the AIDS crisis. So accelerated approval
has been used, but you will notice in our PCAST report that you
cite, Mr. Pallone, that 87--we say in the PCAST report 87
percent of all the accelerated approvals have been for cancer
and for AIDS. And so what Mr. Verone and I did is we looked at
every accelerated approval from the mid-'80s through June 2013.
We found only 19 drugs that had been approved, not for cancer,
not for AIDS, under accelerated approval. We found that the FDA
did use accelerated approval appropriately in those 19 cases,
but it was only 19 cases, Mr. Pallone, and that is why I think
PCAST said we should use it more. I think that is why this
committee and Congress said in FDASIA, FDA, use it more. That
is why there are 2 women who I was surprised to see here, who
are in this room, who have between the 2 of them, 3 boys with
DMD; Christine McSherry and Jane McNeary, and I know that they
represent, as a member of NORD, they represent the kind of
Americans who are suffering and who are looking for FDA to use
accelerated approval more often for conditions that are not
AIDS, not cancer.
So I think appropriately they used it, and that is why I
suggest this chart, because I have been to thousands of FDA
meetings since I left the FDA, with sponsors seldom does the
word Subpart H, accelerated approval or fast track ever get
mentioned. People are not focused on it, that is why I urge you
to consider exhorting the FDA through some simple mechanisms
like a chart, like at every advisory committee when the chair
of an advisory committee turns to the FDA and says, ``What are
we supposed to do with this date? We know what the Congress'
standard was in 1962: two adequate and well-controlled studies.
This is a rare disease. Something like Duchenne Muscular
Dystrophy. We don't have two adequate and well-controlled
studies, so what are we supposed to do?''
Well, there is a lot of hemming and hawing, and I think
that if we had a chart like this that was proposed, that would
summarize in a clear way that there are alternate authorities
like the 1997 authority that Congress created, which was the
single study with confirmatory evidence, and I have explained
that in great detail in my written testimony, that that would
be very useful, as well as to remind everybody of accelerated
approval.
Mr. Pallone, I was at a hearing just last summer, in August
2013, for a drug for autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease. My spiritual director had his nephew die of this
disease. I know people who have died of this rare disease. It
is a terrible disease, and yet not once did anyone ever mention
at that hearing the possibility of accelerated approval, even
though it is a serious disease, it is for a situation where
there are no approved therapies, it is ripe for consideration
under accelerated approval, just like PCAST, just like you and
FDASIA said FDA should do, and yet it was never considered.
So I am struggling to think of ways, Mr. Pallone and the
committee, to try to bring this forward in practical ways, and
that is why I come up with something as simple as a chart. It
might seem pedantic, it might seem trite, but I think sometimes
simple things work. And so I think you are right when my
analysis shows that the FDA has used this authority
appropriately and prudently, but not frequently. And the other
thing that has been completely overlooked is that single study
with confirmatory evidence standard, which Congress created in
1997 and FDA seldom used.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the vice chair of the subcommittee, Dr.
Burgess, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I actually
appreciate that last part of your discussion, Mr. Sasinowski.
You started at the FDA just a couple of years after I started
in private practice, and I can recall back in the '80s being
frustrated by the fact that it seemed like there were new
therapies that were available in Europe, and it took us forever
to get them in this country. Of course, Chairman Waxman, or
Ranking Member Waxman, deserves a lot of credit for starting
the user fee agreements, which we reauthorized in the last
Congress.
Dr. Neil, I wanted to ask you just very quickly if you
could--you mentioned that your company was involved in novel ex
vivo gene therapies. Could you give us a synopsis or a summary
of--without violating, obviously, propriety interests, but can
you tell us some of the directions that you are--in which you
are working?
Mr. Neil. Yes. The core of our technology is something
called the bio pump. So we remove a small piece of dermis, the
layer just below the skin, about half the size of a toothpick,
and we transduce that with a viral vector to express a
transgene, a protein that a patient with a rare and orphan
disease might not express at all, or might express in too low a
quantity, and it is causing their disease, and they could
benefit from having this restored. And after the transduction,
all of the viral antigens are washed away and we re-implant
this small piece of tissue back into the patient, so the
patient effectively manufactures their own protein that they
could not manufacture before, or in a sufficient quantity, and
that then addresses, we hope, the disease in question.
And we are aiming this technology at a number of rare and
orphan diseases that could benefit.
Mr. Burgess. And in addition to rare diseases, are there
more common diseases that you are also working toward?
Mr. Neil. Yes, that is very likely, but I think that we
shouldn't overlook the fact that very often we can learn so
much by studying a rare and orphan disease initially because
the population is enriched, we understand the mechanisms much
better, and then we can apply the lessons that we have learned
to the larger syndromic diseases.
Mr. Burgess. Since a lot of this panel, or a this hearing
today, deals with the regulatory aspects, how is that--how has
your experience been then when you take this information back
to the FDA for regulatory approval? Do they understand what you
are doing, are they able to give you the proper direction about
how to structure your studies so that regulatory approval can
be achieved?
Mr. Neil. Yes, our interactions with FDA have been a little
bit earlier than approval, because we are just embarking on
some of these programs in the clinic, but those interactions
have been very positive, and they seem very helpful and very
interested in the technology, but we and other companies are
now bringing to FDA very novel therapies which incorporate many
different elements, such as medical devices, gene therapy,
tissue transplant and so on, and I think that, and I directed
some of my testimony toward that, the increasing complexity of
these types of treatments, something that FDA is going to need
to invest in expertise in----
Mr. Burgess. That is----
Mr. Neil [continuing]. Culture.
Mr. Burgess. That is correct. I don't mean to interrupt you
because I am going to run out of time, but that is correct,
they don't have the----
Mr. Neil. Right.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. Expertise currently. They do have
to develop it.
Dr. Tunis, I really appreciated your end of the discussion.
You talked about from the payer aspect to the CMS aspect.
Certainly we want to avoid the public relations disasters that
were of Asten and Provenge from a year or two ago, and one of
my concerns through a lot of the hearings that we have had here
is anyone looking at the end use of this, I mean, OK, we have
got NIH developing, we have got the FDA which is going to
regulate and/or approve, but we also need to involve the payer
at some point to let them know what is coming so that they can
appropriately adjust. So I do appreciate you bringing that up,
and I think oftentimes we overlook that aspect of the
regulatory pathway.
Mr. Neil. Yes, and, you know, I think, just to point out, I
think, you know, the payers are often viewed collectively as,
you know, not in favor of innovation or somehow resistant to,
you know, new technologies, and while, you know, there are
certain ways in which that is true, I think it is also true
that the health system understands that innovation is
potentially a way to get better outcomes at even lost costs,
you know. Treating disease is obviously, you know, cheaper than
treating a--you know, treating it forever is cheaper than
having to continue to treat it in an ongoing way.
So the challenge really is that--and as I said, I do think
the payers get left out of these conversations. There were a
couple of payers on the PCAST committee, and again, most of the
discussion about the--is about regulatory issues, but, you
know, a metaphor I use is you don't want to create this
superhighway of innovation in the regulatory space, and then
have a gravel road, you know----
Mr. Burgess. Um-hum.
Mr. Neil [continuing]. In the reimbursement space for
those----
Mr. Burgess. And I have been down that gravel road. You
know, when I was in medical school, we learned about the
treatment of peptic ulcer disease. It was a surgery, a highly
selective vagotomy of removal of part of your body, but I also
remember going to a luncheon meeting back in the '70's where
Dr. Fordtran from Dallas came down and talked about this new
idea he had of a histamine blocker to deal with ulcer disease.
And, of course, now half the country is on proton pump
inhibitors, and the highly selective vagotomy is in the
Smithsonian Institution. No one does them anymore. You would
have to go--it itself is a rare disease because you--no one has
to have that anymore. It is hard to get the same, you know, to
be able to account for the savings that Dr. Fordtran created
with the development of his product, because all of the baby
boomers who at that point were in medical school, but were on
their way to developing ulcer disease, would have required that
surgery at some point in their future.
Mr. Neil. To say nothing of them cured of antibiotic
therapy for helicobacter pylori, which----
Mr. Burgess. Sure.
Mr. Neil. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. He--his gavel is the
surrogate endpoint for my questioning.
Mr. Pitts. We will have a second round.
The Chair thanks the gentleman. Now recognize the gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, again, thank our
witnesses for your testimony today.
Without greater investment in antibiotics, we will face a
future that resembles the days before these miracle drugs were
developed, one in which people died of common infections, and
many medical advances that we take for granted today will
become impossible, including surgery, chemotherapy and organ
transplantation.
Dr. Neil, you mentioned in your statement, in 2012, PCAST
recommended a limited population drug approval pathway in order
to facilitate drug development. PCAST specifically identified
antibiotics as an area where this pathway would be important,
and as we know, the need for new antibiotics is urgent. The
World Health Organization reiterated this just this month in a
report of antibiotic resistance which said it is a very real
potential for post-antibiotic era here in the near future.
My colleague, Dr. Gingrey, and I introduced the ADAPT Act
which would create the pathway PCAST described. FDA officials
from the Commissioner down have talked about the Agency's
desire to work with Congress to get this done. We are eager for
Congress to act quickly and given the urgency of the situation.
Dr. Neil, could you explain how this pathway would benefit
antibiotic development?
Mr. Neil. I think that--yes, it is on. I think it would
benefit it tremendously, not only the development of it, but
also the appropriate use of these new drugs once they get into
clinical use. But the idea that one can identify very easily
through surrogate markers the appropriate population with a
serious infection, and be able to address that much more
quickly, speed these antibiotics to the market, I think is a
terrific one. And not only that, I think what we learn from
this and how to implement it can be applied to other serious
diseases later on, potentially.
Mr. Green. OK. Dr. Allen, cancer patients are particularly
at risk for serious bacterial infections. Patients undergoing
chemotherapy have suppressed immune systems, making it more
difficult for them to fight off other diseases. Without
antibiotics, chemotherapy would be significantly more
dangerous.
Dr. Allen, you talk about a limited population pathway for
antibiotics. Could--this could be important to cancer patients.
Can you talk to us about that?
Mr. Allen. Sure. Well, as you mentioned, and thank you for
your leadership in this area, risk of infection for cancer
patients is certainly increased, and it has the potential to
interrupt their treatment on a chemotherapy or other anticancer
drug, that they may have to stop that treatment, and it could
have a detrimental effect toward harnessing the growth of the
cancer. Even more detrimentally is if a cancer patient who is
immune-compromised is infected with microbial infection, it
poses them at risk for serious adverse events and fatality. So
it is not insignificant here both in the treatment of the
cancer, but also in the survival of the patient.
Mr. Green. OK. In 1990, there were almost 20 pharmaceutical
companies with large antibiotic research and development
programs. Today, there are only two or three large companies
with strong active programs, and only a small number of
companies that have more limited programs.
Ms. Radcliffe, in your testimony, you mentioned that the
ADAPT Act and the importance of the voluntary pathway that can
help foster novel drug development. Can you elaborate on how
this kind of pathway would address some of the economic
challenges, particularly the size, the cost and time it takes
to complete clinical trials that may be hindering antibiotic--
investment in antibiotics?
Ms. Radcliffe. Yes, certainly. BIO supports the ADAPT Act,
and we thank you very much as well as Representative Gingrey
for your work on developing this pathway. It has to walk a very
fine line.
Mr. Green. Yes.
Ms. Radcliffe. It is important that sponsors be able to
seek the designation early, or follow the pathway early on in
development so that they can gain the benefits of being able to
design a clinical pathway in a smaller population, and with
attention from FDA as to the greatest clinical efficiency in
those trials. This Bill would permit that to happen. It is also
important that the pathway not infringe on the pathway--on the
practice of medicine, and that is an important protection for
patients. Physicians have to be able to use a product that they
believe to be the best for their patient and the circumstances
where the patient finds him or herself. And so, therefore, it
is very important that such a pathway not infringe on the
path--on the practice of medicine, and the Bill that you have
introduced does that. So we think that it will be a very
great--of very great assistance to sponsors in terms of
incentivizing work in this incredibly important area for
antibiotic resistance.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know I am out of
time. To meet this crisis, we need a multi-prong approach that
includes enhanced monitoring, better use of antibiotics, and
investment in new therapies, and we can no longer ignore the
risk of antibiotic resistance, the epidemic and the growing
number of lives these superbugs claim.
And I thank you for having the hearing today.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is great to have
you all here.
I have been interested, there is a Washington Post story
published May 16 on the movement by States on right-to-try
laws. The one column--part of the end of the article, and, Mr.
Chairman, if we could submit it for the record. I----
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shimkus. There is a story about the spouse, Amy Auden,
from Lone Tree, Colorado, who had--her husband had melanoma, 2-
year battle, the last year they tried to get a promising drug,
couldn't get it, and he has since passed. And her comment is,
of course there was a chance Nick would have been in the 52
percent of the people who are responding to the drug, however,
a 52 percent chance of life is better than a 0 percent chance
of life, which was the dilemma that this family was placed in.
And, hence, you see States moving to address this. It is not--
what--a brief comment on this movement by States on--to right-
to-try laws, and that is probably symptomatic of a slow process
of getting drug therapies quickly to the market. Is that true?
Let us just go from left to right, if you want? And if you
don't want to answer, that is fine. I mean it is----
Mr. Neil. Well, in my experience, FDA has always been very
compliant in getting patients, you know, into small trials or
compassionate use trials. To me, the issue has always been for
smaller companies, having the resources to be able to provide
that, and I think mechanisms----
Mr. Shimkus. This wasn't a small company that she had to
deal with----
Mr. Neil. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. So----
Mr. Neil. Well, yes, I think that there should be some way
for companies to recover their cost, and to get patients into
trials, and to be able to collect the information that you need
to make that----
Mr. Shimkus. Right.
Mr. Neil [continuing]. Usable.
Mr. Shimkus. And please kind of go quickly. I have got--
actually my two official questions that I need to get to.
Ms. Radcliffe. So this is a very, very difficult issue. BIO
has a board-level Biothics Committee which is currently
involved in taking a deep look at the issues around expanded
access. I think everyone understands that if somebody in their
own family were in such a situation that they needed an
investigational product, I think most of us would do everything
that we could to----
Ms. Shimkus. But is the statement----
Ms. Radcliffe [continuing]. Ensure----
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. About the process----
Ms. Radcliffe. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. And how slow and methodical, and
people who--it is happening, I mean these are--there are three
States I think, there is Colorado, one is going to be signed
into law on Saturday, from what I am reading, and that is a
response to people feel that they are not getting a chance to
fight for their life, and they are being held up either in
the--let me move forward. I--because I need to move on on these
two other questions. On the presence counsel raises the fact
that in recent years there has been a regulatory uncertainty
about a variety of important issues that has hindered
investment and innovation. One such issue is combination of
therapies and studies that are required for their approval.
Has FDA since provided sufficient clarity in this area, or
is there need to ensure greater regulatory certainty for
companies to spur further innovation in this increasingly
important area of drug development? Anyone want to try it?
Mr. Neil. I think there is further need, particularly
outside of cancer, to echo Mr. Sasinowski's comments earlier.
Mr. Shimkus. Great, thank you. Anyone else?
Mr. Tunis. Yes, you know, and I would just add again, sort
of related to some of the comments I made in my testimony, that
the better equipped, you know, we are in the context of
delivering healthcare to get the additional information about,
you know, products that are approved through an accelerated
pathway, I think the more the FDA can count on some of the
unanswered questions about safety, you know, safety and
effectiveness to be efficient--to be answered at least at some
point, and then the opportunity to accelerate--to use the
accelerated authorities more frequently, I think, is enhanced
as the delivery system gets better at filling in what is not
studied pre-market.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me finish with this last question, and the
rest I will submit for the record.
A second distinct area that report highlights which is of
particular interest to me is the issue surrounding the
certainty and the regulatory pathway when it comes to therapies
for which patients are picked based upon companion diagnostics.
The companion diagnostic may or may not be approved already,
adding an additional layer of complexity for the sponsor.
Do any of you witnesses have experience in this area to
comment on what needs to be done to encourage investment and
innovation for these personalized approaches?
Mr. Allen. So the trial that I mentioned with regards to
lung cancer is working to try and advance these technologies
through the regulatory process, by using new technologies that
have the ability within a single test to monitor the activity
and presence of different genetic alterations. So it has the
ability to really reform the current single test paradigm with
a single drug. But I think the FDA has been proactive in
issuing guidance documents both from the drug and diagnostic
side, to begin to lay out what their feelings are on how to
generate this evidence, but some of this is also an artifact of
making sure that there is a robust research enterprise to
really understand which are those true alterations that are
driving different diseases.
Mr. Shimkus. Great, thank you.
My time has expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Waxman, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The PCAST report's fourth recommendation is the creation of
a new pathway that manufacturers could choose to use for
initial approval of drugs shown to be safe and effective in a
specific subgroup of patients. The report notes that such
approvals could sometimes be based on relatively small and
rapid clinical trials showing a favorable safety and
effectiveness risk benefit ratio for the narrow population most
in need of the drug, however, it notes that for such a pathway
to work, FDA would have to be confident that the drug generally
would not be used beyond the limited population for which it
was evaluated and intended.
Dr. Allen, do you think the pathway makes sense if FDA does
not have adequate authority to ensure that the designation is
used to inform potential users and payers of the special
standing and circumstances surrounding approval of the drug?
Mr. Allen. I think it is important to state that the
intention of the limited population pathway is to still operate
within the confines of safety and efficacy, and that is not
altered. I think that ensuring appropriate use of these types
of products will require a great deal of interaction with the
medical community, and make sure--in making sure that the
appropriate lines of communications are present, to make sure
that the benefit risk profile within that subset is maintained,
and communicating clearly that the benefit risk for the
entirety of the population may not be known yet, but those
patients with the most life-threatening version of that disease
don't have the time to wait. So this allows for access for
those with the most severe form of a relatively common illness.
Mr. Waxman. So you think that if a--if they have adequate
authority to designate this information, that that would be
important if they are going to release this drug before it is
approved for the general population?
Mr. Allen. Yes, certainly, and having the ability to
communicate is largely based on the label, as it is with all
prescription drugs----
Mr. Waxman. Um-hum.
Mr. Allen [continuing]. But in this case, it would be
important to indicate if there is--if this has only been tested
in the most severely ill patients, through use of some sort of
symbol----
Mr. Waxman. Um-hum.
Mr. Allen [continuing]. Or logo to communicate it, but also
the ability to pre-review marketing material, and that has been
an effective strategy in other areas such as accelerated
approval.
Mr. Waxman. Let me turn to another recommendation in the
report. Recommendation five has to do with another new
potential mechanism for more quickly making new therapies
available to patients, a so-called adaptive approval. As I
understand it, adaptive approval refers to the concept that
there would be a series of approval stages that would gradually
allow a new therapy to be marketed for broader patient
population, so as more is learned about a drug, the use of it
could be expanded.
The PCAST apparently explored this concept extensively,
however, in its final recommendation, it said that Congress
should not legislate this new pathway, instead, any use of this
approach should instead be tested in pilot projects.
Dr. Allen, can you say more about why PCAST was hesitant to
have any legislation on this pathway at this point?
Mr. Allen. Well, I don't want to speak on behalf of the
entire work group, but, you know, from my perspective, it is
very difficult to have one set of rules that governs a very
diverse set of products----
Mr. Waxman. Um-hum.
Mr. Allen [continuing]. And given the pace at which science
is accelerating, I think many of the other witnesses on the
panel today have talked about some really innovative approaches
to different diseases, and it is hard to really kind of draw a
single line in the sand. A drug for prevention is very
different than a drug for late-stage pancreatic cancer, and the
benefit risk profile of that is very different----
Mr. Waxman. Um-hum.
Mr. Allen [continuing]. And so it is hard to codify that
into law.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Sasinowski, do you have anything to add on
this? Why did PCAST recommend against legislation?
Mr. Sasinowski. I cannot speak for PCAST, just as Mr. Allen
can't, but for my own perspective, and that from NORD, is our
perspective is that it was premature. It merits exploration,
but at this time, you know, trying to integrate that and come
up with a system, we didn't have a program in front of us that
had enough granularity for us to speak to it with any
confidence. So I think that this is in the exploratory world.
Mr. Waxman. And I appreciate that.
Let me, Mr. Chairman, just briefly mention one other
critical issue that deserves a hearing in and of itself. We
need new therapies to be marketed but we have got to address
high prices for these therapies. They are no good for anyone if
we can't afford them. And I have a recent article from the New
York Times that describes the hardships faced by patients with
chronic diseases who can't afford the price of their
treatments. It notes that the high prices of treatments for
diabetes and other chronic diseases are a major contributor to
the U.S.'s $2.7 trillion annual health bill. This is an issue
we will have to address at some point. And I would ask
unanimous consent this article be made part of the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Waxman. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
And now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance,
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good morning to you
all.
The State I represent, New Jersey, represented as well by
Ranking Member Pallone, is certainly among the medicine chests
of the world, and a center of significant biomedical
innovation. We are the proud home to tens of thousands of jobs
in these life-saving industries. These companies reinvest
hundreds of millions of dollars each year back into R&D in
order to bring much-needed therapies to patients, to market.
I am deeply concerned about the slashing of R&D budgets
that may look good on a financial spreadsheet, but I think
would be tragic for patients moving forward. I ask this out of
a concern regarding recent news on certain potential acquiring
companies' intentions to slash R&D spending, for example, in
the case of Allergan, a company that provides hundreds of jobs
in the congressional district I serve. A potential buyer of
Allergan has stated that it can achieve cost synergies by
cutting approximately $1 billion in investment in R&D, and
eliminate 5,000 high-quality U.S. jobs, as well as lower its
tax rate from 26 percent to low single digits. Companies like
Allergan invest significant capital in R&D in order to continue
to development treatments for unmet medical needs. These
investments not only support high-skilled, well-paying jobs,
but also continue to deliver new, potentially life-saving
products in the development pipeline. I am concerned that this
could become the model for other such mergers, and we would
lose the engine for innovation and growth here in the United
States.
To you, Ms. Radcliffe, how dependent are future cures on
robust commitments in the private sector to research and
development?
Ms. Radcliffe. Thank you. So BIO is unable to comment on
any particular companies----
Mr. Lance. Yes, I realize that but----
Ms. Radcliffe [continuing]. Businesses and things----
Mr. Lance [continuing]. In general, please.
Ms. Radcliffe. We are not familiar with that. I personally
am not familiar with the situation, specifically in the case
that you mentioned, to make any comment whatsoever. Obviously,
the mission of BIO is to ensure that there is a research--a
robust research and development pipeline in the United States
for the development of new cures that will help patients and
meet unmet medical needs.
Mr. Lance. And do you believe that the level of research
and development now in this country, in private companies,
that, in general, that is the level that should continue and
perhaps even increase?
Ms. Radcliffe. Again, not commenting on any specific
company, because there--every individual company may have its
own situation with respect to exactly the level of research and
development that it is conducting, as opposed to research and
development that it licenses in or that are conducted in
partnerships and so forth, however, I think that it--for BIO,
again, the level of research and development in the United
States is extremely important, as I said in my testimony, it is
very important that we as a Nation continue to elevate our
research and development for the purposes of meeting unmet
medical needs for patients, and also in terms of global
competitiveness.
Mr. Lance. So in general, you favor more research
development funding as opposed to fewer funds in that portion
of the larger whole?
Ms. Radcliffe. As a general principle, yes.
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Ms. Radcliffe. And, of course, it would matter as to how
that research and development funding were specifically spent.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
To the panel in general, the President's Council of
Advisors on Science and Technology states that one of the most
powerful incentives for drug development is granting periods of
exclusivity to new drugs. It also mentions the economic
disincentives created by long clinical trials required for
conditions such as Alzheimer's Disease. The President's council
acknowledges that engaging in the economic analyses required to
provide potential policy changes is beyond the scope of the
report and outside core experience. That being said, Hatch-
Waxman was enacted in 1984, and it is indisputable that the
time and cost it takes to develop a drug has significantly
increased over the course of the last 3 decades. There are many
potential therapies that would address other unmet medical
needs, such as rare diseases and mental health, areas in which
I am involved; I am the Republican chair of the Rare Disease
Caucus, that lack sufficient patent protection.
To the panel in general, what are your thoughts on using
data exclusivity to address these issues?
Mr. Sasinowski. You know, first, on behalf of NORD, I want
to acknowledge Congressman Lance's leadership in the
congressional caucus on rare diseases.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much.
Mr. Sasinowski. We have so awarded you, you know, on behalf
of your leadership in that area, and we believe that the
ability of all--let us say the Orphan Drug Exclusivity Act had
a tremendous incentive that has sparked a great deal of
research and development for rare diseases. You heard even Dr.
Neil mention that his company is moving in the area of rare
diseases, maybe in part because of the economic incentive that
is provided by the Orphan Drug Act. So these kind of incentives
have been powerful. Every person or every organization that has
examined it has found their utility. The question though that
is sometimes raised, Congressman Lance, is should we, for
instance, expand the exclusivity, should we enter into the
orphan drug exclusivity now that we have other forms of
protections that exceed 7 years, perhaps in order to re-
establish the primacy of orphan drug exclusivity that should be
extended beyond 7 years. So these questions have been raised,
and they are serious questions that I think that merit further
discussion.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Allen, you indicated it is hard to
legislate or to come up with a good legislative model when you
have all these different diseases, and you have some which are
fatal and quickly fatal, others which are chronic. Don't you
think simpler might be better, and that maybe Mr. Sasinowski's
chart might be of some help in that regard?
Mr. Allen. Absolutely, and I think that was what was
intended and what the committee enacted through the
breakthrough therapies designation; a very simple requirement
of early clinical activities showing a substantial improvement
that results in a very flexible, intensive collaboration to get
that drug through the process.
Mr. Griffith. And sometimes we get fancy. We like to do
things that are more complicated.
Mr. Sasinowski, you want to talk about your chart again for
a minute? Somebody might not have been watching earlier.
Mr. Sasinowski. Well, thank you, Congressman Griffith. As a
fellow Virginian, I appreciate that.
I am holding up a paperclip. Sometimes a paperclip can do
an awful lot of good. And so I have been involved in this area
of drug innovation, like I said, for more than 3 decades, and I
have wrestled with this question of what can we do as--to
achieve what we all want to achieve, like to accelerate
approvals. And when I have been involved in this process, I see
how often, shockingly, these very simple concepts that the
Congress has created, such as fast track, you know, are not
considered, and if we just give them more visibility, it sounds
so simple, but if we required that at every new therapy that
were to come before the FDA, there would be a simple question
put, is this therapy one that would be a candidate for
accelerated approval, it wouldn't take hardly any resources to
consider that, it wouldn't delay at all the review of it, but
it might spark the very kind of thing that others around the
table here have talked to, that if we are going to engage in
accelerated approval, we have to start that engagement early in
order to identify intermediate clinical endpoints, and identify
surrogates that can be used. And so since we are not
recognizing the utility of it until, at all, very late in the
process, we lose that--we forfeit that opportunity.
So thank you, Congressman, for recognizing that.
Mr. Griffith. All right, I appreciate that. I would ask you
to put on your thinking caps. I don't necessarily expect an
answer today, but if you can think of what other legal barriers
are out there that are currently limiting the potential for
doctors, researchers, drug companies, to communicate on how
therapies are working for patients in the real world, and what
can we do to break down some of those legal barriers that are
preventing reasonable and valuable treatments from getting to
the patients. And if you have an answer today, I would be glad
to hear it. Got about 2 minutes of my time left, if you want to
use it. If not, if you could submit ideas for the record, I
would greatly appreciate that.
Mr. Sasinowski. Well, Congressman----
Mr. Griffith. Yes, sir?
Mr. Sasinowski [continuing]. One thing I am not sure about
the legal--even though I am a lawyer, I am not sure about the
legal impediment. I will have to think about this further, but
many of the members of this committee have suggested issues
that where natural histories or registries could be a very
valuable tool. If we understood more about the natural history,
progression of a disease, we could better understand how it
might work in a small population. We could be able to discern
what is the treatment benefit, versus what is the natural
course of disease, and in the same way, we can tell, separate
what is a safety signal that is a true safety signal that might
be due to the therapy, from just a signal that is part of the
natural course of the progression of the disease.
So these natural histories and registries are very
important. We, on behalf of NORD, have been encouraging the
development of them in every area, and there are difficulties
in trying to get physicians and trying to get medical
institutions to be able to share information, and to be able to
have uniform information so that we are not talking about
apples and oranges. We need some sort of common lexicon in
these areas.
So I don't have the specific answer of what are the legal
aspects of that----
Mr. Griffith. Right.
Mr. Sasinowski [continuing]. But I know what the target
should be.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that.
Mr. Chairman, if anyone would like my time. If not, I yield
back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentlelady from North Carolina, Mrs.
Ellmers, 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
panel for being here today on this very important issue.
I represent the Second District of North Carolina, and in
our district we have 70,000 veterans, and I am very proud to
represent them. Many of them are returning home from
Afghanistan, and certainly have come home from Iraq, and are
living in our communities with PTSD, and I know that is
something that you are all aware of. I understand that new
path-breaking technologies are emerging in treating veterans
with PTSD, specifically, the use of magnetic resonance therapy.
Dr. Neil, this is a question for you: Do you know if the
Department of Veterans Affairs has looked into any of these new
technologies, in particular, into the magnetic resonance
therapy treatment?
Mr. Neil. Thanks, Mrs. Ellmers. No, I do not know that.
Mrs. Ellmers. OK. Getting into the issue of how we need to
move forward on many of these treatments, such as PTSD. You
know, there is broad agreement that the present system that we
have with clinical trials is ineffective and costly. There was
an expert that participated in the PCAST report that estimated
a more efficient clinical trial system could cut the cost in
half across the industry.
Dr. Neil, do you have any thoughts on what we can do to
make trials more efficient and less expensive, and what would
this mean to the R&D budgets across the industry?
Mr. Neil. Well, thank you again. First of all, I would just
say that it would have a huge impact because more than 40
percent of industrial R&D expenditure is in the area of
clinical trials.
Mrs. Ellmers. Um-hum.
Mr. Neil. And one of the reasons that we formed
TranCelerate Biomedical as an industry collaboration was to
address clinical trials' inefficiency, and there, we looked at
this and said these are areas where we do not have, cannot
really realize any competitive advantage, and we are all
spending the same money over and over again to basically
reconstruct a clinical trial's----
Mrs. Ellmers. Um-hum.
Mr. Neil [continuing]. Infrastructure every time. We are
all using the same investigators, we are all training the
investigators, and then we are not recognizing each other's
training. We all have our own Web site to communicate with--so
on and so forth. And so we took that on, and the early results
are very promising as a way to be able to increase a lot of
efficiency, reduce the burden on clinical investigators----
Mrs. Ellmers. Um-hum.
Mr. Neil [continuing]. And reduce the cost. I think there
are a lot of other great examples, the cystic fibrosis example
being one of them, with their clinical trials network where
specific--or disease-specific networks could be created, so you
become plug-and-play by being able to start these trials very
quickly, and this new lung cancer master protocol, I think, is
a great innovation in that direction.
So taken all together, I believe there is an enormous
amount of efficiency on the table. There are a lot of things in
my testimony that I specifically recommended around IRB's,
safety monitoring boards, clinical trial networks, and new
innovative approaches to this like, again, in your State, the
Duke Clinical Research Institute, their collaboration with the
NIH----
Mrs. Ellmers. Um-hum.
Mr. Neil [continuing]. With the collaboratory. So they are
exploring ways to be able to randomize using electronic health
records and test different therapies. I think we need to
explore all of that, and there is no doubt that we will have
the greatest impact on accelerating these cures to patients,
reducing costs, and making the whole system work better if we
could take that on. And I think Congress could do a lot here.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Dr. Neil.
Let me see, time. About a minute left.
Dr. Tunis, I have a question, and it gets back to the issue
that has been asked a number of times on how much of the
patient involvement is taken into account, especially in the
FDA, when it comes to moving forward in an accelerated fashion.
How does the FDA view the patient input on some of these
issues?
Mr. Tunis. Certainly aware that there is a, you know, a
couple of focused initiatives going on at the FDA that are
really trying to enhance the degree to which patient
perspectives are taken into account. There is the patient focus
drug development that I believe came out of the FDAMA was--and
FDASIA was--OK. And then on--in the--actually, in the Center
for Devices, there is a medical device innovation collaborative
that is very much focusing on patient perspectives on benefit
risk, very much with the notion that, you know, one of the
potential delays in product development is what level of
concern, or what willingness patients have to tolerate risk,
and whether the regulatories and the regulator's perspective on
that is different from the patient's. And I think there is a
view that the patients are probably--are--maybe, in many cases,
willing to tolerate more risk, particularly in serious and
life-threatening illnesses.
So it seems to me, you know, from my observations, that
there is a lot of recognition that the patient perspective is
important, and the difficulty is, you know, capturing it both,
you know, individually and aggregately, and how do you make a
regulatory process that might even have to be adjustable based
on individual patient preferences for balancing benefits and
risks. So their interest is there, but I think it is
complicated.
Mrs. Ellmers. It is complicated, and certainly liability
plays into all of this as well.
It looks to me, you really want to comment on this.
Mr. Sasinowski. I do. I do, because----
Mrs. Ellmers. I would like----
Mr. Sasinowski. Because Congress deserves a great deal of
credit, and as the lawyer understands the drug law, a 1906 drug
law was created, it never mentioned--no law until FDASIA ever
mentioned patient. It was assumed that laws could be created in
order to enable a regulator to look at what the medical
industry and the drug industry produced in some sort of
paternalistic way for patients.
Mrs. Ellmers. Um-hum.
Mr. Sasinowski. Now I am speaking on behalf of NORD, who
represents 30 million Americans with rare diseases. And so we
are so pleased that this Congress in FDASIA introduced the
concept for the first time that the patient voice is
meaningful, has a role in drug development, and that is why you
had the patient focus drug development, the structured benefit
risk ratio. The FDA said we can now empanel--the FDASIA law
said empanel patients in part of the FDA internal review team
as special Government employees. Tiffany House with Pompe
Disease did that for a drug for Pompe, and the FDA reviewers,
later when I talked to them, I said what did you learn from
having a patient for the first time as part of your internal
review team? They said we learned that for a patient with a
relentlessly progressive deteriorating disease, that for that
patient to be stable was a huge win.
So the role of the patient is now emergent, and it is due
to this Congress. So I just couldn't avoid taking the time to
say thank you.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you to the panel. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman, I know we went over our time, but I really could not
avoid hearing those thanks and appreciative words. So much of
what we typically do not hear. So thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. And thank you
for your remarks.
The Chair recognizes Mrs. McMorris Rodgers 5 minutes for
questions.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Would any of you, and maybe specifically Ms. Radcliffe or
Dr. Neil, speak to the bureaucratic or regulatory burdens faced
in starting or conducting clinical trials? And when was the
last time that we, as a Nation, or Congress addressed the
regulatory framework which governs how clinical trials are
conducted, and do you think it is time for an update, given new
technologies we can now bring to bear?
Mr. Neil. Yes, I do think that this is an important issue,
as I said previously, which is impacting the speed of
development and its cost, especially, and also its
effectiveness. So I do think this is worth a re-examination. I
think there are a lot of things that we could potentially do at
the statutory level. And here, I am thinking about standardized
contracts for investigators, institutional review boards,
safety monitoring boards which could be set up at the national
or regional level, rather than the inefficiencies of having to
establish these at every institution, and not having people who
are necessarily as professionally qualified and experienced in
monitoring these types of studies as they could be, as
examples. And I think that working through public-private
partnerships, or possibly authorizing additional money through
the NIH to allow these trial networks to be established would
also be a great help.
Ms. Radcliffe. Yes, I recommend Dr. Neil's testimony as a
fairly comprehensive list of some of the things that could be
done to expedite clinical trials. For BIO specifically, we have
launched an initiative to look at 4 things. One is central
IRB's, that is to streamline the review of protocols when they
extend over multiple academic centers. The qualification
process for drug development tools, such as biomarkers, and we
have talked a little bit about that earlier in this hearing.
Clinical trial networks. One of the great advantages of
establishing clinical trial networks is to speed up the patient
recruitment process which, today, is very much longer than it
has been in the past. And so we could really make great inroads
to addressing that issue. And finally, adopting a risk-based
approach to clinical trial monitoring using centralized
monitoring mechanisms. So those are 4 areas where we really
want to make some progress at BIO over the coming years.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Thank you. Thank you.
Like many, I have been following the story of an innovative
company, 23andMe, which developed a DNA testing kit that allows
individuals to see which diseases or conditions they may have a
predisposition to. And it seems to me that alerting individuals
that they are more likely to have a certain disease or
condition is a good thing, and it could be something that aids
the development of new and innovative cures. For example, the
genetic make-up of an individual who carries the gene for
Huntington's Disease but does not suffer from the symptoms
could be analyzed to determine what is his specific biology
that stunts the development of that awful disease.
So the question, are products like this making a major step
towards personalized medicine and tailor-made cures, and what
does it mean for millions of people to be able to have crowd
source--to be able to crowd source their genetic information?
Anyone that may want to answer.
Ms. Radcliffe. All right, I will answer. We are--in the
biotechnology industry, we are extremely excited about the
potential for the use of genetic information in the design of
clinical trials, and the expediting of those clinical trials,
and also in healthcare delivery to help physicians and patients
understand the best course of action. I think it is also
important to understand though that information needs to be
delivered in a way that enables the best decision-making by
patients. A very specific example is that a patient might
receive information about a risk of a certain type of cancer,
and take action on that in a way that really would be
detrimental to that person's health. And so as all of this
wonderful information comes out, and as it is made available
more broadly, we also have to put a great deal of thought
toward the context for delivering that health information in a
way that is helpful and not harmful.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Then would you speak to the role
that FDA is playing in the process, and has FDA promoted the
development of these kinds of diagnostic test? Is the FDA
approval process adequately equipped to consider these types of
products?
Ms. Radcliffe. This is an area where BIO has worked for a
long time with FDA. The products that are coming out are so
novel and so different from those that have been reviewed by
FDA in the past, that they really require a different kind of
scrutiny and different expertise. FDA has done a lot to improve
that regulatory process, and to ensure that it has the
expertise internally to manage these new technologies. I think
that in the future, there will be a need for FDA to continue
evolving to make sure that it is keeping up with the pace of
scientific advances.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Thank you. And I too want to thank
the panel and for everyone for participating. I am very excited
about this 21st Century Cures Initiative, like everyone.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Now recognize the gentlelady from Tennessee, Mrs.
Blackburn, 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
thank each of you for taking the time to be here, and I
apologize that we have been jumping up and down from the first
floor where we have Chairman Wheeler with the FCC with a
hearing going on, and I know for some of your groups, having
access to broadband for some of the new medical apps, for
telemedicine concepts, things of that nature, is very
important. It is important to us also. So we have been in and
out of that hearing.
I have been pleased to catch some of the comments about
clinical trials and looking at those meaningful outcomes of
bringing patients into that process, and we were discussing
this in our office this morning. Dr. Summer, who is--does our
health policy in the office, and I were talking about how
important that is to have that impact. And my experience, you
know, you have health professionals like Mrs. Ellmers and Dr.
Cassidy and Dr. Burgess that are on this panel, but I come from
the other side as a community volunteer who was chairman of the
board for the Lung Association, on the Heart Board, the
Arthritis Board, Children's Hospital, those components there in
Nashville. And realizing as we put the emphasis on different
participation for managing disease like asthma and the outreach
we did with the Lung Association, how important it was to hear
from those patents and those patients of how different
protocols and therapies affected them, and what the outcome
was, and the importance of finding something that worked.
And, Dr. Radcliffe, I think it is the reason it was so--
when I went to the State Senate in Tennessee, I took the
initiative of working with a colleague, and we pulled together
a biotechnology task force to begin to look for some of those
personalizations that can come about in the medical field for
treating these--the diseases that impact us. So I have enjoyed
hearing your comments today, and appreciate that you all would
take your time.
Just more one question I want to add to the mix here. And,
Dr. Allen, I am going to come to you on this. We have had a
little bit of discussion this morning as we have looked at
Section 903 in FDASIA, and being able to pull those external
experts into the process, and, of course, the conflict of
interest, things of that nature, always has been such a
problem, but I think that for those of you who are medical
professionals, and for those like me who want to find answers
and find a way to cure some of these diseases, having that
participation is vitally important. And so I would just ask
you, how is the FDA doing as it comes to the involvement and
making it possible for some of these experts to openly
participate, be full participants, in this process, which is
what we are going to have to have if we get to some of these
answers?
Mr. Allen. Right, so I think some of the panelists have
already commented on bringing the FDA's efforts, and bringing
patient expertise to the process and how important that is, in
addition to Section 903 that you mentioned, bringing subject
matter experts into the review process. And I think that was a
very important component of FDASIA to expand on activities that
the FDA was already doing, and might be able to even enhance
through 903, and making sure that there were diverse experts in
really subsets of specialties like rare diseases, or in
different genetic diseases, to make sure that they had access
to them.
You know, again, this goes back to resource-constrained
agency. They simply will never have all of these experts, and
particularly, as medical therapy becomes more and more diverse
and specialized. So I think the--Section 903 provides one way
to allow experts to be more involved in review, and I think we
all can agree that we would like to see the FDA continue to
implement that as rapidly as possible. I think even there is
opportunity beyond just Section 903, which is really focused on
involving expertise in the review process, but even things with
not just the specific review, for things like developing best
practices and guidance documents, there is a real opportunity
to also call on those experts and those patients to make sure
that they are able to contribute to the many diverse and
important things that the FDA is charged with carrying out. And
they continue to have more and more responsibility, and,
unfortunately, not the resources to go along with that, so this
is one way to help open those doors.
Mrs. Blackburn. We will continue to hold them accountable.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, and thank you,
Ranking Member Pallone, for holding today's hearing. I am
pleased that this committee is focusing its efforts on the 21st
Century Cures Initiative, and the President's Council of
Advisors on Science and Technology, PCAST, Report, on Drug
Innovation.
I believe that some of the best work that this Congress did
during the 112th Congress was in working together to pass
FDASIA. I have always been proud to serve on this committee
because of the tremendous impact laws that originate within
this committee can have on medical research and disease
treatments.
The 21st Century Cures Initiative proves that this
committee's commitment to getting new treatments into the hands
of patients as quickly and safely as possible remains strong.
So let me ask you, Dr. Neil, in your written testimony, you
suggested that Congress target its efforts in several different
ways; one of which, and I quote you, was ``to ensure that the
FDA has adequate resources to do their job.'' I think it is
critical the FDA--that the FDA does have adequate funding and
staff resources in place in order to meet the demands of
increasingly complicated and advanced medical therapies. I know
there was significant frustration last year when sequestration
caused $85 million in pharmaceutical and medical device company
paid user fees to be unavailable to the FDA. Fortunately, the
fiscal year 2014 Omnibus Appropriations Act restored the
ability and the availability of these funds to the FDA.
However, beyond funding, Dr. Neil, you mentioned that, and
again, I am quoting you, ``new trial designs and clinical
endpoints will require collaborative efforts with academics and
patient advocacy groups.''
So could you elaborate on how academics and patient
advocacy groups can better assist the FDA with the resources
they need to meet the demands of 21st century medical
treatments?
Mr. Neil. Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Engel. I believe
that FDA should be given more resources so that they can engage
consultants, convene meetings with outside experts and also
with patient advocacy groups to a greater extent. And I also
think part of their--this new resources allocation that they
might get beyond their base budget funding could allow them to
hire more staff that could engage with small companies along
the way to be able to guide them through the process more
efficiently. I think they don't have enough money right now to
be able to support the sort of scientific work that they need
to do, in other words, there could be a lot more scholarship
and original research in the areas of regulatory science that
impinges on all of this inside the FDA, both an intramural and
extramural program, and also the ability, just simple things
like being able to travel to scientific meetings, I know that
that is constrained right now too. And all of these things
would help them to be able to create a more scientific culture
internally, to be apprised of the latest advances in science,
and to be able to incorporate that as they need to in their
review process.
Mr. Engel. Well, thank you.
I mentioned to Dr. Woodcock during our last FDASIA hearing
in November 2013, but I am particularly interested in the
development and approval of drugs for rare diseases. I am a co-
author of the Paul D. Wellstone muscular dystrophy community
assistance, research and education amendments of 2008 and 2013.
I did it in conjunction with our colleague, Representative
Burgess, and one of the aspects of FDASIA I am most interested
in is the improvements made to the various expedited approval
pathways, and the establishment of the breakthrough therapy
pathway. To me, diseases like muscular dystrophy are why the
expedited approval pathways are so important. One type of
muscular dystrophy, Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, is the most
commonly lethal genetic disorder of children worldwide,
affecting 1 in every 3,500 live male births. There is no cure,
it is always fatal, and often at a young age, so the best hope
for those with Duchenne is to treat the symptoms and delay its
progression. However, in recent years, the muscular dystrophy
research pipeline has held much promises, potentially life-
saving therapies appear on the horizon, some of which are a
result of Congress' efforts to improve research into this
spectrum of muscle-weakening diseases through the MD Care Act,
which was first passed and signed into law in 2001.
So it would appear to me that establishing quality
intermediate endpoints that can add value to future trials is
vital for experimental medications to be considered under the
various expedited approval pathways.
So my question is recognizing the significant challenges
that exist in developing therapies within the rare disease
space, how can the FDA, NIH, drug companies and patient
advocacy organizations better work together to ensure proper
parameters for success and failure, being established through
the critical trial process? Anybody want to comment on that?
Mr. Sasinowski. Well, Congressman Engel, I couldn't applaud
you more for your work in the area, and with the MD Care Act
and others, for reaching out to these communities of patients
with rare diseases. So thank you for your work in that area.
I think that my testimony--my written testimony, I tried to
describe what I thought would be four proposals that would
advance the interests of those with rare diseases. I think
number one is, you know, to again have FDA use accelerated
approval more often. As I noted in my written testimony and my
oral statement earlier, that when we looked at all of the use
of accelerated approvals since FDA started it for the AIDS
crisis in the mid-'80s through June 2013, there were only 19
drug therapies that the FDA had approved with that pathway that
were not for cancer and not for AIDS. So it has to be used for
these rare diseases, because in these rare diseases, we are
looking, just as you said, Congressman, we are looking for
something--an endpoint in a trial design that is something
short of the ultimate clinical benefit. We don't want to have a
clinical trial that is going to follow DMD boys all the time
until they lose ambulation. And that is the ultimate clinical
benefit, and we don't have the luxury to design clinical trials
because we don't have enough boys and we don't have enough
time. So we need to establish these other endpoints, and I
think accelerated approval would help us do it, and I think
this committee has done a great deal in FDASIA, and I think
that there is more though that can be done.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Cassidy. I am sorry, I came in late, so if someone has
already answered this. Several of you, and I think the PCAST
recommendations speak of increased NIH funding, and decry the
fact that since '03, there has been some decline. And reality
is we have constrained Federal resources.
So with that context, there was an IOM report or GAO, I
can't recall, from about 20 years ago suggesting that the NIH
should reprioritize its funding priorities, and better reflect
current needs. Frankly, I think when I looked at it a couple of
years ago, they had not done so.
Now, do you have any thoughts on whether or not the NIH is
appropriately allocating its resources to our current funding
needs? I look at Alzheimer's, I think it may be getting $600
million, but the cost of future Alzheimer's is huge.
Ms. Radcliffe, do you have any thoughts, just to call upon
you?
Ms. Radcliffe. First, thank you for highlighting the
importance of continuing to fund the NIH. As you noted, the
real----
Mr. Cassidy. Yes, I got that, but----
Ms. Radcliffe. Yes.
Mr. Cassidy [continuing]. Frankly, we don't have enough
money. So my real question is, my pointed question is, does the
NIH need to reallocate some of its assets, because, again, the
IOM suggested this 20 years ago, I am not sure it has been done
since.
Ms. Radcliffe. Yes, so we have been extremely supportive of
a new center at NIH called the National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, NCATS, and we are extremely interested
in supporting the work of that center----
Mr. Cassidy. I----
Ms. Radcliffe [continuing]. Because it will more directly
lead to----
Mr. Cassidy. I hear what you are saying. I have limited
time so that is not really what I am asking.
Dr. Neil, any comments upon what I just suggested?
Mr. Neil. I think they are doing a very good job, actually,
in prioritizing at the moment. One wishes that one could
predict where important discoveries were going to come from,
but----
Mr. Cassidy. Now, let me ask you, it isn't so much to
predict important discoveries, it is the fact that we have this
incredible challenge of neurodegenerative diseases. I mean that
is just out there.
Mr. Neil. Right.
Mr. Cassidy. And if you look at what we are funding that
with relative to other diseases and their future cost, which is
easily predicted, it seems perhaps, again, a different priority
than others would select if you could just start over. So any
specific--again, people may be hesitant to criticize NIH, but
if we are asking for more funding, we have to also know they
are using their funding wisely.
Mr. Neil. Yes. I just wish that one could, again, really
think about how to prioritize and manage it, but we don't know
where a discovery in a completely different area that affects
mitochondria or who knows what may be the breakthrough that we
need in neurodegenerative diseases.
Mr. Cassidy. You are suggesting that we need to have no
direction whatsoever, I think I am--I think is what I am
hearing from you, but rather rely upon kind of basic research
to produce.
Mr. Neil. Well, I don't think it is just that, but I think
that the most promising basic research needs to be funded if we
are going to continue to advance.
Mr. Cassidy. Mr. Sasinowski, any thoughts?
Mr. Sasinowski. Yes, it--with your particular concern about
neurological, neurodegenerative diseases, yes, a large swath of
the rare diseases in this country fit into that category. And
as, you know, Dr. Neil just mentioned, you know, the
underpinnings, the pathophysiology of many of those go back to
mitochondrial energy production. So if we could have
reallocation of NIH funds that would redirect it to some of
these areas that have the promise of being able to address a
lot of diseases, that might be a worthwhile endeavor.
Mr. Cassidy. It seems like we should have some metric; what
is the future cost, what is the current morbidity, and have it
reflect that.
Dr. Tunis, you know, I used to do medical research. My
nurse who I worked with, who basically told me what to do when
I showed up, said, man, the paperwork has increased
dramatically over the years. Now, one of the recommendations, I
think number seven, suggests that maybe FDA could be more
efficient in terms of how it does it process. I am asking you
just to ask, it could be anyone, how would you grade what FDA
has done in terms of, is the monitoring process thoroughly
useful, or is some of it kind of, oh, my gosh, why in the heck
are we doing this? It is just driving up cost. Any kind of a--
any kind of grade you would give the FDA for their current
efforts?
Mr. Tunis. Well, I think--I would hate to grade FDA, but I
think FDA actually recognizes that there are a lot of this
excessive activities and cost embedded in clinical trials, and
one of the things, again, Garry and others know a lot about is
they do have this partnership with Duke called the Clinical
Trials Transformation Initiative which is systematically trying
to identify where there are, you know, excessive regulatory
burdens, things that contribute to the inefficiency of clinical
research, and, you know, doing--you know, exploring how those
things could be minimized. So I would give the FDA an A grade
in terms of identifying that there are opportunities to
improve, and having at least that forum to, you know, to look
for solutions. And I don't know if, Garry, you wanted to add
anything to that.
Mr. Neil. Well, the--monitoring is a particular issue that
we took on with TranCelerate, and FDA provided input into that,
and we know that we are overdoing this in ways that are not
really adding value, maybe subtracting value and driving cost,
so moving to a more risk-based monitoring approach, again, with
FDA----
Mr. Cassidy. Any sense of how much cost that adds? Five
percent, 10 percent, marginal cost of----
Mr. Neil. It----
Mr. Cassidy [continuing]. Monitoring which may be
inefficient?
Mr. Neil. It depends on the trial, obviously, but--and I
can't give you a precise estimate, but it is very substantial.
Mr. Cassidy. Very substantial.
Mr. Neil. Very substantial.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. That was kind of my impression from being
frontline way back when.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
That concludes the first round of questioning. We are going
to go to one follow-up per side now.
I will recognize Dr. Burgess 5 minutes for his follow-up.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again, I want to
thank the panel for being here. It has been a long morning but
a very informative morning. I would be remiss if I did not
acknowledge, I guess, my co-sponsor, Eliot Engel, has left, but
the MD Care Act, Mr. Chairman, that is a good Bill and one that
I hope we can have a legislative hearing and a markup on before
we get too deep in the political season, because it is one that
needs to occur, and, in fact, the last reauthorization--we
haven't addressed the problem that occurs that we are doing
such a good job, some of these patients are now living until
early adulthood when they didn't before, and the current Act
does not address young adults with the illness, and we need to
do that. So I hope we can have that legislative hearing.
I also, Mr. Sasinowski, I don't want to correct you, but it
was actually the last Congress that passed FDASIA, but it was
this committee that did the work, and I just wanted to
acknowledge the work of Brian Bilbray, who is no longer with
us, and really it was his--I mean he was a bulldog on the
surrogate endpoints when FDA was in testifying before this
committee. And without Brian Bilbray's contribution, I don't
think FDASIA would have been as effective, and, of course,
the--I certainly--I appreciate the hearing this morning about
the conflicts, the trying to improve the status of the
conflicts language so that we could improve the advisory panels
that we empanel to advise the FDA on approvals.
Look, one of the things that the President's council did
come up with and talk about was the woeful state of the
information technology at the Food and Drug Administration. You
hear the urban legends about the warehouses of new drug
applications that are in boxes on paper applications in the
basement somewhere. I don't know whether it is true or not
because I have never seen it, but can anyone speak to--I guess
there has been the hiring of a new chief information officer.
Does anybody see any daylight on the horizon there? Apparently
not.
Let me just tell you what is so frustrating. This
committee, for the last--I have been on the committee for 10
years, and we have had this discussion over and over and over
again. As a practicing physician, I have received the slings
and arrows because doctors' offices are not coming into the
information age rapidly enough, and here we have the FDA which
is just stumbling all over itself. I mean surely there is
something we can do about that to digitize the data. I mean if
this were a class action lawsuit, the large litigation firms
around the country would get together, digitize the data and
analyze it in a weekend, and we can't do it as a Federal
agency. I don't know, surely somebody has some thoughts on how
to improve this system. Again, let the--for the clerk's
benefit, no one volunteered an answer. I just--I acknowledge
this is something that needs to be fixed. I appreciate Dr.
Cassidy's comments about the funding constraints, but if we
don't fix this, we are not getting out of this problem.
I do want to ask Mr. Sasinowski, probably the one thing I
have heard this morning that I am going to take with me out of
this hearing is that perhaps the default position that the FDA
ought to be the accelerated pathway. And the FDA historically
has been risk averse, but you are talking about a new world
order where the FDA now defaults to the accelerated pathway. So
can you speak to accelerated approval as the default in the
future?
Mr. Sasinowski. Yes, Dr. Burgess, that the--I don't see it
as a default. I don't see most of the therapies coming through
the FDA's gauntlet, being approved under accelerated approval
because it only fits for those which are serious diseases where
there is an unmet medical need, but what I am saying is that
those twin criteria could apply to many diseases, especially
the rare diseases, the 7,000 rare diseases that affect
Americans, and so for those, you know, that should be part of
the discussion at the beginning, at the pre-IND meeting, when
we are first coming into the FDA, that should be part of that
engagement, because you have heard several other witnesses, and
it was also in FDASIA and PCAST, that said if you are going to
go forward with accelerated approval, you have to start that
discussion early because you have to be able to identify the
surrogate endpoints, and the intermediary clinical endpoints so
that you can run the studies in the proper way. And so that
discussion is not going on. So what I was suggesting, Dr.
Burgess, is that every time that a new therapy is proposed to
the Agency, one of the first questions always be, as part of
their checkbox, is this a candidate for accelerated--would this
fit, is this a serious disease for which there is an unmet
medical need, and then the system can integrate that. And it is
currently just not being considered.
Mr. Burgess. Not only is it not being considered, but I
will just tell you, not a month goes by that someone is not in
my office with a tale of woe----
Voice. Yes.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. About getting their drug or
device approved, and I for one, in this committee, I am just
tired of hitting my head against that wall, and it is time for
us to break through or break out of that modality and move into
the 21st century.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding the hearing. I will
yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
That concludes the questions at this point.
The Members will have follow-up questions. We ask that you
please respond promptly.
This has been a very informative hearing. We appreciate you
sharing your expertise with us and the practical
recommendations.
I remind Members that they will have 10 business days to
submit questions for the record. Members should submit their
questions by the close of business on Tuesday, June 3.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
