- REAUTHORIZATION OF ANIMAL DRUG USER FEES: ADUFA AND AGDUFA

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REAUTHORIZATION OF ANIMAL DRUG USER FEES: ADUFA AND AGDUFA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 9, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-25

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

80-810                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          LOIS CAPPS, California
Vice Chairman                      MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JERRY McNERNEY, California
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina
Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                  Islands
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................    67
Prepared statement...........................................    68
Hon. Cory Gardner, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Colorado, opening statement....................................    68
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    69
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................    70
Prepared statement...........................................    71
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................    71
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    72

Witnesses

Bernadette Dunham, Director, Center for Veterinary Medicine, U.S.
Food and Drug Administration...................................    74
Prepared statement...........................................    77
Richard A. Carnevale, Vice President, Regulatory, Scientific and
International Affairs, Animal Health Institute.................   103
Prepared statement...........................................   106
Mike Apley, Professor and Section Head, Production Medicine and
Clinical Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas
State University...............................................   111
Prepared statement...........................................   113
Lance B. Price, Professor, Department of Occupational and
Environmental Health, George Washington University.............   123
Prepared statement...........................................   125

Submitted Material

Discussion drafts
ADUFA........................................................     2
AGDUFA.......................................................    38
Letter of April 5, 2013, from medical coalition to the Committee,
submitted by Mr. Waxman........................................   142
Letter of April 5, 2013, from medical and scientific
organizations to the Committee, submitted by Mr. Waxman........   145
Letter of April 2, 2013, from the Patient, Consumer, and Public
Health Coalition to the Committee, submitted by Mr. Waxman.....   148
Letter of April 24, 2013, from the the Food and Drug
Administration to the subcommittee, submitted by Mr. Pitts.....   150

REAUTHORIZATION OF ANIMAL DRUG USER FEES: ADUFA AND AGDUFA

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 9, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 4 p.m., in room
2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Shimkus, Gingrey,
Lance, Guthrie, Griffith, Ellmers, Upton (ex officio), Pallone,
Capps, Green, Barrow, Christensen, Waxman (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Gardner.
Staff Present: Clay Alspach, Chief Counsel, Health; Gary
Andres, Staff Director; Matt Bravo, Professional Staff Member;
Sydne Harwick, Legislative Clerk; Robert Horne, Professional
Staff Member, Health; Carly McWilliams, Professional Staff
Member, Health; John O'Shea, Professional Staff Member, Health;
Andrew Powaleny, Deputy Press Secretary; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment and Economy; Heidi Stirrup, Health
Policy Coordinator; Tom Wilbur, Digital Media Advisor; Alli
Corr, Minority Policy Analyst; Eric Flamm, Minority FDA
Detailee; Karen Lightfoot, Minority Communications Director and
Senior Policy Advisor; Karen Nelson, Minority Deputy Committee
Staff Director for Health; and Rachel Sher, Minority Senior
Counsel.
Mr. Pitts. Time of 4 o'clock having arrived, this
subcommittee will come to order. The chair will recognize
himself for an opening statement.
Today's hearing focuses on the reauthorization of two
successful programs, the Animal Drug User Fee Act, ADUFA, and
the Animal Generic Drug User Fee Act, AGDUFA.
[The bills follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. In 2003, ADUFA I was authorized to help the Food
and Drug Administration review of animal drugs. Similar to the
prescription drug user fee for human drugs, under ADUFA, FDA
collected funds to expedite the new animal drug approval
process, reduce the application backlog and improve
communications with drug sponsors. The program was authorized
for 5 years, and Congress renewed the program for an additional
5 years in ADUFA II in 2008.
In fiscal year 2012, FDA completed 747 ADUFA reviews. And
according to FDA, the agency has exceeded all performance goals
outlined in ADUFA I and II. However, absent congressional
action, FDA's ability to collect these user fees will expire
September 30, 2013.
FDA and industry have negotiated an agreement regarding the
size and scope of ADUFA III, which would extend the program
through fiscal year 2018, and these recommendations were
delivered to the committee in February. Under the negotiated
proposal industry would pay approximately $23.6 million in
fiscal year 2014 and similar amounts adjusted for inflation for
fiscal years 2015 to 2018. Twenty percent of this total would
come from application fees, 27 percent from product fees, 27
percent from sponsor fees, and 26 percent from establishment
fees. The ADUFA III proposal also includes an annual offset
adjustment based on any collection shortfall in previous years.
AGDUFA I, ADUFA's generic cousin, was first authorized in
2008 for 5 years in order to improve the review of abbreviated
new animal drug applications, eliminate application backlogs
and reduce review times. To date, according to the FDA, the
agency has exceeded all performance goals but one from AGDUFA
I. This program also expires September 30, 2013, unless it is
reauthorized, and FDA and industry have negotiated an agreement
for AGDUFA II.
Under the proposed AGDUFA II agreement, industry would pay
$7.3 million in fiscal year 2014, which allows for hiring of 22
FTEs and includes a one-time cost of $850,000 for information
technology; $6.9 million for fiscal year 2015; $7.4 million for
fiscal year 2016; $7.9 million for fiscal year 2017; and $8.4
million for fiscal year 2018. These fees would be paid through
application fees, 25 percent of the total; product fees, 37\1/
2\ percent; and sponsor fees, also 37\1/2\ percent of the
total.
The legislation to reauthorize ADUFA III was introduced
today by Congressman John Shimkus, and the AGDUFA II
reauthorization sponsored by Representative Cory Gardner was
also introduced today.
I want to welcome all of our witnesses, thank them for
being here today, look forward to your testimony. We have a new
set of lights, and so green is go with your statement, a 5-
minute statement. Yellow I think there is 30 seconds left. Red
is you are over time. So thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The Subcommittee will come to order.
The Chair will recognize himself for an opening statement.
Today's hearing focuses on the reauthorization of two
successful programs--the Animal Drug User Fee Act (ADUFA) and
the Animal Generic Drug User Fee Act (AGDUFA).
In 2003, ADUFA I was authorized to help the Food and Drug
Administration's (FDA) review of animal drugs.
Similar to the Prescription Drug User Fee for human drugs,
under ADUFA, FDA collected funds to help expedite the new
animal drug approval process, reduce the application backlog
and improve communications with drug sponsors.
The program was authorized for 5 years, and Congress
renewed the program for an additional 5 years in ADUFA II in
2008.
In FY2012, FDA completed 747 ADUFA reviews, and, according
to FDA, the agency has exceeded all performance goals outlined
in ADUFA I and II.
However, absent Congressional action, FDA's ability to
collect these user fees will expire September 30, 2013.
FDA and industry have negotiated an agreement regarding the
size and scope of ADUFA III, which would extend the program
through FY2018, and these recommendations were delivered to the
Committee in February.
Under the negotiated proposal, industry would pay
approximately $23.6 million in FY2014, and similar amounts,
adjusted for inflation, for FYs 2015-2018.
Twenty percent of this total would come from application
fees, 27% from product fees, 27% from sponsor fees, and 26%
from establishment fees.
The ADUFA III proposal also includes an annual offset
adjustment based on any collection shortfall in previous years.
AGDUFA I, ADUFA's generic cousin, was first authorized in
2008 for 5 years, in order to improve the review of abbreviated
new animal drug applications (ANADAS), eliminate application
backlogs, and reduce review times.
To date, according to FDA, the agency has exceeded all
performance goals but one from AGDUFA I.
This program also expires September 30, 2013 unless it is
reauthorized, and FDA and industry have negotiated an agreement
for AGDUFA II.
Under the proposed AGDUFA II agreement, industry would pay:

$7,328,000 in FY2014 (which allows for the hiring
of 22 FTEs and includes a one-time cost of $850,000 for
information technology);

$6,944,000 in FY2015;

$7,429,000 in FY2016;

$7,936,000 in FY2017; and

$8,467,000 in FY2018.
These fees would be paid through application fees (25% of
the total), product fees (37.5%), and sponsor fees (also 37.5%
of the total).
The legislation to reauthorize ADUFA III was introduced
today by Rep. John Shimkus, and the AGDUFA II reauthorization,
sponsored by Rep. Cory Gardner, also was introduced today.
I want to welcome all of our witnesses and thank them for
being here today. I look forward to your testimony.
Thank you. At this time, I would like to request unanimous
consent for Congressman Gardner to participate in the
subcommittee hearing. Without objection so ordered. I now yield
the remainder of my time to Rep. Gardner.

Mr. Pitts. At this time I would like to request unanimous
consent for Congressman Gardner to participate in the
subcommittee hearing. Without objection, so ordered.
I now yield the remainder of my time to Representative
Gardner.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CORY GARDNER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you for
allowing me to be here today; Ranking Member Pallone and other
colleagues on the subcommittee for the opportunity to
participate today. And I would also like to congratulate
Congressman Shimkus for his introduction of the Animal Drug
User Fee Amendments Act of 2013.
My congressional district is home to over 2.8 million head
of cows, 450,000 hogs and pigs, and close to 160,000 sheep and
goats. There is far more livestock in my district than there
are people. At least that is what they tell me in Colorado.
But, in fact, the State of Colorado is the fifth largest State
in the Nation when it comes to cattle on feed.
The ADUFA and AGDUFA programs have been a success at FDA,
and the continuation of these important programs will ensure
that livestock producers in Colorado and indeed throughout the
country will continue to have access to safe and effective
animal drugs to treat their herds.
In particular, the Animal Generic and Drug User Fee Program
at FDA has achieved noteworthy success since first being
authorized in 2008. FDA decreased a significant backlog of
applications and reduced the review time for new animal drug
applications. The reauthorization of AGDUFA will continue this
progress at FDA and other--and our producers with cost-
effective generic products that are available to the market on
the market faster.
It is an honor to have the opportunity to lead the
reauthorization of AGDUFA through this committee, and I look
forward to working with my colleagues to ensure its passage and
to hearing from the witnesses today. And with that, Mr.
Chairman, thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlemen, and now
recognizes the ranking member of the subcommittee Mr. Pallone
for 5 minutes for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE JR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am pleased that the committee is having a hearing on two
important bills today, the Animal Drug User Fee amendments and
the Animal Generic Drug User Fee amendments, both of which I
have cosponsored. Without congressional action the current
agreements will expire at the end of this fiscal year, which
would have a serious and harmful impact on the ability of FDA's
Center for Veterinary Medicine to review new and generic drug
applications in a timely manner.
Prior to 2003, FDA's review of animal drug submissions was
taking over a year and a half to be completed, and this
obviously led to serious concerns that new and innovative
pharmaceutical products were not making their way on to the
marketplace in order to treat our Nation's pets, as well as
food animals that help sustain the Nation's food supply.
Accordingly in 2003, Congress first enacted ADUFA to help
improve the FDA review of new animal drugs.
Like other user fee programs for human drugs, ADUFA
authorized the FDA to collect fees to help ensure that the
agency had the resources it needed to help expedite the new
animal drug approval process, reduce the application backlog
and improve communications with drug sponsors.
In 2008, because of the success of this program, Congress
reauthorized ADUFA for 5 years--that is ADUFA II--and so here
we are again 5 years later. In order for the FDA to continue
the success of this program, Congress must act to reauthorize
these user fees.
Under the proposed ADUFA III agreement, the industry would
pay approximately $23.6 million in fiscal year 2014 and similar
amounts in the remaining 4 years based on inflation adjusters.
This includes some resources for technology infrastructure in
the first year. These fees will continue to allow the agency to
more efficiently and effectively review an animal drug
applications and provide industry with predictability and
speedier reviews.
In 2008, Congress authorized the AGDUFA program for 5 years
in order to improve the review of abbreviated new animal drug
applications or generic versions of animal drugs. AGDUFA
enabled the agency to eliminate its application backlog and
reduce review times. Similar to ADUFA, FDA and industry
negotiated an agreement regarding the size and scope of an
agreement for generic animal drugs, or AGDUFA.
Under the new proposal before us today, the industry would
pay $7.3 million in fiscal year 2014, which includes technology
funding; 6.944 million in fiscal years 2015; 7.429 million in
fiscal year 2016; 7.936 million in fiscal year 2017; and,
finally, 8.467 million in fiscal year 2018. Once implemented,
AGDUFA will continue to speed lower-cost animal drugs to the
marketplace and bring significant savings to ranchers, farmers,
and pet owners.
I think we can all agree that these programs have been
particularly effective. This project should not be interrupted,
and so, Mr. Chairman, I stand ready to work with you so that
this process will be expeditious, and we can pass these
agreements into law as soon as possible.
Let me close by saying that I recognize that there is a
growing concern among stakeholders and some members of the
subcommittee about the use of antibiotics in food animals.
Clearly we face significant challenges when it comes to
maintaining the effective use of antibiotics. With fewer and
fewer innovative antibiotic products coming down the
pharmaceutical pipeline, it is even more important that we keep
antibiotics that are currently on the market working. So I look
forward to hearing from our second panel about how bacteria
that are resistant to antibiotics begin to proliferate, and
what type of threat this poses to humans.
So thank you again for all the witnesses for being with us,
and we are looking forward to your testimony.
Nobody wants my time, right? No. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlemen.
I now recognize the chairman of the full committee Mr.
Upton for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
today's hearing on the reauthorization of the Animal Drug User
Fee Act, as well as the Animal Generic Drug User Fee Act.
You know, Congress first created ADUFA back in 2003 and
AGDUFA back in 2008, and together these programs have yielded
many benefits for the American people, and they have ensured
that veterinarians, livestock producers, poultry producers, pet
owners have access to new and affordable animal drugs to keep
their animals healthy. They have assisted animal drug producers
by fostering a stable and predictable FDA review process. And
finally, they have helped American consumers by keeping that
food supply safe. For companies like Zoetis, which employs over
700 people in my district, these programs are essential for
them to keep producing top-of-the-line drugs for pets and
livestock.
I was fortunate enough to be the lead House sponsor of the
original ADUFA bill back in 2003, and it is great to see how
successful it has been and how many Americans it has, in fact,
helped. I believe that there is a bipartisan, bicameral
interest in getting these user fees reauthorized well before
they expire at the end of September of this year, and I intend
to do all that I can to make sure that that effort happens. So
I look forward to working with all of our colleagues on those
bills. I want to particularly thank Mr. Gardner and Mr. Shimkus
for their leadership on both of these pieces of legislation
respectively, and I yield the balance of my time to John
Shimkus.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Thank you for holding today's hearing on the
reauthorization of the Animal Drug User Fee Act (ADUFA) and the
Animal Generic Drug User Fee Act (AGDUFA).
Congress first created ADUFA back in 2003 and AGDUFA in
2008. Together, these programs have yielded many benefits for
the American people. They have ensured that veterinarians,
livestock producers, poultry producers and pet owners have
access to new and affordable animal drugs to keep their animals
healthy. They have assisted animal drug producers by fostering
a stable and predictable FDA review process. Finally, they have
helped American consumers by keeping the food supply safe.
For companies like Zoetis, which employs over 700 folks in
my district, these programs are essential for them to keep
producing top of the line drugs for pets and livestock.
I was fortunate enough to be the lead House sponsor of the
original ADUFA legislation in 2003, and it is great to see how
successful it has been and how many Americans it has helped.
I believe there is bipartisan, bicameral interest in
getting these user fees reauthorized well before they expire at
the end of September. I intend to do all I can to make this
reauthorization effort bipartisan, and I look forward to
working with my Democratic colleagues on these bills.
I thank John Shimkus and Cory Gardner for their leadership
on ADUFA and AGDUFA, respectively.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you also,
Chairman Pitts, and I appreciate holding this hearing on the
user fee reauthorization bills that are important to our
agriculture community and the consumers they serve.
Today I am pleased to introduce legislation reauthorizing
the Animal Drug User Fee Act, along with companion legislation
to reauthorize generic drug user fees, introduced by my
colleague from Colorado Cory Gardner. Together these bills will
provide the FDA with critical resources to improve the animal
drug approval process and allow drug manufacturers to bring
innovative products to the market, improving food safety and
animal health. These are the same tools the FDA has
successfully utilized to reduce application backlogs and
provide a more predictable process since ADUFA was first signed
into law over 10 years ago.
ADUFA is important to many of my constituents in southern
Illinois as well as rural and agricultural communities across
the country. It is a fact of life that animals get sick, and it
is important for veterinarians to have the ability to provide
the best drugs and treatment available. H.R. 1407 and 1408
provide veterinarians access to products to prevent, control
and treat animal diseases in our pets and livestock.
Livestock producers benefit as well. Last week when I
announced the introduction of ADUFA reauthorization, I stood
with beef and pork producers from my district who spoke on the
importance of this legislation to their businesses and
livelihoods. They rely on the timely availability of these
drugs to provide a safe food product to maintain the health of
their herds.
At the end of the day, all American consumers benefit from
the availability of safe and affordable food. This will have
positive impact on everyone in our district, from producers on
family farms to pet owners and consumers in major urban cities
and suburbs around the country.
I want to thank Chairmen Upton and Pitts, along with
Ranking Member Waxman and Pallone for becoming original
cosponsors of these reauthorizations, and I look forward to
working with them to move these bills through the committee. I
believe the hearing today will be a productive next step for us
to move forward on swift bipartisan passage of H.R. 1407 and
1408 through the House.
Thank you to our witnesses from the FDA and the animal
health community for being here today. I look forward to
hearing your input on the importance of a clean reauthorization
process.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee Mr. Waxman,
5 minutes for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Our hearing today is going to examine FDA's animal drug
user fee programs, which have been successful at speeding both
brand and generic drugs for animals to the market, and that is
very important. But the reauthorization of these user fee
programs also gives us an opportunity to look at providing FDA
with new tools to address a glaring public health crisis, the
problem of antibiotic resistance.
Antibiotics are truly a lifesaving gift. Unfortunately the
more they are used, the less they work. Untold numbers of
Americans die or are infected each year by antibiotic-resistant
bugs. To remain effective, antibiotics must be used
judiciously. To be sure, antibiotics are overprescribed for use
in humans. That is a real and difficult problem and one that
requires our attention. But we have to look at all areas in
which antibiotics are used and reduce all unnecessary uses.
We know that most antibiotic use occurs on the farm, and
much of this use is not to treat sick animals, which everyone
agrees is important, but for disease prevention or growth
promotion. Unfortunately we don't know exactly how much because
it isn't reported anywhere.
We now have an overwhelming body of evidence showing that
the overuse of antibiotics in industrial meat production is
threatening to destroy the effectiveness of our most important
antibiotics for human use. In recent years reports from the
Institute of Medicine, GAO and the World Health Organization
all describe the global public health threat generated by
bacteria that had become resistant as a result of antibiotic
use on the farms.
There is a bill that would take steps to curtail the
inappropriate use of important human antibiotics.
Representative Slaughter's Preservation of Antibiotics for
Medical Treatment Act, or PAMTA. We always take these things
and put them down as acronyms. This bill has a long history.
Congressman Dingell and I introduced the very first version
back in 1980 as The Antibiotics Preservation Act.
I think this legislation makes good sense, but it has,
unfortunately, never moved very far. At least part of the
reason it has failed to move is that industry claims there is
not enough data to show a link between the use of antibiotics
on the farm and the development of resistant bugs that harm
people. That is why we need to ask industry to give us more
data on how these drugs are being used. Industry should provide
evidence to document its assertion that there is no link.
Industry should not be able to have it both ways. We know a lot
about how antibiotics are being used in humans thanks to our
healthcare system infrastructure. We know very little about the
use of antibiotics on farms and ranches.
In the 2008 reauthorization of the animal drug user fee
legislation, we took a sensible step by requiring drug
companies to make certain limited reports to FDA on their
animal antibiotics sales data, but we need to go further.
Earlier this year I introduced the Delivering Antibiotic
Transparency in Animals Act, or DATA. The DATA Act would
enhance the information FDA gets about how these drugs are used
by putting modest requirements on the drug companies and the
major industrial meat product companies like Tyson or
Smithfield Farms.
This is a commonsense bill. There is no prohibition on the
use of these drugs. We are simply asking that industry tell us
more about the way these drugs are used so that we can learn
more about how resistant bugs which are harming Americans every
day are bred.
The issue of antibiotic resistance is not new to this
committee. In the 111th and 112th Congresses, we held several
hearings on this issue. Now is the time for the next step by
moving the DATA Act as we work to combat the public health
crisis.
I understand the argument for keeping the Animal Drug User
Fee Acts free of controversy, but I do think we need to find a
way to address this issue soon. We need to ensure that FDA has
not only the resources and procedures for speeding safe and
effective animal drugs to market, but also the information to
ensure that they are being used judiciously.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing today.
I look forward to the hearing, hearing from our witnesses, and
I yield back a second, the 3, 4 seconds I don't have any
longer.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlemen.
That concludes the opening statements by the Members. We
have two panels today. I will ask the first panelist to please
come forward to the witness table and introduce her at this
time.
Dr. Bernadette Dunham, Director of the Center for
Veterinary Medicine, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, is our
first witness. Thank you for coming. You will have 5 minutes to
summarize your written testimony. Your written testimony will
be made part of the record. And so at this time, Dr. Dunham,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BERNADETTE DUNHAM, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR VETERINARY
MEDICINE, U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION

Dr. Dunham. Thank you very much.
Good afternoon, Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone and
members of the subcommittee. I am Dr. Bernadette Dunham,
Director of the Center for Veterinary Medicine at the Food and
Drug Administration. Thank you for this opportunity to discuss
FDA's proposals for reauthorization of the Animal Drug User Fee
Act and the Animal Generic Drug User Fee Act.
As you know, these fee programs are designed to expedite
access to new therapies for food-producing animals and
companion animals, and foster innovation in drug development by
enabling FDA to maintain a stable workforce to provide a
predictable and timely review process.
These programs have been highly successful and have enabled
FDA to eliminate a backlog in application, dramatically reduce
the time needed to review animal drug applications and other
submissions, improve timely communications with drug sponsors,
and achieve other efficiencies in the drug approval process,
while still ensuring the drugs are safe and effective.
In my testimony today I will provide the status of FDA's
reauthorization activities. I will also provide some
information about each program, our achievements to date, and
our proposed changes.
The user fee provisions of ADUFA II and AGDUFA I will
sunset on October 1st, 2013, if not reauthorized. Timely
reauthorization is needed to ensure there is it no disruption
to these important programs.
FDA began the reauthorization process with the public
meeting held November 7th, 2011, and began discussions with
stakeholders in February 2012. FDA published the negotiated
recommendations in the Federal Register on December 5th, 2012,
and solicited public comment. Another public meeting to get
input on the recommendations was held December 18th, 2012. The
final recommendations transmitted to Congress include for each
program the goals letter outlining the performance metrics, the
proposed legislative language, and a summary of public
comments.
FDA considers the timely review of the safety and
effectiveness of new animal drug applications to be central to
the agency's mission to protect and promote public health.
Under the original Animal Drug User Fee Act enacted in 2003,
the agency agreed to meet a comprehensive set of performance
goals established to show significant improvement in the
timeliness and predictability of new animal drug review
process. The additional funding enabled FDA to increase the
number of review staff by approximately 30 percent.
In 2008, before ADUFA I expired, Congress passed ADUFA II,
which included an extension of the program for an additional 5
years. And I am pleased to report that FDA has exceeded all of
the performance goals established under ADUFA for each year of
this critical program.
During the first 5 years of the program, the agency was
able to dramatically reduce review times from 500 days to 180
days and completely eliminate the backlog of 833 submissions
within the first year.
Due to the current success of the program, FDA and industry
agree that only minor refinements to the performance goals that
ADUFA II established were necessary. Our recommendations
relating to the financial enhancements of this program include
a new statutory inflation adjuster, a new provision for
recovering collection shortfalls, and a modification of the
workload adjuster.
To increase revenue stream stability, reduce application
fee costs and minimize the potential for collection shortfalls,
the recommendations also modify the fee revenue distribution.
FDA's recommendation to Congress after consultation with the
regulated industry is that the total fee revenue estimate for
fiscal year 2014 will be $23.6 million, which includes a one-
time information technology funding in the amount of $2
million.
AGDUFA I authorized FDA's first-ever generic animal drug
user fee program, and the additional funding enabled FDA to
increase the number of review staff by approximately 45
percent. Furthermore, the authorization of AGDUFA I enabled
FDA's continued assurance that generic animal drug products are
safe and effective, and provided pet owners, ranchers and
farmers with greater access to lower-cost therapeutic drugs.
FDA agreed to meet performance goals to expedite the review of
generic applications and submissions without compromising the
quality of the agency's review.
During the 4 years of AGDUFA I, FDA has exceeded every goal
every year, with one minor exception. We missed a performance
goal by 1 day for one submission of an investigational generic
new animal drug in 2009.
The additional resources provided under AGDUFA I enabled
FDA to completely eliminate a backlog of 680 submissions in 22
months. In addition, the agency has been able to dramatically
reduce review times from 700 days to 270 days.
FDA's goals for AGDUFA II are to sustain and enhance the
core program's operation and performance, while providing
predictable review times and resources sufficient to keep pace
with actual costs. FDA and industry agreed to shorter review
times for certain reactivations and resubmissions and to
implement a process for timely foreign inspections.
Our recommendations for financial enhancements for AGDUFA
II include a fixed inflation adjuster of 4 percent each year to
achieve the proposed revenue levels, and modification of the
workload adjuster to ensure that it adequately captures FDA's
workload. We also recommend modifying the fee revenue
distribution to increase the stability of the revenue stream
and reduce application fee costs.
The total 5-year revenue for AGDUFA I was $27.1 million.
The proposed total 5-year revenue for AGDUFA II will be $38.1
million, which includes a one-time IT funding for $850,000 for
fiscal year 2014 for the first year planned of a total of
$7.328 million.
FDA's ADUFA and AGDUFA legislative proposals represent
considerable input from and agreement of stakeholders, the
public, and the agency. ADUFA and AGDUFA are widely regarded as
extremely successful programs. The recommendations we have
submitted for reauthorization of these programs will ensure FDA
has a stable workforce to provide the predictable and timely
review process the drug sponsors need in order to foster
innovation. They will also provide for expedited access to new
therapies for food-producing animals and companion animals,
while ensuring the drugs are safe and effective.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss ADUFA and AGDUFA
programs, and I am happy to answer any questions.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Dr. Dunham, for your opening
statement.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Dunham follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. I will begin the questioning and recognize
myself 5 minutes for that purpose.
Dr. Dunham, Congress first enacted ADUFA in 2003 and AGDUFA
in 2008. Would you explain how ADUFA and AGDUFA improved FDA
regulations of new animal drug, generic animal drugs as far as
benefit to public health is concerned? And then tell us what
the new improvements, the improvements in the new proposed
ADUFA and AGDUFA agreements, how they would improve that.
Dr. Dunham. Yes, sir. These programs have enabled us to
adequately have the scientific staff that we need to do our
reviews and to afford us the opportunity to bring innovative
products to our review process, thereby enhancing and
protecting both the health of the animals and from that, very
specifically looking at food-producing animals, to ensuring
their health is sustained, and therefore any product that you
are going to consume should be safe. And the extensive review
we have to assure that is something that we have benefited from
with this program.
And continuing along that line, that also applies then to
the AGDUFA, or generic animal drugs, where, again, the safety,
effectiveness and availability of these products which are
needed because of the diversity of the species that we have,
these programs have both been successful.
And the public health side is both sides, companion animal
medicine to ensure they are safe and effective and keeping
animals healthy, because, as you know, even with zoonotic
medicine, there is an opportunity for problems there. So this
is one thing we value very much when we cross over the lines of
public health in everything we do for our review process.
The changes that we will be looking at are to further
enhance our interaction with our sponsors in working with them
earlier as they come forward with innovative products. The more
that we can partner with them in regards to reviewing the
science behind their innovation, we can address issues of
concerns and help them work through this and provide data that
can hopefully bring us to a single review. This will allow the
expedition of an approved product that is meeting all of our
standards for safety and effectiveness, and get those drugs to
the veterinarians for them to be able to take care of all the
species. And I think the diversity of the species that we deal
with is challenging, and for that reason these programs have
helped us tremendously.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Why are the ADUFA and AGDUFA agreements so important to
livestock, and poultry producers, and veterinarians, and pet
owners and consumers? And what are the consequences of the not
reauthorizing the animal drug user fee programs?
Dr. Dunham. Again, with the success that we have had and
the capability of bringing forth more safe and effective
products to address the plethora of diseases that we have
because we have so many species that we need to look at, this
program has led to that success. And there are still many, many
more diseases that we need to address with our sponsors.
The program, if we were not to continue this, would, in
fact, set us back. The way in which we have been able to have
expedited reviews, i.e., work with our companies to address and
review the science, if we don't have the staff to complete
that, we are going to be turning back and having slower
reviews, and that is going to, I think, lead to harm because we
are not going to have the needed products that we want out
there to address the concerns of the health of the animals that
we take care of every day.
And I do believe that with the programs sustaining us,
there is a lot of new science coming forward, and the
challenges for having these review processes will bring the
best of the best together and, I think, open more venues that
we see information that we gather on the animal side many times
transmits over for information on the human side.
And so I think together we can be a force to reckon with,
because this is what we need in this day and age. And more
importantly, I think it is something that we understand these
drugs that we develop, although we need many of them, there is
innovative science coming onboard, and we have to be very
judicious in how we use the products, as you mentioned earlier
in the testimony coming forth with the Members. And I think the
more that we are aware of the complexity of the challenging
reviews that we have, the more we can work together to ensure
public health.
Mr. Pitts. All right. How do ADUFA and AGDUFA take small
businesses into account? What accommodations do these programs
make for them? And then finally I want to ask how does ADUFA
foster innovation in drug development?
Dr. Dunham. With the opportunity to give waivers for
sponsors where they are small businesses, we can work with
them. And many times on the first round through, we will work
very closely with them to help minimize the cost factor the
first time around.
We are also able to give waivers, as we have always done,
for anything from minor species. And at the same time that we
do this, we work very closely with the sponsors to bring them
in earlier, as I said, to be able to address what they propose
to do and understand the procedures they have to go through in
order to get there.
For generic drugs, where they will copy your pioneer, we
have an opportunity there on the fee system that we can address
the small businesses so that if it is the first time in and
they haven't had any approvals, it is a much lower fee, and
once they get above six applications approved, it will be an
increase in the fee on that one, and when they have had more
than that. So we give a break on the finances in order to help
them, and all of our sponsors have benefited from that.
When the sponsors are able to have recovery of not only the
efficacy and the speed with which drugs are approved, then when
you get it to market, the benefit comes back always for
research. When we can do that, they are able to break ground
with innovation. And what we do now is we try to meet with them
very, very early on, even before they are coming with the
application, so that we can understand where they are going to
be going. And with these opportunities we can then fine-tune
issues or be able to flag something that is going to be very
challenging, and work with them to review sooner, and be able
then to hopefully have all of these various technical sections
that they have to meet be met thoroughly and effectively, and
hopefully with one cycle review.
So having our staff be able to engage in interaction with
them has been a real success rate. I think the sponsors have
also improved, because the more that they can understand what
it takes to have a really good application coming in the front
door, the quicker we are going to have a single review, and
that is the goal, and that is the time saving across the board.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady, and my time is
expired. I now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee
Mr. Pallone, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Dr.
Dunham, for being here today.
I know you are not likely to answer the question, but I
have to ask you really just to alert the FDA to an issue that I
am concerned about, and that is implementation of an e-labeling
or a paperless labeling system for drug products. And I would
like to quickly use this opportunity to go on record with a
question and look forward to hearing back from the FDA in a
timely manner.
Three successive FDA unified agendas starting in the spring
of 2009 have contained notice of a proposed rule signaling to
me that electronic distribution of required drug product
prescribing information is an FDA priority. E-labeling would
ensure that most up-to-date prescription drug product, safety
and efficacy information is available to healthcare providers,
something I think we all agree is critical. In addition, it
would also provide significant gains to patients, manufacturers
and dispensers. In today's world current technology makes e-
labeling a viable alternative that has tremendous value and
could hopefully also lower costs.
So my two questions are given the need for e-labeling, is
there a date that the agency can commit in regards to
completing the rulemaking process in implementing e-labeling?
And second, is there any update on your process moving forward
that you can share? And I don't expect you to answer this, but
if you want to; if not, through the chairman, you know, have
the FDA get back to us.
Dr. Dunham. I would be delighted to pass that question over
to the key members in the agency that can address that and have
them get back to you as soon as possible.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Now, getting back to the Animal Drug User Fee legislation,
Dr. Dunham, I want to thank you for your testimony about these
important programs. It is clear they have been every bit the
success that the other user fee programs at FDA have been. They
have allowed the agency to move efficiently and effectively to
review animal drug applications, and have provided industry
with predictability and, of course, speedier reviews. And I am
glad to be a cosponsor of the legislation. We will work to see
that it moves through this committee in a timely way.
Another topic at today's hearing which has come up is
antibiotic resistance and its relationship to the use of these
important lifesaving drugs in food-producing animals. As this
committee well knows, antibiotic resistance is a grave public
health threat. I recognize that there is a growing concern
among stakeholders and some members of the subcommittee about
the use of antibiotics in food animals. Specifically they say
that there is a lack of data on how antibiotics are used and in
what quantities. But in the 2008 ADUFA reauthorization
legislation, we did include some provisions to address this
knowledge gap.
So my first question is can you tell us about what those
provisions did? Then what kind of information did you get as a
result? And do you think it has been successful overall? In 2
minutes.
Dr. Dunham. Actually, in fact, it was very successful. I
think section 105 allowed us to be able to report out what the
sponsors did with regards to sales of their drugs and
distribution. And when we did this, it was really good because
we had a lot of comments coming back, and, in fact, the
comments have said, can we do more, and can we make this even
more useful?
And I think always we would appreciate the opportunity in
ways to work with everybody to get the best data. And what we
have done is we have now also put out an advanced notice of
proposed rulemaking just to do that, to gather information from
many stakeholders as to additional ideas for how to improve,
what this data would look like. There are areas that we would
like to refine, and we hope with the 2012 report we are going
to see the format change.
And further, based upon receiving some additional input,
one of the areas that you know is important is how do we gather
information on use data, and this is something that extends way
beyond. And we do want to be able to work with our other
agencies, such as USDA and CDC, and academia to figure out some
ways to do this. And we have also been looking at different
programs internationally. People are embracing how to do this.
So I think this is a very good way for us to reach out and
improve this, and we look forward to reviewing the comments and
coming back with some proposals. But I think this is something
that we all want to work together on.
Mr. Pallone. Well, you still have 30, 40 seconds here. What
kind of information did you actually get, though?
Dr. Dunham. We are talking fast.
We were able to put out exactly what--the actual indication
for the groups of animals. We do it in aggregate, and they will
be able to say what the dosage is, what the form of
administration is, their sales distribution.
The issue there has been could we have more, can we refine
this, and I think that there are areas that we can, and this is
what we do with working with our stakeholders to be able to
fine-tune this so we can have a little bit more information.
I think what is really critical is we are also very nicely
at the same time doing two other things. We have a proposal out
there right now, which is Guidance 209, which we did finalize
to say we do want to phase out growth promotion and feed
efficiency use of medically important antibiotics and bring
back in oversight by veterinarians. And Guidance 213 is how we
work with our pharmaceutical companies to make the label
changes appropriate to do just that and to change that
authorization on the labeling as well. And the veterinary feed
directive is one of the key tools that will come back in with
the hands of a veterinarian to do all of that. That is
happening simultaneously.
What would be really good now is as we fine-tune all of
this, what does that look like when you really do see these
strengths occurring and you are getting feedback from what the
distributions are, and how we can further enhance this
reporting schedule. And I do think everything is coming
together in a way that I really appreciate with collaboration
in addressing the very important issue, because, as you said
earlier, it is a very important issue internationally.
Everybody is involved. Judicious use is critical no matter what
the antimicrobial. And I think together now you are finding
everybody rallying, and I think in the spirit of collaboration,
this is the best I could ever have. I am very grateful to work
with so many fabulous folks coming up with new ways of
addressing this very important issue.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you. Thanks very much.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois Mr. Shimkus, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I am going to
be following up on my friend Mr. Pallone's question. But before
I do that, Dr. Dunham, I see you got your Ph.D. In
cardiovascular physiology from Boston University; is that
correct?
Dr. Dunham. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. Is that animal cardiovascular physiology, or
is it one and the same or----
Dr. Dunham. Believe it or not, it was actually in a medical
program that I was doing with my basic science Ph.D. So it was
done at Boston University and Harvard Medical School. So we
were dealing with patients, and we had then some opportunity
for live-animal medicine.
Mr. Shimkus. Obviously with the University of Illinois
close to my district and knowing folks who have gone into
veterinarian medicine, it is a pretty stringent, obviously,
path to get there and sometimes more difficult, some would
say----
Dr. Dunham. Yes, it is.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Than some other aspects. So I
just noticed that on your bio and wanted to ask about that.
And you have been with the FDA for a long time.
Dr. Dunham. Yes, since 2002.
Mr. Shimkus. And the other point is that in this day and
age, when we question role of government, I think the FDA and
really the history with this program, it really does talk about
the benefits of some government activity involved in protecting
the safety and advocacy of our food supply for our public. So
it is--I mean, even conservative Republicans have to talk to
some of our friends in the district and say, yes, there is a
role for government, and this is one, and this has been
helpful, and why.
But can you walk us through what you have done and the FDA
actions have been over the past few years when it comes to this
whole debate on the animal use--antibiotic use in animals?
Dr. Dunham. What we have done is we have always had a very
detailed review requirement on safety and effectiveness for
drugs being used in food animals, and we have developed one
important document, Guidance 152, which really did take a look
at the very important drugs and to put those into a category of
those that are very critical and most important. And with that
the majority of all our antimicrobials are, in fact, under
prescription. It is the very old drugs that you know have these
particular labels on them that were not as specific as we would
like them.
Anymore now it is really important that we understand what
the pathogen is, what the disease is that it caused, how do you
have the correct label, and then working with the veterinarian
and the producers together, because everybody is engaged in
this to make sure we have a very healthy animal and, from that,
a safe food product. Working together they are able then to
assimilate exactly what would be the requirement for a drug to
be used and to follow through.
And now anymore we are able to fine-tune, working with
laboratories and also our national antimicrobial resistance
monitoring system, to really be able to understand what these
pathogens are doing and where is the resistance occurring.
Number one, I don't want the drug to develop resistance in
the animal, and I certainly don't want to have a problem with
resistance in people, and that is why everybody has a role to
play in judicious use of these very important drugs. And these
programs now bring us together so that we can track and follow
through to see what is happening. And the more that we have the
veterinarian back overseeing and working closely, this will be
another way of enhancing that judicious use, which is really
important.
And in combination, that data comes back that we are
looking at for our review process so that we can be able to see
what is happening with resistance and follow that across the
board. And I think this way, if there are three or four drugs,
it will be a veterinarian to work at that program, understand
that particular production site, and be able to select the best
antimicrobial, and be able to follow that.
Mr. Shimkus. My time is running short. And you were talking
about older drugs and stuff. What authority currently does the
FDA have to restrict the use of any antibiotic that my have
adverse impact on human health?
Dr. Dunham. I am sorry, could you repeat that one more
time?
Mr. Shimkus. What authority does FDA have today on--you
know, if there was an old antibiotic that they might suggest
might have an adverse impact on human health, what can FDA do
today?
Dr. Dunham. Right now, as I mentioned, we have taken a very
active approach to be able to work a collaborative procedure to
be able to phase those out. We have identified them. We have
said these older drugs that are medically important will be
phased out. We have 213, which is the guidance we would like to
see finalized and approved this year. Within the first 3 months
the sponsors will let us know their intention, and we have
given them 3 years to make those changes, and this allows us to
then go to a mandatory process if they don't.
Mr. Shimkus. So this all debate occurred in your
discussions with the, obviously, stakeholders in the industry
and yourself.
Dr. Dunham. Yes. This is one thing that I am very proud of
to think that we have reached out and said, you know, we have a
problem, we all know this. How can we all work together through
this? And I think when everybody rolls up their sleeves and
comes to the table and addresses this issue, you bring the best
of the best out of everybody and many solutions. And not one
size fits all, so how do we do this? And doing it together I
think is a real success. So I am looking forward to that.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from California Mrs. Capps for 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing.
I know my colleagues have heard me talk a great deal about
the beauty of an innovation that takes place in my district.
One of our biggest agricultural sectors is cattle production,
so having a working Center for Veterinary Medicine at the FDA
is very important to the central coast of California as well.
I want to thank the agency and industry partners for
working together to come up with their agreement. I am pleased
that we are here working on this topic today, and thank you,
Dr. Dunham, for your testimony.
It seems clear that over the years FDA has recognized that
the use of antibiotics in food-producing animals can lead to
the development of drug-resistant infections in humans. In
1999, FDA released a framework to evaluate the potential impact
antibiotic use in food-producing animals could have on the
development of antibiotic resistance in humans. 2005, FDA
withdrew the approval of one such antibiotic, fluoroquinolone,
for use in poultry because a significant increase in resistance
to that drug was observed in humans after it became widely used
in chickens.
More recently FDA has announced that it is unwise and
irresponsible to use important human antibiotics for growth
promotion in animals, and the agency has taken a number of
steps to encourage the industry to voluntarily stop such uses.
Dr. Dunham, can you and will you now tell us a bit more
about what went into the withdrawal of fluoroquinolone and the
human health concerns that led FDA to take this extraordinary
step?
Dr. Dunham. Thank you, Representative Capps--we had an
opportunity to, again, bring the best science forward and to
follow this along. And with the data that we had at that time,
one of the problems that we have seen is Campylobacter is a
problem within poultry. And when we had an opportunity to watch
what was happening, when exposed then to the drug, at that time
the data was being collected so that we could see there really
was not only the hazard, but then once there was further
exposure, then we had a problem that we were able to identify.
And upon doing so and collecting the best science and review,
then we were able to take action.
And I think once we know the risk, the hazard, the
exposure, that is the time when you have all the science that
can be behind you when you make a decision like that. And then
we went forth with that proposal at that time, and a few years
later it was taken off the market.
Mrs. Capps. I appreciate your response and this example,
which I was hoping that would be addressed in this way, because
it really highlights a troubling glimpse, I believe, into the
dangers to human health from the overuse of important
antibiotics on farms. And I am glad that we can see as a
committee that you are in your Department attempting to build
cooperation from industry in eliminating unnecessary uses of
these drugs through a voluntary approach. But I do hope, and I
guess this is the cautionary note, that if the voluntary
approach fails, that FDA will either take a leadership role
with regulatory action, or come back to us to let us know that
you need new authority.
I believe we really--this is scratching the surface here
with this one example. Antibiotic overuse does pose a harmful
public health threat, and we need our preeminent public health
regulatory agency to do all it can to protect American people
and preserve the effective of these lifesaving drugs by
overuse, and they become less effective when they are really
needed for something else that is serious.
Last Congress we had numerous debates right here in this
room about the shortages in the antibiotic pipeline and about
the numerous potential superbugs that are resistant to our
current antibiotic arsenal. These are human causes like
overprescription and improper use. There are--one of things
contributing to this is overprescription and improper use that
contribute to the resistance for sure. But as FDA's actions now
have shown, animal uses also contribute, and I wanted to get
that on the record so that we could highlight the importance.
These issues are related, and I urge this committee and my
colleagues to work together on this aspect of this issue so
that we can address the full causes of antibiotic resistance. I
appreciate your testimony and your being here today.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes the gentleman from Virginia Mr. Griffith, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you so much for being here today; do
appreciate it very, very much.
You know, we look at these issues, and I am very concerned
about the ag issues in my district, and it is one of largest
industries in my district. I have been looking for ways to
promote it and ways to expand it, and, of course, these issues
that you bring up today are very important.
According to the National Cattlemen's Beef Association,
there are approximately 7,600 beef farmers and 220,000 head of
cattle in the Ninth District, and that is not counting our
lambs and our goats and everything else that we have. For this
reason development and approval of new animal drugs and generic
drugs, including antibiotics, are very important to the farmers
that I represent.
I do appreciate your being here and the positive
relationship that I am told exists between your office and the
stakeholders in the ag and pharmaceutical industry. So I do
appreciate that.
I am concerned about large-animal vets and the shortage we
have of those. I understand that there is a big concern about
that shortage, and I am just wondering if the FDA is taking
those concerns into consideration when proposing new guidance
documents.
Dr. Dunham. Thank you very much. And, yes, we are. We have
been meeting with the American Veterinary Medical Association
because this issue of do we have sufficient food-animal
veterinarians available has been an issue for a number of
years.
And the other thing that is happening while we address
those issues is to understand the plethora of veterinarians and
where they are located versus where they are not, and how
things have changed with regard to the practice of veterinary
medicine as we have seen even with human medicine, and the
technologies are enabling a tremendous amount of change that we
want to embrace.
Just for example, we have the capability of smartphones. We
have the capability of labs talking to each other much better
and correlating and very quickly turning things around. So you
think about all of that, and you say, well, how can I do this
even more effectively? We need to hear from the producers and
the veterinarians as to how we can coordinate this. The
opportunity for veterinary technicians has been looked at. The
universities are all embracing where advancements in medicine
have taken us and how then are we using those in practice.
The coordination with some of our producers are state-of-
the-art with how, as you know, they are set up, their track
record, their records of medical references, their access to
laboratories, and, again, a veterinarian to be there, which is
so important, to oversee and work through this and be able to
prescribe and know what is happening with those herds to ensure
their health is there, again, to make sure we are protecting
public health and any food item.
And I think as we talk through them, there is a variety of
different ways of addressing concerns as we work through these,
where I said, again, not one-size-fits-all and we learn from
each other, and certain things that work in one State can work
in another State.
The opportunity, again, for communication is going to be
critical as we establish the veterinary-patient relationship in
a way that embraces today's technology, where we are located
and how we interact. And I have been very, very pleased. We had
a committee that was brought together through the American
Veterinary Medical Association for just that purpose, how do we
work through these challenging issues right now. And, in fact,
there are a number of students that I am very pleased are
continuing to seek their careers in the food-animal production
side of veterinary medicine.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I have got two questions arising out of
your answer. One, do you think that we should be working to see
that we get either larger enrollment in our existing schools,
or should we be looking to maybe expand and have some new
veterinary medicine schools open up in the country?
Dr. Dunham. Well, actually there are a few more schools
that I think will be opening up. I think the most important
thing is for us, when we are talking to the next generation, is
to encourage them, I think, to a stellar occupation in
veterinary medicine. I can't be prouder to be a veterinarian
because of the plethora of issues that we get to be challenged
with. It is fantastic, and it is so rewarding to encourage them
and let them know there are careers in the field. That is one
thing I would love to see us do more of.
The schools themselves are actually top notch. And you
mentioned a minute ago that it is oftentimes more challenging,
Representative Shimkus, to get into veterinary medicine. That
is true. But I think the rewards that you get afterwards in the
public health mission that we accomplish every day is
outstanding. So that would be part and parcel of what I would
encourage.
Mr. Griffith. And then the other question I would have, we
had some hearings about medical devices before we left, and
there were some interesting cheap fixes that we saw, and there
were other issues involved that wouldn't affect the veterinary
side. But I am just wondering if FDA is prepared to move a lot
of those things forward fairly quickly, because we learned
about a device that was being used for children in the African
Continent, but it was an $8 hack onto a smartphone. And it
would seem to me, you know, as the FDA prepared--I know you
can't answer for people--but on the animal side, are we
prepared to get that stuff out into the field as fast a
possible when it is something as simple as an $8 hack on a
smartphone?
Dr. Dunham. As long as we can keep things and make sure it
doesn't impinge on safety and effectiveness, we are going to
work through a number of these opportunities to be able to
further enhance how we can share information that is so rapid
and moving so quickly, and also tracking. And I think with that
there is that capability of, you can pull up an X-ray or lab
report.
You could have our veterinarians, which are first
responders, getting back to us very, very quickly right now,
and I think that alone says so much when you realize how
quickly everything moves in this day and age. Internationally
we travel, animals travel, microbes travel. It is incredible.
Food is already across countries before you can blink your eye.
The more that we need to embrace technology for all the
benefits, it is also quintessential in protecting animal health
and public health to be able to enhance those communications.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you so much, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from Virgin Islands Dr. Christensen
for 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for your answers as well and your testimony.
I also want to follow up on the resistance issue, and I
think just to step back for a moment and make sure that we all
understand what we are talking about. And for the record, could
you give us a brief overview of how antibiotic resistance
developed, and why it is a particular problem with continual
long-term administration of antibiotics in feed or water as is
done for growth-promotion purposes?
Dr. Dunham. I think the question of antimicrobial
resistance is challenging. It is incredibly complex, and I
don't have the answer. But I do know that there are incredible
minds internationally working on this, as we all need to, every
day, because it touches all of us, not just humans and not just
animals; everything, plants as well. So the more that we are
able to understand the complexity of this, we have the
opportunity to intervene.
No matter what, judicious use of any antimicrobial,
anywhere, from a dentist, physician or veterinarian, is
quintessential. That being said, then that is why it is so
important that we have the veterinarians overseeing and using
these drugs with their medical training, and working closely
with the producers who absolutely then know their animals and
how we can coordinate this and track it.
I think that part is happening more and more, and the
recognition that if you use an antimicrobial, you are putting
pressure back on that pathogen. You want to make sure you have
eliminated that pathogen. So knowing the right antimicrobial to
choose based upon what the pathogen is and the disease that it
has caused, and to follow that through or to work up your lab
to be able to decide that, that is the kind of stuff that we
all have to embrace, and that is what we are seeing.
So one thing we have chosen, as I mentioned, was to
recognize that I think growth promotion and feed efficiency
were very, very older claims on antimicrobials way back, and
what was missing was exactly the pathogen, and the disease and
the dosage. Now we want to come fast forward, and all of these
very important drugs need to have that, and they need to be
under veterinary oversight. So where they would have been in
the past, we are now looking to do that; phase out, labels will
be changed, identification is on the label. So now when a
physician or a veterinarian is looking at this label, it will
identify that, and then they can do the proper workup. That
brings us back again to developing judicious use across the
board.
Mrs. Christensen. As a physician, you know, we are always
pressured to give antibiotics for viruses, for flus and so
forth. Sometimes that is quite unpopular because you just don't
do that unless you have a pathogen. So it is important, as you
said, in human health as well as in animal.
But when we held a hearing on antibiotic use on animals
back in 2010, one thing we heard from some animal producers was
that growth promotion was actually a manifestation of disease
prevention; and that is, the reason why antibiotics could make
animals grow faster and use feed more efficiently was that the
low chronic doses of antibiotics actually were preventing
disease. The question that raises, of course, is whether when
the industry says it phasing out growth-promotion uses of
medically important antibiotics, maybe it simply intends to
change the label, but not its practices.
So could you help address this question for us: How does
FDA define disease ``prevention''? And is it possible for
industry to essentially switch a growth-promotion claim to a
disease-prevention claim with just some data showing that the
same dose of a drug that promotes growth will also prevent a
disease?
Dr. Dunham. That is why with Guidance 213, which we
certainly hope will be finalized this year, it will have us
work very closely with the pharmaceutical company, because now
they really do have to come back. And if there is going to be a
prevention claim, it has to be able to identify everything we
just talked about very clearly, because that is what was
missing before.
Mrs. Christensen. So you don't have a definition for
``disease prevention'' in this instance?
Dr. Dunham. You will see that in 213. But basically if you
want to control something, that means you already have a
problem. You can see within a herd there is a group of animals
that have a problem, and you want to see to be able to prevent
and control that from further expanding.
If you want to prevent, you would need to have, again, an
awareness of the history of the animal, the herd, and whether
or not as a veterinarian everything you have seen indicates
that you can be expecting something to happen. But you would
still have to now very much understand what that pathogen is to
be able to make that call. And only the veterinarian, in
pulling everything together in their medical history, would
make that decision, and it would have to be then, as far as the
drug sponsor coming in and have a label, that if they are going
to put that claim on, what are they preventing, and what is the
surrounding circumstances that a veterinarian would need to
make it happen.
So you would have treatment, control and prevention in each
one to be fine-tuned and explained, and now those labels would
have to meet this new criteria before they could have that on
them.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. And now
recognize the gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Ellmers, for
5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Dr. Dunham. And a moment ago you were
speaking with my colleague, Mr. Griffith, about the excellent
veterinarian schools in the country. And being a member
representing District 2, North Carolina, I have to speak up for
the NC State School of Veterinary Medicine; excellent school.
And I will just have to add, as I have told everyone that I
have come in contact with over the last 2 weeks, that my son
has been accepted to NC State in the agriculture business
school.
Dr. Dunham. Fantastic.
Mrs. Ellmers. So I am very excited about that.
I am concerned. You know, in North Carolina, agriculture is
the number one industry, and, you know, ag and our farmers, so
important. Some of the larger farms, entities, you know, doing
great and certainly have their issues to deal with. Some of the
smaller farm entities, obviously any of these, you know, any
more regulation or any more burden we put on them just makes it
harder for them do what they need do. And, you know, I am
particularly concerned about those farmers in the
administration of any of these, you know, any of the jeopardy
that we put them in.
You know, how would you explain to them that they can use
the FDA? And I will just talk about the veterinary feed
directive. How can we speak to them and know that this is
something that is going to be feasible for them, something that
is going to be workable, that they will be able to take
advantage of, but at the same time be able to afford cost-wise?
Dr. Dunham. That is a great question. And I am actually
able to tell you right now we are very pleased because we have
just teamed up with the USDA. We are having five very special
outreach listening sessions to address and listen from folks
that are in either very remote locations or their concerns as
to what this will do and mean for them. So right now we have
our first one, which actually took place in Bowling Green,
Kentucky today.
Mrs. Ellmers. Great.
Dr. Dunham. And then we will be doing Olympia, Washington,
Fort Collins, Colorado, Pierre, South Dakota, and College
Station, Texas. And it is for that whole purpose, both
listening to veterinarians as we have been doing, but also the
producers, what are some of the hurdles they think they will be
facing and how will we help them move through this, because it
is not one size fits all. And you are absolutely correct, a
smaller group versus a big producer that has everything they
need, how do we help them understand those issues and how can
we work with them.
The aspect of the veterinarian and how can they establish
their veterinary patient-client relationship, they can set that
up, and they have now a lot more latitude of what does that
look like. And how you and I can set it up would be different
to how I would set it up with somebody else. That is going to
help. And the more that we dialogue them, that is going to
bring us together to address their concerns so that we are not
going to be adding further to their challenging days, because
we need them, be they small or large, they are all a part of
what we want with agriculture. And I am very pleased to know
that we have been having some good feedback with them.
And they share their concerns already. We have had a lot of
meetings with different producers. They have come in or they
have actually come into D.C. and they have come from different
States, and we have had a chance to meet with them, explain
what this all looks like, what will the veterinary feed
directive be, and how a veterinarian now has the opportunity to
fine-tune and be responsive for this and to work with them. And
I have been really, really impressed with the willingness to
say, well, I have this issue, maybe we could do this, what
about this. That brings out the best, and the solutions are
going to be terrific coming forward.
Mrs. Ellmers. Great. Well, thank you. And, you know, I am
glad you mentioned coupling with the USDA, because my next
question has to do with, you know, the veterinary shortages
that of course across the country we are faced with. And, you
know, one of the things that we are looking at here in Congress
are the possibility of, you know, basically veterinarian
medicine loan repayment programs. And, you know, from your
perspective, I don't want to put you on the spot, you know, but
there is a high basically tax that is associated with that, as
high as 39 percent of repayment. In your opinion, coming from
the FDA and having to do with our farmers and agriculture
across this country, to me, I mean, that is pretty
straightforward. That is a pretty negative effect, especially
when you are talking about trying to serve underserved areas.
What is your opinion on that? And I mean, just in the 40
seconds you have left, if you can just give me a little idea of
what you think.
Dr. Dunham. That is definitely a challenge. I think all of
our students, no matter where they are, are facing tremendous,
tremendous burdens with the student loans. Any possible way we
can assist is going to be welcomed, and they appreciate that.
And yet when I meet with the students, they are absolutely
dedicated and thrilled to be doing what they want to do, and
yet they are willing to take on these loans. So anything we can
do to help is what we have to do, and to show them that there
is still a way to have a career that is incredibly rewarding
while, as you said, paying off these loans.
So I do welcome that. I know all of the associations are
trying to do something. We would like very much to even have a
student loan repayment program ourselves. Haven't quite got all
the money for that, but I would love to do that. But anything
that we can do and encourage would be a real positive, because
we need them, it is a career that we have to have and sustain.
Veterinary medicine is so important. I know many times we look
at those as just being the ones that take care of the animals,
but veterinary medicine crosses so many areas.
Mrs. Ellmers. Absolutely.
Dr. Dunham. And they come with the most incredible
dedication. And then their experience, maybe they will be
members of Congress. It will be fantastic what they can
continue to do.
Mrs. Ellmers. Great. I truly appreciate your testimony.
Thank you.
Dr. Dunham. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. I know the
gentleman just walked in. We are about to wrap up questions.
Dr. Gingrey, do you have any questions you would like to
ask?
Dr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, I think I will just pass at this
time. Thanks.
Mr. Pitts. All right.
All right, at this time, then, with unanimous consent, we
will recognize Representative Gardner, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
members of the committee.
Dr. Dunham, thank you for your testimony today. And just a
couple of quick questions for you. Everybody has bragged about
their vet school, so I will throw in a word for Colorado State
University and the aforementioned Fort Collins, Colorado, where
you will be having a clinic here, at least a forum, very soon.
So thank you for your participation in that.
In your testimony you described the significant backlog on
generic applications prior to the authorization of AGDUFA. What
caused that backlog in the first place? And if you don't mind
maybe talking a little bit about the causes. Was it simply a
matter of resources? Go into that a little bit.
Dr. Dunham. It was actually resources and just not having
the resources to have the dedicated people we need to do that
review. And I can't echo enough how appreciative we are of this
program, because once you get a chance to fill the resources
and have staff that can do the review, it is incredible what
you can accomplish. And to have that sustained reliability,
then, on not only keeping our FTEs, but you are able to then
give back to the companies to know exactly what these
performances are. And together we can enhance and get those
drugs reviewed. And so that is why this program and its
reauthorization is critical, because we have established so
much, and I would hate to see us go back. And the success story
exemplifies that.
Mr. Gardner. I think in your testimony, I believe you were
talking about, was it was AGDUFA or ADUFA? I think you talked
about hitting every single performance goal except for the
one----
Dr. Dunham. That was on AGDUFA.
Mr. Gardner [continuing]. By one day. And that was AGDUFA,
correct, as a result of this?
Dr. Dunham. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. And in your discussions with farmers and
ranchers, I know you spoke with my colleague a little bit about
this, can you describe the importance of having generic drugs
on the market?
Dr. Dunham. I think it is really important. As we all know,
we always value what the cost factors are. And just like on the
human side, it is an opportunity to have a safe and effective
drug that would be able to give you some cost savings. And I
think, as you said earlier, with the plethora of animals and
species we have, you can see how much more diversity we are
going to have to deal with all of that.
So the more that we can have generic drugs come through and
have their approval, it is going be helping everybody. We need
so many drugs approved for so many different diseases in so
many species, it is constantly challenging us. So this is
another plus, and I have been very impressed with what they
have done.
Mr. Gardner. About 2 months ago, Jennifer Johansson, who is
the vice chair of the Generic Animal Drug Alliance, testified
before the Senate HELP Committee stating that the number of
generic new animal drug applications decreased after the
implementation of AGDUFA. Are you aware of a reason for this?
Do you feel at the present time that the submissions are
adequate to provide available generics to producers?
Dr. Dunham. I think we are seeing that. I think at the time
we were also going through some economic turmoil and I think
there was a little bit of hesitancy, we even saw that, as to
how many applications were actually coming in, and that is
something that goes along with what happens in the market. But
that seems to have leveled out right now, and I would have to
say that I think we are going to continue to see more coming
forward.
Mr. Gardner. You mentioned some of the feedback, the forum,
the information you are getting from stakeholders. We have
talked about what you are getting from veterinarians, what you
are talking about getting from people in the livestock
industry. Could you describe the stakeholder process with other
people who may be outside of the industry itself but who are
interested in the pharmaceutical issues as it pertains to the
animal side?
Dr. Dunham. Yes. And we have a number of stakeholders, many
of them are here actually today in the audience. We have a
number of other activist groups, i.e., that are helping us
across the board with anything on medicine, consumers,
academics, association groups that you will see here trying
again to see how can we work together to address whatever these
challenging issues are. Working with other agencies as well
brings us forward. The public at large. We often have calls,
letters from the public with their issues and their concerns
all the way from whatever it is with companion animal medicine
to the issues du jour of how we can be more judicious in the
use and protection of antimicrobials. I know we don't do the
biologics, that is done with USDA, but together those will help
address the health concerns that we face and the venues of how
we can all come together.
And what that also does is it brings some of the best
scientists and the issues du jour and how fast science is
advancing. And so there have been opportunities to further
collaborate with groups. They have come in and suggested
different things that we can do with them. The sharing of
information has been absolutely fabulous on that end.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Dr. Dunham. I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
our first panel.
Thank you very much, Dr. Dunham, for coming, for all the
good information and testimony you presented. The members may
have additional questions. They will forward those to you if
they do.
We will now call the second panel to the witness stand and
I will introduce them as they come. Dr. Richard Carnevale, Vice
President of Regulatory, Scientific and International Affairs,
Animal Health Institute. Secondly, we have Dr. Mike Apley,
Professor and Section Head of Production Medicine and Clinical
Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State
University. Thirdly, Dr. Lance Price, Professor in the
Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, George
Washington University. And that concludes the second panel.
Thank you all for coming. You will each have 5 minutes to
summarize your testimony. Your written testimony will be placed
in the record.
Dr. Carnevale, we will start with you. You are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF DR. RICHARD A. CARNEVALE, VICE PRESIDENT,
REGULATORY, SCIENTIFIC AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, ANIMAL HEALTH
INSTITUTE; DR. MIKE APLEY, PROFESSOR AND SECTION HEAD,
PRODUCTION MEDICINE AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, COLLEGE OF
VETERINARY MEDICINE, KANSAS STATE UNIVERSITY; AND DR. LANCE B.
PRICE, PROFESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF OCCUPATIONAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL
HEALTH, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY

STATEMENT OF RICHARD A. CARNEVALE

Dr. Carnevale. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee. Thank you very much for holding this hearing on
this important piece of legislation, as you have aptly
described today, and for the opportunity to speak to you today
about an important human and animal health benefit that results
from using medicines to keep animals healthy.
I am Dr. Richard Carnevale. I am a veterinarian by training
with a degree from the University of Pennsylvania School of
Veterinary Medicine, and I am here today on behalf of the
Animal Health Institute, a trade association that represents
companies that make medicines for animals.
Our companies share a common mission. We contribute to
public health by protecting animal health. Animal health
products also give veterinarians and livestock and poultry
producers the necessary tools to protect the health and well-
being of food-producing animals. Veterinarians work hard to
prevent disease in animals, and it is important for them to
have the medicines available when needed to treat a disease or
disease threat.
Mr. Chairman, the Center for Veterinary Medicine has a
rigorous science-based approval process that provides to the
American public the products necessary to protect public health
by protecting animal health. Every year scientists uncover new
diseases in animals, some of which pose a threat to human
health. As more animals are raised to feed the planet and as
animals are reared closer to people, we will continue to need
new medicines to protect animal and human health.
The reauthorization of ADUFA will continue to provide the
agency the resources necessary to maintain and improve this
approval process, provide new and innovative products to allow
our pets to live longer and healthier lives, and contribute to
food safety by keeping food animals healthy.
The FDA animal drug approval process looks much like the
human drug approval process. Animal drug companies submit data
packages that demonstrate safety, efficacy, and the ability to
meet the same stringent FDA manufacturing standards as human
medicines. It is a costly process, requiring as much as $100
million and 7 to 10 years to bring an animal drug to market.
The market for animal drugs, however, is nothing like the
market for human drugs. Our products are used to treat seven
different major species of animals and many more minor species.
A blockbuster animal drug will have sales of around $100
million, but the vast majority of animal health products have
market sizes of around $1 million or less. There is no Medicare
or Medicaid--excuse me. I am missing a page. Sorry. I will move
right on.
The reauthorization of ADUFA will continue to provide the
agency the resources necessary to maintain and improve this
approval process, provide new and innovative products to allow
our pets to live longer and healthier lives, and contribute to
food safety. Passage of this important legislation will have
several benefits. FDA/CVM benefits by having additional
resources to meet its mission of protecting public health.
Animal health sponsors benefit from a stable and predictable
review process, allowing them to make informed decisions about
the investment risks of research and development dollars.
Veterinarians benefit from having new and innovative medical
advances available to treat, control, and prevent diseases in
their patients. Livestock and poultry producers and the
veterinarians on whose advice they rely also have the tools to
keep food animals healthy. Pet owners benefit by having their
animals live longer and healthier lives, increasing their
enjoyment of these companions. And consumers reap the food
safety benefits that come as a result of the availability of
additional tools to keep food animals healthy.
AHI believes that the funding agreed to by the industry
over the next 5 years is based on an objective assessment of
agency resource needs and will allow the agency to maintain all
current standards and also improve performance in key areas.
The agreement calls for approximately $118 million in funding
over the 5 years and uses a variable rather than fixed
inflation factor, as was mentioned today. The financial
agreement seeks to reduce the impact that fees may have on
small businesses and small product markets by reducing the
total percentage of fees coming from new animal drug
applications and supplemental applications from 25 percent to
20 percent. The agreement also includes a provision for FDA to
make up potential fee shortfalls that may be experienced by
allowing for adjustments to levied fees in the outyears of the
program.
FDA has consistently met timeframes for all sentinel
submissions identified in the goals letter, as Dr. Dunham
explained, and we are confident the agency will continue to do
so over the next 5 fiscal years. The new agreement continues
all current submission review timeframes mandated in ADUFA II;
however, the new agreement adds important enhancements to the
review process.
Animal drugs generally go through a phased review process,
whereas each specific area, called technical sections, of the
new animal drug application is submitted and reviewed
independently. Once the technical sections for safety,
efficacy, manufacturing, and environmental impact are
completed, an administrative NADA is filed referencing those
sections, and approval of the product occurs within 60 days. If
technical sections can be completed more rapidly, it will lead
to earlier filing of the administrative NADA and, therefore,
reduce overall time to market of safe and effective animal
medicines.
Mr. Pitts. Could you wrap up, please?
Dr. Carnevale. Yes. And that will be accomplished by
significantly shortening the review times of the second pass
submissions.
There are other agreements that we have talked about today,
and I will sum by saying that the new agreement commits the
agency to work with the industry to examine some longer-term
goals. First, AHI will enter into discussions about how to
extend conditional approval process and also will take a look
at how current animal drug combinations are approved. This
could have significant future import with the advent of the FDA
proposal to move more antimicrobials used in feed to the
veterinary feed directive program, as was discussed.
Mr. Chairman, I ask you to pass this legislation in a
timely manner and reject any changes that would jeopardize this
bill so this program can continue without interruption. Thank
you very much.
Mr. Pitts. Thank the gentlemen.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Carnevale follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Recognize Dr. Apley, 5 minutes for opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF MIKE APLEY

Dr. Apley. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, good
afternoon, I am Mike Apley. I am a veterinarian----
Mr. Pitts. Is your mike on? Yes.
Dr. Apley. Got it. Thank you.
I am Mike Apley. I am a veterinarian and a clinical
pharmacologist at Kansas State University College of Veterinary
Medicine, with friends at North Carolina and Colorado.
Mr. Shimkus. What about Illinois?
Dr. Apley. Some up there, too.
My specialty areas are food animal production and the use
of drugs in these animals. Today I wanted to share with you a
little bit about how drugs are used in food animals.
The first thing I wanted to emphasize is that this use
revolves around the relationship of veterinarians to food
animal producers. Veterinarians are a vital part of the drug
use decisions by food animal producers, especially for
antibiotics. This relationship is described and promoted in
programs such as beef quality assurance and pork quality
assurance. The combination of close monitoring and knowledge of
the animals by the producer with the training and experience of
the veterinarian is the best possible approach to animal
health.
Antibiotics may receive approval by the FDA Center for
Veterinarian for five indications: treatment of disease,
prevention of disease, control of disease, improved feed
efficiency, and improved rate of gain. Those last two
indications are production uses, which may also be referred to
as growth promotion claims. These claims are specifically
referred to in FDA Guidance for Industry 209, which Dr. Dunham
referred to, in which FDA/CVM refers to these indications as
injudicious uses and asks for voluntary withdrawal of these
indications.
While the FDA has not released official definitions for
indications 2 and 3, which were prevention and control, that I
am aware of as yet, as a clinical pharmacologist I wanted to
share my working definitions of these applications. Prevention
is the use of an antibiotic to prevent disease occurrence in a
population of animals when experience suggests that this
particular time in a production cycle is very likely to result
in a disease outbreak in this population of animals. The need
for prevention varies according to the current disease pressure
and may change over time. Control, on the other hand, is use of
an antibiotic to reduce the number of additional clinical cases
in a population where clinical observation or recent stressors
and exposure indicate that the disease process is clinically
apparent or in development.
The overarching goal of veterinarians and producers is to
replace the need for prevention or control uses of antibiotics
through practices such as biosecurity and vaccinations. The use
of antibiotics for therapy and control are considered a
therapeutic use by the American Veterinary Medical Association,
the FDA Center for Veterinary Medicine, the World Organization
for Animal Health, and Codex Alimentarius.
In my submitted testimony, I have included tables of labels
for cattle and swine. My first table summarizes uses that are
labeled for improvement of rate of gain or feed efficiency,
with the emphasis on ones that would be affected by Guidance
209. For antibiotics in cattle with labels strictly for
improvement of rate of gain or feed efficiency, there are four
which are not classified as human medically important and five
which are. There are some labels which have a rate of gain or
feed efficiency claim and a prevention or control claim. In
that category, there is one which is not medically important
and three that are. These claims are examples of ones that
would be affected by the removal of growth promotion claims.
When we move to prevention or control of disease only, there
are only three out of eight which are medically important.
I would also like to emphasize the findings of a study in
which I was lead author, which addressed the use of antibiotics
in the feed for swine. In this study, it was found that
approximately 15 percent of the medically important antibiotic
use in feed for swine was for growth promotion. The greatest
use on a kilogram basis of the medically important antibiotics
in swine was attributable to the tetracyclines, which are
chlortetracycline and oxytetracycline in these cases.
As for cattle, there are other antibiotics, which have an
injectable or in-water route of application on the label. These
include ceftiofur, ampicillin trihydrate, tulathromycin,
penicillin G. This illustrates the complexity of this issue and
the need to evaluate our discussion based on these different
antibiotics and pathogens of interest.
Lastly, if they are to be used other than according to the
label, there must be a veterinarian involved, and this would
include any changes in dose, duration, or disease indications.
Provisions are available to allow some extralabel use in feed
and minor food animal species, but for major food animal
species, any extralabel use in the feed is illegal.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today, and I will
answer questions as they come.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Apley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. And now recognizes Dr. Price 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF LANCE B. PRICE

Dr. Price. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone, and the
members of the Health Committee, thank you for this
opportunity. My name is Lance Price. I am a professor of
occupational and environmental health at George Washington
University here in D.C., where I study the connection between
antibiotic use in food animal production and antibiotic-
resistant infections in people. As such, I am here to testify
that we need to know more about the antibiotics that we are
using in food animal production.
First, let me thank you for giving us the 2008 ADUFA
amendments that have shed some light on the gross quantity of
antibiotics being sold through food animal producers. However,
today's antibiotic resistance crisis forces me to ask you for
even more detailed information in the 2013 reauthorization.
Antibiotic resistance is one of the greatest threats that
we face as a Nation. Tens of thousands of Americans' lives are
lost each year due to antibiotic-resistant infections, and we
have no choice but to act swiftly and aggressively to meet this
enormous public health challenge. The victims of this crisis
have names, like Carlos Don, a boy who died 2 weeks before his
13th birthday of a drug-resistant infection. The victims are
also the parents who pace helplessly in hospital rooms while
doctors struggle and eventually fail to find an antibiotic to
treat their sick children.
Sadly, we fail these victims even now, because we know how
to control resistance, but we have taken insufficient action to
do so. We control resistance by reducing antibiotics in
hospitals and in clinics, but also, and importantly, we control
resistance by reducing antibiotic use on our industrial farms.
For as long as we have known about antibiotics, we have known
that the more we use them, the more likely we are to have
resistance, but despite this knowledge, we continue to use
antibiotics as cheap production tools on our industrial farms.
And I would like to be clear: We do need antibiotics to treat
sick animals, but using them routinely for nontherapeutic
purposes threatens animal and human health alike.
Our own FDA, the agency that is charged with protecting
human health and charged with regulating antibiotics in food
animals production, tells us that our food supply is riddled
with antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Let me show you what the
FDA tells us about drug-resistant bacteria in our food supply.
These are the ADUFA reports since 2009. And what they tell us
is that our food supply is full of drug-resistant bacteria.
They show that half of the ground turkey products on our
grocery store shelves are contaminated with multidrug-resistant
E. coli, including some strains that are resistant to our most
important antibiotics, such as cephalosporin. In the 2010
report, they showed a strain of salmonella that was resistant
to all the antibiotics that they tested.
Now let me show you what we know about antibiotic use in
food animal production. Here are the ADUFA reports. So here are
the drug-resistant bacteria in our food supply, here are the
ADUFA reports reporting on the drugs that are used in food
animal production. The ADUFA reports tell us that 30 million
pounds of antibiotics are being used in food animal production
each year, but they tell us little else. They don't tell us how
antibiotics are being divided up among the major animal
species, whether they are sold over the counter or under
veterinary order, or the proportion of antibiotics sold for
nontherapeutic purposes. We need this information and we need
our FDA to give us more.
The FDA has offered only voluntary guidelines to eliminate
the most egregious use of antibiotics: growth promotion in food
animal production. In response to criticisms that these
voluntary guidelines are weak, the FDA Deputy Commissioner,
Mike Taylor, said that the FDA would trust, but verify
compliance. Unfortunately, without more detailed data
collection, the FDA will lack the information it needs to
verify, leaving them only to trust. The time to verify is now
and the time for more detailed data collection is now.
ADUFA is the perfect bill for requiring additional data
collection for three reasons: ADUFA is now, ADUFA is about
drugs used in food animal production, and ADUFA already
authorizes the FDA to collect some high level data via Section
105. With these data, we can assess the impact of FDA's
voluntary guidelines, we can identify places where improvements
can be made, and hopefully we can confirm industry claims that
antibiotics are being used more sparingly.
This is an issue about transparency, it is about
accountability, but most of all it is about public health. We
need to act now to protect American lives. So as a public
health researcher, a microbiologist, and a citizen of this
country, I implore you to require more detailed data collection
and reporting from the FDA, including how the antibiotics are
being used divided up among those major animal species, whether
they are sold over the counter or under veterinary control, and
the proportion of antibiotics sold for growth promotion,
disease prevention, control and treatment, such as the
provisions included in the DATA Act, H.R. 820, sponsored by
Ranking Member Waxman and Congresswoman Slaughter.
In closing, I would like to thank you for your time and for
giving me the opportunity to testify on such a critical issue.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Price follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. That concludes the opening statements of the
panelists. I will begin the questioning and recognize myself 5
minutes for that purpose.
Dr. Carnevale, what are some of the benefits of ADUFA and
AGDUFA to livestock, poultry producers, veterinarians, pet
owners, consumers? And why have ADUFA and AGDUFA been so
successful?
Dr. Carnevale. Well, as you heard today, there is a really
great need for new products for both livestock and pets and
horses and other species as well. Getting a drug approved is a
very expensive process, as I mentioned in my testimony. What
ADUFA and AGDUFA does is allows the company to have more
certainty with the agency about how the product will be
reviewed and the timeframes for that approval.
It doesn't give any certainty that the product will be
approved. All the standards for safety and efficacy are still
maintained. It simply gives the manufacturer a better idea of,
if they invest the amount of money it takes to get a product
approved, they will have the FDA do an efficient job of
reviewing that product, and if the data supports it, it will be
approved.
So it helps to have these drugs out there faster for the
livestock owner that needs those treatments. ADUFA will help
get those products to market faster. It will help the pet owner
as well to get products in the hands of his small animal
veterinarian faster so that these products can be used. And it
just enhances the whole efficiency of getting these products on
the market.
Mr. Pitts. What are, in your opinion, the most important
improvements in the user fee agreements that we are talking
about today?
Dr. Carnevale. I think the important improvement is that we
have maintained a reasonable cost basis. I think one of the
things that we were concerned about going into ADUFA III was
the cost of the program, the escalating cost of the user fee
program, in addition to the cost of development.
We were able to do a very good objective assessment of what
the costs should be, and I think we are compensating FDA for
the needed costs that they have in running the program, but not
overpaying. So I think that is one of the benefits that came
out of the negotiation.
Also, we were able to get them to enhance the process. I
mentioned second pass reviews. It will allow those second pass,
the second time the submission comes into the agency to maybe
have a shorter timeframe, to speed that administrative approval
process. So there are some significant benefits. We also got
the agency to agree to look at some long-term changes in the
process that might help to get products to the market sooner.
Mr. Pitts. Do you feel, in light of the testimony we have
heard today, that the FDA review process as it exists today
protects animal and public health?
Dr. Carnevale. There is no question it does. It is a very
rigorous process. I used to work at the agency a number of
years ago. I know how rigorous the process is that takes place
at the Food and Drug Administration. As I mentioned, the data
requirements are as great, if not more, for animal drugs,
particularly food animal drugs, than they are for human
medicine. FDA protects animal health to the utmost extent.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Doctor----
Dr. Carnevale. Human health as well.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Apley, can you please elaborate on the role
of veterinarians in animal drug development and drug use
decisions?
Dr. Apley. In animal drug development, as a practicing
veterinarian, previously I had the opportunity to interact with
companies and interact on needs that drove research and
development, which was very valuable for all of us.
As a veterinarian that guides use, one of our most
important things we do is work with producers to develop
protocols and establish those protocols. And to show you how
far that goes, in my days as a feedlot consulting veterinarian,
we actually had computerized records, and each animal that was
treated was individually identified. And one of the first
things I did each time I visited, twice a month, to train and
monitor records was to go through the individual animal
treatment records and determine what our treatment response
was, if we were doing things appropriately. And we had a
protocol that could change, but the only way it could change
was if we all agreed on it.
Mr. Pitts. In your opinion, does the FDA have the authority
to appropriately address antibiotic issues?
Dr. Apley. In my opinion, they do. I have worked with them
as a veterinarian and as a member of both producer and
veterinary organizations. They are very good, in my opinion,
about seeking our input and also evaluating what is going on
out in the field.
Mr. Pitts. And do you think the reauthorization of these
user fee programs will foster animal drug development?
Dr. Apley. I do, yes.
Mr. Pitts. My time has expired. Thank you very much.
Recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Pallone,
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask Dr. Price about your testimony regarding
antibiotic resistance. Although this committee has looked at
this issue repeatedly in the past, we do have some new members
who did not get to participate in our prior hearings, and for
those of us who were around, it might help to get a refresher.
First of all, can you describe how resistance develops for us?
Dr. Price. Sure. So what we are talking about are bacteria
that are resistant to the effects of antibiotics, right, and
those bacteria can cause infections in people and those
infections are harder to treat.
The way bacteria become resistant to antibiotics are
through mutations in the DNA, but also by picking up genes from
other bacteria. And these things are promiscuous, you know, the
Berlusconis of the biological world, and they pass these genes
around. And when you use an antibiotic, you select for those
resistant ones, those that have picked up these resistance
genes, to proliferate, and they grow and they multiply.
And bacteria multiply. I mean, you can go from, seriously,
one bacterium to billions in 24 hours. These are fast growing
bacteria. And so wherever you are using antibiotics, you are
selecting for these drug-resistant bacteria, whether it be in a
hospital or on a farm where you have thousands of animals
crammed together and, you know, among each others' feces and
sharing bacteria constantly. And so when you add in these
antibiotics, that is the magic ingredient for creating drug-
resistant pathogens.
And then when you butcher those animals, you almost
inevitably contaminate the carcass with the bacteria from those
animals, and now you have meat products that are contaminated
with drug-resistant bacteria that then are distributed to every
grocery store in the country. And the NARMS reports tell us
that the drug-resistant bacteria are there, that our food
supply is riddled with drug-resistant bacteria.
And then there are the food animal producers, the people
working in the industry that can pick up these resistant
bacteria, bring them to their homes, bring them into our
hospitals.
Mr. Pallone. And then what is the harm to humans at that
point? Because now they become resistant as well? What is the
harm to humans?
Dr. Price. So the harm to humans is that we get infected
with these drug-resistant bacteria, and the best defense
against a bacterial infection is an antibiotic. So if you go
into a doctor with a bacterial infection, they are going to try
to treat you with an antibiotic, but if that bacteria is
resistant to antibiotics, you could die of that infection, that
treatment is going to fail.
And so every time we use antibiotics, every drug that we
waste for nontherapeutic purposes in food animal production is
creating resistance to those drugs, so those are taken off the
shelf for therapy. So the physician has to reach higher and
higher on that shelf for those last drugs.
Mr. Pallone. And what you are saying is that the very
nature of farm production with this bacteria causes that
environment where the resistant bacteria thrive, essentially?
Dr. Price. Exactly. So when I look at a modern food animal
production setting, I see the perfect setting for disease
proliferation, for bacteria to spread among animal hosts,
right. So we know if we cram people together in unsanitary
conditions, they are going to spread bacteria among one
another. And then we add the magic ingredient, which is
antibiotics, which is going to force those bacteria to become
resistant to those antibiotics. You know, people call these
factory farms, but I don't see factories making meat, I see
factories making drug-resistant bacteria.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlemen. Now recognize
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Dr. Carnevale, you have heard Dr. Price and some of
his answers. Can you explain to us why there are logistical
difficulties and expenses for your members in reporting sales
by animal species, dose, intent of use, and for the growth
promotion, disease control, or treatment?
Dr. Carnevale. Yes. Well, as you know, since 2008, our
companies have been providing sales data. Sales data is not an
indicator of use. The problem with our companies trying to
refine exactly how those products are being used in the field
is because when our companies sell their product, particularly
feed use products, they will sell them to a distributor, to a
veterinarian, to other sources. They may get used at that level
or they may be sold to other distributors.
So once the product is out in the field and being used our
companies don't know what the product was sold for, because
many of these products have multiple species on the label and
multiple indications. So they are frequently fairly long labels
for many of these products. And once the product is sold in the
marketplace our companies simply don't know exactly what
species it has been used in or what is the purpose it was used
for.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
Dr. Apley, what is the relationship, if any, between the
most serious human antibiotic-resistant concerns and antibiotic
use and resistance in food animals?
Dr. Apley. I think that relationship is discussed on the
basis of specific organisms of concern. One of the things I
want to make clear is that I think engaging in this
conversation is critical and support that. I think if we start
to assume that all resistance is due to this, we go down a road
where we are going to end up with consequences that aren't
appropriate. If you look at organisms such as salmonella, it is
quite appropriate to have these discussions. There are others
for which I think the evidence is much less apparent, at least
in my evaluation of it.
Mr. Shimkus. So, I mean, you mean consequences that are not
appropriate. What do you mean by that statement?
Dr. Apley. We do good in animals with antibiotics when we
apply them judiciously. We can have benefits for their health.
And, you know, we talk about in the environments they are in.
Well, if you take modern swine production, you know, you shower
in, you shower out. They take a group of animals completely
out, it is steam cleaned, it is sanitized, they come back in,
and still----
Mr. Shimkus. So versus this walking around in each others'
feces and----
Dr. Apley. At times during the production period, like with
a slatted floor, they will have some there, they track it
through, so there is some present, but it isn't like they are
wallowing in a cesspool. It is designed so that it is tracked
through, goes into a pit and then is removed.
Mr. Shimkus. And you have operated major feed operations,
or you have observed all this process----
Dr. Apley. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. In the field?
Dr. Apley. Yes. But we do have beneficial effects on
creating healthy animals. And I am a believer that healthy
animals create healthy food.
Mr. Shimkus. And that was my follow-up, too. It would be
better to have a healthy animal that goes through the food
process than an unhealthy animal for human consumption?
Dr. Apley. Correct. And I want to emphasize that our goal
in the food animal industries is to prevent disease. Sometimes
we get the impression that we are throwing these things around
and just flying them in. They are an expense to us, and when we
have to use them, we have an animal that is ill or on the verge
of being ill, and it is in everyone's best interest, the
animal, the producer, the consumer, that we do everything we
can, vaccines, animal flow, to produce that. So it is important
we realize that we don't use antibiotics because we are lazy
and don't want to try to prevent disease, we use them as a
tool.
Mr. Shimkus. Let's follow up on the collection of data and
the responses that you have heard here. Will use data provide
us the information we need to understand the epidemiology or
the risk of antibiotic resistance? It is hard for me to say;
easy for you all.
Dr. Apley. I think we have to carefully define between use
date and sales data. There is a recent paper by Jensen that was
conducted in Denmark, in the Netherlands, that showed very
clearly that sales data does not correlate well with use data.
And then the other important thing we ask is how are we
going to use these data. It is very important that when we have
these data we actually apply them to something that is related.
If we collect use data over here and have resistance data over
here and marry them together, we will get lines on a graph
which we may try to interpret, but they may be, in fact, not be
related.
I am not saying we shouldn't look, but we need to put very
careful thought into how we are going to collect and interpret
the data first.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlemen. And now
recognize the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Waxman,
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Price, thank you very much for being here today. Some
in the animal production industry have recognized the
overwhelming scientific evidence and acknowledge that routinely
giving antibiotics to animals in their feed or water can lead
to the growth of resistant bugs. However, they claim there are
too many steps between raising those animals on the farm and
buying their meat at the grocery store, and that the risks of a
consumer contracting an antibiotic-resistant pathogen from that
meat is remote.
Could you describe the steps by which the uses of
antibiotics on the farm lead to these human illnesses?
Dr. Price. Well, I think it is very clear with the classic
food-borne pathogens, like salmonella, for instance, that when
we use antibiotics in food animal production, there is a direct
line. We create the drug-resistant strains of salmonella in
food animals that then make a direct line to humans through the
food supply.
But the research that we have been doing in my lab and
around the world now is looking beyond those classic food-borne
pathogens, and now we are looking at the two biggest killers:
we are looking at staph aureus and we are looking at E. coli.
And every time we look now we are seeing more and more evidence
that those bacteria, some burden of those--let me give you a
case of the burden.
Mr. Waxman. Well, let me interrupt you, because I only have
5 minutes. In other words, isn't it a mistake to say that you
give an antibiotic to an animal for whatever reason and the
consumer that eats the meat from that animal is not exposed?
Isn't it that by using antibiotics for whatever purpose we are
engendering the development of bacteria that are resistant to
the antibiotics that we have now available?
Dr. Price. Exactly. Whenever we use antibiotics on the
farm, we are creating drug-resistant bacteria that could
possibly cause----
Mr. Waxman. And obviously antibiotics are appropriate under
some circumstances, but there is such a large use of
antibiotics for animals that we don't know if they are being
used for therapeutic purposes or just being used to generally
keep the animal healthy and in better commercial shape. Isn't
that what the problem is?
Dr. Price. It is.
Mr. Waxman. Now, Dr. Apley seemed to talk about healthy
animals are better, so that means we want to keep animals
healthy. But is there a problem in trying to keep animals
healthy if they don't have a disease, if we are just giving
them antibiotics as a preventative for a disease?
Dr. Price. I see a major problem with using antibiotics to
try to keep animals healthy as a preventative tool. If we have
created a food animal system that makes animals sick routinely,
then we have created a faulty system, we need to change the
system. We need to prevent infections other ways than using
antibiotics. That only invites resistance. And so I will say
again, I think we should treat sick animals, but if we see that
animals are getting sick all the time, we should change the way
we are doing it.
Mr. Waxman. Now, we don't have the data, and I have
introduced a bill called the DATA Act to require industries to
provide FDA with more detailed information on which drugs are
sold and in what quantities for which animals and report to FDA
to provide more detailed public reports on that information.
Now, Dr. Carnevale said they don't keep track of this
information. Of course they can make some estimates about it.
They can know details. But they certainly have a lot more
information than anybody else about the use of their
antibiotics.
How would public health researchers such as yourself make
use of this information and why is getting this information so
important?
Dr. Price. Well, we need to look at the relationship
between antibiotic use and antibiotic resistance, especially
for the newer drugs. You know, the emergence of cephalosporin-
resistant E. colis. You know, ask an infectious disease doc
what they would use if they got a cephalosporin-resistant E.
coli, and many would probably tell you they would use a
carbapenem. And carbapenem-resistant E. colis are the CREs, the
nightmare super bugs that the CDC hasbeen talking about.
So we need to understand how these antibiotics are being
used, but also, as I said before, I think we need to be able to
celebrate the food animal producers who are using them less.
Mr. Waxman. If we don't have every bit of information to
show the link between the sale of an antibiotic and the use of
the antibiotics, aren't estimates important rather than just
say, we don't know, and therefore we don't want to know? I
mean, if we recognize, for example, that drug companies don't
have firsthand knowledge of how the drugs are actually used, if
we ask them to give an estimate of which animals they are sold
for, if they have good sales departments, they should have at
least a basis for these estimates. Isn't that important and
helpful information?
Dr. Price. It is certainly important. And I hear people say
that it is hard to get those data, it is so hard, it is going
to be hard to do this. But I say what is hard is trying to
treat a kid with a multidrug-resistant infection, watching them
die of these drug-resistant infections, or trying to find new
antibiotics to replace the ones that we have blown out through
growth promotion and routine disease prevention.
Mr. Waxman. And if you will permit, Mr. Chairman. And the
bill does ask for requirements by people who use the
antibiotics, so we can get a pretty good picture overall even
if the drug companies don't have detailed information about how
their drug is being used after they sold it. But they don't
know who the customers are and what it is used for. Thank you.
Dr. Price. That is why I am supportive of your bill.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. And now
recognize the gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Ellmers, 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to our panelists for being here today.
Dr. Apley, we are talking about tools and we are talking
about antibiotics being used by veterinarians and farmers for
their livestock to keep animals healthy. What other tools are
there besides antibiotics that can be used if we are trying to
get away from the use of antibiotics?
Dr. Apley. Sure. And I mentioned pig flow strategies, for
example, for the swine industry, which involves very precise
control of where the pig is produced, where they move next, and
monitoring disease upstream, if you will, say, in the actual
pig production facility or in the farrowing facilities so that
they can nip it in the bud before it goes further. An example
in cattle is preconditioning, where instead of shipping them
straight to the feedlot, as in the past, we give them an
intermediate stage maybe closer to where they originally were,
of altering weaning ages. One of the things we have discovered
in cattle is called the Sandhills calving system, where we move
them to fresh pastures; fence line weaning of calves, genetic
selection. The list goes on and on, and there is a real, real
huge focus on that type of disease prevention.
Mrs. Ellmers. So it is more the process of the livestock
farmer really taking care of the animals and making changes
necessary.
I also want to ask you, and just in some of the other
testimony and questioning that you had, to my understanding
just listening to you, you feel that the data collection as far
as antibiotic usage is adequate? Is that a correct assumption
on my part?
Dr. Apley. If I could really know a few more things, I
would like to know out of interest. I think the question
becomes, how would we work it so that it is practical and
doable? And then as a scientist, I always want to know that the
data I have collected here, how it is confounded, what differs
in how it was collected to something I am going to compare it
to.
So data estimates are good, but if we are going to make
real conclusions as X is causing Y----
Mrs. Ellmers. Right.
Dr. Apley [continuing]. Then we have to be incredibly
careful on how we interpret that. What I am waiting to hear is,
as we move forward on methods for collecting the data, is how
do we anticipate interpreting it and then moving from
interpretation to regulatory or other uses.
Mrs. Ellmers. Perfect. Thank you. I appreciate your
approach. I think that is very effective.
Dr. Price, I have got some questions. I was just going over
some of your testimony here. You are critical, I think that is
an accurate assessment, of the FDA on the use of antibiotics
and the treatment of use of antibiotics. And one of the quotes
that I am just going to point out here, it says, the FDA, I am
paraphrasing there, negotiated an agreement to collect fees
from drug makers in exchange for expediting drug approval,
while missing a prime opportunity to seek some commonsense
provisions to simply measure, not restrict, just measure the
use of antibiotics.
But in all honesty, isn't that really what you are looking
for? I mean, you really are looking to restrict. And you have
pointed out a number of situations. And, look, I am a nurse, I
totally understand the idea and concept, and I think we are all
well aware of overuse of antibiotics, but I am not necessarily
sure that the farming community is where we need be focusing
and not on just the over-prescription made on antibiotics, you
know, out there in the medical world.
You named a few forms of bacteria--staph aureus, MRSA--you
also mentioned cephalosporin-resistant E. coli. Now, E. coli I
know are being found on farms, obviously. But are those found
on farms? Are these particular bacteria strains there and
something that we should be issuing?
And I would further that, and we have only got 30 seconds,
so I apologize, my time will be running out, but we do cook
food, I mean, and so the assumption that food is being eaten
that is, you know, filled with bacteria, it does get cooked. So
I would like you to comment on that as well.
Dr. Price. OK. I will go quickly. We see the same E. coli
that cause urinary tract infections, kidney infections, blood
infections on the farm, we see them in the animals, we see them
in the meat. We see staph aureus, we see multidrug-resistant
staph aureus, and we see MRSA on the farms. And there is a
difference on the farms that use antibiotics and those that
don't. We see more antibiotics on the conventional farms than
those antibiotic-free farms. That is very clear.
You said we should cook the meat. It is true. We should
cook the meat. I don't want anybody to think we shouldn't. But
do you cook chicken? When you open that package, you know that
liquid that is in there? Think about drug-resistant bacteria on
your hands. So you open that up. Now your hands are
contaminated. But we have spoken, so you are going to be really
careful. And you are going to put that chicken right in the hot
frying oil, right? And then you are going to take that package
and you are going to open up the cabinet and you are going to
throw it away. You have just contaminated your cabinet. You are
going to go wash your hands. You are going to contaminate your
faucet, you are going to pump the soap and contaminate that.
And you are going wash your hands and you are going to sing
``happy birthday'' and get them really clean, and you are going
to rinse them off and you are going to recontaminate and you
are going to make a salad, and that salad can get drug-
resistant bacteria in it. And that is how those things can
spread. And you still have them on your cutting board, on your
countertop. These things spread around. We don't think it is
that people are eating chicken sushi. That is gross, right? It
is cross-contamination and that happens.
Mrs. Ellmers. OK. And I appreciate that. And I realize I
have run out of time, so I appreciate the indulgence. But I
would say there again, it is an issue of process and
efficiency. So thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. And now
recognize the gentlelady from Virgin Islands, Dr. Christensen,
5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good
afternoon to the panel.
Dr. Price, it is nice to welcome a fellow Colonial here
today. And my first question, you may have already answered,
because the first question I had was, is there more that the
FDA and industry should be doing to address the problem of
antibiotic resistance stemming from the use of these drugs on
the farm? And you have about four or five recommendations
regarding reporting and data. Is there anything further that
you would add?
Dr. Price. Well, I just want to emphasize that prudent use
goes beyond just growth promotion. So that is, as I said, the
most egregious use. But I think routine disease prevention. So
I am not talking about, you know, for a short period of time
you see that there is a problem and you have to use
preventative antibiotics, but I am saying when you time it for
a flock cycle or a herd cycle and you are going to say every
time we are going to give antibiotics at this time, that is a
problem and that is going to select for drug-resistant
bacteria, and it does select for drug-resistant bacteria, and
we have to get past that. You know, control I am OK with,
therapy I am definitely OK with, but this routine disease
prevention is, I think, insane.
Mrs. Christensen. I am sure you are just passionate about
the overuse of antibiotics in human beings.
Dr. Price. I am. I am. And they work hand in hand, and I
wanted to say that earlier. It is not just antibiotic use in
food animal production. I don't want anybody to walk away from
here thinking that. You know, we have abused antibiotics in the
hospitals and we have abused them on the farms. And the thing
is, as I think about this environmental health paradigm where
they say, with cancer, they say, you know, the genes load the
gun and the environment pulls the trigger. So you are born with
this propensity for cancer and then you get exposed to a
carcinogen, and that can pull the trigger. But I think about
the food loading the gun. So you are ingesting drug-resistant
bacteria that is loading your system.
Most of us probably have some of these drug-resistant
bacteria in our guts. Most of the time it is no problem. But
then we get sick, we go into the hospital, we get treated with
antibiotics, and then those bacteria have a selective
advantage, and they proliferate and they get disseminated, and
then they get disseminated into the hospital.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you. And I had asked Dr. Dunham a
question I wanted to ask you also. As we finalize the guidance
that recommends the phasing out of animal production uses like
growth promotion and feed efficiency, do you think it is
possible for industry to essentially switch a growth promotion
claim to a disease prevention claim with just some data showing
that the same dose of a drug that promotes growth would also
prevent disease?
Dr. Price. I am very concerned about this. I am very
concerned that if we don't collect very detailed data, that if
we don't get the data that I am asking for, that Congressman
Waxman's bill would collect, that people are just going to
change what they are doing. We need to be collecting data on
how much are being used so we can see hopefully that they come
down. But if they just switch the names of it, the bacteria
don't care. The bacteria don't think about names of antibiotic
use.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my
time. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. And now
recognize the gentlemen from Colorado, Mr. Gardner, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
witnesses today for joining this hearing.
And, Dr. Price, you mentioned factory farmers earlier. What
is your definition of a factory farm?
Dr. Price. Well, as I said, other people use this term. I
rarely use that term. I think when I see these farms, I see
factories making drug-resistant bacteria. I see an industry----
Mr. Gardner. Just to be clear----
Mr. Price [continuing]. That is breaking all the rules.
Mr. Gardner. Just to be clear, you are not talking about a
feedlot in and of itself being a factory farm?
Dr. Price. No. I am talking about any kind of CAFO where
you have animals packed together that are part of an industrial
system where you are bringing the animals all in, you are
cramming them together, and you are feeding them feed that is
laced with antibiotics.
Mr. Gardner. And I want to be very clear here. I am not
trying to put words in your mouth.
Dr. Price. Please.
Mr. Gardner. You don't like feedlots?
Dr. Price. I don't like putting thousands of animals
together under unsanitary conditions and giving them
antibiotics. I do not like this.
Mr. Gardner. OK. So just the way we keep feedlots, you
don't like that?
Dr. Price. I do not like situations where we feed animals
crammed together antibiotics, because I know what it does. It
creates antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
Mr. Gardner. Right.
Dr. Price. My family owns a cattle ranch in Texas. I was
raised working work on a cattle ranch. I am not against meat
production. There is not a person in this room that loves a
hamburger more than me, I can tell you that.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you.
Dr. Apley, it is not often that I get somebody from Kansas
before this committee, so I thought we would spend the rest of
the time talking about water. Just kidding, just kidding.
Dr. Apley, as a veterinarian you are obviously trained in a
different way than a doctor is in how to assess--than an M.D.,
a medical doctor that treats humans, is trained to communicate
with something that can't talk back to you to tell you where it
hurts, to tell you what is wrong. And because of that you have
a different relationship with the people that you see, the herd
that you oversee, your--the people, the ranchers that you are
dealing with.
Can you tell me a little bit about how you interact with
the people who are managing a herd, because you have a
relationship with them, right? It is not just, you know,
distributing a drug, here it is, and you don't see them again,
and they walk away, and they are gone.
Dr. Apley. Well, probably the best way to describe a day,
show up, look at the records, see the manager, and then the
rest of my day was spent with the people that took care of the
animals. The hardest thing as a veterinarian is to just stand
back and not do, but to watch and observe. So we observed what
they were doing, and we used protocols and standard operating
procedures as the basis for our training.
Mr. Gardner. And what would happen--if we talked about some
of the preventative efforts to make sure that our herds are
healthy, what would happen? What would the economic impact be
on our food supply if we did not prevent disease in our herds?
Dr. Apley. Well, it would be dramatic and catastrophic if
we weren't able to prevent disease, and that goes back to all
the different ways we are summing together to try to prevent
that disease.
Mr. Gardner. Would it impact the supply available to
consumers around the world?
Dr. Apley. It would definitely have a negative impact on
what we are able to produce, yes.
Mr. Gardner. Could you talk a little bit about some of
the--and you mentioned it before, but go over again some of the
key points of public and animal health safeguards that are in
place from a regulatory standpoint and industry standpoint.
Dr. Apley. Well, for example, in feed use we are not able
to use that off label at all. That is strictly by the label.
For injectable uses, uses we can use on individual animals like
that, there is the ability to use that off label, but only
under very strict Animal Medicinal Drug Use Clarification Act
regulations, which require veterinarians involved, has a valid
rationale, assigns an extended withdrawal period to make sure
the animals are properly identified.
Mr. Gardner. And is there anything the FDA could be doing
more to establish appropriate guidelines, regulations regarding
the administration of animal drugs?
Dr. Apley. I think one of the biggest things, and Dr.
Dunham mentioned this, is there are listening sessions out
there as we look at moving towards all of the feed and water
uses being under veterinary control, that we come up with a
system with limited veterinary availability in some areas that
makes that workable for all parties. We appreciate them have
those listening sessions, and I think right now that is one our
biggest goals to get that done correctly.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. And just appreciate your work with
us today and look forward to working with you through the
process.
Yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlemen.
We have a UC request.
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, I would ask on behalf of Mr.
Waxman unanimous consent to enter into the record some letters
that were sent to him and you with regard to the DATA Act.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. I want to thank the witnesses for your
testimony. It has been a very important hearing; excellent,
excellent testimony. Members may have questions that they will
send to you. I remind Members they have 10 business days to
submit additional questions for the record, and I ask the
witnesses to respond to the questions promptly. And Members
should submit their questions by the close of business on
Tuesday, April 23rd.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 6:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


