- REPORTING DATA BREACHES: IS FEDERAL LEGISLATION NEEDED TO PROTECT CONSUMERS?

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REPORTING DATA BREACHES: IS FEDERAL LEGISLATION NEEDED TO PROTECT
CONSUMERS?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 18, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-71

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

86-395                         WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey                Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               PETER WELCH, Vermont
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PAUL TONKO, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

LEE TERRY, Nebraska
Chairman
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey              Ranking Member
Vice Chairman                      G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
DAVE B. McKINLEY, West Virginia      BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  JIM MATHESON, Utah
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri                   Islands
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California, ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio
FRED UPTON, Michigan, ex officio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Lee Terry, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Nebraska, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................     3
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     4
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    74

Witnesses

Kevin Richards, Senior Vice President, Federal Government
Affairs, Techamerica...........................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Dan Liutikas, Chief Legal Officer, Comptia.......................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Jeffrey Greene, Senior Policy Counsel, Cybersecurity and
Identity, Symantec Corporation.................................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Debbie Matties, Vice President of Privacy, CTIA--The Wireless
Association....................................................    34
Prepared statement...........................................    36
Andrea M. Matwyshyn, Assistant Professor of Legal Studies and
Business Ethics, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania    42
Prepared statement...........................................    44
David Thaw, Visiting Assistant Professor of Law, University of
Connecticut School of Law......................................    49
Prepared statement...........................................    51

Submitted material

Statement of the Electronic Transactions Association, submitted
by Mr. Terry...................................................    76
Letter of July 17, 2013, from the Credit Union National
Association to the subcommittee, submitted by Mr. Terry........    78
Statement of McDonald Hopkins LLC, submitted by Mr. Terry........    82
Statement of the National Retail Federation, submitted by Mr.
Terry..........................................................    86

REPORTING DATA BREACHES: IS FEDERAL LEGISLATION NEEDED TO PROTECT
CONSUMERS?

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 18, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:04 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Lee Terry
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Terry, Lance, Harper, Guthrie,
Olson, Kinzinger, Bilirakis, Johnson, Long, Barton, Schakowsky,
Sarbanes, McNerney, Barrow, Christensen, and Waxman (ex
officio).
Staff present: Kirby Howard, Legislative Clerk; Nick
Magallanes, Policy Coordinator, Commerce, Manufacturing, and
Trade; Brian McCullough, Senior Professional Staff Member,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Andrew Powaleny, Deputy
Press Secretary; Shannon Weinberg Taylor, Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Michelle Ash, Democratic Chief
Counsel; and Will Wallace, Democratic Professional Staff
Member.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LEE TERRY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEBRASKA

Mr. Terry. Good morning. I recognize myself for an opening
statement.
In today's economy, nearly everyone leaves a digital
footprint. Even if you made a concerted effort to avoid
smartphones, laptops, and social media, although I have not
found that person, you would have a difficult time keeping your
personal information from being held in an electronic database
somewhere.
Consumers should have the peace of mind that their data is
protected in a responsible way. But with all types of nefarious
activities online, cyber criminals are finding new ways and,
frankly, seem to be very consistent in their wishes to steal
data. So in the event that our personal data becomes exposed,
we need to be able to trust that the companies in possession of
that data will notify us of the exposure. And certainly it is
in those companies' best interest to notify promptly and
clearly in order to preserve a trusting relationship with their
customers.
Given these considerations, the question before us is: What
are the rules of the road for companies that experience a
breach in their data stores? Currently, the laws that govern
data breach notification are a patchwork of state- and
territory-specific statutes. Unfortunately, they tend to differ
from each other in many ways. For example, while a number of
States have adopted a common definition of personal
information, even more States have adopted alterations to that
definition, and those vary unpredictably. The definition is
important because it triggers the duty to notify of a breach.
Three States include encrypted or redacted data in the
definition of personal information, whereas the rest do not.
Five States include public records in the definition.
Meanwhile, four States protect an individual's date of birth
and mother's maiden name as personal information.
With at least 48 of these various state- and territory-
specific laws on the books, you can see how the cost of
compliance could add up. The global price tag of cyber crime
has been calculated at around $110 billion annually, and we
should not add unnecessary compliance costs to this. Adding to
the confusion, these laws also tend to vary on the number of
days that can elapse after a breach before notification as well
as the method of notification.
Even small breaches can cause a compliance headache. In one
recent example, a large company experienced a breach where the
personal information of just over 500 consumers was
compromised. In comparison to other breaches involving tens of
millions of consumers, this may seem small. Yet it turns out
that these 500 consumers lived in 44 different States and
therefore had to be notified pursuant to 44 different sets of
rules.
We must remember that where a breach in data is an
intentional intrusion from the outside, for example, if it is
done by a hacktivist, a foreign agent or a run-of-the-mill
criminal, the company holding the data is also a victim.
Burdening these entities with overly complicated notification
rules is not a solution to the harms that result from the
exposure of that personal information held by the company.
And with that, I look forward to hearing the testimony of
our witnesses and learning about whether or not we can improve
the current legal landscape for breach notification.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Terry follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Lee Terry

In today's economy nearly everyone leaves a
digital footprint.

Even if you made a concerted effort to avoid smart
phones, laptops, and social media, you would have a difficult
time keeping your personal information from being held in an
electronic database somewhere.

Consumers should have the peace of mind that their
data is protected in a responsible way.

But, with all types of nefarious activities
online, cyber criminals are finding new ways to steal data.

So in the event that our personal data becomes
exposed, we need to be able to trust that the companies in
possession of our data will notify us of the exposure.

And certainly it is in those companies' best
interest to notify promptly and clearly in order to preserve a
trusting relationship with consumers.

Given these considerations, the question before us
is: What are the rules of the road for companies that
experience a breach in their data stores?

Currently, the laws that govern data breach
notification are a patchwork of state- and territory-specific
statutes.

Unfortunately, they tend to differ from each other
in many ways.

For example, while a number of states have adopted
a common definition of ``personal information,'' even more
states have adopted alterations to that definition, and those
vary unpredictably.

This definition is important because it triggers
the duty to notify of a breach.

Three states include encrypted or redacted data in
the definition of ``personal information,'' whereas the rest do
not.

Five states include public records in the
definition. Meanwhile, four states protect an individual's date
of birth and mother's maiden name as ``personal information.''

With at least 48 of these various state- and
territory-specific laws on the books, you can see how the cost
of compliance could add up.

The global price tag of cyber crime has been
calculated at around $110 billion annually, and we should not
add unnecessary compliance costs to this.

Adding to the confusion, these laws also tend to
vary on the number of days that can elapse after a breach
before notification as well as the method of notification.

Even small breaches can cause a compliance
headache: In one recent example, a large company experienced a
breach where the personal information of just over 500
consumers was compromised.

In comparison to other recent breaches involving
tens of millions of consumers, this may seem small. Yet it
turns out that these 500 consumers lived in 44 different states
and therefore had to be notified pursuant to 44 different sets
of rules.

We must remember that where a breach in data is an
intentional intrusion from the outside-for example, if it is
done by a ``hacktivist'', a foreign agent, or a run-of-the-mill
criminal-the company holding the data is also a victim.

Burdening these entities with overly complicated
notification rules is not a solution to the harms that result
from the exposure of personal information.

And with that, I look forward to hearing the
testimonies of our witnesses and to learning about whether we
can improve the current legal landscape for breach
notification.

Mr. Terry. At this point, I will yield back my time and
recognize the ranking member, Jan Schakowsky, for her
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Apropos of this hearing, it has just been reported this
very morning that Anonymous claims to have hacked into 1,800
email accounts of Members of Congress and their staffs. So that
is apparently in the news. I don't know to what extent that has
been confirmed. So I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
about this issue and steps that can and should be taken to
address it.
As a long-time consumer advocate, I believe that the public
does have a right to be informed if their personal information
such as names, email addresses, passwords, home addresses,
health and financial data is compromised. As more and more
information moves online, it is equally important to ensure
that precautions are taken to keep that data secure.
Less than 2 years ago following the breaches of data at
Citicorp, Epsilon and Sony, a report of the data security from
Protegrity found that personal information was ``highly
valuable'' to cyber criminals but ``vastly unprotected.'' Since
then, it seems to me, and you will set me straight, little has
changed. Last year, 680 confirmed data breaches compromised
almost 28 million records. Many of those could have been
prevented with relative ease had the entities holding the data
followed known best practices. This is clearly a major issue
which the private sector has not done enough on its own to
address, and one of great concern, I believe, to the public.
Almost every state and territory including my home State of
Illinois has adopted data breach standards. While national
standards might be needed to adequately address this issue, I
want to make clear, my view is that any federal law should not
weaken strong State laws. In addition, any federal response
should establish a baseline so that every American can be
assured some level of data protection, not just notification
after the fact.
This subcommittee has several questions to answer as we
consider data breaches and hopefully data security as well.
What specific measures should be taken to protect personal
information stored online? When should consumers be notified of
a breach? What role should the federal government play in
ensuring that those steps are taken? I believe that entities
that store important data should act proactively to defend that
information and the consumer should be notified if a breach
could result in personal harm.
The DATA Act, introduced by Mr. Rush and passed by voice
vote just 4 years ago, would have taken those steps to protect
American consumers. I was a cosponsor of that bill along with
Mr. Barton, and I believe it should be the framework for
bipartisan legislation in this Congress.
Again, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today
about what can and should be done to address breach
notification and data security. I hope that this subcommittee
can work constructively toward a bipartisan solution to this
major issue that impacts all of us.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Terry. And that is our goal.
At this time the chair recognizes the chairman emeritus,
Mr. Barton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am very happy
that you are having this hearing. As Congresswoman Schakowsky
just pointed out, this is an issue that is not unfamiliar to
the subcommittee or the full committee. Going back to my tenure
as chairman in 2005 and 2006, we passed a bill out of committee
but it didn't go to the floor. Under Mr. Dingell's chairmanship
and Mr. Waxman's chairmanship, again, we passed bills that came
out of committee and we have even had one bill that passed the
floor of the House but it wasn't taken up in the Senate. The
last Congress, we passed a bill out of this subcommittee but it
was not taken up at full committee.
So this is an issue that we all have general agreement on.
As Congresswoman Schakowsky has pointed out, it is not a
partisan issue. Hopefully under your leadership, Mr. Chairman,
and Mr. Upton's leadership at the full committee, we will pass
something in this committee, on the floor and get the other
body to take it up.
This year alone, our last year, in 2012, there were 470
breaches that meet the definition, and so far this year, there
have been 326 breaches. This is an issue that is not going to
go away. It would appear to be obvious that we need a federal
bill instead of a patchwork of State bills, and I would agree
with what Congresswoman Schakowsky said, that a federal bill
should be a baseline bill and not a bill that limits the
States.
With that, Mr. Chairman, again, thank you for your
leadership. I believe you are the man who can make this happen,
subcommittee, full committee, the floor and then with the other
body. And with that, I will yield back.
Mr. Terry. No pressure there.
Are there any other Republicans on this side that wish to
have time yielded?
Mr. Barton. If not, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Terry. Then we will yield back.
Before I announce our panel and start our testimony, an
announcement of sorts--oh, Henry is here, so while he is
sitting down, my announcement is, we will recess at noon and
reconvene if it is still necessary to. I have a feeling that
there is going to be enough questions that we will reconvene at
1 o'clock but break at noon, and I recognize the full committee
ranking member, the gentleman from California is recognized for
5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I welcome
all of our witnesses today.
Our subcommittee is going to address the federal role in
data breach notification. It is alarming just how common data
breaches have become. Since 2005, at least 600 million records
containing consumers' personal information have been
compromised as a result of more than 3,800 data breaches in the
United States. At least 72 million personal records have been
compromised only in the time since July 2011, when the
Subcommittee last considered this issue.
Every type of entity has proven vulnerable, including
private sector companies of all sizes, colleges and
universities, and federal, State, and local governments.
Breaches result from a wide variety of causes. External
criminal attacks, dishonest insiders, and simple negligence can
all be responsible for compromising consumers' personal
information. Moreover, in recent months, it has become
abundantly clear that commercial data breaches can also result
from State-affiliated cyber attacks.
Consumers face severe threats to their financial well-being
when data like banking information or Social Security numbers
are compromised. In 2012 alone, more than 12 million U.S.
adults were victims of identity theft or similarly costly forms
of fraud. Less reported, but also of concern, is when breaches,
non-financial in nature, threaten consumers' privacy, including
breaches involving health-related information, biometric data,
or a person's precise location.
Nearly all U.S. States and territories now have laws that
require notice for their own residents when a data breach
occurs. These laws vary greatly, but several of these laws are
quite strong, ensuring that consumers receive prompt, clear and
complete notification when their personal information is
breached and providing them with resources to protect their
financial well-being. I am glad that these laws have been
enacted, but after-the-fact breach notification is only half of
what is needed. The private sector also must take reasonable
steps to safeguard personal information.
When it comes to information security, prevention is the
best medicine. Research shows that the vast majority of attacks
on commercial data--78 percent according to the Verizon RISK
Team--utilize simple tactics easily thwarted by basic security
infrastructure and procedures.
There are many companies that take information security
very seriously and work diligently to combat this problem, and
perhaps there will always be cyber crime. But unfortunately,
there are also companies that are not doing enough to prevent
breaches, and consumers are paying the price.
As the subcommittee moves forward with its work on
information security, I strongly encourage all members to keep
two points in mind. First, federal legislation must not move
backward by undermining those States with strong breach
notification laws. And second, effective security for
consumers' personal information indisputably requires both
breach notification and reasonable safeguards for commercial
data.
I look forward to the testimony we are going to get today
and our discussion of this issues today and in the future and I
hope we can work together to deal with this important issue.
Mr. Terry. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman.
At this time I am going to introduce our full panel, and
then we will start with Mr. Richards. Mr. Richards is the
Senior Vice President of Federal Government Affairs for
TechAmerica. We have Dan Liutikas, Chief Legal Officer,
CompTIA. We have Mr. Jeff Greene, Senior Policy Counsel,
Cybersecurity and Identity, Symantec Corporation. We then have
Debbie Matties, CTIA--The Wireless Association Vice President
of Privacy. We have Andrea Matwyshyn, Assistant Professor of
Legal Studies and Business Ethics at the Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania. David Thaw will complete our
testimony, and he is Visiting Assistant Professor of Law at the
University of Connecticut School of Law.
You will see little lights down there. Green means go. At 4
minutes, the yellow line will come on and that should be a
sign, if you got a full page or two left, you may want to skip
to the conclusion. The red light means I'm going to lightly tap
the gavel, and so I appreciate keeping it to the 5-minute mark,
especially since we have been kind of put on an awkward, tight
schedule today.
So Mr. Richards, you may begin. You are recognized for your
5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF KEVIN RICHARDS, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, TECHAMERICA; DAN LIUTIKAS, CHIEF LEGAL
OFFICER, COMPTIA; JEFFREY GREENE, SENIOR POLICY COUNSEL,
CYBERSECURITY AND IDENTITY, SYMANTEC CORPORATION; DEBBIE
MATTIES, VICE PRESIDENT OF PRIVACY, CTIA--THE WIRELESS
ASSOCIATION; ANDREA M. MATWYSHYN, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF LEGAL
STUDIES AND BUSINESS ETHICS, THE WHARTON SCHOOL, UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA; AND DAVID THAW, VISITING ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF
LAW, UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT SCHOOL OF LAW

STATEMENT OF KEVIN RICHARDS

Mr. Richards. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and distinguished members of the subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to testify today and for
convening this hearing on the important issue of data breach
notification. I am Kevin Richards, Senior Vice President of
Federal Government Affairs of TechAmerica, a leading technology
association representing the world's premiere technology
companies from the information and technology communications
sector at the state, federal, and international level.
The topic of today's hearing is an issue of great concern
to our members who view the unauthorized disclosure and use of
personal information as a threat that erodes public confidence
in a connected world. TechAmerica's member companies understand
better than anyone the nature of cyber threats that America
faces today and what must be done in order to protect
consumers' information from data breaches.
The rapid growth of the collection of information in
electronic form has provided consumers, businesses and
governments with tremendous opportunities from revolutionizing
the way medical care is provided to enhancing government
services, to enabling a free Internet with more opportunities
appearing daily. However, this collection of data has also
resulted in a concomitant exposure of companies to risks and
liabilities arising from the collection, use, storage and
transmission of information, particularly sensitive information
about individuals.
TechAmerica strongly believes that if a breach occurs that
poses a significant risk of serious harm, that there should be
a consistent national policy to ensure that customers and
consumers are notified in an appropriate manner.
Today, 48 different State jurisdictions in the United
States have data breach notification laws, and while many
businesses have managed to adapt to these various laws, a
properly defined data breach notification standard would go a
long way to guide organizations on how to address cyber threats
in their risk management policies. It also would help prevent
breaches and give guidance on how best to respond if an
organization should fall victim to a reach caused by an attack.
It would be particularly helpful for smaller businesses, many
of whom cannot afford teams of lawyers to navigate 48 breach
standards should something bad actually happen.
National data breach legislation should be carefully
crafted and in particular be technology-neutral to help
organizations prevent and respond to security incidents while
avoiding costly, burdensome rules that would not provide any
real protection to consumers and free security innovation. Such
legislation will provide much-needed regulatory relief to
companies facing conflicting legal obligations under today's
patchwork of State laws.
TechAmerica has been a leader in calling for a strong,
preemptive, and uniform national breach notification law.
Federal legislation that promotes notification to consumers
when their data has been compromised is needed, and can
effectively help restore consumers' online trust and
confidence.
The first objective of federal data breach notification
legislation should be to establish a uniform national standard
and preempts the current patchwork of existing State laws while
providing a safe harbor for those entities that take steps to
protect their systems from breaches and render data unreadable,
undecipherable and unusable in order to protect individuals
from harm. The following recommendations are a result of
lessons learned from the implementation of regimes by the
current 48 different State jurisdictions in the United States
and which serve as a good benchmark for drafting potential
legislation.
One, legislation must establish a single, uniform
preemptive standard. Two, a meaningful threshold for
notification should be established. Three, define carefully the
kind of personally identifiable information that is covered by
notification requirements. Four, avoid mandating specific
technologies while encouraging the adoption of good practices.
Five, when third-party managed data notification is required,
avoid consumer confusion. Six, a federal law should do more
than the patchwork of state laws to protect consumers.
In conclusion, TechAmerica believes that the patchwork
quilt of state laws and existing requirements needs to be
overhauled by a uniform preemptive national standard based on
the risk of harm. This would be in addition to the significant
protection consumers receive today. With the chairman's
permission, TechAmerica would like to request the submission of
TechAmerica's national data breach legislative principles for
inclusion in the record for today's hearing.
Mr. Terry. Unanimous consent to allow? Hearing no
objection, so allowed.
Mr. Richards. Thank you. We are happy to offer assistance
to the committee and work with you as the legislative process
moves forward.
Thank you for allowing me the privilege to appear today in
order to share TechAmerica's views on the important of data
breach notification. I would be happy to answer any questions
that the committee may have at this time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Richards follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you very much.
And now, Mr. Liutikas, you have your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAN LIUTIKAS

Mr. Liutikas. Good morning, Chairman Terry, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and distinguished members of the House Subcommittee
on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade. This testimony is
submitted on behalf of the 2,000 members of the Computing
Technology Industry Association, also known as CompTIA, a not-
for-profit trade association.
CompTIA is also the leading developer and provider of
vendor-neutral education, IT workforce certifications including
A+, Security+ and Network+, and organizational credentials such
as the Security Trust Mark.
My name is Dan Liutikas, and I am the Chief Legal Officer
of CompTIA. Prior to CompTIA, I was an attorney in private
practice focusing on corporate technology and intellectual
property matters, primarily for the small- to medium-size
business. I am a native of Chicago, Illinois, and was born to
immigrant parents from Lithuania. My father opened his own
television repair shop and then later started a construction
business. My mother started her own restaurants, delis, and
banquet halls. Both lived the American dream by being
entrepreneurial and starting their own small businesses. From
my own experience, I submit that small business owners don't
want handouts.
Like the businesses started by my parents, many of our
members are small- to medium-sized businesses expect that they
are IT solution providers that help other small- to medium-
sized businesses set up IT systems and manage data. They also
just want a fair shot at pursuing the American dream. In the
context of today's hearing, that means eliminating unnecessary
barriers to entry such as redundant and burdensome regulations.
With that context, let me state upfront that our membership
supports a federal approach to data breach notification.
It is hard to believe that it has been 10 years since
California became the first State in the country to enact a
State data breach notification law. Today, there are 46 states,
D.C., and several territories that enacted data breach
notification laws. Data breach notification standards are
clearly a relevant concern for millions of users sharing
information through the Internet and for information being
stored in various forms.
A federal approach will bring clarity and certainty not
only to small businesses but also to consumers who may not be
aware of the notice obligations of a particular State's data
breach notification law or even when such obligations may
apply.
We appreciate the opportunity to submit our written
testimony that provides greater details on the burdens of the
current patchwork of State laws and the way in which
advancements in mobile technology exacerbate those burdens.
Therefore, I would like to spend the balance of my time on a
solution.
Based on our collective experience and outreach efforts, we
believe that the IT industry will be receptive to a national
data breach reform framework that contains the following six
principles.
Number one, there should be a single national federal
standard for data breach policy. Businesses which conduct
commerce over multiple States need the certainty and efficiency
that a national standard would provide.
Number two, Congress and the FTC should not mandate
specific technology or methods for data security practices. The
environment for data security is constantly evolving, so any
regulation should focus on promoting validated industry
standards for security, rather than a single quickly outdated
solution.
Number three: There should be an exemption from
notification requirement for entities that deploy technology or
methods such as encryption and other technologies that render
data unusable or unreadable by hackers as a harm-prevention
measure.
Number four, all enforcement and penalties for data breach
law should be administrated by a central government agent
instead of State Attorneys General, except in cases where the
federal agent can or has not acted.
Number five, entities compliant with existing data breach
legislation such as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act should be exempt
from new regulation. We should not reinvent the wheel or create
conflicting of overlapping regulations.
And number six, notification should occur on a reasonable
time frame, which includes allowances for risk assessment and
any necessary law enforcement procedures or investigation.
Notification should be focused on events where there is a
possibility of actual harm including a minimum threshold of
affected individuals.
In closing, I want to reiterate that we believe that a
national data breach framework is in the best interest of both
consumers and small- to medium-sized businesses.
Thank you again for the opportunity to share our
perspective on the issue of data breach notification reform,
and I look forward to our discussion on how to best approach
this issue, and I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Liutikas follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you very much.
Mr. Greene, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY GREENE

Mr. Greene. Chairman Terry, Ranking Member Schakowsky,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on behalf of Symantec Corporation. We are the
largest security software company in the world with 31 years of
experience in developing Internet security technology.
For organizations that have critical information assets,
the risk of a data breach has really never been higher than it
is now. We estimate that last year, there were 93 million
identities exposed. Thankfully, few of these victims will have
his or her identity stolen or bank account raided, but the
reality is that all of them are at risk for it because once
your information has been stolen, you can do little more than
hope that no one tries to monetize it.
The costs of these breaches is real. Mr. Chairman, as you
mentioned in 2012, our Norton cyber crime report put the global
price tag of consumer cyber crime at $110 billion, and that is
just the consumer side. On the business side, the Ponemon
Institute estimated that in 2012, the average organizational
cost for a breach in the United States was $5.4 million.
Breaches can be caused most commonly or very commonly by
lost computers or portable media, and they can be caused by
outright theft--people that walk out the door with sensitive
information, disgruntled or fired employees. But there is
another cause for breaches, and that is targeted attacks, and
actually last year, according to our Internet Security Threat
report, 40 percent of breaches were caused by targeted attacks
and hackers. Most of these attacks rely on social engineering,
basically trying to trick people into doing something on their
computer that they were never do if they were fully cognizant
of their actions. We also saw a lot of email attacks. It is
still a very common vector. And we regularly see criminals
mining social media to come up with tidbits about individuals
they use to craft emails that will look legitimate, even to
very cautious users. Twenty twelve also saw the emergence of
what we call watering hole attacks. Like the proverbial lion in
the jungle who waits by the watering hole for unsuspecting
prey, cyber criminals have become adept at compromising
legitimate Web sites and then sitting on them and waiting for
visitors to come by and then attempting to compromise every one
who visits.
The growing use of the cloud also presents unique
challenges and opportunities. Cloud done right is an
opportunity for very strong security. You are putting your data
behind higher walls and having it watched by more walls. Cloud
done wrong, though, can be a recipe for data breach because you
are grouping your data with many other people's, creating a
very desirable target for attackers and one that is not well
defended.
As you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, mobile devices require
strong security. We are all doing more and more of our lives on
mobile computers, and unfortunately, the criminals are
following. Last year, we saw a 58 percent increase in the types
of malware that were designed specifically for mobile devices,
and even since we released our report in April, we have seen
dramatic evidence of the increasing focus on mobile attacks.
Good security really starts with the basics--patch
management, updating your patches on your computer, and strong
passwords. The breach that the ranking member indicated was
reported this morning, based on the early reporting, there was
a significant number of people who were using the word
``password'' as their password. That is just not a strong
password; you are asking for it.
So-called zero days or previously unknown critical
vulnerabilities receive a lot of media attention, but
unfortunately, it is still well-known older vulnerabilities
that cause most patches. Modern security software is essential.
I am not talking about the proverbial your father's antivirus
anymore. Modern security software will monitor your computer
looking for anomalous Internet activity, processes or other
system events that could be indicative of a previously known
infection. We have reputation-based technology we use that
actually looks at individual files based upon their frequency
we see out in the wild and we are able to detect previously
unknown threats just by looking at a file that way.
Looking at the legal landscape, we do support a national
standard for breach notification, and we have identified three
principles that are key to us. First, the scope of any
legislation should include all entities that collect, maintain
or sell significant numbers of records containing sensitive
personal information, and we think that that should apply
equally to the government and to the private sector. Second,
pre-breach security measures should be central to any
legislation. New legislation should seek to minimize the
likelihood of a breach and not just focus on what to do
afterward. And finally, any notification scheme should minimize
false positives. Promoting technology like encryption as a best
practice would significantly reduce these false positives and
limit the burden on consumers and on businesses.
I thank you again for the opportunity and the privilege to
testify today. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Greene follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you very much.
Ms. Matties, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DEBBIE MATTIES

Ms. Matties. Chairman Terry, Ranking Member Schakowsky, and
the members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to participate in today's hearing. My name is Debbie Matties,
and I am the Vice President for Privacy at CTIA.
CTIA along with AT&T, Comcast, DIRECTV, NCTA, Time Warner
Cable, USTelecom, and Verizon is a member of the 21st Century
Privacy Coalition. The Coalition seeks to modernize U.S.
privacy and data security laws to better serve consumers as
well as to reflect the ways that communications technology and
competition has changed in the last two decades.
CTIA commends the subcommittee for exploring whether
federal data breach legislation is necessary to protect
consumers. Today's patchwork of state and federal data security
and breach notification laws is complicated for businesses and
provides uneven protection for consumers. A strong,
comprehensive and streamlined federal framework enforced by a
single agency would create more certainty for businesses and
better protect consumers from the harms associated with data
breaches.
Today's variety of State and federal requirements creates
inconsistent, sometimes contradictory responses to breaches
that do not benefit consumers. For example, some States require
breach notifications to occur ``without unreasonable delay''
whereas other States require specific time frames for
notification. Some states provide an exemption for notification
for immaterial breaches whereas other States do not.
Most data breaches impact consumers in multiple States,
just like the breach that happened here in the House, and
electronic data is rarely segmented by State. So under law, the
question becomes, which State law should apply? The State in
which the consumer resides? The State in which the breach
occurred or the State in which a vulnerability existed and was
exploited? For wireless consumers using family plans, often the
user of a device is in a different State from the subscriber
who pays the bill. Given the fact that breaches inevitably
transcend State borders, a federal approach to breach
notification is appropriate so that all consumers receive the
same benefits.
The absence of a consistent nationwide regime also creates
unnecessary distraction for companies that need to stop a
breach, evaluate the damage caused by the breach and its scope,
correct whatever vulnerability resulted in the breach, work
with law enforcement to investigate the brief, and of course,
most important, notify consumers to help mitigate any harm.
These time-sensitive activities are hampered when a company,
especially a small business, has to evaluate which of the 48
different State regimes applies to each of their customers and
then tailor breach notifications accordingly. It also makes it
difficult for consumer protection agencies, consumer advocates
and businesses to educate consumers faced with a data breach
about their rights.
Multiple federal regimes undermine consumer protection in a
similar manner. For example, wireless carriers fall within the
FCC'S CPNI rules to the extent they are providing a
telecommunications service such as voice. But some providers of
voice like Skype are not subject to CPNI rules, and then the
FTC asserts data security jurisdiction over wireless carriers
when they are providing Internet access.
In any case, the CPNI rules don't really make a lot of
sense. They don't cover critically important information like
name, Social Security number or credit card number but they do
cover, for example, the number of voice lines a subscriber has
on her plan. A unified, streamlined federal data security and
breach notification law that applies equally to all entities
and to all data would make consumers more confident in the
security of their online information and would in turn give
them greater trust in Internet commerce. This unified federal
approach to data security is bipartisan and is in line with the
Obama Administration's recommendations to level the playing
field for companies and provide a consistent set of
expectations for consumers by simplifying and clarifying the
privacy laws. CTIA supports the Administration's recommendation
to narrow the common carrier exemption to the extent needed to
enable the FTC to enforce data security and data breach
notification requirements.
Mr. Chairman, CTIA fully supports a unified, streamlined
federal data security and breach notification law that is
enforced by the FTC and benefits consumes who expect that their
information will be afforded the same high degree of protection
regardless of what entity collects the information, where the
consumer lives, where a breach occurs, or where hackers may be
trying to access personal information. Congress should enact a
new law to better reflect consumer expectations.
I would be happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Matties follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Well done.
Professor Matwyshyn, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANDREA MATWYSHYN

Ms. Matwyshyn. Thank you. Chairman Terry, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, it is my great honor to be with all of you today to
discuss a topic that I have devoted my scholarship to, and that
is the question of how to improve information security in the
United States.
I started working in this space approximately 14 years ago
as a corporate attorney representing multinational clients as
well as entrepreneurs in Chicago. I really watched the
evolution of this space as both a member of the business
community at first representing clients and now as an academic,
and although there has been tremendous improvement in this
space, we still have a reasonable way to go.
The public awareness around questions of information
security has tremendously increased during the last 10 years,
and it is with great pleasure that I see that we are discussing
these topics today. However, the questions of conduct and
reasonableness in behavior and information security still
remain unanswered.
With that, I would like to offer a historical example to
offer perhaps a paradigm to conceptualize questions of
information security. In addition to teaching Internet law and
data security and privacy law, I also teach securities
regulation, and I would submit that perhaps the questions that
we are facing today have a historical parallel in the questions
that this Congress faced when thinking about balancing the
interests of consumer protection, capital formation and market
stability in the 1933 and 1934 Acts.
Today in this context, perhaps those three elements are
consumer protection, economic stability broadly in terms of
securing information and preserving sectors of our economy that
rely on information flows, and facilitating responsible
innovation. So with those three elements, we can take a look at
the broader set of questions in information security, and I
would submit that perhaps we should draw a clear distinction
between disclosure regulation and conduct regulation.
Disclosure regulation, specifically data breach
notification statutes, have developed to a high degree on the
State level. We have had States function as the laboratories of
experimentation, and the State statutes have shown us the way
as to what is a feasible and successful approach for
disclosure, and offered us guidance to at this point be able to
come up with a set of criteria that can be operationalized on a
national level through the Federal Trade Commission to provide
us the data to be able to analyze what is going on in our
economy, who are the companies that are behaving with best
practices, and who are the companies that are not yet quite up
to par and need to be encouraged regulatorily or otherwise on
the State or national level to improve the quality of
information security that they implement throughout the their
organizations. The written statement that I have submitted
offers a framework of this nature.
Conduct regulation, I would submit, we are not ready to
really focus in on with a national framework yet. We need the
states to show us the way, the same way that they did in the
context of data breach notification. Let the states experiment,
guide us, discover what works, what doesn't work, and then
perhaps we can revisit this question. I would respectfully urge
this body to allow for this state experimentation and to
preserve the right of states to determine recourse appropriate
for their consumer harms.
While disclosure legislation deals with purely providing
information to empower consumers to make good choices, conduct
regulation is the place where we contemplate harms. This
distinction, I think, would be fruitful to operationalize into
a national framework for a data breach notification
harmonization.
And in my last minute, I will highlight some of the
elements that I elaborate on in detail in my written statement
that may provide guidance for a federal harmonized framework.
First, the concept of information from a consumer and from
a corporate perspective does not map onto the notion of PII
that we have been working with. Sometimes the most innocuous
bits of information can be the most important. If I use my
favorite flavor of ice cream as my security question for my
bank account, that is perhaps my most sensitive information,
and so I would suggest that perhaps we should reconceptualize
our notion of what constitutes consumer information in line
with the way that sophisticated companies treat information and
that is around information that is shared by a consumer in a
trusted relationship.
And with that, I will conclude because I am running out of
time but I would request that this committee turn to my
statement and examine the framework that I have proposed. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Matwyshyn follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. We will. I appreciate you submitting that.
Professor Thaw, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID THAW

Mr. Thaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Terry, Ranking Member Schakowsky, distinguished
members of the subcommittee, I am David Thaw, Visiting
Assistant Professor of Law at the University of Connecticut and
Fellow of the Information Society Project at Yale Law School. I
appreciate the opportunity to testify regarding the important
issues of data security and consumer protection, a subject that
I have spent the better part of a decade researching and
working on professionally.
Federal data breach notification is important but it must
be implemented properly. In my oral testimony today, I wish to
address two core issues relevant to proper implementation.
First, whether to address breach notification separate from
broader information security regulation, and second, what
burden of proof should be required if a risk-of-harm threshold
is adopted for breach notification.
I understand the subcommittee to be taking up the issue of
data security beginning with the question of breach
notification separate from comprehensive information security
regulation. I caution against this approach for two reasons.
First, comprehensive information security combined with breach
notification is substantially more effective than is either
regime alone. As part of my research on information security
regulation, I compared the efficacy of these two regimes.
Specifically of note to the subcommittee's agenda, the
combination of the two was nearly four times more effective at
preventing incidents than was breach notification alone. I
analogize the effects of breach notification alone to locking
the bank or vault door while leaving a back window wide open.
Second, approaching the issue of breach notification
separately requires establishing certain information
categories. For example, defining what information to protect
is essential to breach notification. This definition, however,
has a different purpose when considering comprehensive
information security. Furthermore, once established, these
definitions will be difficult to change. The burden to
business, for example, to reclassify information for compliance
with multiple definitions is substantial.
To be specific, the types of information that should
trigger notification differ from the types of information that
should be protected overall. For example, medical records,
wills, personal diaries, sensitive or private photographs and
other similar information are all items federal law currently
recognizes as sensitive personal information. State law has
more narrow definitions including Social Security numbers,
financial account number, and government ID numbers. Consumers
should be informed about unauthorized disclosure of all this
information. By contrast, sensitive information about trade
secrets, computer infrastructure or security measures it not
the province of the general consumer, yet such information must
also be secured. On these bases, I strongly recommend that the
subcommittee address breach notification and comprehensive data
security concurrently.
The second issue I wish to address is the risk-of-harm
threshold. Certain formulations of this threshold negatively
impact information security. Specifically, a threshold
employing a negative presumption of notification, which
requires proving risk of harm before triggering notification
requirements, disincentivizes organizations from conducting
thorough investigations. Organizations have incentives to limit
investigations that might increase their liability. For
example, when conducting comprehensive information security
assessments, auditing and consulting firms often work together
with law firms so that the results will be privileged and thus
not discoverable in future civil litigation or regulatory
investigations. Clients do not want to incur liability for
failure to remediate security vulnerabilities identified in the
assessment. A similar analysis applies to breach
investigations. My research data supports this conclusion as
does my professional experience. Thus, I strongly recommend
that if a risk-of-harm threshold is adopted, the committee
adopt an affirmative presumption of notification where risk of
harm must be disproved before notification is exempted. To
place the burden otherwise disincentivizes information security
investigations, one of the most important tools in protecting
consumers against future breaches and securing the overall
information security ecosystem.
I am happy to offer any assistance to the committee as it
moves forward in his work. I again thank the chairman and the
ranking member for the privilege and opportunity to testify
here today, and I am pleased to answer any of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thaw follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you very much for your testimony and
appreciate the two law school professors here. It makes me
feel--I had flashbacks to law school during your testimony.
With that, I will start the questions--the answer to this
is just yes or no. It was clearly clear in some of the
testimonies but I do want to get it succinctly on the record
starting with Mr. Richards and then going down to Professor
Thaw.
Do you believe there should be a federal notification law?
Mr. Richards?
Mr. Richards. Yes, we do, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Liutikas. Yes, we do, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Greene. Yes, sir.
Ms. Matties. Yes.
Mr. Terry. Now we get to the murkier.
Ms. Matwyshyn. Exactly. Yes, provided the standard is at
the highest level and does not preempt State law, as well as
conduct being carved out to allow for States to experiment.
Mr. Thaw. Yes, provided implemented properly. I provide
detail in my written testimony on this, and concur with
Professor Matwyshyn's statement.
Mr. Terry. See, that is the flashbacks. There is always
enough room to screw up on the test now.
Ms. Matwyshyn. It always depends, right?
Mr. Terry. It always depends.
And the reason why I think it was important to just lay
that item of foundation is that with 48 States and territories
combined already having at least at the multinational level,
you have a level of sophistication where they are already in
compliance and then there is a level of concern that a new
national standard just creates 49 instead of 48. So that brings
us to what Professor Matwyshyn said in her ``but'', and that is
no State preemption. So how does it work without preemption,
and who wants to start? I will go with Dr. Matwyshyn first and
then anyone else that wants to speak on preemption.
Ms. Matwyshyn. So I actually consulted with a California
government official responsible for enforcement, and provided
that the framework on the national level provides a
comprehensive disclosure regime and States and their
enforcement agencies have direct access to this information as
well as consumers, everyone wins because the information would
simply be centralized. So if the disclosure requirements
adequately conceptualize the questions that consumers and
enforcers want to know, States, I believe, would be happy with
a centralized regime and there wouldn't be a problem with
enforcement, however, because of limitations of resources on
the part of the Federal Trade Commission I believe should
remain on the State level.
Mr. Terry. All right. Mr. Richards, Liutikas and Greene,
and Ms. Matties, quickly, though.
Mr. Richards. Sure. Well, we believe the patchwork
framework occurring in State laws are very duplicative in some
cases, and in a lot of cases don't make sense. North Dakota,
for example, requires notice of a breach of name and birth date
so there are different qualifications in terms of PII and what
information you should focus on. New York requires notice of
security breaches made to three separate State agencies. I
think federal preemption is important but I don't think you
should undermine strong consumer protections that are currently
held and enjoyed at the State level.
Mr. Terry. Thank you. Mr. Liutikas?
Mr. Liutikas. I mean, at the end of the day I think we
believe that first and foremost that consumers need the
notification standard but in providing that standard, we could
also simplify matters substantially for the small- to medium-
sized business which the current technology infrastructure
allows them to operate in a way that is much bigger than maybe
they could have done some years ago. So I think centralizing
that notification standard and avoiding having the issue of
determining whether or not a variety of State laws applies or
does not apply would be extremely beneficial to the small- to
midsized business that simply doesn't have the resources.
Mr. Terry. Interesting. Mr. Greene?
Mr. Greene. I would echo what Mr. Richards said, that if
you have essentially 49 standards, you are just creating
another box you have to check to ensure that you are doing
everything right. If you do have a breach, you are not going to
speed the process of understanding the scope of your breach of
who you need to notify.
Mr. Terry. Thank you. And Ms. Matties, I am actually going
to change the question for you to more personalized because of
your background and experience with the FTC. There has been a
suggestion that at least with some of the telecoms that the FTC
has the experience on data breach and notification in those
areas. If there is a national bill, should it include the
telecommunications and video with the FTC?
Ms. Matties. Yes. The FTC has had more than 10 years of
experience working on data breaches and data security cases, so
they are well equipped to handle these kinds of cases. And I
just would like to point out that there is already a model in
Do Not Call for consolidating experiments in the States with
consumer protection. A number of States have consumer
protection laws for Do Not Call in individual States, and when
the national standard became applicable, it really made things
a lot easier for both businesses and for consumers because now
consumers have a one-stop shop to go and put their name on a
list. That would be a similar aspect here.
Mr. Terry. All right. Thank you very much.
The ranking member, Jan Schakowsky, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I just
want to acknowledge that as important as this is to consumers
that maybe in the future we could have a consumer witness or
two to talk about some of their experiences. I think it would
helpful to inform our committee.
Talking about data breaches, Professor Matwyshyn, do you
foresee potential harms to the development of effective
information security laws if Congress enacts certain breach
notification provisions without enacting a well-considered data
security law at the same time? I know Professor Thaw addressed
that. And if so, what would they be?
Ms. Matwyshyn. If I am understanding the question
correctly, I believe that the optimal approach at this juncture
is to bifurcate, to divide off the questions of data breach
notification harm in this Nation from the questions of the best
standard for liability arising from data security breaches.
Ms. Schakowsky. To separate those two?
Ms. Matwyshyn. To separate those two out. While the States
have shown us the way and adequately experimented with
notification, the questions of liability, how to craft it, what
the standards are, what reasonable conduct is, that is a moving
target and still very undeveloped, both from the standpoint of
the information security community as a just-now-coalescing
body of experts and from the standpoint of States having
different approaches to consumer protection and the connection
to other bodies of law. The Securities and Exchange Commission
is starting to regulate in this space.
These issues are tied with broader questions of software
liability generally, and if we start to regulate too early, we
may disrupt existing bodies of law and stifle innovation that
is responsible and consumer protection.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. I do want to put the same question to
Professor Thaw and see if the two of you are in agreement.
Mr. Thaw. I agree with Professor Matwyshyn in the respect
that the States have the ability to provide important
experimentation. However, I am concerned about the resources
that the States have on the technical side. With respect to the
legal standard, I agree with Professor Matwyshyn. They can
experiment and provide us with valuable data. However, this is
a highly interconnected issue across the entire country, and I
do not believe that the States have sufficient resources for
enforcement or for simple providing the research and
investigation necessary to know what standards would be
effective at a national level as opposed to at a State level.
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me get into the issue of data brokers.
Most consumers have never heard about data brokers but there is
a several-billion-dollar industry that knows the name, address,
age, purchasing habits of nearly every American consumer. One
company in this industry possesses on average 1,500 data points
apiece on each of 190 million individuals in the United States
and a profit of more than $77 million on this information. So
again, let me go to Professor Matwyshyn.
The Data Accountability and Trust Act as was passed in the
111th Congress would have required data brokers to submit their
security policies to the FTC and allow the Commission to
perform or mandate the performance of security audits following
a breach of security. What is your opinion on these kinds of
provisions regarding data brokers?
Ms. Matwyshyn. In that case, I believe you mentioned it was
following a breach?
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes.
Ms. Matwyshyn. That would be entirely consistent with the
types of proposals that we are considering now for centralized
breach notification. The goal is to get as much information
about breaches, how they happened, why they happened, the level
of security that is in place in the particular organization to
provide the information to both consumers and enforcement
agencies to determine which entities are the good actors and
which entities are the actors that still have a way to go to
improve the level of care.
Ms. Schakowsky. With just a minute or two, actually less
than that, you may also want to comment on data brokers and the
role that they play and how they should be regulated, Professor
Thaw?
Mr. Thaw. With respect to data brokers, I draw the
committee's attention to the fourth section of my written
testimony where I identify different levels of criticality, and
I would suggest that data brokers are at a higher level of
criticality, the reason being that the information they
contain, to use Professor Matwyshyn's earlier example, could be
information which is an authentication credential such as your
mother's maiden name or your favorite color, your first pet,
something that you use to secure other data that is very
sensitive. For this reason, they should be regulated at a
higher level, and this is something that cannot be overlooked.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, and now we recognize the chairman
emeritus for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to try to
give you a little bit of that time back.
I think in your questions, Mr. Chairman, we established the
panel does support a federal standard for notification. My
question would be, does the panel also support going beyond
that so that we get into the prevention and the liability
issues? Does everybody, you know, support a federal law that
goes beyond breach notification?
Mr. Richards. I think that would depend on--we would
obviously have to see the legislation but I certainly think we
should probably change the culture of how our society looks at
cybersecurity or information technology and how do you protect
the information. Instead of making it an IT department issue,
make it a CFO issue and really change the thinking and the
approach to how we approach data protection in the country.
Mr. Liutikas. I think we also need to look to industry
associations like CompTIA which provides the industry a
platform for collaborating on standards and best practices and
their industry credentials such as the CompTIA Security Trust
Mark credential, which audits the security practices of an
organization. So I think in light of considering options such
as that, I think we should also look at the options that the
industry can provide as well.
Mr. Greene. Conceptually, we support the notion of
requiring security standards, so you are looking to prevent the
breach, not just to mitigate after, and the same thing with the
encryption. So if you have a breach, you are limiting the
damage that can happen. But as Mr. Liutikas said, there are a
lot of existing industry standards that are effective, and any
type of standard needs to be very flexible and performance
based. We don't want to be mandating anything specific in
statute when we have a very shifting threat environment. So the
notion of saying you need to be secure is OK, but if we get
into the where we are mandating specific types of solutions, I
think that could be problematic.
Ms. Matties. CTIA members and the broader 21st Century
Privacy Coalition is interested in talking about data security
for sure but we are happy to see that we are starting with data
breach notifications.
Ms. Matwyshyn. No limitations of liability are appropriate
at this juncture. I think we are a little too premature. On the
state level, experimentation would be great. A negligence
standard perhaps evolving would be a good move. I think we are
ready to address breach notification but I would be cautious in
approaching liability.
Mr. Thaw. Yes, if properly implemented, and I note that
respectfully, Mr. Richards, I am concerned with his proposal of
making this a CFO issue. While that is appropriate to
companies' fiduciary duties under state law, it is not
appropriate to the question of negative externalities that
would result from breaches in one organization to the overall
information ecosystem. I also do concur with my panelists'
opinion that flexible standards are important.
Mr. Barton. I agree with flexible standards.
Mr. Chairman, I want to turn it back, but let me simply
say, back in the 1930s when we had a rash of kidnappings, the
Congress did not pass a kidnapping notification law. They
passed strict laws delineating it was a federal crime if it
crossed State lines and empowered the FBI to use every means
possible to go after the kidnappers. We are not talking about
stealing our children but we are talking about stealing our
identifies, and I would hope that this subcommittee and the
full committee goes beyond breach notification law, and with
that, I yield back.
Mr. Terry. It is the intent. I am going to call on Mr.
Barrow, and then we will adjourn, so if you are next in line as
a Republican, you can go to the meeting.
Mr. Barrow, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barrow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
setting the table with your questions. I want to follow up some
of the issues that you raised.
You know, privacy is important to me. The right to be
secure in your persons and papers from State intrusion is in
the Fourth Amendment. Warren and Brandeis said that the right
to be let alone, the right of privacy is the right most prized
by civilized men, I guess we would say today civilized men and
women. I certainly agree with them on that.
I guess the general consensus is that the current regime of
essentially 48 separate State and territorial jurisdictions
regulating this matter and our common market of the United
States just ain't working. I think we all agree with that, and
there is a general need for some federal guidelines, some
federal standards for a uniform law in our national economy.
Mr. Richards, Mr. Liutikas, Ms. Matties, you each talk
about the subject of preemption, the need to preempt
conflicting state laws. I want to ask the other members of the
panel, what is the appropriate scope of federal preemption in
this area? Yes, ma'am, go ahead.
Ms. Matwyshyn. I believe the appropriate scope if creating
a harmonized disclosure form but enforcement should be shared
in the same way that it is in securities regulation. In the
securities regulation context, we have multiple sources of
oversight--the FCC, state level, securities regulators, other
agencies inside the States.
Mr. Barrow. Are you proposing a uniform law but shared
responsibility with respect to enforcing the same law so the
federal regulator would set the rules and regulations but the
State folks might enforce the same federal law if the federal
government isn't devoting enough resources to enforcing its
law, the national standard? Is that what you have in mind?
Ms. Matwyshyn. In the same way that securities disclosures
happen on the federal level primarily but a particular state
may have requirements in terms of protecting its citizens.
Mr. Barrow. Well, additional requirements, additional
substantive regulations and obligations and duties are
different from a uniform standard that either the federal
prosecutor or the state prosecutor can enforce the same law--
one land, one law. That is a very different matter. And having
the right at the state level to enforce a federal standard is
different than being able to make your own standard and enforce
that in addition to the federal standard, so I want to talk
about whether or not there are other folks on the panel who
agree with the proposition that federal regulation ought to
occupy the field when it comes to the substantive obligations
and responsibilities in this area. Mr. Greene?
Mr. Greene. Sir, we would agree that it should occupy the
field but ultimately I think the notion of state enforcement
would be acceptable as long as we are talking about a uniform
federal standard.
Mr. Barrow. I got you.
Professor Thaw?
Mr. Thaw. State enforcement concurrent with federal
enforcement would be appropriate, and I want to emphasize that
in either case, centralized notification and collection by a
federal regulator so that we have information on what is going
on is critical.
Mr. Barrow. All right. We have had a slight diversity of
opinion with respect to who ought to be able to make the rules,
but there seems to be a general consensus that as long as we
are enforcing the same rules, it doesn't matter which
government the cop reports to if they are enforcing the law.
I want to get to the subject of who ought to be the federal
regulator. I think, Ms. Matties, you said that we not only need
to have a uniform federal system but it ought to be headed up
by the FTC as opposed to, say, the FCC. Does anybody disagree
with that on the panel as to which federal regulator ought to
be making the rules that we will be trying to enforce on a
consistent basis nationwide? Does anybody disagree with that
approach? Professor Thaw?
Mr. Thaw. I agree that the Federal Trade Commission is the
most appropriate for consumer regulation. However, that should
not exempt critical infrastructure providers, which would
include telecommunications providers from regulations to which
they would also be subject by their regulators. Those
regulators, for example, the Federal Communications Commission,
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission are better familiar with what
are the challenges faced by their entities, and if they need to
impose additional standards, they should not be prevented from
doing so by consumer regulation.
Mr. Barrow. Is it your position that they can regulate in
their areas of subject-matter jurisdiction and should not be
able to regulate in the area of consumer protection?
Mr. Thaw. If I understand your question correctly, my
position is not that they should be pushing out the consumer
regulator so the consumer regulator has no authority but only
that they may and if necessary should regulate concurrently
with the consumer regulator.
Mr. Barrow. What do other members of the panel feel about
that? Mr. Richards, Mr. Liutikas, Mr. Greene?
Mr. Richards. Mr. Barrow, I would say that the FTC
definitely when it comes to consumer information certainly I
think our approach to privacy in this country is somewhat
patchwork when you are dealing with HIPAA and the Fair Credit
Reporting and Gramm-Leach-Bliley, so I certainly think that the
current functional regulators also have a good system in place
but the FTC certainly is equipped when it comes to consumer
information.
Mr. Barrow. Mr. Liutikas?
Mr. Liutikas. I would generally concur with that although I
think we would have to conduct some further analysis and see
what really makes sense at the end of the day. You know, the
question right now is somewhat theoretical but I think overall
makes sense, and we certainly support having a federal agent,
so whichever department that is.
Mr. Barrow. Well, my time has run out, Mr. Greene. I regret
that. But if any of you all want to follow up on this and
supplement the responses that you have given or that others
have given on this subject, please feel free to do so for the
record.
Thank you so much, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Terry. And I mistakenly used the word ``adjourn''
earlier. We are recessing until probably 1 o'clock, hopefully
by 1:03 or 1:04 we are asking questions of you. So thank you
for your patience, and we will see you in 50, 55 minutes.
[Recess.]
Mr. Terry. I appreciate you all being back. We are missing
Professor Thaw for the moment.
Ms. Matwyshyn. He went to go fetch a deserted bag so that
they don't confiscate it. He will be right back.
Mr. Terry. Oh, that is important. We will string things
out, but we will start with the questions. We have a short time
before either votes or the next committee takes over. So we
don't want to delay until he comes back but we will start with
other people.
Vice Chairman of the subcommittee, you are recognized for 5
minutes, Mr. Lance.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon to
the panel.
To Ms. Matties, what, in your opinion, should be the proper
standard for breach notification? Suspicion that a breach has
occurred or actual evidence that such a breach has occurred?
Ms. Matties. Actual evidence that a breach has occurred.
Mr. Lance. So you would have a higher standard before----
Ms. Matties. Yes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. And number two, should a breach have
to result in identity theft or other financial harm to require
consumer notification?
Ms. Matties. There certainly should be consumer
notification for identify theft and financial harm, and we are
willing to talk to you about the other kinds of harms that
might result from a breach of other information.
Mr. Lance. Do you have suggestions regarding that other
than financial harm?
Ms. Matties. We are still working with our members to talk
about this, and we look forward to talking to you as well about
it.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Are there others on the panel who have an opinion on that?
Yes, Professor.
Ms. Matwyshyn. I believe that actual harm should not be
required for notification. It serves a function to advise
consumers of the occurrence of a breach and also to allow for
tabulation and centralization of information about security
practices so that we can collectively get a better picture of
the entirety of the economy and the behaviors that are
happening around information security.
Mr. Lance. Thank you.
Others on the panel? Mr. Richards?
Mr. Richards. I thank you. We would--our standard would be
that there should be a notification requirement if the breach
presents a significant risk of harm to consumers and may
perpetuate identity theft.
Mr. Lance. A significant harm to consumers, which might be
a slightly different standard from financial harm, if I am
understanding you accurately?
Mr. Richards. Yes.
Mr. Lance. Professor Thaw?
Mr. Thaw. I believe that notification should at least occur
in all cases to a central reporting authority, which could be a
federal regulator, that a substantial risk of harm is too high
a threshold. I base this on the civil litigation where it was
virtually impossible for any case to advance based on those
types of claims, and with respect to the types of harm, I
believe this requires further investigation but should not be
limited to identity theft.
Mr. Lance. And if the notification were made to an entity
of the federal government, that entity would then in turn
determine whether further notification should be made to the
consumer?
Mr. Thaw. That would be conditional on whether or not
notification had already been made also by the company. I think
at least the agency should retain the right to make that
determination.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Are there other thoughts from the
panel? Hearing none, Mr. Chairman, I am finished with 2 minutes
to.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Lance.
Mr. Harper, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank each of you
for being here, and it is a very important issue to each of
you, I know, and certainly it is to our country and many
businesses, and I will start with you, if I could, Mr.
Richards, and ask you, how would you define a breach that
constitutes a reasonable risk of harm to consumers?
Mr. Richards. Sure. Thank you, Congressman. In terms of a
reasonable risk, we believe that data that could be used to
perpetuate identity theft, if you were to allow someone to use,
log in to or access an individual's account or establish a new
account using that individual's identifying information, and we
would hold it to that standard.
Mr. Harper. So as you define a breach, how do you define a
significant risk of harm to consumers?
Mr. Richards. If there is a risk of identity theft or
stealing personal information and using or creating a new
identity based on that personal information.
Mr. Harper. Well, how should we or how would we define what
constitutes a significant risk of harm to consumers? If you
were advising us, if Congress did define the type of personally
identifiable information that constitutes harm to consumers, is
it possible that such a list would keep up with technological
innovations?
Mr. Richards. Yes, sir. I think it is important not to
mandate specific technologies. As you know, we need a flexible
framework. Some technologies today and best practices can
render data useless, and in that case, if a company or an
organization is trying to take the right approach and render
the data useless, we believe a safe harbor should be granted to
incentivize that good behavior if the information is
indecipherable, but we need a flexible framework in an effort
not to undermine innovation for new technologies that come down
the line.
Mr. Harper. And I know I am going to mispronounce your
name, Ms. Matties, if I could ask you a question. My
understanding from your testimony is that different data breach
requirements apply to different entities, even for the same
information. Is there any public policy justification for
applying different data breach requirements to the same
information?
Ms. Matties. No, there is not.
Mr. Harper. And I will ask this panel-wide, if I could. All
of your testimony points out that States have different
notification requirements and definitions. Is there a certain
time frame post breach that you believe individuals have a
right to be notified? I would like to hear each of your
responses on that, and I will start with you, Mr. Richards.
Mr. Richards. Certainly. Well, we think there needs to be a
little bit of time in order for a company to perform cyber
forensics. We don't have a specific position on a specific time
frame but our businesses and their approach is as quickly as
possible and consulting with law enforcement and others, and we
follow up on our due diligence and report it to the consumer as
quickly as possible.
Mr. Harper. Well, following up on that, how can--maybe you
can walk me through. How is notification without unreasonable
delay how that really works in the real world?
Mr. Richards. Well, I think in terms of, if you look at the
different State requirements, there is different time frames
that are offered. Puerto Rico is 10 days to notify folks.
Vermont is about 14 days. Minnesota requires reporting to
credit bureaus within 48 hours. So sometimes when you are
looking at the condensed time frame, you are really trying to
figure out the extent of the breach, what has been breached. So
I think in terms of those time frames, it is a very short
turnaround and a very short fuse, and I think companies want to
make sure that they have the right answers before they disclose
information publicly but I believe they do have the
responsibility to report it to consumers.
Mr. Harper. Thank you. And I will ask each of you, is there
a certain time frame post breach that you believe individuals
have a right to be notified?
Mr. Liutikas. Yes, Congressman, we certainly--and we will
mirror a little bit of what Mr. Richards said. We believe in a
reasonable time frame in which to notify. I think it is just
important for the exceptions to be made for instances where law
enforcement needs to act or other information needs to be
gathered so that the correct information is being provided to
the consumers. So we don't have an exact timeline that we
recommend but we do recommend having exceptions for those
legitimate reasons.
Mr. Harper. And Mr. Greene, I think I can at least get your
response before my time is up.
Mr. Greene. Sure. I would say that you definitely need to
have enough time so the company can determine the scope of what
was lost and what wasn't lost, fix the vulnerability. You don't
want to go public and basically hang a target around your neck,
and I would say, though, a rush to report can be bad. Every
incident is different. I think if there is one rule, it is that
first reports are pretty much always wrong. With respect to the
breach about Congress today, you are going to see what was
published today a week from now is going to be outdated, is
going to be different, so you need to allow time. It needs to
be as quickly as possible but you need to make sure that you
are getting it right. It is better to be right in most cases
than it is to be fast.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, and I believe my time has expired so
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, and now the chair recognizes the
gentleman from Texas, of which he is very proud and will
probably mention that. He is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing, and thank you to the witnesses for attending.
Mr. Chairman, you should know that I got my plug in with
all the witnesses as to why they should move to the great State
of Texas before we were gaveled in at 11 o'clock, so we are
done with that business.
At the end of the day, this hearing, to me, is about two
questions. Number one, is federal legislation necessary when
data has been breached. If the answer is yes, then what should
that legislation look like. In your written testimonies that I
reviewed last night, it appears that federal legislation would
help protect consumers, but Mr. Richards raises the point that
there are some technology companies it is helpful but not
vital. The two professors were concerned with, you know,
federal government overreach and taking over what the States
are doing pretty well. But I believe this difference raises an
important point, that if we pursue legislation, we must
carefully draft it to ensure that the federal government
doesn't become the 49th entity out there that companies must
comply with. We should have a Hippocratic oath for data
breaches: harm has been done; do no more harm.
In regards to the ultimate decision to pursue legislation,
consumers expect their privacy of their personal information to
be protected, and I know you all agree we must keep them at the
forefront of this conversation and debate.
My first question is for you, Ms. Matties. Do you think the
existence of 48 different data breach regimes results in brief
notifications being faster or slower?
Ms. Matties. I think it makes it slower. Companies try very
hard to comply with all the laws out there but it certainly is
a distraction, at best, from the other tasks that they need to
complete when dealing with a data breach as has been discussed
by the other panelists.
Mr. Olson. Does anybody else care to comment on that,
faster or slower? Professor Thaw?
Mr. Liutikas. Congressman, I think it makes it
significantly--oh, I apologize.
Mr. Olson. You are up next, Mr. Liutikas.
Mr. Thaw. I believe historically it has made it slower but
it absolutely does not need to. It is a very formulaic regime
for which procedures can be developed, for example, to
analogize to something with which I believe many people may be
familiar, Legal Zoom, the product that provides--you punch in
the information, we generate a will or something similar. I
could develop today a program that would handle the current
jurisdiction requirements in place.
Mr. Olson. OK, Mr. Liutikas, come on in.
Mr. Liutikas. Thank you, Congressman. In addition to making
the process slower today, I think the process of actually
evaluating all of the different requirements and the laws out
there also creates more opportunity for not properly reporting
under a variety of State laws. So not only does it slow it
down, I think there is more opportunity for mistakes to be made
as well.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
Another one for you, Ms. Matties. How do wireless companies
deal with the fact that States have different definitions of
personal information? Can that result in over-reporting in some
States? Does it create consumer confusion? And what harm may
companies incur if they over-report and some examples? So
basically over-reporting, confusion, harm, examples.
Ms. Matties. I am not sure I have examples for all those
questions, but certainly, over-reporting can be a problem. It
is sort of the boy who cried wolf. If you get notices over and
over that actually don't pertain to you, you may start to
ignore them, but worse, you may actually start making changes
to your passwords and closing and opening bank accounts
unnecessarily, wasting your own energy. So the different State
regimes can cause over-reporting, which can harm consumers, and
it also certainly impacts businesses in being able to comply
with those laws.
Mr. Olson. It looks like the professor wants to make
comments. Ma'am, you are up.
Ms. Matwyshyn. I wanted to play up on that point. The two
complaints--I shouldn't say complaints. The two comments that I
have heard repeatedly from businesses in their compliance
efforts, first, that the regulatory end of this complicated.
Different regulators are required to receive filings in
different States so simplifying the regulatory complexity would
be something they would want.
The second point that they repeatedly mention to me is the
definition of what constitutes information that triggers
reporting, and they would be happy with a broader definition of
the information that triggers information as long as it is a
bright line, it is clear to them. And so many companies,
especially the most sophisticated technology companies, are now
erring on the side of reporting because it is simpler, and they
don't view it necessarily as a bad thing, they just want
simplification and a single regulatory point of contact.
Mr. Olson. And I would assume when they go public that they
have had some data breach, that affects their business because
consumers look at a company that has had a data breach, maybe
is having some faults, which is not true, but the bottom line,
in the market they get spooked and move their products
elsewhere. One more comment, ma'am. I am out of time.
Ms. Matwyshyn. If I can just follow up, the other benefit
that a centralized point provides is the ability for companies
engaging in highest security practices to announce that. So
even if they suffer a data breach from a zero day
vulnerability, for example, if they are using the highest end
software possible, then enforcement agencies are going to say
oh, they tried really hard, this is a good company doing the
right thing. But if it is someone who hasn't updated their
systems in 6 years and that is why they had a data breach, that
is a completely different ball of wax.
Mr. Olson. I am out of time. I thank the witnesses, and
come to Texas.
I yield back.
Mr. Terry. No.
Mr. Johnson, you are recognized.
Mr. Johnson. Also no, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank the panel for being here today. I
spent about 30 years of my professional career before I came to
Congress in the information technology field in the Department
of Defense, worked as the director of the CIO staff for special
operations command, so I certainly understand the complexities
of data security and how easy it is for those who are
determined to get into it.
So with that as a backdrop, do we have any empirical data
to answer the question about how quickly we should notify
consumers? I mean, do we have any data that tells us after
several hundred thousand identities are breached, do we know
how long before the bad guys start using that information?
Anybody on the panel? Mr. Greene?
Mr. Greene. Unfortunately, there is no answer. There are
thriving black markets in personal information, whether it is a
Social Security number, et cetera, or simply credit card
numbers, and it can be a game of roulette whether your card is
bought before it goes stale or not, so we don't know how fast.
It really depends on how they are going to use their
information. Slightly off point, but there is empirical
evidence. The Ponemon study from last year found--it was
looking at the impacts, and one of the drivers of increased
costs was notification too early. What they found is, companies
that rushed to notify often notified a significant number of
people who once they did their full forensic work had not
actually had their personal information made public, yet the
companies notified them. The individuals, many of them, went to
the trouble of changing passwords, etc. The company had to pay
for monitoring and other services. So we do know--and again,
not discounting the need to notify quickly but doing it too
quickly can drive up costs, both for the individuals and the
companies.
Mr. Johnson. Speaking of quickly or not quick enough, do
you think that breaches are over- or under-notified today?
Again for the entire panel. Does anybody have a thought? Yes,
ma'am.
Ms. Matwyshyn. I would say they are dramatically under-
notified. Frequently, they are never discovered, and that is
partially because companies unfortunately don't always have
state-of-the-art security in the place. Also in the public
sector, we have the same challenges with security. So I would
assume there are two breaches for every one that is reported.
Mr. Johnson. Given that there is a plethora of State
regulations that require this, do you think an overarching
federal standard lessons the risk of under- or over-
notification?
Ms. Matwyshyn. I think it is heading in the right
direction. I think we are improving. We are all becoming more
educated about these issues. Companies are becoming more
sensitive. There is dramatic improvement in the last decade,
and particularly in industries such as financial services, they
are improving, and there is a learning curve happening, so we
are heading in a good direction, and I think federal harmonized
legislation is a step in that direction.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Richards, you noted that the FTC has been
relatively active in bringing cases against companies for
failure to maintain or disclose their security practices. If
the FTC has this existing authority, do we need to address data
security in more federal legislation?
Mr. Richards. Congressman, in reference to your last point,
I believe strong federal preemptive data breach notification
law that is broad in scope would cut down on over-notification
certainly. We believe that the FTC does have a lot of
jurisdiction within its existing authority but we believe given
the patchwork quilt of 48 different State laws that a broad
federal preemptive law would be very helpful to our businesses.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I think I know the answer to this next
question, Mr. Richards, but can data security and data breach
notification be addressed separately or are they hand in hand?
Mr. Richards. Well, I think they can be. Well, I would
suggest addressing them separately, first data breach
notification, getting some consensus on the committee. I think
certainly the conversation around data security is important. I
think there should be some focus on what we have been talking
about in terms of a safe harbor, how do you incentivize
companies or give companies some type of guidance on how they
render the data useless so if it is hacked or stolen, you have
taken the measures and you shouldn't have to report. So I think
certainly as a balance, a lot of the focus has been on what
happens post breach but I certainly think there are some
measures they can take pre-breach.
Mr. Johnson. Great. I think I am last, Mr. Chairman. If you
would indulge for one more?
Mr. Greene, you stated that there were 93 million
identities exposed in 2012. Does this mean people, their names,
their user names or their Social Security numbers? What does
identity mean in that 93 million number?
Mr. Greene. By the way we counted, it was name in
connection with Social Security number, address--one of the
following: Social Security number, address, date of birth, or
credit card information. Essentially, information that put
together would allow financial fraud or identity theft.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Terry. Well done, everybody, so that concludes the
questioning period, which means that we are finished except for
a little bit of work here.
I ask unanimous consent to include the following statements
in the record: one, statement of the Electronic Transaction
Association dated July 18, 2013; two, a letter from the Credit
Union National Association, CUNA, dated July 17, 2013; a letter
from McDonald Hopkins LLC dated July 18, 2013; number four,
National Retail Federation statement dated July 18, 2013. These
have all been approved by the minority staff. Hearing no
objections then, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Terry. No documents to be submitted on your side. Now
all of our business is done, and I want to thank all of you. It
has been very insight. It was very stimulating, and we greatly
appreciate your time and your testimony, which is your talent,
and thank you, and we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:24 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Those of us who have been in Congress more than a term or
two know the issue of informing consumers in the event of a
data breach has been around for a number of years.
The importance of protecting our personal information grew
as the crimes of identity theft and financial fraud became more
pervasive in our digital world. It's a fact of life almost
every citizen has some digital footprint or profile--whether
from the state and county records, school records, or
transaction with businesses.
As we enjoy the wonderful new conveniences and efficiencies
provided by the technology, the downside is that it also
facilitates the ability of criminals to act with equal
efficiency to commit identity theft or other crimes that can
potentially injure far more consumers' credit and finances. No
longer is a criminal confined by what he can gather from a few
paper based records taken from a mailbox or file cabinet.
Rather, the most sophisticated of today's cybercriminals can
attempt to hack into digital databases and gain access to the
data on millions of individuals.
Data breaches were a somewhat novel issue 8 years ago when
we first learned of it. Our constituents were being notified of
a breach of their information for the first time under a
handful of state notification laws. The landscape has evolved
and notifications have become more common, as have breaches and
state notification laws: we now have laws in 48 states and
territories, including every state represented on this dais
except for one--many of which have slight differences--as well
as a separate federal notification law addressing breached
health information. Entities holding our personal information
have also evolved, incorporating security as an essential part
of their operation. Experience has demonstrated the harm to
their customers and the entity's reputation are reason enough
to encourage those who hold our information to take reasonable
steps to protect it.
Yet breaches, identity theft, and financial fraud continue
and we must consider whether the current notification regime is
appropriate. I believe timely notification is an important
aspect of helping consumers protect themselves following a
breach of their information--and I question whether having to
examine 48 different laws before notifying one's customers is
helpful to this goal. If the breach was intentional or if the
data falls into the hands of criminals with malicious goals,
the consumer should be aware to take preventative steps to
protect or monitor their accounts more closely. Dealing with
identity theft or account fraud can be an expensive and time
consuming ordeal for a victim.
I think the title of the hearing is an appropriate question
to ask: ``Is Federal Legislation Needed to Protect Consumers?''
Certainly no one would propose 48 variants of the same law--
each with their own compliance requirements--as an efficient
way to address any problem. Can a Federal notification law
replace the state laws in a way that maintains the protections
afforded by the states and minimizes consumer confusion? I
think the potential benefits to both consumers and businesses
from a single standard make this an issue worthy of our time. I
welcome our witnesses and look forward to discussing their
perspectives.
----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
