- PPACA ENROLLMENT AND THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PPACA ENROLLMENT AND THE INSURANCE
INDUSTRY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 7, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-144

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

_____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
91-184                        WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey                Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               PETER WELCH, Vermont
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PAUL TONKO, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
PETE OLSON, Texas                    KATHY CASTOR, Florida
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 GENE GREEN, Texas
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Tim Murphy, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the state
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the state of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the state
of California, opening statement...............................     8
Prepared statement...........................................
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, prepared statement.........................    80

Witnesses

Mark Pratt, Senior Vice President of State Affairs, Americas
Health Insurance Plans.........................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................   110
Frank Coyne, Vice President of Operations, Chief Transformation
Officer, Blue Cross Blue Shield Association....................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Answers to submitted questions...............................   120
Paul Wingle, Executive Director of Individual Business and Public
Exchange Operations and Strategy, Aetna........................    28
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Answers to submitted questions...............................   129
Brian Evanko, President, Individual Segment, Cigna...............    31
Prepared statement...........................................    33
Answers to submitted questions...............................   139
J. Darren Rodgers, Senior Vice President and Chief Marketing
Officer, Health Care Service Corporation.......................    36
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Answers to submitted questions...............................   153
Dennis Matheis, President of Central Region and Exchange
Strategy, Wellpoint, Inc.......................................    41
Prepared statement...........................................    43
Answers to submitted questions...............................   163

Submitted Material

Article entitled, ``Changes in Mortality After Massachusetts
Health Care Reform: A Quasi-experimental Study,'' American
College of Physicians, May 6, 2014. submitted by Ms. DeGette...    81
Majority memorandum..............................................    92
Minority memorandum..............................................    95

PPACA ENROLLMENT AND THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 7, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:18 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Tim Murphy
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Murphy, Burgess, Blackburn, Olson,
Gardner, Griffith, Johnson, Long, Ellmers, Barton, Upton (ex
officio), DeGette, Braley, Lujan, Schakowsky, Castor, Tonko,
Yarmuth, Green, Dingell, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff Present: Gary Andres, Staff Director; Karen
Christian, Chief Counsel, Oversight; Noelle Clemente, Press
Secretary; Paul Edattel, Professional Staff Member, Health;
Brad Grantz, Policy Coordinator, O&I; Brittany Havens,
Legislative Clerk; Sean Hayes, Deputy Chief Counsel, O&I; Alexa
Marrero, Deputy Staff Director; Christopher Pope, Fellow,
Health; Krista Rosenthall, Counsel to Chairman Emeritus; Tom
Wilbur, Digital Media Advisor; Jessica Wilkerson, Legislative
Clerk; Jean Woodrow, Director, Information Technology; Phil
Barnett, Minority Staff Director; Stacia Cardille, Minority
Chief Counsel; Brian Cohen, Minority Staff Director, Oversight
& Investigations, Senior Policy Advisor; Hannah Green, Minority
Staff Assistant; Karen Nelson, Minority Deputy Committee Staff
Director For Health; Stephen Salsbury, Minority Investigator;
and Matt Siegler, Minority Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIM MURPHY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Murphy. Good morning. I now convene this hearing to
examine the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and
enrollment of the State and Federal exchanges here in the
Oversight and Investigations Committee for the Committee on
Energy and Commerce.
This subcommittee has a long history of trying to get
straight answers from the administration on the status of the
Affordable Care Act. Two weeks before the launch of
HealthCare.Gov, the administration official responsible for the
implementation of the ACA exchanges told this committee that
the Web site would be ready, consumers would be able to go
online, shop for a select plan and then enroll in coverage.
When the Federal exchange opened on October 1, consumers
instead found a crashing Web site. The administration's excuse
for why the Web site didn't work: Volume. Through this
committee's investigation, we learned that the administration
spent over $.5 billion on a Web site that they had been warned
for several months would not be ready and would not work. Facts
that administration officials did not disclose when questioned
by this committee during oversight hearings through 2013.
Just after the failed launch, we asked the administration
on October 8 to provide enrollment data for the first week of
the HealthCare.Gov debacle. The administration ignored us. Why?
It wasn't because the data didn't exist; it was because the
news wasn't good. When Secretary Sebelius testified before the
full Energy and Commerce Committee on October 30 of last year,
was asked about enrollment, she stated that she could not
provide any data because the administration did not ``have any
reliable data around enrollment.''
The very next day, it was reported that there were only six
successful enrollments on October 1. We tried again during a
hearing in January before this subcommittee when we asked the
head of the office running the exchanges if the administration
collected any data on who has paid their health coverage. This
administration official told us that they did not collect this
information ``but we will be,'' as soon as it was finished
building the Web site.
While the administration refused to provide straightforward
answers to our questions on enrollment, it continues to tout
enrollment figures that included individuals who had merely
selected a plan online. When pressed by reporters for
information on the number of enrollees who had paid their
premiums, a White House spokesman said that questions about
payment ``can best be directed to those private insurance
companies that are collecting those payments.''
After months of an administration that refused to be
transparent about enrollment, that's what we did; we did
exactly what the administration suggested we do. On March 13,
we sent a request to each insurance company in the Federal
marketplace and asked them to submit basic information: Who
selected a plan and who paid for it?
The data submitted by the insurers paints an uneven picture
about the status of enrollment and payment through April 15. As
of that date, just two-thirds of enrollees through the
Federally-facilitated marketplace paid their first month
premium. Some States are doing better than others.
My home State of Pennsylvania, for example, has an 81
percent payment rate. Texas, on the other hand, is much lower
at 42 percent. We recognize that many individuals still have
time to pay their first month's premium, which is why we have
asked the insurers to update this information on May 20. As
with any criticism or questions of the Affordable Care Act, the
administration predictably protested and attempted to
misrepresent the purpose of our inquiry.
Let's be clear about why we had to engage in this exercise
in the first place. The administration would not be transparent
about enrollment and provide the underlying data. For the
witnesses today, we ask you to be patient with our questions
about enrollment and implementation. After months of promises
about the status of HealthCare.Gov from HHS officials, we have
learned to be skeptical about blanket statements that
everything is well.
One purpose of today's hearing is to examine enrollment
because it is a key factor in measuring whether these exchanges
are viable. We have a number of other questions for the
witnesses today about the status of implementation. The ACA is
more than a payment rate. We need to know if Americans can
expect the premium reductions they were promised, and we need
to know if they can keep the plan they liked. We need to know
if they can keep their doctor.
We cannot understand the status of the law in its
implementation without hearing from you, the insurance
companies, whose plans make up these exchanges. Under the
President's health care law, these companies will receive
taxpayer dollars in the form of premium subsidies and cost
sharing. We expect the witnesses today to provide the committee
with facts and information about the first year of coverage
under the Affordable Care Act.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Murphy follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Tim Murphy

This subcommittee has had a long history trying to get
straight answers from this Administration on the status of the
Affordable Care Act. Two weeks before the launch of
HealthCare.gov, the administration official responsible for the
implementation of the ACA exchanges told this Committee that
the Web site would be ready. Consumers would be able to go
online, shop for and select a plan, and enroll in coverage.
When the federal exchange opened on October 1, consumers
instead found a crashing Web site. The administration's excuse
for why the Web site didn't work?
Volume.
Through this Committee's investigation, we learned that the
administration spent over half a billion dollars on a Web site
that they had been warned for months would not be ready and
would not work--facts that administration officials did not
disclose when questioned by this Committee during oversight
hearings throughout 2013.
Just after the failed launch, we asked the administration
on October 8 to provide enrollment data for the first week of
the HealthCare.gov debacle. The administration ignored us. Why?
It wasn't because the data didn't exist. It was because the
news wasn't good. When Secretary Sebelius testified before the
full Energy and Commerce Committee on October 30 and was asked
about enrollment, she stated that could not provide any data
because the administration did not ``have any reliable data
around enrollment.''
The very next day it was reported that there were only six
successful enrollments on October 1. We tried again during a
hearing in January before this Subcommittee, when we asked the
head of the office running the exchanges if the administration
collected any data on who has paid for their health coverage.
This administration official told us that they did not collect
this information ``but we will be'' as soon as it finished
building the Web site.
While the administration refused to provide straightforward
answers to our questions on enrollment, it continued to tout
enrollment figures that included individuals who had merely
selected a plan online. When pressed by reporters for
information on the number of enrollees who had paid their
premiums, a White House spokesman said that questions about
payment ``can best be directed to those private insurance
companies that are collecting those payments.''
After months of an administration that refused to be
transparent about enrollment, that's what we did. On March 13,
we sent a request to each insurance company in the federal
marketplace and asked them to submit basic information: who
selected a plan, and who paid for it. The data submitted by the
insurers paints an uneven picture about the status of
enrollment and payment through April 15. As of that date, just
two-thirds of enrollees through the federally-facilitated
marketplace paid their first month premium. Some states are
doing better than others. My home state of Pennsylvania has an
81 percent payment rate. Texas, on the other hand, is much
lower, at 42 percent. We recognize that many individuals still
have time to pay their first month's premium, which is why we
have asked the insurers to update this information on May 20.
As with any criticism or questions of the Affordable Care
Act, the administration predictably howled in protest and
attempted to misrepresent the purpose of our inquiry. Let's be
clear about why we had to engage in this exercise in the first
place: the administration would not be transparent about
enrollment and provide the underlying data. For the witnesses
today, we ask you to be patient with our questions about
enrollment and implementation. After months of promises about
the status of HealthCare.gov from HHS officials, we have
learned to be skeptical about blanket statements that ``all is
well.''
One purpose of today's hearing is to examine enrollment,
because it is a key factor in measuring whether these exchanges
are viable. We have a number of other questions for the
witnesses today about the status of implementation. The ACA is
more than a payment rate. We need to know if Americans can
expect the premium reductions they were promised. We need to
know if they can keep the plan they liked. We need to know if
they can keep their doctor. We cannot understand the status of
the law and its implementation without hearing from the
insurance companies whose plans make up these exchanges. Under
the President's health care law, these companies will receive
taxpayer dollars in the form of premium subsidies and cost-
sharing. We expect the witnesses today to provide the Committee
with facts and information about the first year of coverage
under the Affordable Care Act.

Mr. Murphy. Thank you to the witnesses for being here
today, and I now would like to recognize the ranking member,
Ms. DeGette, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to take a
few minutes, since the chairman has walked through the greatest
hits of the problems they have had with the ACA, of where we
stand now and where we stand after the first enrollment period
has just closed. So as we continue to get information about how
the exchanges in the Affordable Care Act and the enrollment are
performing, let's review what we already know.
The first thing is, despite the disastrous beginning of the
Federal exchange, good news: The Web site was fixed. More than
8 million people signed up for insurance through the exchanges
created through the Affordable Care Act which is more than 1
million more than were originally projected before the
disastrous unveiling.
Now, of those 8 million people, 3 million of them waited
until the last month of enrollment, and so their premiums are
not due until April 30, or in some cases, later than April 30.
Even so, my colleagues, in their quest for knowledge on the
other side of the aisle, sent out a questionnaire to insurers
that manipulated the payment deadlines to skew the
understanding of how new insurance coverage is performing.
How does that happen? Because they cut off the responses
April 15, at least 2 weeks before many of the premiums of these
3 million people were even due for payment. What this does is
it skews the amount of people who were enrolled. Then, of
course, they issued a press release posthaste.
Now, for years, my friends on the other side of the aisle
have made a series of claims that really are unsubstantiated.
First, they claimed that the bill contained death panels, then
they claimed that the bill would eliminate private insurance
within 3 years, then they claimed that the law would destroy
millions of jobs. When the Web site was broken, they insisted
the law would never meet enrollment goals.
Now, Mr. Chairman, today we finally have a chance to see in
a snapshot what's happening with the Affordable Care Act, and
the facts reveal that every single one of those claims were
wrong. As of today, as I said, more than 8 million people
enrolled in private plans through Federal and State
marketplaces. Millions more have enrolled through Medicaid and
in off-exchange plans.
Gallup just released a new poll finding that in the last 6
months, the percentage of adults without insurance has dropped
about 20 percent, and what that means is there are more than 11
million Americans with insurance today than there were 6 months
ago. Premiums are below the levels predicted by the
Congressional Budget Office, and the agency has once again
reiterated that the Affordable Care Act has slowed inflation
and saved billions of dollars and will even reduce deficits. So
by any rational, reasonable measure, we can call this law
success, and that success will make a real difference in
people's lives. That's what's important here.
Yesterday, researchers from the Harvard School of Public
Health released a comprehensive study on the impacts of health
insurance coverage. They were looking at mortality rates before
and after the passage of RomneyCare, the landmark Massachusetts
health insurance expansion that served as a model for the
Affordable Care Act. They found that the mortality rate in
Massachusetts fell by about 3 percent in the 4 years after
passage of the State's health insurance law.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent to put
a copy of that study into the record.
Mr. Murphy. Without objection.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. DeGette. So if we can achieve that same level of
success nationwide with the Affordable Care Act, and there's no
reason why we shouldn't be able to do so, that could result in
17,000 fewer deaths per year. That, Mr. Chairman, in a
nutshell, is what the Affordable Care Act means for Americans.
Now, what I wish we could do in this subcommittee, and I've
said this both publicly and privately many, many times, is sit
down with the ACA, figure out what the flaws are and figure out
how we can work in a bipartisan way to fix it. And that's what
I think we should do. Instead, what we get is this misleading
analysis last week which said that only 67 percent of enrollees
had paid for the coverage they enrolled in on the exchanges.
And my chairman, Mr. Upton, said the administration's
recent declarations of success may be unfounded. But again, I
will say, the report was misleading because almost half of the
enrollees in the health care exchanges, 40 percent of them, did
not even have to make their initial premium payment until April
31. I'm glad we've got the insurers here today to clear up this
record. I'm glad we have everybody here to see exactly what
we're talking about here.
So my suggestion is, let's look at the successes, let's
look where we need to make improvements, and let's work
together to do just that. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Gentlelady's time has expired.
Now recognize the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Upton
for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. With a friendly pat on the back, I'll just say
April 31 has yet to come. ``30 days has September, April, June
and November.''
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the witnesses for being
here today as well, for sure. At this subcommittee, our
investigations are about getting the facts. A quest for
transparency, the self-proclaimed most transparent
administration in history has repeatedly dodged our simple
questions about the health care law and refused even a
semblance of transparency about how its signature legislative
achievement is or is not working.
We wanted the basic data from the administration on
enrollment 1 week after the launch of HealthCare.Gov, and the
administration has rejected our request for more information
each and every time. Members of the press have asked. The
administration suggested the only way to get the facts was
directly asking the insurance providers themselves. So we took
their advice and we did just that, but the administration cried
foul again.
We began asking about HealthCare.Gov months before October
1 of last year. Repeatedly, we are told things were on track
and working the way it was supposed to. We learned that this
was not the case and the administration officials did
everything in their power, it seems, to hide the chaos behind
the scenes.
The American public does deserve better. They deserve
better than an administration that promised them $2,500 in
savings on health care premiums only to see the cost rise
sharply for many. They deserve better than an administration
that repeated promises officials knew that would be impossible
to keep, promises that Americans could keep their doctors and
keep their health care plans, also.
Like it or not, millions of Americans have found themselves
with the unwelcome reality of cancellations and lost access to
their trusted doctor. And one Democratic colleague from
Massachusetts said just 2 weeks ago, the worst is yet to come.
Today we are going to hear firsthand from insurance
providers about how implementation is working from their
perspective. While the administration has declared this
conversation over, the fact is that serious questions remain
unanswered, and it is our responsibility to continue seeking
the facts.
How many people have completed the enrollment process? Are
the risks presented by these pools sustainable? How much more
will premiums rise this next year? Is the back end of the Web
site on track to be working by the next enrollment period? Are
there any other delays or changes ahead that will disrupt the
ability of families and businesses to plan for their health
care coverage and needs? Will more health care plans be
canceled in the coming years?
So what's wrong with seeking that information? Nothing that
I know of. We released basic data points on enrollment as of
April 15, and we'll do so again on the data that we collect
through May 20. The facts are the facts, and while the
administration and its allies furiously try to muddy reality,
the public deserves transparency.
And while the administration toasts to the law's success
with its Hollywood allies, declaring this conversation over, we
will continue our pursuit for facts for the American people so
that we can finally have a full, accurate picture of this
health care law, and I yield the balance of my time to Dr.
Burgess.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

At this subcommittee, our investigations are about getting
the facts--a quest for transparency. The self-proclaimed ``most
transparent administration in history'' has repeatedly dodged
our simple questions about the health care law and refused even
a semblance of transparency about how its signature legislative
achievement is--or is not--working.
We began asking for basic data from the administration on
enrollment one week after the launch of HealthCare.gov, and the
administration has rejected our requests for more information
every time. Members of the press have asked, and the
administration suggested the only way to get the facts was
directly asking the insurance providers themselves. So, we took
their advice and did just that, but the administration cried
foul.
We began asking about HealthCare.gov months before October
1. Repeatedly we were told things were ``on track'' and
``working the way it was supposed to.'' We learned that this
was not the case, and administration officials did everything
in their power to hide the chaos behind the scenes.
The American public deserves better. They deserve better
than an administration that promised them $2,500 in savings on
their health care premiums, only to see the costs rise sharply
for many. They deserve better than an administration that
repeated promises officials knew would be impossible to keep--
promises that Americans could keep their doctor and keep their
health care plans. Like it or not, millions of Americans have
found themselves with the unwelcome reality of cancellations
and lost access to their trusted doctors.
Today we will hear first hand from the insurance providers
about how implementation is working from their perspective.
While the administration has declared this conversation over,
the fact is that serious questions remain unanswered. And it is
our responsibility to continue seeking the facts. How many
people have completed the enrollment process? Are the risks
presented by these pools sustainable? How much more will
premiums rise next year? Is the backend of the Web site on
track to be working by the next enrollment period? Are there
any other delays or changes ahead that will disrupt the ability
of families and businesses to plan for their health care
coverage and needs? Will more health care plans be cancelled in
the coming years?
What is wrong with seeking this information? Nothing. We
released basic data points on enrollment as of April 15, and we
will do so again on the data we collect through May 20. The
facts are the facts, and while the administration and its
allies furiously try to muddy reality, the public deserves
transparency. While the administration toasts to the law's
success with its Hollywood allies, declaring this conversation
over, we will continue our pursuit for facts for the American
people so we can finally have a full, accurate picture of this
health care law.

Mr. Burgess. I thank the chairman for yielding.
I thank our witnesses for being here today. I know it's not
always easy or pleasant to come before this subcommittee. I,
like the chairman, wish that the administration had been a
little bit more forthcoming about information which would have
obviated your need to be here today, but I do appreciate the
fact that you responded to our requests and that you have
provided the data.
The fact remains the administration has withheld facts or
changed facts during the rollout of this law and that the
Federal agencies responsible for the implementation currently
excel only in opacity. So you are here today to provide that
transparency that the American people were promised earlier in
this administration, and I thank you for being here.
I have particular concern over one aspect, and I will delve
into it a little bit more during the questioning today, but
that is the issue on the grace period, the 90-day period of
time that is granted to people who are receiving the tax
credits, the advance tax credits for the offset of the cost of
their insurance. If they don't pay their premium in spite of
the tax credit, they are given a grace period of 90 days.
My understanding is that the companies will be responsible
for the first 30 days; beyond that, it will be the doctor or
the hospital, the provider who submits the bill who may be on
the hook for that. And I am very interested to know what you
have in development to keep practices, to keep providers
apprised of the fact that a patient's claim may be in a pending
status when that claim is submitted.
I know from running a doctor's office, you always call and
verify benefits, but now we have a new realm that we've entered
into: Not only would you identify that someone has been
enrolled, but that they've paid and that they're current on
their payments so that the provider in question would not be at
risk. So we will get into a little bit more on that in the
question-and-answer period.
I thank the chairman for the time and yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize the ranking member of the full committee,
Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Last week the Republican whip, Representative Kevin
McCarthy, wrote an op-ed opposing the Affordable Care Act. He
wrote, ``President Obama needs to learn a simple lesson: Saying
something doesn't make it true.'' Well, psychologists call this
projection, a defense mechanism that involves ascribing your
own behavior to others.
In one phrase, Representative McCarthy summed up 5 years of
Republican opposition to the Affordable Care Act. Over and
over, Republican leaders have fabricated criticisms of the
Affordable Care Act and none of them have been true. Republican
leaders said that the ACA would create death panels; well,
there are none in the law. Republican leaders said that the law
was unconstitutional; the Supreme Court held exactly the
opposite. Republican leaders said that the ACA would increase
the deficit; well, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office
found that the law will reduce deficits by over $1 trillion.
Republican leaders said that the law would cause health care
costs to skyrocket; in fact, in the 3 years after passage of
the ACA, health care spending growth was at its lowest rate in
50 years.
Republican leaders said that the law would cause massive
job losses; in reality, there have been 48 consecutive months
of job creation since the ACA was passed with more than 9.2
million jobs created. Republican leaders said there would be a
huge loss of coverage under the law, but every independent
analysis shows that the number of Americans with health
insurance is growing and the number of uninsured dropping
rapidly. Republicans said enrollment would fall far short of
CBO estimates because few Americans would sign up; at 8 million
and growing, enrollment has exceeded everyone's expectations.
Mr. Chairman, I just summarized 5 years of relentless
Republican opposition to the Affordable Care Act. It's a sad
and, I believe, reprehensible record. The Republican Party is
trying to scare families from getting the health insurance they
need. We saw the same pattern just last week when this
committee released another report claiming imminent failure.
This time, the report said that one-third of enrollees had not
paid for coverage. There was just one problem: The data was
incomplete, out of date, and manipulated. Due to the late surge
in enrollment, premiums were not even due for over 3 million
Americans.
The testimony we're going to hear today from the insurers
contradicts the Republican findings. That testimony says that
80 to 90 percent of enrollees have paid their premiums. Mr.
Chairman, it was a mistake to release those inaccurate and
misleading findings, and it's not the first time this has
happened.
This morning, I released a memo describing the Republican
record of distortion, exaggeration, and misdirection. It's a
sad record, and I'd like to make it part of this hearing
record. The simple fact is, despite 5 years of ceaseless
opposition, the Affordable Care Act is working. Over 8 million
Americans have signed up for private health care coverage on
the State and Federal exchanges. Millions more have signed up
for Medicaid. Premiums are well below CBO expectations. No
American ever has to fear being discriminated against or denied
coverage based on a preexisting condition.
No amount of blatant falsehoods and cynical partisanship
can obscure the facts. The Affordable Care Act is an enormous
step forward in the health of our Nation. And I yield back the
balance of my time, and I appreciate this opportunity to set
the record straight.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
We'll now move forward here with our witnesses. Just one
moment, please. We're moving quicker and that's good. I just
wasn't quite ready.
So I'd like to introduce the panel for today's hearing. We
have Mr. Mark Pratt, who is a senior vice president of State
Affairs for America's Health Insurance Plans; Mr. Frank Coyne
is the Vice President of Operations and Chief Transformation
Officer of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association; Mr. Paul
Wingle is the Executive Director of Individual Businesses and
Public Exchange Operations and Strategy for Aetna; Mr. Brian
Evanko is the President of Individual Segment for Cigna Health
and Life Insurance Company; Mr. J. Darren Rodgers is the Senior
Vice President and Chief Marketing Officer at the Health Care
Services Corporations; and Mr. Dennis Matheis is the President
of Central Region and Exchange Strategy at WellPoint, Inc.
I will now swear in the witnesses. You are aware that this
committee is holding an investigative hearing and when doing
so, we have the practice of taking testimony under oath. Do any
of you have any objections to testifying under oath? All the
witnesses have indicated no.
The chair, then, advises you that under the rules of the
House and the rules of the committee, you are entitled to be
advised by counsel. Do you desire to be advised by counsel
during your testimony today?
Mr. Wingle is saying you would like to be advised by
counsel. Well, if you are sitting behind him, that's fine.
Anybody else? You have counsel behind you. You are
certainly are welcome at some point to ask clarification from
them, that's fine.
In any case, would you all please rise and raise your right
hand, and I'll swear you in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. You may be seated. All the witnesses
have taken that oath, and you are now under oath and subject to
the penalties set forth in Title 18, Section 1001 of the United
States Code. We'll have you now each give a 5-minute opening
statement. Please stick to the 5 minutes. You'll see a red
light go on when you're at the end of your time.
Mr. Pratt, you may begin.

STATEMENTS OF MARK PRATT, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF STATE
AFFAIRS, AMERICAS HEALTH INSURANCE PLANS; FRANK COYNE, VICE
PRESIDENT OF OPERATIONS, CHIEF TRANSFORMATION OFFICER, BLUE
CROSS AND BLUE SHIELD ASSOCIATION; PAUL WINGLE, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS AND PUBLIC EXCHANGE OPERATIONS
AND STRATEGY, AETNA; BRIAN EVANKO, PRESIDENT, INDIVIDUAL
SEGMENT, CIGNA; J. DARREN RODGERS, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND
CHIEF MARKETING OFFICER, HEALTH CARE SERVICE CORPORATION; AND
DENNIS MATHEIS, PRESIDENT OF CENTRAL REGION AND EXCHANGE
STRATEGY, WELLPOINT, INC.

STATEMENT OF MARK PRATT

Mr. Pratt. Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette and
members of the subcommittee, I am Mark Pratt, Senior Vice
President of State Affairs in America's Health Insurance Plans.
I lead AHIP's legislative and regulatory activities in the
States, including implementation of the Affordable Care Act and
our work with the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners. We appreciate this opportunity to testify on
enrollment in the new health insurance exchanges and
implementation of the ACA.
Our written testimony focuses on two broad areas: One, our
members' experience in the ACA's initial open enrollment period
for 2014; and two, our members' priorities for improving access
to high-quality affordable health coverage in 2015 and beyond.
Since the enactment of the ACA, our members have been working
the implement the law's many requirements with a strong focus
on delivering high value coverage options for consumers.
Helping them obtain the secure, affordable coverage they need
has been our central goal throughout the implementation
process.
While working on operational issues related to ACA
implementation and providing recommendations to policymakers,
our members have focused on several major goals. Among them:
Minimizing disruptions for consumers, businesses and
stakeholders; ensuring the workability of the exchanges and
allowing State flexibility; maximizing choice and competition;
and addressing specific ACA provisions to make health coverage
more affordable.
On numerous issues, our members have provided technical
assistance and expertise to assist Federal agencies in
resolving the operational challenges that surrounded the launch
of the new exchanges in the HealthCare.Gov Web site. They have
devoted significant resources to performing manual processes
and workarounds that were necessitated by the problems
following the October 1 launch. Despite the challenges our
members encountered, we are proud that they ultimately were
successful in offering a broad range of high-valued coverage
options to consumers who are enrolled in exchanges in 2014.
HHS has reported that approximately 8 million individuals
signed up for exchange plans during the initial open enrollment
period for 2014. While uncertainty remains with respect to how
many people have paid their first month's premium, health
insurers have been doing everything possible to encourage
exchange enrollees to pay their premiums.
In the coming weeks, we anticipate that there will be
greater clarity on the question of how many exchange enrollees
have paid their premiums. A number of individual plans have
publicly announced their preliminary data, and we anticipate
that more announcements will be forthcoming; however, it may be
a period of time before system-wide numbers on premiums
payments are available. Our members will continue their ongoing
outreach to encourage exchange enrollees to pay their premiums.
Looking forward, we continue to believe that affordability
must be the central priority as we focus on further expanding
access to high quality, affordable health insurance coverage in
2015 and beyond. One critically important step that Congress
can take to make coverage more affordable is to delay the ACA
health insurance tax and eventually repeal it.
We are deeply concerned that this tax is undermining
efforts to control costs and provide affordable coverage
options. We strongly support bipartisan legislation to fully
repeal the tax introduced by Representatives Boustany and
Matheson and cosponsored by 230 House members. We also support
as a short-term solution separate bipartisan legislation that
proposes a 2-year delay on the tax.
On another front and in closing, we have worked closely
with our members to provide comments to Federal agencies on
dozens of proposed rules and other regulatory documents. We
consistently have emphasized the importance of creating a
regulatory environment that promotes a wide range of affordable
coverage options. Thank you again for this opportunity to
testify. I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Pratt. I thank you for yielding
back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pratt follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Now, I recognize Mr. Coyne for his 5 minutes.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF FRANK COYNE

Mr. Coyne. Good morning, Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member
DeGette, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
invitation to testify here today. I am Frank Coyne, Vice
President in the Office of the President for the Blue Cross and
Blue Shield Association, which represents the 37 independent
community-based Blue Cross and Blue Shield companies that
collectively provide health coverage for 100 million Americans.
Blue Cross and Blue Shield companies offer health care
coverage in every ZIP Code in the country and have long been
committed to offering consumers across the country a wide
variety of insurance options. My remarks today focus on the
Blue's participation in the Multi-State Plan Program
administered by the Office of Personnel Management and
enrollment in Blue Cross and Blue Shield MSP plans.
The Affordable Care Act authorizes OPM to contract with at
least two entities, at least one of which must be a not-for-
profit to offer products on the State and Federal marketplaces.
Under this Multi-State Plan Program, OPM certifies health plans
in conjunction with States for placement on the exchanges.
For 2014, OPM certified Blue Cross and Blue Shield
companies to offer Multi-State Plan products in 30 States and
the District of Columbia. Collectively, Blue Cross and Blue
Shield companies offered more than 150 Multi-State Plan
products. OPM has developed a standard contract for OPM issuers
that meets its requirements. The association is party to that
contract with OPM and are Blue licensee plans have agreements
with us to fulfill many aspects of that contract, such as
customer enrollment, benefits and claims administration and
customer service, among other activities.
In addition, the contract contains a requirement to report
enrollment information to OPM. In order to fulfill this
requirement, we ask Blue plans to report information on their
Multi-State Plan enrollments to us, and we convey enrollment
information to OPM. As of April 1, 2014, a total of 283,783
individuals have selected an MSP plan.
I appreciate the opportunity to discuss Blue participation
and enrollment in the MSP plan, and I look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Coyne.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Coyne follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Now, Mr. Wingle, you're recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAUL WINGLE

Mr. Wingle. Good morning, Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member
DeGette and distinguished members of the subcommittee. My name
is Paul Wingle, and I am executive director of Individual
Business and Public Exchange Operations and Strategy at Aetna.
Thank you for inviting us to today's hearing. I have a brief
opening statement and will then be happy to answer any
questions you may have.
Aetna is currently participating in the individual market
on the exchanges in 17 States. Over the course of approximately
the last 2 months, Aetna has worked with the subcommittee to
provide requested data and information related to enrollment in
plans offered through federally-facilitated marketplaces.
As of the third week of April, Aetna had over 600,000
members who had enrolled, and roughly 500,000 members who had
paid. For those who are reached their payment due date, the
payment rate, though dynamic, has been in the low- to mid-80
percent range. As outlined in our prior submissions to the
subcommittee, these are dynamic figures and do not reflect
final enrollment numbers, as some enrollees have not yet
reached their payment due dates.
An example would be a member with a June 1 policy effective
date who has not yet paid but whose initial payment is not yet
due. We are happy to continue to work with the subcommittee to
provide updated information and data and note that, as the
subcommittee has recognized, this might include material,
nonpublic, confidential, and proprietary information.
Thank you again for the opportunity to be here today, and I
would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wingle follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Wingle, he yields back.
And now, Mr. Evanko, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN EVANKO

Mr. Evanko. Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette,
members of the subcommittee, good morning and thank you for the
opportunity to testify at this hearing on PPACA enrollment and
the insurance industry. I'm Brian Evanko, and I currently serve
as president of the U.S. Individual Segment at Cigna
Corporation. I oversee the operation tasked with developing,
promoting and maintaining the Cigna products that are offered
in the individual health market, including those products that
are offered on the exchanges set up pursuant to the patient
protection and Affordable Care Act, or ACA.
Cigna is a global health services company dedicated to
helping people improve their health, wellbeing, and sense of
security. Through its subsidiaries, Cigna offers an integrated
suite of health services, such as medical, dental, behavioral
health, pharmacy and vision care benefits, along with other
related products including group disability, life, and accident
coverage.
We employ more than 26,000 people and have sales capability
in 30 countries and jurisdictions. We manage more than 80
million customer relationships throughout the world. Despite
our large footprint, 80 percent of Cigna's overall health care
business consists of administrative services. This means that
we help employers to administer their policies. We also
administer claims processes which are not risk-based like
traditional insurance. Many of the employers that we assist are
self-insuring and the claim payments come out of the employer's
own funds.
Cigna's traditional insurance business is concentrated in
the large group market. We have a very limited presence in the
individual market, including on the ACA exchanges. The
individual market currently constitutes approximately 3 percent
of Cigna's total revenue. We currently offer health insurance
products on the exchanges in five States, four of which--
Arizona, Florida, Tennessee, and Texas--are Federally-
facilitated marketplaces. The only state-run exchange in which
Cigna is participating is in Colorado.
We have entered the exchanges on a focus basis in 2014 to
gather deeper learning about consumer behaviors in the
individual market, to understand the operational implications
of how the exchanges function, and as a potential longer-term
source of growth for Cigna. For 2014, we did not expect the
exchanges to have a significant financial impact on our
company. The health insurance marketplace is evolving rapidly,
and Cigna, like other health insurance companies, is constantly
challenged to maintain affordability, accessibility, and
consumer choice in its product offerings.
Cigna has worked collaboratively with our clients and
customers, health care professionals, state, and Federal
regulators as well as other stakeholders to maintain our
heritage of providing high-quality health insurance products
and services while adapting to the ACA and other statutory and
regulatory changes.
We believe that health care is a shared responsibility of
the individual, the private sector, the medical community and
the government. Accordingly, we look forward to how we can all
work together to improve the health and wellness of and the
quality of care for all Americans. I'd welcome any questions
that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Evanko follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Mr. Evanko yields back, and now we go to Mr.
Rodgers to be recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF J. DARREN RODGERS

Mr. Rodgers. Good morning, Chairman Murphy and members of
the subcommittee. I'm Darren Rodgers----
Mr. Murphy. Bring the mic as close to you as possible
because we can't hear up here. Speak right into it.
Mr. Rodgers. Good morning again, everyone. I'm Darren
Rodgers. I'm Senior Vice President and Chief Marketing Officer
at Health Care Service Corporation or HCSC. HCSC is a mutual
legal-reserve company which does business as Blue Cross and
Blue Shield of Illinois, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and
Texas. HCSC is the largest customer-owned nonprofit health
insurance company in the Nation. We're headquartered in
Chicago, Illinois, with a workforce of nearly 20,000 employees
serving nearly 14 million members throughout our five State
Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans.
For over 80 years, HCSC has been committed to expanding
access to cost-effective health care to as many people as
possible in every part of each of our five States. Whether
through employer-sponsored insurance, government programs or
individual products, HCSC is committed to its purpose and to
offering our customers a wide range of cost-effective and
sustainable product choices to meet their health and wellness
needs.
As we transition to a new health care marketplace, HCSC
remains committed to its individual and small employer markets
and continuing to offering accessible products, particularly to
those individuals who do not have access to employer-sponsored
coverage.
We're proud of what our brand stands for: Security and
peace of mind, and our commitment to our communities in which
we operate, as well as our large and geographically-diverse
network of health care providers in our operating States. This
allows us to offer a variety of affordable product choices in
every county of every State in which we operate.
To support our individual and small-employer market, HCSC
participated in the health insurance exchanges. We offered a
similar portfolio of products both on and off exchange with a
variety of deductibles, copays, coverages and other options
with the goal of meeting our members' diverse health care
needs.
At the current time, enrollment and payment information can
only be presented as of each day when the numbers are counted.
As such, there are natural lags between the effective date of
coverage and the date on which the members' coverage payment
may be due. For instance, applicants with policies with an
effective date of May 1 still have time remaining in their
payment deadline. In addition, adjustments and reconciliations
to this data are ongoing. The data HCSC is providing represents
our good-faith estimate based on our records to date.
With these caveats, HCSC received between October 1, 2013,
and April 15, 2014, approximately 830,000 applications across
our five States, comprised of approximately 600,000 on-exchange
and 230,000 off-exchange applications. We estimate that these
830,000 applications represent coverage for just over 1.2
million applicants.
In the written copy of my opening statement, we provided a
snapshot of our current first-month payment rates. As you can
see, January through April looked fairly consistent and range
from 83 to 93 percent. The payment rates for May are currently
less because payments are still coming in and being posted.
HCSC is and always has been committed to improving access
to quality of care for all Americans. I thank you on behalf of
HCSC for the opportunity to be a part of this important
discussion.
Mr. Murphy. I thank the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rodgers follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Now, Mr. Matheis, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DENNIS MATHEIS

Mr. Matheis. Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette and
members of the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations thank you for the opportunity to
be here today on behalf of WellPoint. I am Dennis Matheis,
President of the Central Region and Exchange Strategy. I am
responsible for creating WellPoint's exchange strategy and
overseeing its launch. Prior to my current role, I was
President of Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Missouri.
WellPoint is one of the Nation's leading health benefit
companies. We believe that our health connects us all, so we
focus on being a valued health partner in delivering quality
products and services that give members access to the care they
need. With nearly 67 million people served by our affiliated
companies, including nearly 37 million enrolled in our family
of health plans, we can make a real difference to meet the
needs of our diverse constituents.
We are an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue
Shield Association. We serve members as the Blue Cross licensee
for California, and as the Blue Cross and Blue Shield licensee
for Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Indiana, Kentucky, Maine,
Missouri, Nevada, New Hampshire, New York, Ohio, Virginia, and
Wisconsin. In most of these service areas, our plans do
business as Anthem Blue Cross, Anthem Blue Cross and Blue
Shield, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Georgia and Empire Blue
Cross and Blue Shield or Empire Blue Cross. We also serve
customers in other States through our Amerigroup and CareMore
subsidiaries.
WellPoint is currently operating in the federally-
facilitated exchange, which includes Georgia, Indiana, Maine,
Missouri, New Hampshire, Ohio, Virginia, and Wisconsin. We also
participate in several State-based exchanges, including
California, Colorado, Connecticut, Kentucky, New York and
Nevada.
While there is no doubt that implementation of the
exchanges presents a complex and daunting undertaking, we
believe we've been able to apply our knowledge and experience
to make the system work better for our members. We are seeing
strong membership growth and large percentages of our newly-
enrolled customers are successfully paying their premiums by
the due date.
Our most important priority through all of the complexity
of ACA implementation is to ensure that our members receive the
best possible care. Working closely and collaboratively with
the physician community, our innovative programs from new
payment models to telehealth solutions to sophisticated data
analytics that arm physicians with better information, we are
creating value for our members, for our physicians and for the
health care system. We are proud of the work we are doing to
transform health care.
WellPoint was pleased to provide the committee last month
with enrollment data from October 1, 2013, through April 15,
2014, for States where we participate in the federally-
facilitated exchange. As we stated to the committee at the time
of submission, this data is not final and only represents a
snapshot in time. The data included enrollees whose policies
have effective dates of April 1, May 1 and June 1, which means
that premiums for such policies would not be due until April
10, May 10, and June 10, respectively.
Also, the reported enrollment in premium payment data is
subject to adjustments. For example, enrollees may elect to
drop their coverage, elect to change the effective date of
their coverage after submission of their application, or
continue to enroll through special enrollment periods. In
response to the committee's request, we submitted the total
number of applications received for enrollment in the
federally-facilitated exchange during the period of October 1,
2013, through April 15, 2014.
The percentage of applications that have paid a premium
will differ depending on whether the percentage is calculated
based on the total number of applications and premium payments
received during this entire period, roughly 70 percent; or as
calculated based on the total number of applications and
premium payments received for policies whose premium deadline
has passed, ranging up to 90 percent depending on the State.
WellPoint feels privileged to be able to serve our growing
community of members. We take great pride in transforming
health care with trusting, caring, creative and innovative
solutions. I thank the committee for the opportunity to testify
today on behalf of WellPoint and look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Matheis follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. For the record, all the witnesses did not go
over time, and we'll make sure we fill in the gaps here what
has not been provided to us and see if we can get some
information.
Do any of you, particularly from the insurance companies--
I'm recognizing myself for 5 minutes, by the way--have any data
among those people who have subscribed, if the costs they are
paying for their overall health insurance plan is more, less,
or the same as they were paying in a previous year? Mr. Wingle,
do you keep that data?
Mr. Wingle. I don't have that data available.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Evanko, do you know if your plan has that?
Mr. Evanko. I don't have specific figures to share. I can
try to provide some context.
Mr. Murphy. Would you submit it for the record.
Mr. Rodgers, Mr. Matheis, do your plans keep a record of
what people paid in a previous year versus what they're paying
now?
Mr. Rodgers. No, I haven't looked at that information.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
And of those who all have signed up for insurance, do any
of your companies ask for or have any data if people were among
those who had lost their insurance, that is their insurance was
canceled because of change in the Affordable Care Act? Any of
you from insurance companies, do any of you have that data?
Mr. Matheis. We currently do not have that information
available.
Mr. Murphy. OK. All right. Thank you.
So we don't know if the people who were signing up with
these health insurance plans are people who are renewing
insurance, had lost insurance or never had insurance, am I
correct? Mr. Wingle? Mr. Evanko? Mr. Rodgers? Matheis?
Mr. Matheis. That's correct.
Mr. Murphy. I know Secretary Sebelius said that she did not
think we had that data either.
Mr. Wingle, your Chief Executive, Mark Bertolini, said that
premium rates in 2015 will range from very low single digits to
some that will be over double digits. Can consumers expect this
for their 2015 premiums?
Mr. Wingle. It's important to recognize, first of all, that
we're at the start of the rate filing and approval process, so
we're very early in the process of establishing those rates and
submitting them to State regulators for approval and review.
Our rates, it's also important to understand, reflect a number
of key factors, most importantly the benefits covered by the
plans we're filing, the population covered by those plans and
the underlying health care costs in the geographies where those
plans are offered. There will be some variability across
geography and depending on those circumstances.
Mr. Murphy. Some might face double-digit increases? We
don't know yet, you're saying?
Mr. Wingle. I can't say for certain whether some will pay
double digits, single digits or no increase at all. It's too
early to say.
Mr. Murphy. If there's no increase in insurance, we should
all celebrate because I'm not sure that has existed in my
lifetime.
Will there be decreases?
Mr. Wingle. It's hard to say. It will vary by geography and
rating factors.
Mr. Murphy. All right. Mr. Matheis, you announced your
quarterly earnings and noted that the ramp-up in the fee of
government is charging insurers under the health care law would
impact marketplace premiums next year. What can consumers
expect?
Mr. Matheis. So similar to my colleague's comment, we are
in the process of developing our rates now for the 138 rating
regions in which we do business across the 14 states. So I
don't have exact numbers yet, chairman, in terms of what our
rate increases are going to be. Certainly, inputs into that are
the experience that we're developing through the population
that we're serving, the expected medical trend that's going to
occur and then the fees and taxes that occur through the ACA
and through State and other Federal constructs, that all goes
into the rate construct process.
Mr. Murphy. I think I'm going down the same hole with each
of you, so let me cut to the chase. The bottom line here is,
you do get for risk corridors, you do get some money back from
the Federal Government to balance out some of your costs, am I
correct, with each plan? Mr. Evanko, is that true?
Mr. Evanko. The risk corridors, as you know, sir, are part
of the three Rs. We at Cigna Corporation are not expecting a
material, receivable or payable, as it relates to risk
corridors.
Mr. Murphy. My point is that, as we're looking at this
data--and we'll continue to monitor and we recognize some of
this is still preliminary--based upon who has signed up and
what their health care costs are, for example, if you don't
reach the 40-percent number that the President had hoped,
people between 18 and 35, and mostly those who signed up have
been the older and sicker, then that's going to have an impact
upon your plan costs. Am I correct, Mr. Rodgers?
Mr. Rodgers. Could you restate that question?
Mr. Murphy. That if people who have signed up are not the
young, healthy invincibles but are indeed the older folks who
have preexisting conditions and other health care costs, that
you're going to have to face some sort of increase in premiums.
Am I correct?
Mr. Rodgers. Well, as two of my colleagues have said, the
rates that we file for 2015 haven't been finalized yet, but
those will reflect----
Mr. Murphy. I understand. I am anticipating. You've been in
the business for a while.
And the Federal Government does provide some funds for you
to help balance these out. Am I correct? Federal money comes to
you to help as the risk corridors, and you have other people
there who, the increased--costs go up. Am I correct?
Mr. Wingle. The three Rs program does exist to provide some
guard rails. We have not----
Mr. Murphy. Right. And but over time, that amount of money
from the Federal Government will decline. Am I correct?
Mr. Wingle. Some of those programs are transitional and
one's permanent.
Mr. Murphy. I understand. But we'll get back to this. Thank
you.
I yield and now recognize Ms. DeGette for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Last week, the
majority Republicans on this committee put out a report stating
that only 67 percent of the people who signed up for insurance
through the State and Federal marketplaces had paid their first
month's premiums and then had a big press blitz about that
saying that Obamacare had once again failed. So I kind of want
to walk some of you through that allegation and see how true it
is.
I want to start with you, Mr. Matheis. I believe that the
press reports I've seen, the reports from the administration
show that through the end of March, which was the deadline,
about 8.1 people enrolled through either the Federal or State
exchanges. Is that correct, to your knowledge?
Mr. Matheis. Did you mean 8.1 million?
Ms. DeGette. Yes.
Mr. Matheis. Yes. I have the same source of data that you
do on that point.
Ms. DeGette. That's fine.
Now, in your testimony, you said that the data used in that
Republican analysis, quote, included enrollees whose policies
have effective dates of April 1, May 1, and June 1. Is that
correct?
Mr. Matheis. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And that's about 3 million out of 8 million
people, about 40 percent. Is that correct?
Mr. Matheis. Again, since we didn't enroll all 8 million
people, I can't attest to that question or not.
Ms. DeGette. But, OK. Well, I will say what I've seen is
it's about 3 million out of 8 million. Now, so the 3 million
people who enrolled--or let me just say, the people who
enrolled in March, they had coverage, in general, that began no
earlier than May 1. Is that right?
Mr. Matheis. If you enrolled in March, you would have
potentially an effective date, depending on what day of the
month you enrolled in, could be April 1, could have been May 1.
Ms. DeGette. May 1. And so those peoples' premiums were not
due until at the earliest, the end of April; is that correct?
If you enrolled March 31, your premiums were due at the end of
April or later, right?
Mr. Matheis. To help facilitate members enrolling, what we
have done at WellPoint is actually extended the payment period
10 days beyond the last day of the effective month.
Ms. DeGette. So it could be April 30, or it could be even
later, correct?
Mr. Matheis. So an April 1----
Ms. DeGette. Yes or no will work.
Mr. Matheis. An April 1 effective----
Ms. DeGette. Right.
Mr. Matheis. [continuing]. Would actually have until May 10
to pay their premium.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Now, Mr. Matheis, let me ask you, your
testimony said, while WellPoint ACA's policies whose deadline
for paying premiums has passed, about 90 percent have paid
their premiums. Is that correct?
Mr. Matheis. So our data in our----
Ms. DeGette. You can say yes or no. That's what your
testimony said.
Mr. Matheis. Yes. So it's----
Ms. DeGette. OK. Now, that's more than 67 percent. Is that
correct?
Mr. Matheis. Last time I looked, yes. Greater than 67.
Ms. DeGette. Now, Mr. Wingle, let me take you off the hot
seat, Mr. Matheis.
Mr. Wingle, I want to ask you, Aetna has shown of the 5- to
600 enrollees who have paid, about 85 percent up until March
paid their premiums. Is that correct?
Mr. Wingle. Our range is in the low- to mid-80s, month to
month.
Ms. DeGette. OK. And that's also more than 67 percent,
isn't it?
Mr. Wingle. Empirically, yes.
Ms. DeGette. Yes.
And Mr. Rodgers, let me ask you, for your company, the ACA
payment policies whose premium payment deadlines have passed,
about 83 to 85 percent of them have paid their premiums; is
that correct?
Mr. Rodgers. Yes, except for the most recent month.
Ms. DeGette. Right. The ones whose payment deadlines have
passed.
Mr. Rodgers. Yes, that is correct.
Ms. DeGette. Yes. And that's also more than 67 percent,
isn't it?
Mr. Rodgers. That is more than 67 percent.
Ms. DeGette. Yes. So what I wanted to ask about is, do any
of you expect to see substantially lower payment percentages
than you saw historically before the latest enrollment? Mr.
Matheis.
Mr. Matheis. So I will give a little context to my answer.
Ms. DeGette. OK. I need a yes or no. I don't have much
time. I'm sorry.
Mr. Matheis. Well----
Ms. DeGette. Do you expect to see it go down to 67 percent
for April?
Mr. Matheis. I don't think we have enough information to
know exactly where it's going to be.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Well, Mr. Rodgers, let me ask you this
question, then: Mr. Upton said that he thinks suddenly, maybe
they won't pay for their enrollment in March. So I wanted to
kind of go through, because you've got a nice chart in your
testimony and it shows the payments month by month that people
made when they enrolled. So for 1/1/2014 on the exchange, 85
percent of the people paid; is that correct?
Mr. Rodgers. That's correct.
Ms. DeGette. For 2/1/2014, 86 percent paid, correct?
Mr. Rodgers. That's correct.
Ms. DeGette. For 3/1/2014, 88 percent paid; is that
correct?
Mr. Rodgers. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And for 4/1/2014, 83 percent paid; is that
correct?
Mr. Rodgers. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. And you're still waiting for everybody else to
pay because their deadline has not passed yet; is that correct?
Mr. Rodgers. That's correct.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Can I just follow up with a clarifying
question: When she asked about historical data, were you
referring to the last couple months or comparison with previous
years under different plans?
Ms. DeGette. Well, we didn't have an exchange.
Mr. Murphy. No, no, I just----
Ms. DeGette. Chairman, we only just got the exchange.
Mr. Murphy. No, I wasn't sure if you meant under historical
you mean previous years of plans versus just the exchange.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, what I mean is since the ACA was
implemented starting on October 1.
Mr. Murphy. OK. Thank you. I just wanted clarification on
that.
Now recognize Ms. Blackburn for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you all so much for being with us. I
want to say with this issue on the premiums because we get
asked about this a lot.
So Mr. Wingle, Aetna, your CEO said that premium increases
will vary over 17 States and encompass 132 rating areas,
correct?
Mr. Wingle. That is correct.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Can you identify where premiums will
decrease in 2015? What identification can you place on that?
Mr. Wingle. At this point in the filing season, we can't
offer any guidance on or speculate on where they're going to
fall. We're still gathering the information for file.
Mrs. Blackburn. None?
Mr. Wingle. I can't say none. I can't say any.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Mr. Matheis, can you tell me, identify
any States where you are offering products in the exchanges
where consumers can expect a premium decrease?
Mr. Matheis. At this juncture, we do not have the
information.
Mrs. Blackburn. You don't have the information?
Mr. Matheis. No. The filing rates are due starting in late
May into June, and so we have not computed yet with any
certainty what the actual rates are going to look like in our
138 rating regions.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. A lot of uncertainty floating around
out there.
OK, Mr. Evanko.
Mr. Evanko. I would echo my colleague's comments. We're in
the process making decisions. Some decisions on certain
assumptions have been made, but most assumptions are still to
be determined.
Mrs. Blackburn. So you don't know if your consumers are
going to see any decreases. You know they were promised
decreases through the Affordable Care Act, so.
OK, Mr. Rodgers, to you.
Mr. Rodgers. As the company's marketing officer, I can tell
you I'm not involved in rate setting, but I'm aware of some of
the deadlines we're facing which are generally toward the end
of June.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Well, let me ask you all this, then:
Have any of you conducted any internal analysis of what your
organizations premiums are going to look in 2015? Do any of you
have any internal analysis? Raise your hand for me. So you all
have conducted no--we've got some of our Nation's biggest
insurers, and you have done no internal analysis on what the
trend line is for these premiums? None?
Mr. Evanko. Ms. Blackburn----
Mrs. Blackburn. Oh, Mr. Evanko, have at it.
Mr. Evanko. So I'd like to clarify our comments here a
little bit, or at least my comments as it relate to this issue.
So the decisions related to this are very complicated and they
impact each individual a little bit differently because of
where someone's located, maybe what their APTC eligibility is,
et cetera. So there's a long list of reasons there.
Mrs. Blackburn. Right. We understand that. You're talking
about a 2,300 page law that became about over 20,000 pages of
rules and regulations and we know this changes daily. We
appreciate the predicament that you are in. We also appreciate
the predicament that our constituents find themselves in.
And it is baffling that we can have some of our Nation's
largest insurers and you all don't have any internal analysis
as to what these rates are--I thought that, reading your
reports, you all did analysis in trend lines for the near-term,
the midterm and the long-term and you looked at what the
expectations were so that your stakeholders would all be aware
of what was happening within that market. You know, has anybody
done any kind of analysis?
Mr. Matheis. So can I answer your question?
Mrs. Blackburn. Yes, please. Have at it, Mr. Matheis. Your
mic, please.
Mr. Matheis. So analysis is typically ongoing in our
organization. Rate development typically takes 3 to 6 months to
occur once you have credible information. And so just for
context purposes, we, and as has been stated earlier in this
meeting----
Mrs. Blackburn. Let me----
Mr. Matheis. Let me finish.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Go ahead.
Mr. Matheis. [continuing]. We are just now understanding
what membership we have attracted and so the work is ongoing,
but it has not been finalized. And that's the important point.
Mrs. Blackburn. Let me ask you this: What has been prepared
for your CEO? Any of you?
Mr. Matheis. At this juncture, we do not have a compiled
package to sit down and say, here is what we believe a rate is
going to be in any of our 130 rate areas.
Mrs. Blackburn. When do you expect to have that?
Mr. Matheis. Typically, it will be towards the end of this
month, as rates need to be filed in our States starting end of
May through the June or July time period.
Mrs. Blackburn. Would you submit that to us for the record,
each of you. Do you agree to submit this for the record so that
we will have this?
Mr. Wingle. And representative, I want to concur with my
colleague, we are constantly analyzing our exchange experience.
This is a new population. We don't have the long claims record
or history we had in the previous market, so the more data we
get the better and more confident we feel as we propose rates.
It's an ongoing analysis. It's a constant analysis.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. We appreciate that, and we would like
to have that analysis and the information you have as you get
it and ask that you please stay in touch with us and do those
orderly insertions for the record.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Gentlewoman yields back, and now recognize Mr.
Dingell for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy
and I thank you for the hearing. I'm pleased the committee is
examining the first open enrollment period under the Affordable
Care Act. I would like to examine the staff report where it
claims only 67 percent of Obamacare enrollees have paid their
first month's premium. We want to find out whether that's so
and what it means.
The bottom line, I think, is the ACA is working. After a
turbulent start we got the Web site up. It's running and HHS
now reports that 8 million people have selected plans through
the exchanges. Furthermore, some 4.8 million people are
enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP, and that number would be much
higher if all 50 States chose to expand Medicaid.
CBO estimates that another 5 million people purchased ACA-
compliant plans outside the marketplaces. Finally, Gallup just
found that the percentage of Americans who do not have health
insurance fell to 13.4 percent, down from some 18 percent 1
year ago.
So let's examine and see what goes on.
This question to Mr. Matheis. And ``yes'' or ``no,'' if you
would, please. When WellPoint turned over enrollment figures to
the majority, you did this under the caveat that the data was
not final and only represented a snapshot in time. Is that
correct?
Mr. Matheis. Yes, it is.
Mr. Dingell. Yes?
Mr. Matheis. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, this question, again to you, Mr. Matheis.
And that is because the committee only requested data through
April 15, 2014; is that correct?
Mr. Matheis. Yes, it is.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Mr. Matheis, is it correct that the
people who signed up after May 15 may not have to pay their
premium until later in April, May, or even June, yes or no?
Mr. Matheis. Is there anybody after April 15th, would
have--would have a longer time----
Mr. Dingell. Those folks who signed up after March 15th.
Mr. Matheis. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Mr. Matheis, is it correct that nearly 90
percent of WellPoint's customers whose premium deadline has
passed have already paid their first month's premium, yes or
no?
Mr. Matheis. Yes, it is.
Mr. Dingell. Now, in your experience, have you found that
people are more likely to make their premium payment right
before the deadline?
Mr. Matheis. That is typically human nature, sir.
Mr. Dingell. And we know that from the behavior of
Americans with regard to income tax and things like that.
Now, this question is for Mr. Wingle of Aetna. Is it
correct that, according to your best estimate, roughly 80
percent of Aetna beneficiaries who have reached their payment
due date have paid their first month's premium, yes or no?
Mr. Wingle. Month to month, it ranges from the low to mid
80s.
Mr. Dingell. Say that again?
Mr. Wingle. It ranges from the low to mid 80s, month by
month.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you.
Now, this question is for you, Mr. Coyne of Blue Cross-Blue
Shield. Is it correct that, according to your best estimate, 80
to 85 percent of the individuals buying Blue Cross-Blue Shield
plans through the marketplace have paid their first month's
premiums, yes or no?
Mr. Coyne. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Dingell. I'm not hearing you, sir.
Mr. Coyne. Yes, that is correct, based on----
Mr. Dingell. That's correct.
Mr. Coyne. [continuing]. A report we----
Mr. Dingell. Now, gentlemen, it doesn't take, I think, a
genius or an atomic physicist to figure out the numbers we just
heard from the actual insurance companies greatly differ from
the staff report. I hope everyone will take these companies at
their word instead of falling for smoke and mirrors from my
friends on the other side of the aisle.
I can understand why my friends on the other side of the
aisle are not in attendance, because they would get a very
unpleasant taste of fact which they might not like. My old
daddy taught me, he used to say to me, ``Son, figures don't
lie, but liars can figure.''
And I have always thought that it would be a good thing,
when this committee does its business, that we know what we are
doing, that we deal in hard facts, so that when the legislation
that we work on, the laws that we are dealing with, the
oversight in which we engage actually lead us to truth and
correct response, so that public policies may be founded on
fact rather than fiction and on staff reports that mislead all.
I would suggest that the staff report should be reviewed
with the utmost of care and deposited then very carefully in
the nearest large wastebasket.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the Vice Chair of the committee, Dr.
Burgess, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you for the
recognition.
I would remind the chairman emeritus that we are friends.
Let me ask you a question. April 17th, the day the
President came out with his ``mission accomplished'' speech at
the White House in the press briefing, there was a briefing of
executives of your companies; is that correct?
Anyone is free to answer.
Mr. Matheis. I believe that was correct, sir.
Mr. Rodgers. That is correct, yes.
Mr. Burgess. And was your company represented?
Mr. Rodgers. I'm not sure which particular meeting you're
describing, but I know there have been some.
Mr. Burgess. Well, let me give you the particular meeting.
It was on April the 17th at 1:35 p.m., the President and Vice
President meet with insurance executives in the Roosevelt Room.
Did that meeting take place?
Mr. Matheis. WellPoint was present at that meeting, sir.
Mr. Burgess. WellPoint was present.
Was Cigna present?
Mr. Evanko. Our CEO was not present at that meeting.
Mr. Burgess. Your--was not. OK.
Mr. Wingle. I'm advised that our CEO was not present at
that meeting.
Mr. Burgess. That was Blue Cross?
Mr. Wingle. That's Aetna for me.
Mr. Burgess. Was Blue Cross represented at the meeting?
Mr. Coyne. I don't have that information right now.
Mr. Burgess. Well, for those that were----
Mr. Pratt. And just for the record, I'm advised that AHIP's
President was present at the meeting.
Mr. Rodgers. And I don't--I can't remember the exact date
of those meetings, but I can tell you that when we are called
to the White House, generally we would attempt to be there.
Mr. Burgess. Well, it was April 17th. I mean, I would think
you'd remember. It's a pretty big deal. I mean, I haven't had a
meeting with the President or the Vice President.
Ms. DeGette. Would the gentleman yield? Perhaps----
Mr. Burgess. No, I will not. No, I will not. My time is
limited.
What I would like, from those that answered affirmatively,
Mr. Matheis and Mr. Pratt, can you provide us information as to
what was covered in that meeting--who made the presentation,
how long it was? And was there, in fact, time for there to be
question and answer, or was it simply a presentation to you
from the President and Vice President?
Mr. Matheis. Mr. Congressman, I was not personally present
at that meeting, our CEO was, and I do not know the facts of
the meeting.
Mr. Burgess. Would you make an attempt to answer for me
those questions? Was this an interactive process, or was this a
proclamation? Was it a monologue, or was it a dialogue?
And, Mr. Pratt, if you would provide us that information,
as well.
And here is the deal. I mean, why am I making a big deal of
this? You all are here today because the White House won't
respond to us. And I would think, if it was possible for the
White House to provide a briefing to your executives on April
17th, that same person could be made available to this
committee and be prepared to answer our questions. I don't see
what is so difficult about that. If the news is as great as
everyone has said it is this morning, I think that they would
welcome the opportunity to come to our committee and give us
the information that we are asking for.
Look, one of the questions that I raised in the opening
statement, and I do want your answers on this because it is
important, this 90-day grace period and the coverage that can't
be cancelled during that 90-day grace period because of
nonpayment. Is there any way for any of your individual
companies to keep up with that information on a rolling basis
and keep your providers informed as to the status of a person's
payment or nonpayment of their premium?
We'll start with you, Mr. Coyne, and let's just work down
the table.
Mr. Coyne. We are working with Blue Plans to inform
providers of the enrollee's status, as you indicated.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Wingle?
Mr. Wingle. Yes. We do have a unique identifier for our
exchange membership on the ID card, and we do provide updates
on the member's payment status in our physician information
centers. So when the physician offices call or the provider
calls, they understand what the payment status is of the
member.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Evanko?
Mr. Evanko. Our doctors and our hospitals that are
servicing our customers have the ability to either call or
check online the status of the individual's payment grace-
period situation.
Mr. Burgess. And, Mr. Rodgers, would that even pertain to
you?
Mr. Rodgers. Yes. Similarly, we have electronic means as
well as a telephone service for providers of various types to
verify coverage.
Mr. Burgess. And Mr. Matheis?
Mr. Matheis. Yes, we provide the same service.
Mr. Burgess. And what I would ask of each of you is, will
you make available to the committee the type of information and
how it is transferred to your providers, your doctors and
hospitals, when they call for that information?
And then, Mr. Chairman, further, I would like to ask
unanimous consent--the Secretary was here in December, the
Secretary of Health and Human Services. After that hearing, I
submitted a letter to the Secretary with several questions that
I wanted answered. They have not been answered to date.
I am going to ask those same questions of our insurance
representatives today. I am going to ask those in writing, and
I would appreciate your response to those questions that the
Secretary was unwilling to answer.
Ms. DeGette. Reserving the right to object. I would just
point out that the Secretary was here in front of this
committee testifying three times last year. And if there are
questions she has not answered, we certainly will be happy to
work with the majority and get those questions answered.
Mr. Murphy. Well, the Members do have the right to----
Ms. DeGette. I will drop my reservation.
Mr. Murphy. [continuing]. Submit questions for panelists.
Mr. Burgess. And I will be submitting those questions in
writing for our panel.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Green, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Chairman Murphy and Ranking Member
DeGette, for having this hearing today, and our witnesses for
the testimony.
My district in Texas is a very urban district in Houston
and has one of the highest rates of uninsured people who don't
receive insurance through their employer in the country.
One of the other talking points that my Republican
colleagues have seized upon last year, especially when the
HealthCare.gov was encountering problems early in the
enrollment period, was the idea that fewer people would have
health insurance following the implementation of the Affordable
Care Act than did beforehand.
Now, I know that all our representatives here today see
that the information and how many people they have enrolled and
their total number of customers are proprietary, and I
understand that. But you are all also, I would hope, familiar
with the general insurance landscape and how it has changed
under the Affordable Care Act.
Earlier this week, the Gallup Poll released a survey
examining the total number of Americans that have insurance.
Mr. Pratt, are you familiar with that survey?
Mr. Pratt. Generally, yes.
Mr. Green. The Gallup Poll conducted interviews with 14,000
American adults. Gallup found that the number of adults without
insurance had dropped to its lowest level since the beginning
of 2008. A drop of this magnitude correlates to more than 11
million people gaining coverage.
Are you familiar enough with the poll to say that that
sounds like a reasonable amount?
Mr. Pratt. Congressman, I think that's what they reported.
I'm not in a position to say whether that's a reasonable amount
or not.
Mr. Green. OK.
Anyone else on the panel want to talk about that Gallup
poll? Because, you know, again, these are what we are seeing
since the enrollment period ended.
RAND and The Urban Institute released similar reports in
March and April. Are any of you familiar with these reports?
Mr. Matheis. Just very generally, Congressman.
Mr. Evanko. I'm not familiar with the reports.
Mr. Green. OK. Well, in early April, RAND Corporation
released the results of their poll, which found the overall
number of Americans with insurance had grown to 9.3 million as
of mid-March, even before the late enrollment date surge. The
Urban Institute also released a report in the past month
suggesting that millions more people have coverage than before
the ACA was implemented.
My question of any of our witnesses: Would you agree that
the findings of these, whether it be RAND, Gallup, or The Urban
Institute, are consistent with millions of Americans signing up
for health insurance? Did you all experience that with your
companies during the signup, that they selected your company as
part of the--if you happened to be part of the exchange, both
national or the State exchanges?
Mr. Matheis. Congressman, at WellPoint, we do not have
enough information at this point to know how many uninsured are
actually among the enrollees, because we just don't have access
to that data at this point.
Mr. Green. OK.
Well, generally, the ACA has led to a huge increase in
coverage. Even without the polls, we have seen some of the
numbers. And can you verify that with your companies, whether
it would be WellPoint, Blue Cross? Have you seen that increase
in the number of people who have signed up with your companies
since the deadline?
Mr. Rodgers. Speaking for Healthcare Service Corporation, I
provided in my written testimony as well as in my opening
comments the number of people that we signed up on- and off-
exchange through the open enrollment period. I can't tell you
today how many of those came from the ranks of the uninsured or
from our competitors or either from a prior policy with one of
our five Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans, but we're certainly
happy to have the numbers up.
Mr. Green. OK.
Well, and we understand there were people who were using
the Web sites and the national exchange to shop. And I had some
companies who said, I'm a small business, I encourage--in fact,
I have a number of them in my area. He said, we have actually
helped our employees sign up individually, because, you know,
you have 10 employees, they weren't required, but they actually
used it. And I know that's an analogy, but I have heard that
from a lot of my employers.
Now, I know my Republican colleagues, with the missed data
from these polls, that anything that comes through the
administration for the overall signup--in March, Speaker
Boehner said that there were less people today with health
insurance than there were before this law went into effect.
I think, not even basing it on a poll, would you all agree
that there are more people that have health insurance now,
let's say since May 1st, than we had before the ACA?
Mr. Pratt. I can't speak to numbers on that enrollment.
Mr. Green. OK.
I don't know how my colleagues continue to make unfounded
claims in the face of the clear evidence that the Affordable
Care Act is providing millions of Americans with healthcare
coverage. It makes me wonder what would possibly convince them
that millions of Americans have gained coverage under the law.
I suspect that, ultimately, once the information becomes so
indisputable, that it maybe will change the subject and,
rather, concede that clearly more people have health insurance
as a result of the ACA.
And having served many years in Congress and even before
that in the State legislature in Texas, no law Congress ever
passes is perfect. That's not how our forefathers created the
system. So we do need to go back, like our ranking member said,
and see what we can do to fix the ACA. And I appreciate you
all's efforts to help us do that once we get to that point.
And I will yield back my time.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Griffith of Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here.
Ms. Blackburn asked you earlier for a show of hands, and I
am going to do the same. If your company anticipates a
reduction for the average family that you insure of $2,500 or
more, would you raise your hand?
If your company anticipates a reduction in premium of
$2,000 per average family for your subscribers, raise your
hand.
Same for $1,500?
All right. I appreciate that.
When will your companies submit their rates to the
administration for 2015? Do you all have a date that you're
going to do that by? We'll start with----
Mr. Rodgers. I believe the----
Mr. Griffith. Yes?
Mr. Rodgers. [continuing]. Rates are due toward the end of
June. I believe it's June 27th. I think that some of the States
are a little bit ahead of that.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And do you know when those will
become public?
Mr. Matheis. Depending on the market, sir, that will vary,
depending on the States.
Mr. Griffith. All right.
And when you submit those to the administration, will you
commit today to submitting those rates to us, as well?
Mr. Rodgers. I'm not involved in the rate submission
process, but to the extent that's possible--I'll need to talk
with our company representatives about that.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I certainly can't see how it would be
illegal to share information with the United States Congress,
but----
Mr. Rodgers. I didn't say ``illegal.''
Mr. Griffith. But if possible, you will do it, Mr. Rodgers?
Mr. Rodgers. I need to confirm with our actuaries who are
involved in the rate-filing process, because I'm not.
Mr. Matheis. We are happy to work with this committee as
long as the rates remain proprietary until they do become
public and all of our competitors see them.
Mr. Griffith. All right. That's certainly fair.
Any others?
Mr. Wingle?
Mr. Wingle. I'd have to take that under advisement about
how we share rates.
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Evanko?
Mr. Evanko. I'd just say that the rates are very
competitively sensitive, for obvious reasons. So we want to
make sure that it's a level playing field at the time any rates
are disclosed.
Mr. Griffith. Have either you or anyone in your
organizations--and, again, it's for all of you all--engaged in
discussions with the administration already about the 2015
rates?
Mr. Rodgers. Not that I'm aware of.
Mr. Wingle. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Griffith. Everyone is silent. Does that mean there have
been none? Has anyone had any discussions with the
administration about rates for 2015?
Mr. Matheis. None that I'm aware of.
Mr. Griffith. OK.
Mr. Evanko. No.
Mr. Rodgers. No.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Appreciate that. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Pratt, the ACA includes a tax credit for small
businesses to purchase health insurance coverage for employees.
The law also levies a tax on health insurance purchased by
small businesses.
On the one hand, we give employers a tax credit to make
health insurance more affordable, and then we turn around with
the other hand and we tax those policies. Does that not seem as
an inherent conflict in policy to you?
Mr. Pratt. Congressman, we have expressed significant
concerns with the new tax on small businesses and individuals
that total some $100 billion that will largely be passed on to
them in the form of higher premiums.
Mr. Griffith. And what we are trying to do, of course, is
to see if we can't keep premiums down. And the ACA, Obamacare,
has failed to meet its promise of a $2,500 reduction for the
average family. That's pretty straightforward, isn't it?
Mr. Pratt. Congressman, we do believe that the health
insurance tax runs counter to the goal of providing more
affordable coverage.
Mr. Griffith. And as a part of this, we are actually taxing
government itself. We've got Federal programs, including
Medicare Advantage, Medicaid Managed Care. The Federal
Government is, in fact, taxing itself with the tax that you
spoke of earlier through its subsidization of Medicare and, in
part, Medicaid. And then State governments are also having to
pay the tax.
Do you have any idea how much that tax is on the American
people? You said $100 billion in increase, but how much for the
Federal and State governments?
Mr. Pratt. Congressman, I don't have that information
handy. But we did commission a study by Oliver Wyman that does
break out that information in more detail, including on a
State-by-State basis, and we'd be happy to make that available.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate that, if you would.
Also, in your testimony, you write that insurers have many
duplicate enrollments because of the problems with
HealthCare.gov. And I can tell you that we had that in both--I
have heard it from constituents and in our family. Apparently,
we didn't push the right button the first time around. I say
``we''; my wife did it all. Don't want to take on any
assumptions that it was us doing it; it was my wife working
over the computer for hours and hours. But actually submitted
several different applications, ended up with one.
How widespread is that problem for citizens out there? And
is that part of the confusion between whether or not people
have paid their premiums or not?
Mr. Pratt. Congressman, the challenge you referred to, I
think, was presented as a result of the problems with the Web
site and the technology. And, anecdotally, we have heard from
our members about a number of duplicate enrollments. Don't have
an order of magnitude on that other than to know that it has
been a problem and an issue.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate that.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Ms. Schakowsky for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This morning, the Democratic committee staff released a
memorandum on the amazing number of distortions and false
claims that Republicans have made about the Affordable Care
Act. It's a deplorable record. Virtually every major prediction
or claim made by the Republicans about the ACA since 2009
turned out to be wrong.
Today, we have the benefit of hearing from some of the
companies that are actually working on the Affordable Care Act
in the real world. These companies were not the biggest
supporters of the law, they still oppose many provisions, but
they do not live in the Republican echo chamber, they live in
the real world. And I hope they can provide some clarity on a
few questions.
The first question I have for all of you is whether the ACA
is a government takeover of health care.
Republicans have made that claim I don't know how many
times. By one count, the phrase appeared on Speaker Boehner's
Web site 90 different places. It's mentioned on the RNC,
Republican National Committee, Web site 200 times. Days before
the Affordable Care Act's passage in 2010, then-House-Minority-
Leader John Boehner's office wrote that, quote, ``Democrats
have opted for a government takeover of health care.''
So, Mr. Wingle, the ACA is now in effect. Has the
government nationalized Aetna, or is it still a for-profit
corporation?
Mr. Wingle. We are a publically traded, for-profit
corporation.
Ms. Schakowsky. And, Mr. Evanko, what about you? Has Cigna
been taken over by the Federal Government?
Mr. Evanko. No. We're a for-profit organization.
Ms. Schakowsky. Mr. Rodgers, Mr. Matheis, have your
companies been nationalized, or are they still nonprofits?
Mr. Rodgers. We are a not-for-profit, mutual legal reserve
company.
Mr. Matheis. And we are actually a for-profit organization.
Ms. Schakowsky. Oh, you're a for-profit. Sorry.
Mr. Pratt, you work for the trade group that represents the
private insurance industry. Is there still a private insurance
industry, or has the industry been destroyed or taken over by
the government, as Republicans predicted?
Mr. Pratt. There is still a private industry, and we
represent many of those companies.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
Republicans also questioned whether private health
insurance would even exist in 2014. In 2010, Senator Coburn
said, quote, ``There will be no insurance industry left in 3
years,'' and that, quote, ``Private health insurance will be
dead in 3 years,'' unquote. I should note that nearly 4 years
have passed since that statement was made.
Mr. Pratt, is the private health industry dead?
Mr. Pratt. Representative, no.
Ms. Schakowsky. Does anybody else on the panel believe the
private industry has disappeared, private insurance industry?
Thank you.
Republicans have also claimed that Americans will no longer
be able to see their doctors because of the ACA.
Mr. Wingle, does your company healthcare plan--do the plans
cover physician care?
Mr. Wingle. They do.
Ms. Schakowsky. And, Mr. Evanko, what about you? Does Cigna
have doctors in its healthcare plans?
Mr. Evanko. Yes, we do.
Ms. Schakowsky. Mr. Rodgers, what about HCSC? Do you
include doctors in your networks?
Mr. Rodgers. Certainly.
Ms. Schakowsky. And, Mr. Matheis, what about WellPoint?
Mr. Matheis. Yes, we cover physician services.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Republicans have claimed that nobody would sign up for
coverage. They've claimed that huge numbers have not paid for
coverage. Eight million people have signed up for coverage on
the exchanges. Millions more have coverage outside the
exchanges. And each of the insurance companies here today have
testified that people have signed up in droves and upwards of
80 or 90 percent have paid their premiums.
Mr. Chairman, I don't know if there will ever come a day
when Republicans will admit their criticisms of the ACA have
been unfounded. I think we may have reached a turning point
last week when you released your misleading report on the
Affordable Care Act enrollment. I think the American public
finally realize that Republicans have absolutely no credibility
on this issue. You cannot be this wrong this many times and
still expect to be taken seriously.
One commentator, Ezra Klein, even gave the Republican
behavior a name: Obamacare Derangement Syndrome. He defined it
as, and I quote, ``the acute inability to see Obamacare as
anything but a catastrophic failure that the American people
will soon reject. For those suffering from ODS, all bad
Obamacare news is good news and all good Obamacare news is
spin. In this world, delays of minor provisions in the law
prove that the entire structure is collapsing, while surges of
millions of people enrolling in insurance don't prove anything
at all.''
Mr. Chairman, perhaps we can ask our panel of insurers if
their policies cover Obamacare Derangement Syndrome. But,
really, that's rhetorical.
And I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. But it would be important to know if that's a
preexisting condition, and I think it's not coverable----
Ms. DeGette. It would be covered now. Good news, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. It depends what the death panel says, I think.
Mr. Olson is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair.
And welcome to our witnesses.
I wish you weren't here, but you are here. You're here
because the administration will not give us the information we
need to educate our constituents about Obamacare and the
rollout of HealthCare.gov.
I want to talk about, all of you, a question about the back
end and the money you're supposed to be getting from the
exchange and the information. In your experiences, is it
working?
Mr. Pratt, is the back end working? Are you getting what
you need from HealthCare.gov?
Mr. Pratt. Representative, throughout the open enrollment
period, we worked very closely to develop workarounds, manual
processes, and other things that were necessary to make the
system work better. It's my understanding that, while the back-
end problems have improved, some remain.
Mr. Olson. Workarounds. You guys stepped up to the plate to
work around the disaster of the healthcare exchange rollout? Is
that what you're trying to say?
I mean, you guys took it upon yourself instead of depending
on what--they've got information. You depend upon them. And is
sort of trickling down and just coming out slowly, slowly,
slowly not what you need? Is that you're saying? You guys
stepped around to make that happen?
Mr. Pratt. Representative, I think what I would say is that
we kept the interests of our members squarely in mind, in terms
of minimizing disruption for them. And our members did what was
necessary to make sure that it was as smooth as it possibly
could be.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Coyne?
Mr. Coyne. I would agree with Mr. Pratt. There are still
back-end issues to be worked through but that we are working
with CMS on those. CMS has called a meeting of health insurers
in the Federal marketplace on May 20th to consider some of
those back-end issues and try and find solutions to them.
Mr. Olson. And I hope you keep us advised of what that
meeting puts forth, give us that information. Because we are
not getting it from the Obama administration.
Mr. Wingle?
Mr. Wingle. We've worked closely to share our concerns
about technical needs and help work with the industry, through
our trade association, with colleagues to recommend
prioritization on fixes for back-end issues, whether they're
data cleanup issues or other issues related to the back end of
the exchange.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Evanko?
Mr. Evanko. There are certainly more manual processes than
we anticipated prior to the exchanges launching. I'd say there
have been improvements in some areas. The one back-end issue
that we are most focused on is the APTC payments coming from
CMS to us as a carrier. That's a manual process today. We have
been getting the payments we've been requesting, though, as it
relates to APTC.
Mr. Olson. Manual process. Twenty-first century, manual
process.
Mr. Rodgers?
Mr. Rodgers. We're continuing to work with the enrollment
process to make sure that any of the members that have selected
one of our five Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans get the
information they need from us and ultimately the care they
need.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Matheis?
Mr. Matheis. Yes. We've seen significant improvement, but
we still have a number of opportunities for improvement as we
move through the remainder of this year.
Mr. Olson. And one final question for all the panelists. Is
the Web site fixed?
Mr. Pratt?
If it's not fixed, when it will be fixed?
Mr. Pratt. Representative, I don't work in the operations
area. I think if the back-end issues are considered part of the
Web site, I would say----
Mr. Olson. They are.
Mr. Pratt. [continuing]. Yes, that there are still issues
outstanding that we're working on.
Mr. Olson. Not fixed.
Mr. Coyne?
Mr. Coyne. There are still issues on the back end.
Mr. Olson. Another one not fixed.
Mr. Wingle?
Mr. Wingle. There's still work to be done.
Mr. Olson. Not fixed.
Mr. Evanko?
Mr. Evanko. I can't comment on the end-to-end process. I
can only comment on the component when CMS sends us enrollment
transactions, and there is still work to do before that's 100
percent.
Mr. Olson. Not fixed.
Mr. Rodgers?
Mr. Rodgers. Yes. We are still working with the files that
we get, and I think there could be some improvement.
Mr. Olson. Still not fixed.
Mr. Matheis?
Mr. Matheis. Yes. I echo my colleagues' statements. We
still have opportunities for improvement.
Mr. Olson. Six for six. All not fixed.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So much of the debate we have with our Republican
colleagues about the Affordable Care Act comes down to one
simple question: Is it a good thing for Americans to have
access to quality health insurance?
You would think this is a simple question. Every Republican
member of the committee has health insurance. I bet that every
pundit who makes a living attacking the ACA has health
insurance. They all make certain their children have health
insurance. I bet they wouldn't dream of going without it for an
extended period of time.
Two big reasons these people make sure they have coverage
is that it can help them stay healthy and it can prevent
catastrophic medical bills that can lead to financial ruin.
But, this week, we got clear evidence from Massachusetts that
health insurance actually saves lives. Researchers at the
Harvard School of Public Health looked at mortality rates in
Massachusetts and in surrounding States.
My question, Mr. Pratt, is that, in 2006, Massachusetts
passed major health reform legislation; is that not correct?
Mr. Pratt. Yes, that's correct.
Mr. Tonko. And did that coverage expansion bear some
significant similarities to the Affordable Care Act, including
an individual mandate, expanded Medicaid coverage, and
insurance exchanges?
Mr. Pratt. Generally, I would say that's fair to say.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
The Harvard researchers found that, following healthcare
reform in Massachusetts, mortality rates dropped significantly
compared to surrounding States. The death rate from treatable
illnesses like cancer and heart disease declined even faster.
These findings are truly remarkable. Nearly a 5 percent
drop in mortality from preventable illnesses. They found that
for every 830 individuals who gained coverage, 1 life was
saved. Extrapolating that onto the national scene, if the trend
holds, it means that ACA will save tens of thousands of lives.
I'm not going to ask the witnesses to comment on the
specifics of that study, but these witnesses know the value
that health insurance provides.
Mr. Matheis, do you have any doubt that your health
insurance plans cover lifesaving treatments?
Mr. Matheis. No, they do, sir.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Evanko, what about you? Do you help members
access lifesaving treatments?
Mr. Evanko. Absolutely.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And, Mr. Rodgers, Mr. Wingle, what about your plans?
Mr. Wingle. As a healthcare company, we are proud of
providing consumers with high-quality plans competitively
priced. We are very proud of that.
Mr. Rodgers. Yes, sir, I agree.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you for your affirmative answers. Thank
you.
I think Republicans are really outside of the mainstream
when they try to argue that Americans aren't better off if they
have health insurance coverage. Their tireless efforts to
discourage people from getting covered are truly shameful.
Even more shameful is the refusal of Republican Governors
and some legislatures to expand the Medicaid program. Doing
that would provide millions of Americans with healthcare
coverage, and the Harvard study indicates that doing so would
save thousands of lives.
So we thank you for your affirmative answers.
I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Gardner for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for being here today and
your time.
Last year, the President apologized for his broken promise,
if you like your plan, you can keep your plan, after millions
of Americans received plan cancellations.
I'd like each insurer to reply in turn, how many plans did
you cancel or discontinue last year because of Obamacare?
Mr. Coyne?
Mr. Coyne. We don't have that information at the
association. Individual health plans have that information.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Wingle?
Mr. Wingle. We can provide that information to the
committee.
Mr. Gardner. Could you submit that for the record, and by
State, with the total for all of you?
Mr. Evanko?
Mr. Evanko. Sure. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. Do you have the number off the top of your
head right now?
Mr. Evanko. I can give you approximations and----
Mr. Gardner. Sure. That would be great.
Mr. Evanko. We had approximately 2,000 customers,
individual customers, in South Carolina and Connecticut.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Wingle?
Mr. Wingle. Again, we'd want to get you the firm data.
Mr. Gardner. OK.
Mr. Rodgers?
Mr. Rodgers. I don't have that data with me. I think we've
provided it to other congressional committees, so we'd
certainly be happy to----
Mr. Gardner. But that's not a number that you keep on the
top of your head?
Mr. Rodgers. Not at all.
Mr. Gardner. OK.
Mr. Matheis?
Mr. Matheis. I don't have the number of products off the
top of my head, but we'd be happy to find that out.
Mr. Gardner. If you could submit for the record by State
and what the total, I would appreciate it.
And then, to AHIP, does your organization know how many
plan cancellations there were nationwide last year, or for your
members?
Mr. Pratt. Congressman, we would not have that information.
Mr. Gardner. You don't ask that of your members, or they
don't provide that to you?
Mr. Pratt. To my knowledge, we do not, no.
Mr. Gardner. OK.
Mr. Coyne, does your organization know how many member
plans were canceled? You don't?
Mr. Coyne. We haven't asked for that information either.
Mr. Gardner. In order to avoid these cancellations, some
insurers offered early renewal plans so they could continue
into 2014. If each of the insurers could reply in turn, how
many plans did you offer early renewals to last year that would
have been otherwise cancelled?
Mr. Matheis?
Mr. Matheis. We offered early renewals to all of our
customers in all 14 States that was allowable. So California
did not allow us to offer early renewal, but in the majority of
every other market we offered it to every customer.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Rodgers?
Mr. Rodgers. We offered early renewals in four of our five
States. The Montana plan became part of our larger----
Mr. Gardner. And how were those offers? How many offers
were there?
Mr. Rodgers. I don't have the number with me, but they're
significant numbers, yes. And----
Mr. Gardner. Could all of you provide those for the record
and by State, breaking it down, please?
Mr. Evanko?
Mr. Evanko. Yes. We offered early renewal to about 235,000
customers in all States except for Connecticut and South
Carolina, as I t estified earlier.
Mr. Gardner. OK.
And Mr. Wingle?
Mr. Wingle. We offered early renewals as consistent with
State laws and regulations.
Mr. Gardner. OK.
Last year, President Obama apologized for these canceled
plans and offered a 1-year delay of enforcing the Obamacare
requirements that led to the cancellations. This delay has
since been extended.
I'd like each insurer to answer: How many plans do you
currently offer that do not meet the law's requirements but you
are able to continue offering because of this delay?
Mr. Matheis?
Mr. Matheis. I would have to get you that number, sir. I
don't know it off the top of my head.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Rodgers?
Mr. Rodgers. Yes, I don't know the number.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Evanko?
Mr. Evanko. I don't know the exact figure either.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Wingle?
Mr. Wingle. I don't have the hard numbers on the pre-ACA
plans.
Mr. Gardner. To AHIP, do you know how many plans your
member organizations currently offer under this delay?
Mr. Pratt. Could you please repeat that question,
Congressman?
Mr. Gardner. The question is the 1-year delay of enforcing
Obamacare requirements that led to the cancellation, this delay
has been extended. How many plans do you currently offer that
do not meet the law's requirements but you're able to continue
offering because of this delay?
Mr. Pratt. I don't have that information.
Mr. Gardner. You don't have that number.
Mr. Coyne?
Mr. Coyne. The only information we have has been informally
reported to us, and it contains all non-ACA-compliant plans
across the Blue system. And that number is 3.2 million.
Mr. Gardner. Yes.
Mr. Matheis, what happens with those plans when the time
runs out, when the delay expires?
Mr. Matheis. So, depending on how the State handles it,
with the extension, in theory a customer could sign up for 2
more years----
Mr. Gardner. What happens after that time expires?
Mr. Matheis. Then they would be----
Mr. Gardner. Canceled?
Mr. Matheis. [continuing]. Moved to an ACA product.
Mr. Gardner. So that plan would be canceled?
Mr. Matheis. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Rodgers, would that plan be canceled at
the end of the time period?
Mr. Rodgers. Mr. Matheis' characterization was correct, I
believe.
Mr. Gardner. So, yes, that's a cancellation after the time
expires.
Mr. Evanko, would those plans be canceled after the time
expired?
Mr. Evanko. Based on the current guidance, yes.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Wingle, would those plans be canceled
after the time expires?
Mr. Wingle. Where feasible, we would offer the member an
ACA-compliant alternative.
Mr. Gardner. Could you submit the total numbers for all of
those plans that would be canceled when the time expires and
break it down by State, please?
Thank you.
And one of the excuses that we've heard from the supporters
of the healthcare bill is that the law didn't do this, didn't
cause the cancellations, that you were the ones who planned the
cancellations and planned all of the cancellations.
Were the massive cancellation notices sent last year, the
ones the President apologized for, were these because of
Obamacare or because of you?
Mr. Matheis?
Mr. Matheis. The law required us to send out those
cancellations.
Mr. Gardner. So Obamacare required the cancellations.
Mr. Matheis. Yes.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Rodgers?
Mr. Rodgers. The law required us to, in certain
situations----
Mr. Gardner. So Obamacare caused and required the
cancellations.
Mr. Evanko?
Mr. Evanko. We had such a small fraction of our book of
business that was not offered early renewals. But that was----
Mr. Gardner. But Obamacare required the 2,000 cancellations
that you said?
Mr. Evanko. In the two States where we did not offer early
renewals.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Wingle, did Obamacare cause the
cancellations?
Mr. Wingle. Plans that weren't compliant with the benefit
requirements of the law were canceled.
Mr. Gardner. So that's a yes?
Mr. Wingle. That is a yes.
Mr. Gardner. In attempting to pass this law, the President
said repeatedly, if you like your plan, you can keep it. Did
that turn out to be true for all of your customers?
Mr. Matheis?
Mr. Matheis. No, that was not true for 100 percent of our
customers.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Rodgers?
Ms. DeGette. Time's over.
Mr. Rodgers. Not for 100 percent.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Evanko?
Mr. Evanko. For over 99 percent of our customers, that was
the case.
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Wingle?
Mr. Wingle. Not in all cases, no.
Mr. Gardner. OK. Appreciate your time.
And I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I now recognize Ms. Castor for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you very much. And good morning.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this hearing to
discuss the strong enrollment numbers of the Affordable Care
Act.
When the enrollment numbers were released last week, coming
from the State of Florida, we were floored. About 1 million
Floridians signed up under the Affordable Care Act. This far
exceeded our expectations. We thought 600,000, 700,000, but to
get to about a million signed up that doesn't include the about
300,000 children that signed up under children's health
insurance or our disabled neighbors or children under Medicaid.
And then I learned from our Florida Blue executives
Friday--Florida Blue is the market leader in Florida--that that
million-dollar figure does not include others that signed up
with private health insurance companies, so let's add on
another probably couple hundred thousand. It's really
remarkable, and it has far exceeded our expectations.
I just think about all of my neighbors all across the State
that are breathing easier because now they have financial
security in their lives that they did not have before.
And I want to thank all of our navigators, the insurance
brokers, many of the insurance companies that were out
providing information, all of our community outreach partners.
You have made a fundamental difference in the lives of millions
of Floridians, and it's going to be very meaningful for them
and their families.
It's also good news for neighbors that have insurance
already. Most people across America already have insurance, and
if you have insurance, what you want most of all is that you
want other people to have insurance. Because the cost of these
high premium increases and rate increases over time were
largely caused by this huge uninsured population. And those
costs, when they show up at the hospital for health care, they
have to be paid somewhere. So that's what we're hoping then.
And we've heard time and time again the scare tactics here,
and we'll see what happens with premium increases, but do we
want to go back to the double-digit consistent premium
increases of the past? I don't think so. So this is a way that,
hopefully, over time we will be able to stabilize the
marketplace.
And I think my colleague, Congressman Tonko, was right. I
think my Republican friends now are in danger of sounding like
they are opposed to people taking personal responsibility and
having health insurance. People need to have health insurance
to maintain their quality of life, to make sure they don't go
bankrupt. And I would hope that my Republican friends could now
turn the page and we could get to work on many of the
complicated issues with health policy in America.
Now, one of my Republican colleagues' favorite attacks on
healthcare reform is that it will cause people to lose their
doctors. Now, you have to say, OK, even in Florida, where you
have over a million people that now have health insurance,
they're going to be able to see a doctor, 8 million nationwide.
But this is especially bizarre coming from Republicans, because
they have long opposed any policy proposals to broaden
networks. They have fought efforts to increase reimbursement
for primary care providers who serve Medicare and Medicaid
patients.
What has been lost in this debate is the fact that the ACA
sets important new network adequacy standards that guarantee
access to key essential community providers. It ensures that no
consumer will ever see a huge out-of-network bill if they're
taken to an emergency room. And it gives consumers strong
appeal rights. It's a huge step forward in patient access.
Mr. Pratt, can you give us some context here? Providers and
insurance regularly negotiate rates and determine who will be
inside of a network; isn't that correct?
Mr. Pratt. Representative, yes, that's correct.
Ms. Castor. And if insurers had to include every provider
in their network, wouldn't that eliminate their bargaining
power and substantially increase premiums?
Mr. Pratt. Congresswoman, I think that is generally
correct. I wouldn't characterize the amount of the increase,
but it is a very important aspect of keeping premiums
affordable.
Ms. Castor. OK.
Can these high-value networks improve care coordination and
move us towards a system where we pay for quality rather than
quantity in our healthcare system?
Mr. Pratt. Absolutely. Our members are working very hard
toward that end.
Ms. Castor. See, I think this network adequacy in the
marketplace is an important issue. We need to make sure that
consumers have access to providers in their area and that they
have enough choices to get the care they need when they need
it.
Republicans should not attack the ACA for letting the
private market work. And, remember, personal responsibility is
fundamental; it's a fundamental tenet of the Affordable Care
Act. And it's oftentimes the customer's responsibility to
review all of the choices they have, whether it's bronze,
silver, gold, platinum, and the networks contained therein, and
make their own choice.
So the law sets key new standards and provides important
protections, but insurers and providers will continue to
negotiate to ensure sufficient access at fair prices.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Burgess [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson,
5 minutes for your questions, please.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Wow. So much to talk about, so little time to talk about it
all.
Gentlemen, thank you for joining us today.
You know, one of the reasons this committee has requested
this information from you is because the administration has
refused repeatedly to provide any data on who is actually
paying for the Affordable Care Act. In fact, one White House
spokesman told reporters to ask your industry for this
information.
So here's the question for you: Do you currently provide
any information to the administration on who has paid for their
plan? If yes, what information do you provide and how is it
provided and how often? Do you provide any information to the
administration?
Mr. Wingle. The only information we provide around payment
is related to the invoicing we do with the government to get
the premium tax credit.
Mr. Johnson. And how is it provided and how often?
Mr. Wingle. It's the process we described earlier. It's a
workaround process because the financial management module is
not fully constructed on the FFM, and it's done monthly.
Mr. Johnson. And who did you send it to, Mr. Wingle?
Mr. Wingle. Send it to CMS.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Well, it's a little confusing. So the administration will
pay your industry a subsidy for potential customers who never
even effectuate their enrollment. So if you're not providing
the details to the administration on who's paying for the
Affordable Care Act, how are they paying you? What are they
basing their payments to you on?
Mr. Wingle. I'd only make one clarification. We do not
submit information for payment from the government for members
who are not effectuated, who haven't made their own portion of
the binder payment. We do not do that.
Mr. Johnson. Well, let me dig a little deeper then. So how
do you get paid? How do you get paid, and what is that based
on? What information do you provide the government, the
administration, that gets you paid?
Mr. Wingle. The process essentially works because we have
the enrollment file information. We understand the premium for
the plan selected by the consumer on that enrollment file.
Mr. Johnson. So you're paid based on enrollment, not on
actual payment?
Mr. Wingle. We understand the member's responsibility on
that enrollment, and the difference between the premium rate
and the member responsibility tells us what the government is.
And we roll that figure up monthly.
Mr. Johnson. So if you only submit for effectuated--I can't
even pronounce that word--doesn't the administration know the
pay rate? Don't they know how much these people are paying?
Mr. Matheis. Yes, sir, they've determined the subsidy
eligibility as part of the enrollment process.
And so a file would come to us; we'd bill for the member
responsibility. Upon collection of that member responsibility,
then we would typically, if the system were working as
designed, we would send a file to the government, to the
exchange, saying, here are the members that have effectuated
enrollment and here's ultimately the payment that is back due
to us.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
So do you believe the administration is currently able to
report the payment rate or who is fully enrolled? Do you think
they have that information, based on what you give them?
Mr. Matheis. So, to date, the payments that are coming back
and forth are estimated. So there's not been a direct
reconciliation between our company and the exchange on a
member-by-member basis. That's one of the works in progress
that we discussed on the back-end discussion we had earlier in
the day, sir.
Mr. Johnson. Considering, then, that the administration is
able to report who selects a plan on HealthCare.gov, would it
would be possible for them to gather information on who has
actually paid for a plan?
Let's start down with Mr. Pratt.
Mr. Pratt. Representative, it's my understanding that that
capability is not present yet. I'm not sure----
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Coyne?
Mr. Pratt. [continuing]. Whether it may be in the future.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Coyne. Yes, it's my understanding, as well, that that
capability isn't ready yet.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Wingle?
Mr. Wingle. I don't know what the administration can infer
from the data they have, but I know the financial management
module itself is not available.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Evanko?
Mr. Evanko. One bit of color I'll add to my colleagues is
the submission for APTC is only for those that are APTC-
eligible. So there's also people that do not qualify for that
that should be in that calculation.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Rodgers?
Mr. Rodgers. Yes, I think my colleagues are correct in
their statements, and we're still working on the reconciliation
process for payment.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Matheis?
Mr. Matheis. I would concur with the other statements.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Final question: Does the administration know who's paid for
their plan?
Mr. Pratt?
Mr. Pratt. Congressman, I don't know the answer to that
question.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Coyne?
Mr. Coyne. I don't know either.
Mr. Wingle. I don't know what the administration knows
about the enrollment in terms of who's paid.
Mr. Evanko. I don't know either.
Mr. Rodgers. No, sir.
Mr. Matheis. No, sir.
Mr. Johnson. It's interesting that they sent us to ask you
folks.
OK. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Yarmuth, 5 minutes for your questions, please.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I'm really glad we had this hearing. That's something I
usually don't say very often, but this has been a very
illuminating hearing, because I think what it's done, very
clearly, is to show what our colleagues on the other side's
strategy is, which is to try and hold a hearing in which they
can grab a headline that will in some way scare the American
people about the Affordable Care Act rather than providing true
information about what's going on.
And it's clear from the desperation, once their initial
strategy of trying to deal with this alleged failure to pay
premiums, now they've moved on to try and scare people about
what premiums might increase by later, either next year or in
the future.
So, and I'm glad you all stressed how important it was that
you not give up your competitive position, because obviously
you're all competing in the markets.
And I could turn that strategy around and do the same thing
and ask you speculative questions like, will the premium
increases that we are likely to see approach the 38 percent
that we were seeing in 2010 before the Affordable Care Act was
passed, and ask you to speculate on that, but I won't do that.
And I could ask you about what the rate of cancellations of
policies were prior to the Affordable Care Act.
And I could also ask you--and I think this would be a fair
question; I wouldn't expect you to answer--how many of your
insurance companies, because of the success of the Affordable
Care Act enrollment so far and the beneficial mix of younger
people, has prompted you to explore doing business in other
States, as has been reported in the media. And I think that
would be a question that I would love to have the answer to.
I know, for instance, in Kentucky, the co-op, the nonprofit
Kentucky co-op, which is competing in the exchange, is now
getting ready to do business in West Virginia, because they
don't have a co-op and they see an opportunity there. And I
think the Maine co-op is planning to do business in--or, I'm
sorry, the Massachusetts co-op in Maine, because they see an
opportunity there.
So I think all these things are indications that the
Affordable Care Act, far from being the train wreck which many
have suggested it would become, is actually getting a great
deal of traction as it speeds down the tracks.
And just to put it in perspective, in Kentucky, we have
insured in the period of 6 months roughly half of the
previously uninsured population of the State. We have--411,000
people now have coverage in Kentucky under the ACA. Three-
quarters of those--in answer to one of the questions that was
asked earlier, three-quarters of those we know previously had
no insurance. And 52 percent of all that 411,000 people are
under 35.
So we know things are working in Kentucky. And, as Ms.
Castor mentioned, things are surprisingly successful in
Florida, despite an administration there which has done
everything it could to sabotage the Affordable Care Act.
So, we can speculate about and argue about the level of
success, whether it's a success or a train wreck, but the
markets certainly have had something to say about how they view
the Affordable Care Act in terms of your businesses. I look at
those share prices of the companies represented here and one
based in my own State. Humana is based in my district. When the
Affordable Care Act was enacted, their stock price was 44; now
it's 110. Aetna's was 33; now it's 72. UnitedHealthcare was 27;
now it's 75. And Cigna's was 34, and now it's 83, roughly.
So the market has made a judgment, I think, about the fact
that, at least in terms of your business, the Affordable Care
Act has offered a significant financial benefit.
So I think, again, one of the things that's fascinating
about this hearing is we know what the Republicans have tried
to do, and that's to scare the American people and to use every
little indication of a problem to reflect some kind of a
doomsday scenario that we are looking at.
And, fortunately, the facts on the ground, whether it's the
marketplace, whether it's the experience in Kentucky or Florida
or California, where literally millions of people, by one
estimate, 20.8 million people, got coverage under the ACA or
bought coverage because of the ACA in the private markets
outside the exchanges, we are doing--it's doing exactly what we
intended it to do.
We know there have been glitches, we know there have been
problems. Any undertaking of this magnitude would experience
those. But, again, I thank you for your participation, and I
thank you for this hearing.
And I yield back.
Mr. Burgess. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from New Mexico is recognized for 5 minutes,
Mr. Lujan, for your questions, please.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Matheis, your company's CEO said last week that the
surge in enrollment in March included a higher percentage of
young people than in earlier months. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Matheis. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Lujan. And, Mr. Evanko, your CEO said something similar
last week, as well. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Evanko. That's correct.
Mr. Lujan. And, as a general matter, all else being equal,
a higher percentage of young people in the risk pool will help
lower premiums. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Evanko?
Mr. Evanko. That's a complicated question. It's an
important one, but it's a complicated question.
Mr. Lujan. I think that all that we've heard and from all
the actuaries is that the answer is, yes, we need more young
people in. It lowers premiums.
Mr. Pratt, insurance company premiums are market-sensitive
information that companies are not eager to let their
competitors know until the last minute. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Pratt. Representative, it is competitively sensitive
information. I don't know that I could speak to their
particular perspective on that question.
Mr. Lujan. Well, it seems like they'd want to keep it to
themselves as long as they're able to so that competitors
aren't able to get their hands on it and adjust accordingly. Is
that correct? Is that fair?
Mr. Pratt. It's fair to say it's competitively sensitive
information.
Mr. Lujan. And is it correct that many insurance
commissioners around the country have the authority to review
rates and that the final rates consumers pay are sometimes
lower than the rates that are actually filed?
Mr. Pratt. Yes, Representative. Typically speaking, rates
are filed with the States, and the States review those rates.
Mr. Lujan. Very good. I used to sit on a regulatory body
that the superintendent of insurance was under our
jurisdiction, so I appreciate the answer to that. Because I
know what we saw when I was there, as well, sir, so I'd
certainly agree that.
Is it also true that the ACA contains a series of
policies--reinsurance, risk adjustment, and risk corridors--to
help mitigate potential premium increases?
Mr. Pratt. Congressman, one goal of the 3Rs program, the
so-called 3Rs program, is to stabilize premiums in the early
years of implementation.
Mr. Lujan. And a final question to the panel is: Before the
ACA, wasn't it common for insurance premiums to increase
significantly year to year, often by double digits?
Anyone?
Is there anyone that would disagree that premiums increased
by more than 50 percent between 2003 and 2010?
Hearing none, I guess the answer to that is that there's
agreement.
The 8 million figure only includes people who have signed
up for insurance directly through the Federal and State
marketplaces that my colleagues are trying to dismiss, but
people can also sign up for private ACA-compliant plans outside
of the marketplaces. We don't have a lot of conversation about
that.
Mr. Pratt, are individuals able to enroll in some of the
plans that AHIP represents outside of the Federal and State
marketplaces?
Mr. Pratt. That's correct.
Mr. Lujan. The CBO estimates that 5 million people will
purchase ACA-compliant plans outside of the marketplace this
year. These individuals will obtain the same protections and be
a part of the same risk pools in each State as those who
enrolled via the marketplaces.
Mr. Rodgers, how many of HSCS's enrollments have been
outside of the marketplace?
Mr. Rodgers. As I said in my opening testimony and was
provided in written form to the committee, I believe we had
about 230,000 off-exchange applications during the open
enrollment period ending April 15.
Mr. Lujan. And about how many applicants have you received
overall?
Mr. Rodgers. We've received, overall, about 830,000
applications across our five States.
Mr. Lujan. So that sounds like it's representing about 1.2
million culvert lives. So about 28 percent of your enrollees
signed up outside of the marketplaces; that's a significant
number. And I understand that payment data is not complete but
in the earlier months of this year, what percentage of
individuals enrolling in plans outside of the marketplace have
paid?
Mr. Rodgers. In my written comments to the committee, I
shared with you the on-exchange and off-exchange payment rates
because there is some difference. Typically, the payment
completion rates are a little bit higher off exchange versus on
exchange, and you should have that data.
Mr. Lujan. So from what I was able to get from your
testimony was that between January and April, 90 to 93 percent;
and in May, 63 percent today, and we can verify that in there.
Does that sound accurate, though?
Mr. Rodgers. That's correct. That's in my written comments.
Mr. Lujan. Can any of our other witnesses provide us with
information on how many off-exchange enrollments they have had
to date? If not--Mr. Evanko.
Mr. Evanko. We have approximately 40,000 off-exchange ACA
enrollments. That's about one-third of our total ACA compliant
book.
Mr. Lujan. And what I'd like to do is ask our witnesses if
they'd be willing to provide the committee with detailed
information on their off-exchange enrollments. Would that be OK
with everyone?
Mr. Rodgers. Yes.
Mr. Lujan. Very good. I appreciate that.
You know, later on today we're going to having some other
hearings in other areas, despite the demonization and
demagoguing of the Affordable Care Act, over 8 million
enrollees, can you imagine what it would have been if Democrats
and Republicans would have worked together to fix issues that
needed fixing but we were able to get more people covered? Who
knows where that number would have been.
But later on today, we're going to be having a hearing on
taking away someone's Fifth Amendment rights. We have my
colleagues that are still refusing to release 39 interview
transcripts at an IRS hearing. There are going to be other
hearings. Another request on a hearing with Benghazi, even
though there's been seven other hearings, 50 repeal attempts on
the Affordable Care Act.
I think there's a lot of important pressing business that
we as the Congress need to get our hands around. And I am
certainly hopeful that in the history and tradition of this
committee, with all that I've learned from our senior members,
there once upon a time was an effort for us to work together
and get along, and I certainly hope that those days return.
Every time I'm home, that's what we hear.
So all the witnesses that are here today, thank you so
much; chairman, again, for you being here, as well, and the
hearing being brought together today, an important conversation
I hope that we're able to bring more facts into the debate.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Burgess [presiding]. Gentleman's time is expired.
The chair recognizes Ranking Member DeGette for follow-up.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to follow up on
Mr. Lujan's questioning with the off-exchange enrollments,
because as we've learned, there have been a number of off-
exchange enrollments in addition to the enrollments in the ACA,
both in the Federal exchange and the State exchanges.
So I would ask unanimous consent; the committee has made a
request of 160 plans, including plans from this panel here,
that they provide information about enrollment figures and
premium payments for those plans that are under the Affordable
Care Act exchanges. I would ask also if we would ask those same
plans for that same information on the off-exchange
enrollments.
Similar to the data that we got from Blue Cross and Blue
Shield, it would be helpful to know how many off-exchange
enrollments we have had from these 160 plans and what the
premium payments have been, so I'd ask unanimous consent that
we also ask for that information.
Mr. Burgess. Without objection. The gentlelady yields back.
I recognize myself for follow-up. And I would just say on
the off enrollment, I'm one of those members. I actually had
both Blue Cross and Blue Shield and HealthCare.Gov on hold, or
they had me on hold on December 23 and December 24, and it was
kind of a race to see who would have a live person answer the
phone first. And I think, if I recall correctly, Blue Cross
went off that day, so I was probably an off-exchange
enrollment, so you may count me as that.
I would just like to ask each of you in follow-up, many of
the products you're offering are only affordable because the
government subsidizes part of the premium cost. Do you know
what percentage of the plans with paid premiums and effectuated
enrollment received some form of subsidy from the taxpayer? Mr.
Coyne, I'll start with you and we'll just go down the line.
Mr. Coyne. We don't have that information at this point.
Mr. Burgess. Would you provide it for the record?
Mr. Coyne. Yes, we'd be happy to when we get it.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Wingle.
Mr. Wingle. Our experience probably comports with
generally-available published information on that. It's a
majority of our membership.
Mr. Burgess. And again, can I ask you to submit that for
the record?
Mr. Evanko.
Mr. Evanko. For our on-exchange customers, 80 to 85 percent
are eligible to APTC.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Rodgers.
Mr. Rodgers. Yes, I believe we submitted that information,
if I understood your question, in the two submissions for
April; and with the May 20 submission, we'll provide something
similar.
Mr. Wingle. As did we.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Matheis.
Mr. Matheis. Yes. As you know, that number is a moving
target, but it is around 79 percent for us.
Mr. Burgess. And would you do your best to give us an
accurate representation for the record.
What about a situation where an individual enrolls but then
cancels their plan? Are you only to pay the subsidy monthly or
would you be responsible for returning a portion of the subsidy
throughout the year? Mr. Coyne, let's start with you.
Mr. Coyne. We don't have that information.
Mr. Burgess. And will you submit that for the record?
Mr. Coyne. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. Will you try to find that for us?
Mr. Wingle.
Mr. Wingle. Could you repeat the question, please, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Burgess. A situation where an individual enrolls but
then cancels their plan. Are you only paid the subsidy monthly,
or would you be responsible for returning the portion
throughout the year?
Mr. Wingle. Returning the portion of premium paid or----
Mr. Burgess. The advanced premium tax credit.
Mr. Wingle. The subsidy. The subsidy, under the 3-month
grace period rules, we retain until cancellation.
Mr. Burgess. So you would not be required to return that?
Mr. Wingle. No, not until a member has canceled.
Mr. Burgess. If the member just simply doesn't pay, they
make their first payment, maybe their second payment and then
they stop. At the end of that 3-month grace period, do you have
to return the money for those months where the patient didn't
pay?
Mr. Wingle. In compliance with the 3-month grace period
rules, we retain any premium tax credit received during the
period to help us cover any claims experience we had during the
time the member was enrolled.
Mr. Burgess. So you retain the advanced premium tax?
Mr. Wingle. According with the design of the rules, yes.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Evanko.
Mr. Evanko. Well, at the end of the 90-day grace period, if
the individual has not paid any more premiums, then we owe that
money back to CMS and we credit that in the next month's
reconciliation process.
Mr. Burgess. Interesting.
Mr. Rodgers.
Mr. Rodgers. I'm not familiar with that particular aspect
of the grace-period payments in terms of the return or not, but
I believe that we're only entitled to the money that's for the
time the policy is in effect.
Mr. Burgess. And Mr. Matheis.
Mr. Matheis. That's my understanding, as well, sir.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Coyne, do you know how much your company
has been paid in advance premium tax credits?
Mr. Coyne. Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association does not
actually sponsor any of the products that are on the exchanges;
our member plans do. So we wouldn't be paid premiums or APTC.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Evanko.
Mr. Evanko. We received four payments so far for the months
of January through April, and it's in the range of $30- to $40
million.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Wingle.
Mr. Wingle. We obviously have that data, we can supply the
committee with that data.
Mr. Burgess. And I do need for you to submit that for the
record.
Mr. Rodgers.
Mr. Rodgers. We've received some payments. I don't know the
value of the payments to date.
Mr. Burgess. And will you find that information and submit
for the record, please.
Mr. Rodgers. Certainly.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Matheis.
Mr. Matheis. Yes. I don't have that number ready today, but
we'd be happy to get it for you.
Mr. Burgess. The metal plans, you're all familiar with
them. I keep hearing about a copper plan that's going to be
offered. Are you any of you familiar with that? Are you going
to be offering copper plans, Mr. Coyne?
Mr. Coyne. I'm not familiar with that at this point.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Wingle.
Mr. Wingle. Under the current rules for central health
benefits and the rules for qualified health plans, we're not
currently authorized to offer anything at the so-called copper
level. Our plan benefits start at bronze unless somebody
qualifies for catastrophic care, and that's of the lowest
actuarial value we're allowed to offer presently.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Evanko.
Mr. Evanko. In the event that copper plans were introduced
as something that's allowed, we would certainly consider it.
Cigna believes in choice as one of our core principles for our
customers.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
Mr. Rodgers.
Mr. Rodgers. Currently we're not approved to offer the
copper plans. That's certainly something that we believe, that
members need more cost-effective programs. I expect that we
would offer those.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Matheis.
Mr. Matheis. My comments would be similar to my colleagues,
sir.
Mr. Burgess. Let me just ask each of you, what is your
payment rate for products in the large-group market? Starting
with you, Mr. Coyne, what are your payments for products of
large-group market?
Mr. Coyne. Individual group plans have that information
rather than the association.
Mr. Burgess. I see.
Mr. Wingle.
Mr. Wingle. I carry no responsibility for large group. I'd
have to get back to you on that.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Evanko.
Mr. Evanko. I am not familiar with the large-group payment
rates either. I'm sorry.
Mr. Burgess. Your company, though, is, I mean, you're in
the large-group market.
Mr. Evanko. We are, sir, yes.
Mr. Burgess. Will you get that information for us?
Mr. Evanko. Sure.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you.
Mr. Rodgers.
Mr. Rodgers. I don't have that information with me.
Mr. Burgess. But you will provide it for the committee?
Mr. Rodgers. Certainly.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Matheis.
Mr. Matheis. I'm not sure I understand the question. Could
you clarify it for me, please.
Mr. Burgess. Well, the question was, what are your payment
rates for products in the large-group market?
Mr. Matheis. So is that what our average premium is or?
Mr. Burgess. How many people pay?
Mr. Matheis. Sorry, sir, I'm still not following the
question.
Mr. Burgess. Well, what we've generally been talking about
today is how many people, what percentage of people have paid.
So following along that----
Mr. Matheis. I'm sorry. I was a little slow in the uptake
there. Typically, we would experience somewhere around a 98- to
97-percent premium payment in the large-group market.
Mr. Burgess. Very well. Thank you all for your attendance
today. I ask unanimous consent that members' written opening
statements be introduced into the record. Without objection,
the documents will be entered into the record.
In conclusion, I'd like to thank all the witnesses and the
members who participated in today's hearing. I'd like to thank
everyone who stuck with us in until the end, and that would be
the witnesses. I remind members they have 10 business days to
submit questions for the record, and I ask the witnesses to all
agree to respond promptly to the questions. The committee now
is stands in adjournment.
[Whereupon, at 12:28 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Marsha Blackburn

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing
so that we might have some clarity about the Obamacare
Enrollment numbers.

The rollout of HealthCare.gov was abysmal. In
addition, the administration has unilaterally issued numerous
delays. I believe that we are not finished with very unpleasant
surprises with this law. The American people deserve answers to
many questions and we intend to get those answers.

In March of this year, Secretary Sebelius told us
that she could not tell us how many people who had enrolled in
plans had actually paid their first month premiums. She was
asked if she had asked for that information from insurers, she
admitted that she had not.

The former director of the Center for Consumer
Information and Insurance Oversight at CMS, Gary Cohen also
said that he did not know.

I don't know, but I think when you have a name
like ``oversight'' you should have an idea about what is going
on.

Since the Administration was unable, or unwilling
to provide the information to Congress, we requested this
information from the insurers that the administration lists at
participants in the Federally Facilitated Exchanges.

As we continue to work to I am looking forward to
hearing from each of the witnesses today as we continue to
shine a very bright light on Obamacare.
----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
