- H.R. 2012, A BILL TO IMPROVE THE INTEGRITY AND SAFETY OF INTERSTATE HORSERACING, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 2012, A BILL TO IMPROVE THE INTEGRITY
AND SAFETY OF INTERSTATE HORSERACING,
AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 21, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-102

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

______________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
93-259                  WASHINGTON : 2015

______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  GENE GREEN, Texas
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                      JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            Islands
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PAUL TONKO, New York
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

7_____

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

LEE TERRY, Nebraska
Chairman
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JIM MATHESON, Utah
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Islands
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)        officio)

(ii)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Lee Terry, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Nebraska, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Leonard Lance, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New Jersey, opening statement...............................    11
Hon. John P. Sarbanes, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Maryland, opening statement...........................    11
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................    12
Hon. Gus M. Bilirakis, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida, opening statement............................    12
Hon. Donna M. Christensen, a Representative in Congress from the
Virgin Islands, opening statement..............................    13
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, prepared statement..............................    15
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, prepared statement..........................   126

Witnesses

Jesse M. Overton, Chairman, SkyLearn, Inc., and Former Chairman,
Minnesota Racing Commission....................................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Answers to submitted questions...............................   128
Philip Hanrahan, Chief Executive Officer, National Horsemen's
Benevolent and Protective Association..........................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Additional material for the record \1\
Answers to submitted questions...............................   134
Lawrence R. Soma, Professor Emeritus of Anesthesia and Clinical
Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary
Medicine.......................................................    34
Prepared statement...........................................    36
Additional material for the record \2\
Answers to submitted questions...............................   149
Travis T. Tygart, Chief Executive Officer, U.S. Anti-Doping
Agency.........................................................    47
Prepared statement...........................................    49
Answers to submitted questions...............................   158
Sheila Lyons, Founder and Director, American College of
Veterinary Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation..................    56
Prepared statement...........................................    58
Additional material for the record \3\
Answers to submitted questions...............................   170

----------
\1\ Additional material from Mr. Hanrahan is available at http://
cradmin.clerk.house.gov/repository/IF/IF17/20131121/101517/HHRG-113-
IF17-Wstate-HanrahanP-20131121-U2.pdf and http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF17/20131121/101517/HHRG-113-IF17-Wstate-HanrahanP-
20131121-U4.pdf.
\2\ Additional material from Mr. Soma is available at http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20131121/101517/HHRG-113-IF17-Wstate-
SomaL-20131121-SD001.pdf and http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/
20131121/101517/HHRG-113-IF17-Wstate-SomaL-20131121-SD002.pdf.
\3\ Additional material from Ms. Lyons is available at http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20131121/101517/HHRG-113-IF17-Wstate-
LyonsS-20131121-SD005.pdf.
Wayne Pacelle, President and Chief Executive Officer, Humane
Society of the United States...................................    97
Prepared statement...........................................    99
Answers to submitted questions...............................   211

Submitted Material

H.R. 2012, the Horseracing Integrity and Safety Act of 2013,
submitted by Mr. Terry.........................................     4
Letter, undated, from Water Hay Oats Alliance to Mr. Terry and
Ms. Schakowsky, submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................   112
Statement of Nancy Perry, Senior Vice President, Government
Relations, American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, dated November 20, 2013, submitted by Mr. Pitts.......   113
Article of November 14, 2013, ``Texas Compounder Draws Industry
Scrutiny,'' by Frank Angst, BloodHorse.com, submitted by Mr.
Terry..........................................................   117
Letter of November 20, 2013, from Alexandra M. Waldrop, President
and Chief Executive Officer, National Thoroughbred Racing
Association, to Mr. Terry and Ms. Schakowsky, submitted by Mr.
Terry..........................................................   122

H.R. 2012, A BILL TO IMPROVE THE INTEGRITY AND SAFETY OF INTERSTATE
HORSERACING, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

----------

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Lee Terry
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Terry, Lance, Blackburn,
Harper, Guthrie, Bilirakis, Johnson, Sarbanes, McNerney,
Yarmuth, Barrow, Christensen, and Waxman (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Pitts.
Staff present: Kirby Howard, Legislative Clerk; Nick
Magallanes, Policy Coordinator, Commerce, Manufacturing, and
Trade; Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and
Trade; Andrew Powaleny, Deputy Press Secretary; Heidi Stirrup,
Policy Coordinator, Health; Shannon Taylor, Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Michelle Ash, Democratic Chief
Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; and Will Wallace,
Democratic Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Terry. We are going to start our hearing. Some of you
have testified before or been around our testimony, so you have
a pretty good handle on how it works. I will have an opening
statement, and Mr. Sarbanes will have. We will have statements
that should go about 10 minutes per side. And then we are going
to go right into your testimony. And we will go for Mr. Overton
to my right. So let us start the clock.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LEE TERRY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEBRASKA

Good morning, and thank you all for joining us on our
second in a series of horse related hearings. And as I
mentioned last week, I have very fond memories of working at
the racetrack in Omaha, Nebraska. And even when I was finished
working there, I just couldn't get away from it. There is just
such a romance with those thoroughbreds. I just loved sitting
there, standing on the rail of the stretch. And as they come
around that corner and you can just feel the ground shaking
from their power, and just majestic animals. So I have a real
love for our racehorse industry and those horses.
And so that is why we are here today, is to talk about the
future of thoroughbred horseracing and how the horses have been
treated, and some of the allegations that have been made
through what I would say community-based organizations, but
also legitimate news organizations. So the perception is that
the doping or drug use for the horses has become pervasive. In
fact, in a pool done by a jockey club that has been quoted many
times by my colleagues, and this is the major handicappers and
bettors, will actually take into account the witch barns,
trainers, have a reputation for using masking drugs and
eliminate them from their handicapping, and maybe even some
tracks that have a reputation versus other tracks for how tough
they are in enforcing the no-drugs policy.
Now, these types of unsavory practices bring two major
concerns to the forefront. Number one is the safety of the
jockeys. And there has been one study that showed that 24
horses a week have some incident on the track while they are
racing. While the animal itself we should care for, the most
important is the human being on top of that. It is a dangerous
sport. We know when a horse is racing, and it should not be due
to injury that both the animal and the human being are exposed
to those dangers. And I am deeply concerned about the
implications to the fairness of the horseracing and the
pervasive, or perceived pervasive, use of PEDs may have.
In 1978 when Congress passed the Interstate Horseracing
Act, one of the issues Congress sought to address was a
responsible atmosphere for off-track betting so that people
could place wagers on horses with a degree of certainty that
this was a regulated affair. To put it bluntly, if PEDs are
being used, that is cheating. And you are cheating the bettors
to the point where the big handicappers won't bet on races
where they think horses may have been doped. So it is not
acceptable, and I compliment Joe Pitts and Jan Schakowsky for
this legislation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Terry follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Lee Terry

Good morning, and thank you for joining us for what will be
the second hearing on horse-related issues in the past two
weeks.
As I mentioned in my remarks last week, I have a great
affinity for horses. Growing up, and then as a student, I
worked part-time at the local Aksarben Race track. And for
reference, Aksarben is Nebraska spelled backwards. But it was
there I got to see firsthand how the world of horseracing
works--both on the front and back end of the track.
Unfortunately, I was not surprised when I read last year an
article exposing the drugging of racehorses on race day.
It has become so pervasive that a recent poll by the Jockey
Club found that four in five handicappers and/or bettors take
into account race-day drugs and other performance-enhancing
drugs when betting on races.
These types of unsavory practices bring two major concerns
to the forefront: the safety of the horse and jockey; and the
issue of fairness.
We know that when a horse is racing and should not be due
to injury, both the animal and the human being that is riding
it are exposed to a higher degree of risk. I believe this is
unacceptable.
I am also deeply concerned about the implications to
fairness that the pervasive use of PEDs may have.
In 1978, when Congress passed the Interstate Horseracing
Act, one of the issues Congress sought to address was a
responsible atmosphere for off-track betting, so that people
could place wagers on horseraces with a degree of certainty
that this was a regulated affair. Today, you can go to a
racetrack and place a bet on a horse that you happen to know
may have an advantage over another horse. Which then puts you
at an advantage over another bettor. This is not acceptable.
The Pitts-Schakowsy legislation would designate the U.S.
Anti-Doping Agency as the anti-doping organization with the
responsibility for testing and ensuring the integrity and
safety of races where off-track betting is permitted.
The legislation would also create a stricter regulatory
framework for certain substances and impose an outright ban on
others.
I would like to thank our witnesses for attending today's
hearing and thank my friend Chairman Joe Pitts for joining us
today to discuss his legislation.

[H.R. 2012 follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. And at this time, I have a minute 16 there to
yield to somebody. Mr. Lance?

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LEONARD LANCE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and good
morning to our distinguished panel and everyone in the
audience. The thoroughbred industry has had a significant
cultural and economic impact here in the United States. The
industry supports over one million permanent jobs and has an
estimated economic impact of over $100 billion. Beyond that,
the thoroughbred industry is a part of American culture.
Millions attend and watch events such as the Kentucky Derby and
the Preakness Stakes each year, and thousands attend local
races in their home communities. And New Jersey races at the
Meadowlands and at Monmouth Park generate significant local
interests and economic impact.
However, in recent years, the thoroughbred industry has
been plagued by the usage of performance-enhancing drugs. This
practice not only de-legitimizes the sport but also endangers
both the horses that participate in these contests and the
jockeys who are at risk of serious paralysis or death should a
horse suffer an injury.
Doping in the thoroughbred industry is a concern for every
industry stakeholder from the small time better who has had to
take into account who is doping, what handicapping choices, to
the owners who want to preserve the credibility of their
industry.
I look forward to examining this legislation and hearing
testimony from our diverse and distinguished panel. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman. And now the acting
ranking member, Mr. Sarbanes, you are recognized for your 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN P. SARBANES, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MARYLAND

Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I won't take the
full 5 minutes. I appreciate you convening this hearing so we
can examine this important topic and the proposed legislation
to address this issue of the use of performance-enhancing drugs
in the horseracing industry.
As has been mentioned by the other members so far, this is
a very important industry to the country, generating almost
150,000 jobs. It is a $10.6 billion industry nationally.
Horseracing is important in my State. My district is right
across the street--the boundary of it--right across the street
from the Pimlico race track where the Preakness is held. I
mention that only because everybody who goes to the race parks
in the neighborhood of my constituents.
Mr. Terry. Do you get to charge 5 bucks to park in front of
your house?
Mr. Sarbanes. They charge--yes, they charge more than that,
actually, for people to park on their front lawns.
In addition, the Third District in Maryland is home to one
of the largest memberships of the humane society in the
country, so I am very focused as well on the welfare of the
horses. So this is an important topic of discussion. You do
these things--to examine these things, you make sure that a
sport like this is clean because it is in the long-term
interest of the industry in maintaining the vibrancy of the
industry in the eyes of the public and those who participate.
So it is an important hearing.
I know we are trying to move quickly to the witnesses. I am
prepared to yield time to any other members here if they would
take it. Otherwise, I would be prepared to yield back.
Mr. Terry. Thank you. Mr. Pitts, you are recognized for 2
\1/2\ minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the recognition,
for the privilege to join the important hearing today on H.R.
2012. I would like to augment my statement today by showing a
short video clip, which sets the tone for why the Congress must
act to protect jockeys, horses, and the public from the scourge
of drugs in horseracing. Try to get sound.
[Video.]
Mr. Pitts. You can see on the TV screen a display of one
horse, Coronado Heights, a 4-year-old thoroughbred that
received a diagnosis of early degenerative joint disease but
was raced anyway, broke down, was euthanized on the track. And
I have--at your seat, you can see what was administered to him
1 week before he broke down, 17 syringes. So despite promises
and assurances--statements--groups have been unable to come
together to develop uniform rules. The fact remains that there
is no single entity which has the authority to impose uniform
rules on racing commissions, tracks, trainers and others. So I
urge members to consider H.R. 2012, a sound national framework
to protect horses, riders and the public. We look forward to
hearing the witnesses. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Terry. Gentleman from Florida, do you wish to make a
statement?

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GUS M. BILIRAKIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Thank you very much for holding this very important hearing.
First, I want to echo those views that no one wants to see
animals mistreated or harmed in any way. No horse should be
intentionally neglected, mistreated or subjected to unnecessary
trauma. Additionally, those that participate in interstate
parimutuel activities should be assured that they are
participating on a fair and transparent level that protects the
integrity of the sport.
I do, however, wish to closely examine the most appropriate
manners in which to ensure this. As a general guiding
principle, all manners of compliance assistance and incentives
with States and industries should be exhausted before further
empowering agencies. This committee should applaud the growing
efforts to adopt uniform national reforms on the State level.
Tampa Bay Downs, one of the country's oldest racetracks and the
only thoroughbred racetrack on the west coast of Florida, is
located in my congressional district, and it also supports this
approach. And it is one of the more than 50 racetracks across
the country to endorse these reforms.
Additionally, the Florida Division of Parimutuel Wagering
is hosting a workshop tomorrow to receive public input on its
rules regarding drugs and veterinarian procedures and
enforcement.
Thank you again, Mr. Terry, and I look forward to hearing
from the very--
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Mr. Terry. We have 1 minute. Does the vice chair of the
full committee wish an opening statement?
Mrs. Blackburn. I would just simply welcome all of our
witnesses. We are delighted that you are here. And yield back
my time.
Mr. Terry. Thank you. And that concludes all of the opening
statements. Donna, do you have----
Mrs. Christensen. If I could----
Mr. Terry. Yes.
Mrs. Christensen. This will take----
Mr. Terry. You are----

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE VIRGIN ISLANDS

Mrs. Christensen. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Ranking Member. I grew up in horseracing. My father had race
horses. It is still one of my favorite sports. But I grew up in
a time when these kinds of issues with drugging horses didn't
happen. And I am just glad that we are having this hearing
today. And I thank the witnesses and welcome them.
Mr. Terry. Thank you very much. Now, that concludes our
opening statements. A fun fact before we introduce our guests,
our witnesses, that chariot racing was the first Olympic sport
in 1680 B.C. Horseracing has been around a long time, and we
want to keep it that way.
The witnesses? Henry, do you want to make a statement?
OK. I want to introduce all of our witnesses. As I
mentioned, we will start with Mr. Overton, who is Chairman of
SkyLearn, LLC, and former chairman of the Minnesota Racing
Commission; Phil Hanrahan, Executive Officer, National
Horsemen's Benevolent and Protective Association; Dr. Lawrence
Soma, VMD, Professor Emeritus of Anesthesia and Clinical
Pharmacology at University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary
Medicine. Good thing it wasn't Penn State. We play them
Saturday. I would have had to grill you much more. Travis
Tygart, CEO, U.S. Anti-Doping Agency; Dr. Sheila Lyons, DVM,
founder and director of American College of Veterinary Sports
Medicine and Rehabilitation; and Wayne Pacelle, Chief Executive
Officer and President Humane Society of the United States.
Thank you all for taking your time to share your wisdom with us
today.
Mr. Overton, you will have 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Terry?
Mr. Terry. Yes?
Mr. Waxman. Before he starts, I just want to welcome all
the witnesses. I do have a statement I want to put in the
record in support of the effort to stop the inhumane practices
relating----
Mr. Terry. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. So each of you will have 5 minutes. There is a
little sign up here you can glance up to. The 1-minute mark
will be a yellow slash, and that means start wrapping it up.
Five minutes-ish, I will start tapping the gavel to let you
know to wrap it up.
Mr. Overton, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF JESSE M. OVERTON, CHAIRMAN, SKYLEARN, INC, AND
FORMER CHAIRMAN, MINNESOTA RACING COMMISSION; PHILIP HANRAHAN,
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NATIONAL HORSEMEN'S BENEVOLENT AND
PROTECTIVE ASSOCIATION; LAWRENCE R. SOMA, PROFESSOR EMERITUS OF
ANESTHESIA AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA SCHOOL OF VETERINARY MEDICINE; TRAVIS T. TYGART,
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, U.S. ANTI--DOPING AGENCY; SHEILA
LYONS, FOUNDER AND DIRECTOR, AMERICAN COLLEGE OF VETERINARY
SPORTS MEDICINE AND REHABILITATION; AND WAYNE PACELLE,
PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, HUMANE SOCIETY OF THE
UNITED STATES

STATEMENT OF JESSE M. OVERTON

Mr. Overton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Mr. Sarbanes, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for this opportunity to share my thoughts and experiences
regarding the painful truth about drugging of race horses, the
current challenges with medication rules and the need for H.R.
2012 to reform drug use in U.S. racing.
I was appointed by Governor Tim Pawlenty to a 5 \1/2\-year
term on the Minnesota Racing Commission, with the last 2 \1/2\
years of my service during the tenure of Governor Mark Dayton.
While I no longer serve in an official capacity, my experiences
serving on the racing commission makes me a strong supporter of
H.R. 2012.
Minnesota, like every racing jurisdiction in North America,
is faced with multiple challenges, not least of which is the
establishment and enforcement of uniform regulations in racing.
Specifically, it was my role as a racing commissioner to work
toward a reduction in the number of medication violations
through better testing and serious enforcement protocols.
During my tenure, the commission established stricter
medication rules and employed a modern drug testing lab.
Trainers, in honest, frequently race their horses in multiple
States. So keeping up with various drug requirements and
withdrawal times is a daunting task. And with winning as an
overarching goal, some trainers race in States with more
lenient medication rules. In fact, Minnesota's stricter
medication and enforcement rules resulted in some horsemen
electing not to return to Minnesota when we improved our
medication testing.
It is my strong belief that if integrity is not the
fundamental un-depending of horseracing as both a sport and a
gaming operation, it is destined to failure. Horseracing
involves the Government, gaming operators, racetrack owners and
horsemen. Racehorse owners and veterinarians are supporting
players. In my experience, some of the industry's groups
challenge the integrity of the sport. They will say there are
few or no problems either with the use of drugs or with the
enforcement against those who do not comply with the
regulation. This is simply not true. There is an inherent
problem with the model consisting of 38 separate regulatory
entities and many industry interest groups, all believing that
they are in charge. The fact is there is little coordination
among racing commissions, industry groups at the State and
interstate level. And with so many cooks in the kitchen, there
is confusion, conflict and chaos in medication regulations.
This is a perfect environment for those who can't keep up
with the rules or those who chose to improperly or illegally
medicate horses to take advantage of the disorganization. As a
racing commissioner, I will stand by the length some trainers
will go to win races. As you will hear from other witnesses,
there is no drug or compound that has not been tried in horses,
from EPO, antibiotical steroids, to frog juice and cobra venom.
And I promise, there are chemists right now working up new,
illegal, undetectable substances to give a trainer who wants a
performance advantage, especially if he or she does not have
the fastest horse.
Unless drug testing is conducted uniformly and in state-of-
the-art laboratories, unscrupulous horsemen will continue to
cheat the system for horses and the fans. I have attended many
meetings of racing consortia and regulatory to find a common
regulatory paradigm within which all racing jurisdictions must
comply. But as long as there are 38 separate jurisdictions,
this goal is impossible to obtain despite decades of sincere
people's best efforts.
While multiple States have adopted racing compacts to align
medication requirements, the fact is the enforcement of these
compacts will vary from State to State as no single entity has
authority to enforce in more than one State. The approach is
varied. The outcome is the same. Unlike other professional
sports like football, baseball, there is a central authority.
No consistency in lab capabilities, no uniform penalties, no
dedicated funding to increase lab testing, nor conduct research
to catch the next magic potion illegally administered to
horses. H.R. 2012 and a new authority will provide, through the
U.S. Anti-Doping Agency, USADA, would establish a single drug
testing body by virtue of a strong and consistent enforcement
regulation. Through the enactment of H.R. 2012, all racing
commissions would work in cooperation with USADA to strengthen
and clean the competition policies and provide uniform
medication testing.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Overton follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Overton. Now, Mr. Hanrahan, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PHILIP HANRAHAN

Mr. Hanrahan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am the CEO of the
National Horsemen's Benevolent and Protective Association. The
NHBPA is the largest organization in the United States
representing owners and trainers in thoroughbred horseracing.
We have approximately 29,000 members in the United States and
Canada.
Let me start by stating unequivocally the NHBPA's position
on medication. Owners and trainers who cheat by administering
drugs that have no legitimate use in horses in attempt to
influence the outcome of race should, after due process, be
kicked out of horseracing. The use of dermorphin is doping
plain and simple, so too is blood doping, gene doping and other
narcotics.
However, let me quickly add, data compiled by State racing
authorities shows conclusively that doping of thoroughbred
horses in the United States is extremely rare. In the United
States, two horses are tested every race. During the 4-year
period from 2009 through 2012, there were more than 360,000
post-race tests of blood and urine. Only 142 tests--I say
again, 142 tests--were positive for doping substances. More
than 99.9 percent of all tests showed no doping substances were
present. The NHBPA, however, draws a clear distinction between
illegal doping and lawful therapeutic medication administered
by licensed veterinarians.
The HBPA supports the continued use of Lasix and other
therapeutic medications because they are necessary for the
health and welfare of horses and reduce the risk of injury to
jockeys.
Now, turning to H.R. 2012, the NHBPA opposes its enactment
because it attempts to address a problem that does not exist,
and purports to do so by employing USADA which has neither the
experience in horseracing nor the resources to regulate
medication in the horseracing industry. Medication rules and
machinery for their enforcement already exists in every racing
State.
News reports claim rampant use of illegal drugs that State
regulators are ignoring. A look at the State regulatory data
shows such claims are not true. Data for the most recent 4-year
period shows more than 99.9 percent of the hundreds of
thousands of post-race tests were negative for doping.
Likewise, more than 99.2 percent of tests were negative for
therapeutic medication remaining in a horse on race day.
Despite this objective evidence demonstrating there is no
widespread misuse in medication in thoroughbred racing, some
industry voices have called for a ban on all medication. Those
who do so labor under the erroneous belief that race day
medication is routinely permitted and that it causes injuries
to horses. That is not true. The only race day medication
allowed in the U.S., with minor exception, is Lasix.
Unfortunately, Lasix, which H.R. 2012 bans, has become the
poster child for those arguing in favor of a ban on all
medication and has obscured scientific and medical facts about
Lasix, including the following.
Running hard causes nearly all horses to bleed in their
lungs and can cause instant death on the racetrack. One of my
co-panelists, Dr. Larry Soma, published research documenting
the racetrack deaths of horses due to bleeding in the lungs.
Lasix prevents and lessens bleeding, and is the only medication
that does so. Lasix is not performance enhancing. It does not
make a horse run faster than its God-given natural talent.
A landmark 2009 study in South Africa of 167 thoroughbred
horses and racetrack conditions conclusively proved the
effectiveness of Lasix in preventing and lessening the severity
of bleeding. It is wrong to claim without any empirical
evidence that fatalities are caused by permissive drug use.
Last year's New York report on racehorse health and safety
noted breakdowns at aqueduct occurred for a multitude of
reasons having little to do with medication.
While the NHBPA opposes H.R. 2012, we do recognize the
utility of uniform medication rules. Medication use, post-race
testing thresholds and penalties often vary from State to
State. For that reason, the NHBPA is continuing to work with
the Association of Racing Commissioners International on
drafting uniform model rules. Nine States in the mid-Atlantic
have taken the lead in approved uniform medication rules.
Eleven others are currently considering adopting those rules.
We have high regard for USADA's efforts in policing illegal
drug use in human sports competition. But the organization has
no experience in equine veterinary science or the horse
industry.
In short, H.R. 2012 is not needed. The job is already being
done. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hanrahan follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Additional material from Mr. Hanrahan is available at
http://cradmin.clerk.house.gov/repository/IF/IF17/20131121/
101517/HHRG-113-IF17-Wstate-HanrahanP-20131121-U2.pdf and
http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20131121/101517/HHRG-
113-IF17-Wstate-HanrahanP-20131121-U4.pdf.]
Mr. Terry. Thank you. Now, Dr. Soma, you are recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LAWRENCE R. SOMA

Mr. Soma. Good morning. I would like to review the progress
that has been made in improving equine drug testing and some
changes in the curtailment of use of certain drugs.
Prior to 208, only 5 of the 18 U.S. racing laboratories
were accredited through international standards, which are
referred to as ISO-17025. As of June 13, 10 of the 16
laboratories are accredited. The laboratories that are
accredited to these standards meet technical and quality
management requirements. The standards require that laboratory
to implement a quality assurance system aimed at demonstrating
the ability to consistently produce valid test results starting
from proper handling of incoming samples to reproducibility and
accuracy of analytical results.
This is not a one-shot deal. Laboratories have to be
reaccredited, and the onsite assessment of a laboratory is
mandatory every 2 years. So an inspector comes in--goes through
the laboratory and assesses their quality assurance
capabilities.
The committee appointed by the Racing Medication and
Testing Consortium was charged with developing a second
accreditation program for the equine industry. This committee,
which I was a member, developed a laboratory accreditation
requirements and operating standards. The requirements for this
level of accreditation are extensive and are guided by the
requirements outlined by the U.S. Doping Agency laboratories.
The committee basically started with this handbook and
developed guidelines which can be used in the industry. The
laboratory must participate in an external quality assurance
program which requires analysis of proficiency samples. The
laboratory must successfully identify and confirm and quantify
the drug in blood and urine. The laboratory knows that the
samples are coming but do not know what drug is in the blood or
urine sample. The above requirements are important aspects of
the program that determines if the laboratory has the
capability, personnel and instrumentation required to detect
substance of concern at the concentrations that are mandated by
the industry.
The stated goal of this program is to ensure that all
laboratories are operating at the same standard. The first type
of accreditation indicates how well the laboratory is
functioning, their data management. The second state tells you
how the performance of that is, can you find certain drugs, and
can they be confirmed in a reasonable timeframe?
National guidelines have also been published for the
withdrawal time for 24 commonly used therapeutic drugs. This
allows for the treatment of horses during training, if they are
properly used. For example, progress has been made on the drug
control front. Anabolic steroids have been banned from use in
North America, and the injections of drugs into the equine
joint has been regulated. As a result of these regulations,
injection of drugs into the joint really cannot be done before
7 days--the horse has to be medicated for 7 days before they
allow the horse to run.
There is still a number of drugs which are problematic. One
of the problems is certainly that Lasix is still allowed in the
United States and Canada. Number two, there are many drugs out
there which are difficult to find, and there is very, very
little research in trying to attempt to find these drugs.
Fortunately, the State of Pennsylvania does provide research
funds through our laboratory to look at peptides, EPO type of
drugs, and drugs which are very, very difficult to find on the
current establishment lab. Even if you have a very good
laboratory that can find hundreds of drugs in one screening,
there are still drugs out there which we have not developed a
method for. And these are protein based drugs. These are small
peptides, like the morphine is a small peptides. These are
drugs that are difficult to find. And I am sure there are many
more coming along which the laboratories really need resources
to improve their research capabilities.
But many laboratories have improved. Some laboratories have
left because they could not meet these requirements. So as far
as testing is concerned, I think there has been a great change
over the last 5 years in improving this aspect of racing. Rules
and regulation throughout the States is still a problem. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Soma follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Additional material from Mr. Soma is available at http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20131121/101517/HHRG-113-IF17-
Wstate-SomaL-20131121-SD001.pdf and http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/IF/IF17/20131121/101517/HHRG-113-IF17-Wstate-SomaL-
20131121-SD002.pdf.]
Mr. Terry. Thank you. And, Mr. Tygart, you are recognized.
And as I understand, you just flew back from South Africa. So
if you are talking a little slower because of your jetlag, we
will understand.

STATEMENT OF TRAVIS T. TYGART

Mr. Tygart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
committee. Good morning. My name is Travis Tygart, and I am the
CEO at the United States Anti-Doping Agency. It is an honor for
me to be here representing the USADA Board and the tens of
millions of clean athletes that we serve. It is also an honor
for USADA, a 501(c)(3) not-for-profit corporation based in
Colorado, to play a role as an independent organization to
assist the sport of horseracing to ensure level playing field,
enhance the consumer confidence in the gaming industry and to
sustain a culture of health for athletes, and hopefully allow
for the overall economic growth for the entire horse industry
as we have seen in the Olympic movement.
True sport has been on the idea of honesty, respect,
fairness and an equal opportunity for success under the rule of
law, the very same principles that build the foundation of
every free and democratic society. We firmly believe, as do our
athletes, that the greatest injustice in sport is when one
competitor robs another of their hard work, dedication and
victory because they gained an unfair advantage contrary to the
rules.
Accordingly, we welcome and appreciate this committee's
focus on the harms that are caused by performance-enhancing
drug use in sport. The issue of drugs in sport and corruption
in sport strikes at the very heart of what role sport will play
in America's future.
Bottom line, if we turn a blind eye to fraudulent conduct,
contrary to the rules of competition in track and field,
cycling, football, even horseracing, essentially saying as long
as we win and don't get caught, it is OK, then we send a very
powerful message that it is acceptable, justifiable, even noble
to win by any means necessary, including dangerous performance-
enhancing drugs, fraud or whatever, as long as you win and you
don't get caught.
And make no mistake, the win at all costs culture is alive
and well and will flourish in every sport, including
horseracing, if we do not take decisive action to stop the
thieves from running wild, and instead truly give hope to those
who compete to win under the rules.
USADA's perspective on the current anti-doping climate in
horseracing comes from living the history of the fight against
doping that has occurred within the international Olympic
movement over the past 13 years. In the late 1990s, there was a
myriad of different anti-doping rules and regulations across
the globe in each jurisdiction in sport. There was no uniform
or harmonized policy for what was considered a violation, what
was tested for, how collections and chain of custodies
procedures applied, what laboratory standards applied. There
were varying sanction links. Ultimately, this system of self-
regulation by the various States and sports created an
unattainable position for sport, for athletes. And it seriously
disrupted the economic viability of the Olympic Games. Suffice
it to say, the Olympic rings were badly tarnished. And that was
bad for business.
In 1999, athletes, governments, sporting world said enough
is enough and came together to solve the problem. This game
changing moment ultimately led to the creation of the World
Anti-Doping Agency, or WADA. And after an open, transparent
consultation process, eventually led to the passage of the WADA
Code and the international standards. Today, the code and the
standards are the uniform policies that apply equally to all
athletes, coaches and trainers across the globe. They are the
substantive anti-doping rules that we all agreed to and we are
bound by. Today, there are approximately 520 sport
organizations and 172 governments from around the world that
have accepted and agreed to abide by the WADA Code. There is no
good reason why this same effort cannot be done for the
horseracing industry in the United States. And the current
legislation allows for it.
The first step to curing the problem was passing the
uniform policy. The second equally important measure was to
ensure the uniform and full implementation of the policy. USADA
was open in late 2000 as the organization that handles this
responsibility. It was extremely courageous for the United
States Olympic Committee, the 45 or so national federations
like USA Basketball, USA Swimming, to fully externalize their
efforts to USADA. But they took the stand because it was clear,
the sports themselves could not simultaneously promote and
police themselves.
In addition to true independence and transparency, the WADA
code provides a guide to what this legislation would allow to
be addressed effectively in the horseracing industry. Effective
testing, including standardized selection, collection, chain of
custody and transport rules and practices, a full list of
substances and methods that would capture new designer drugs as
you just heard from Dr. Soma. Implementation of best legal
practices and policies, which must include adequate sanctions
to deter doping, and due process protections for those accused
of violations. The implementation of best scientific standards
for laboratory uniformity and practices, including a robust
accreditation and proficiency testing program, as well as
scientific research for the detection of new substances.
Investigative units and partnerships with Government,
particularly law enforcement, to ensure those who illegally
manufacture, traffic and distribute these dangerous drugs who
might be outside of sports jurisdiction are also held
accountable.
In conclusion, I would like to thank this committee for its
time, its interest on this important, ethical and public health
issue, and for inviting me here today to share USADA's
experiences. We look forward to assisting you in any way
possible going forward as you consider this legislation and
hopefully restore the faith in this wonderful sport. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tygart follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you. And thank you for your extraordinary
efforts to be here today. Dr. Lyons, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHEILA LYONS

Ms. Lyons. Thank you, Chairman Terry, Ranking Member
Sarbanes and members of the subcommittee for allowing me to
testify today. My name is Sheila Lyons, and I am a veterinarian
who specializes in equine sports medicine and physical medicine
and rehabilitation. My private veterinarian consulting practice
is both national and international in scope, which provides me
with an overview of the horseracing industry and the veterinary
profession that includes many distinct jurisdictions. I am the
founder of the American College of Veterinary Sports Medicine
and Rehabilitation, a member of the International Society of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, and a member of the
International Federation of Sports Medicine. I provide
education to veterinary students, veterinarians, physical
therapists, farriers and horsemen across the country and
internationally. My patients have included some of the world's
finest thoroughbred racehorses. But I have regularly provided
veterinary services to horses at every level of the sport for
nearly 30 years.
First, do no harm. This well-known creed describes the most
important and fundamental principle of medical ethics. It is
also the principle that is being violated every day by
racetrack veterinarians across this country.
First, get this horse to the races has become the
substitute creed for too many racetrack veterinarians. The
pervasive and unethical use of injury masking and performance-
enhancing drugs in horseracing in the United States has created
a national health and safety crisis in the industry, and is
destroying the reputation of a once vibrant sport. This pattern
of drug abuse is deemed legal and some might say encouraged
under our current horseracing regulatory system. The
Horseracing Integrity and Safety Act of 2013 holds the power to
reverse this injustice through its mandate of drug free racing,
its designation of a national and fully independent expert
regulatory authority, its requirement that appropriate
penalties be enforced without bias, and this legislation's
clear and unambiguous message to the horseracing industry,
veterinary community and the public that cheaters will not
prosper and drugs may only be administered under the strict
ethical and professional guidelines known as the veterinarian/
client patient relationship. The veterinarian's role will once
again be based upon the principles of veterinary medical
ethics.
The veterinarian/client patient relationship seems a simple
term but holds powerful meaning. This legislation's repeated
incorporation of this term in this bill is key to enacting
essential reform in the standard of veterinary care that all
racehorses receive, without regard to their monetary value or
level of racing.
Not unlike the standards governing human medicine, the
standards of veterinary practice, which all licenses are
conditioned upon, include a fundamental basis for all services
called the veterinarian/client patient relationship. This
requires that a veterinarian have adequate knowledge of the
patient before administering or prescribing drugs for the
animal. Such adequate knowledge requires the veterinarian to
take a full patient history, conduct an examination, make a
diagnosis, develop a therapeutic plan, prescribe medications
strictly for the purpose of restoring or protecting health, and
reexamine that patient to determine the success or failure of
the treatments. The veterinarian must also keep comprehensive
records documenting these professional services. In other
words, this legislation requires that there be a therapeutic
purpose behind the administration of any drug and prohibits the
use of drugs for purposes of promoting competition or profit.
Racehorse is not a diagnosis. And a veterinarian must meet
a higher standard of care and practice before administering
medication.
This legislation provides the essential key to returning
the absolute authority over the regulation of the practice of
veterinary medicine squarely back with each State veterinary
board by banning all drugs during racing while reinforcing the
vet board's mandate of the veterinarian/client patient
relationship. In doing so, the current illusion that racing
commissioners have that racing commissioners have any say
whatsoever regarding which drugs a veterinarian may administer
to a patient will be removed, along with any confusion about
which regulatory authority is in charge.
The State veterinary boards will reemerge as the effective
and sole authorities and regulators over the practice of
veterinary medicine in each State. This legislation not only
provides a dream solution to the ethical and safety problems
plaguing the United States horseracing industry, but its
implementation is absolutely essential if the industry is to
survive and regain its position as an international leader in
the sport.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lyons follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Additional material from Ms. Lyons is available at http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF17/20131121/101517/HHRG-113-IF17-
Wstate-LyonsS-20131121-SD005.pdf.]
Mr. Terry. Thank you. Mr. Pacelle, you are now recognized
for your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WAYNE PACELLE

Mr. Pacelle. Thank you, Chairman Terry. Thank you very much
for addressing this issue. I am glad to be on this esteemed
panel. I am representing the Humane Society of the United
States, and we are an enthusiastic supporter of this
legislation.
You know, I think what we are talking about here is
appreciation for this sport, appreciation for entertainment,
but balancing it with the interest and the needs of the
athletes involved; in this case, both animal and human.
Today's New York Times--if I can just direct you to, for a
moment, a story about boxing. Reconciling a sport's violent
appeal as a fighter lies in a coma. So one fighter is in a
coma, and we have got a front-page New York Time's story about
it, very appropriately so. Attempts to limit the serious injury
and death of fighters should be an important concern of our
society.
Last week, Nicholas Mevoli, participating in deep-
unassisted diving, died. He was trying to break the world
record. If you remember, he went to 236 feet under the water
without any breathing assistance. And he died. Now, there is a
robust debate about what some of the rules should be about
that.
Football, we have had an incredible discussion in society
over the last 3 or 4 years about traumatic brain injuries as a
consequence of professional football injuries and contacts. As
the son of a football coach, I pay very close attention to that
issue. These football players aren't dying on the field, they
are dying some years later as a consequence of this
degenerative brain disorder.
We heard from the official with the anti-doping association
about the scandals in cycling, Olympic track and field and
baseball. These issues have been headlines in our Nation.
In horseracing, we have two problems. We have catastrophic
injuries for these horses on the track, and we have widespread
doping of the equine athletes. I want to say very clearly, the
Humane Society of the United States does not oppose
horseracing. We never have. We have been paying attention to
the industry for decades. All of us are here because I think we
want to see a balance between success for the industry and
proper treatment of the animals and concern for the human
participants, the jockeys, in this enterprise.
But what we have seen over decades is an absence of
adequate self-regulation, and we are presented with the
question, should we do more? Should the Congress do more on
this issue? And I want to say that if we are outraged about--or
deeply saddened by the deaths of these human athletes in other
sports, we should also be outraged and saddened by the deaths
of 24 horses every week on American racetracks. Every week. Not
once in a while. Every week. We have had drug scandal after
drug scandal. You saw Dr. Rick Arthur on the video that was
played during Congressman Pitts' statement. He said ``It is
hard to justify how many horses we go through.'' In humans, you
never see someone snap their legs off during running in the
Olympics. But you see it in horseracing.
The failure for this industry to adopt comprehensive,
consistent national standards is a serious problem that has
been in the works, decade after decade. This Congress has an
opportunity now with the massing of evidence to do something
constructive that is not going to be against the industry's
interest. It is going to be in the interest of the industry.
Any sport that is taking shortcuts, that is allowing routine
doping, and that sees this level of injury and death in the
animal athletes has a major public relations problem. The sport
is in decline in the United States. Other horseracing
jurisdictions around the world are in their ascendancy. And
they are running horses on hay, oats and water. And when an
animal is injured or ill, you address it with a palliative and
allow the animal to rest and to heal, not to get on the track
and to be running at 40 miles an hour, or 45 miles an hour,
often on unforgiving surfaces, often before they are old enough
to sustain these injuries and this beating of the--of their
hooves on the track.
I have got a lot of incidents in my testimony, but I want
to just wrap up, Chairman Terry, by saying just a couple of
quick things. This Congress has addressed issues like animal
fighting at the Federal level. You have done so in spite of the
fact that the States have prohibitions on dog fighting and
cockfighting because there are circumstances and cases where we
need Federal intervention, the nature of the animal fighting
enterprise is national or international. You also just
conducted a hearing on the soring of Tennessee walking horses.
A Federal law was adopted 40 years ago because of the
intentional injuring of horses by physical and chemical means
to enhance performance of these horses. This Congress has
jurisdiction on this issue. This is a multibillion-dollar
industry. Horses move nationally. Hundreds of millions of
dollars wagered on these athletes. The name of this bill,
Congressman Pitts' bill, is the Horseracing Integrity and
Safety Act. That is what needs to be restored. Thank you very
much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pacelle follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you. And that--now, we will proceed to the
question and answers where we get to ask questions, and you get
to answer them. We also have an issue with any minute, the
buzzer is going to go off for votes. So we will see how far we
can get with our questions. So, Mr. Overton, my question is for
you. Follow-up on what Mr. Pacelle just said. There are 38
separate regulatory entities. I am a Tenth Amendment guy. I
like to have States have their powers and their rights. So if
we can have 50 States with regulatory powers, what is the
failure of 38--is there a failure of these 38 racing
commissions, and should there be a Federal law?
Mr. Overton. And----
Mr. Terry. Yes, the microphone?
Mr. Overton. Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee,
definitely there is a problem in all 38, if not all 50,
jurisdictions. It is not intent. It is by design. There is no
enforceability between States of having regulations that are
uniform. We do need uniform. And I would just like to point out
that doing it with USADA, we are not talking about a Government
takeover of their independent group. And they have demonstrated
that they would have the enforceability. And one of the issues
with that enforceability today, we have seen serious violations
of trainers throughout the years. The way they would handle
it----
Mr. Terry. When was the last time there was a trainer
suspended or kicked out of the business because of a violation?
Mr. Overton. That is----
Mr. Terry. Do you know?
Mr. Overton. There have been quite a few. There are some
that have stays right now in the court system.
Mr. Terry. OK. The other question is, do the racing
jurisdictions share information so that they have information
on one trainer or barn that is shared with another as they go
to the next racetrack?
Mr. Overton. Only if there is an investigation.
Mr. Terry. OK.
Mr. Overton. We do share with RCI any rulings that come
out.
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
Mr. Overton. Thank you.
Mr. Terry. Mr. Tygart, since you are here, let us ask
questions. You mentioned in the world, anti-doping code has
been revised a number of times to keep up with the drugs and
the appropriate testing for them. So how has the code been
modified over time, and are there new drugs and tricks of the
trade that need to be addressed, both in your jurisdiction and
as you would think for the horseracing industry? Because one of
the issues here--and I have an article here from--buried
somewhere in my paperwork here--about a compounding entity that
specializes in changing the drug just enough that it can't be
detected. So how do you keep up with those things?
Mr. Tygart. Thanks for your question, Mr. Chairman. The
code itself, which is the umbrella uniform policy has been
changed now three times. The third version was just approved
down in South Africa where I came from you mentioned earlier.
The list of prohibited substance and methods is published every
year. There is a democratic process, an expert group that
provides information on what substances meet the criteria,
whether it is performance enhancing or not, whether it is
against--you know, violates the health and safety of athletes,
and whether it violates the spirit of sport and any of those--

Mr. Terry. And is that wholly applicable to the horseracing
industry?
Mr. Tygart. It very well could be. I mean, I think part of
the process that this legislation would allow for would be that
consultation process to come up with exactly what that criteria
would be, and then have a democratic process every year that
would then publish in advance. So our list is published every
October, going into effect that following year. Listen, I think
cheaters who want to win and there is a big prize at the end to
win, will go to great lengths to ensure that they are not
caught by the testing system, even the best testing systems
that may be in place. But what you have got here are, you know,
labs where 2 of the 16 don't meet even the industry's--I am
sorry, 2 of the 16 are the only ones that meet the industry's
standards for uniformity. So the----
Mr. Terry. Two out of sixteen.
Mr. Tygart. Two out of sixteen, 12.5 percent. So you have
got 87 percent that don't meet the RMTC's own ISO accreditation
and laboratory operating procedures.
Mr. Terry. Well, let me stop you there, because I only have
30 some seconds. Mr. Hanrahan, you mentioned that there is only
a small percentage that fail. But if it is true that they are
not even testing for the right things, is that a reliable
number for us?
Mr. Hanrahan. Eighty-one----
Mr. Terry. Percent of failures?
Mr. Hanrahan. Mr. Chairman, they are testing for known
substances. And I would point out on the issue for example of
dermorphin, which was an unknown substance, that--there was
some human intelligence. There was some suspicions, and samples
were sent to the lab and the lab developed the test to identify
dermorphin. So the labs do work ahead to try and identify
substances.
Mr. Terry. All right. Thank you. Mr. McNerney, as Acting
Ranking Member, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I would like to ask the Chair to recognize
Mr. Yarmuth from the great State of Kentucky, home of the
Derby.
Mr. Terry. Absolutely. With the unanimous consent, so
ordered.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to my
colleague for yielding. As Mr. McNerney said, I represent the
Kentucky Derby and Churchill Downs. And certainly thoroughbred
breeding and horseracing is a signature industry of Kentucky.
So I also represent owners, trainers, jockeys, grooms and of
course a lot of track workers and of course a lot of horses as
well. They don't get to vote, usually. I applaud all of you for
your concern about protecting the health and safety of the
horses and the riders, and also the integrity of the sport. I
appreciate that very much, and I share all of your concerns.
I do have a couple of specific concerns about this
particular legislation. And, Mr. Tygart, I want to start with
you. It has already been established that your background, it
is not in horseracing. Your organization is not in horseracing.
So I am a little bit concerned about the accountability that
USADA might have if empowered under this legislation. To whom
is USADA accountable now?
Mr. Tygart. Well, we currently have Federal appropriation.
So we can, you know, obviously be called up and testifying
about any issues. Our legal process goes through a panel of
independent arbitrators. So, ultimately, any decisions on a
case, whether someone committed a doping violation or not,
athlete or other person, trainer, et cetera, would ultimately
go to independent arbitrators. Obviously, that would be a
written decision publicly available. And, of course, you know,
we are not immune from media scrutiny at any return.
Mr. Yarmuth. Right. And obviously, I am not questioning
your capabilities or integrity. I am just trying to establish
this. Because a lot of times in many cases in the commercial
world, we have empowered independent agencies to set rules and
regulations, and they are totally unaccountable. And that is a
problem. So under this legislation as you understand it, if you
were given this authority, if there were questions about
regulations you handed down, what would be the process through
which--whether it was owners, vets, tracks, whoever would
appeal those, or somebody else to review the regulation?
Mr. Tygart. Yes. What we would envision is not unlike the
process I described in my testimony with the World Anti-Doping
Agency where you have got some input at the governance level of
people that are free of conflict of interest similar to the way
our board is set up today. I think we would be open to having
whether it is a wholly un-sub or additional board members added
that have the type of experience that you heard in some of the
testimony on that. They would obviously have to be free of any
conflicts to ensure the independence. That is how we currently
are operating. I think whether the legislation adds a piece of
oversight or whether the agreements that the legislation calls
for between us and the major stakeholders of the industry. And
those agreements certainly though could be spelled out. Some
accountabilities to ensure proper financial management, proper
governance, those types of things. Again, not on a case-by-case
basis. You don't make policy on, let us say, a single high-
profile case--during the middle of that case. You would want
the process that has been agreed to prior to that particular
case coming up to resolve itself. And then if there is any
effort to revise--amend like we did with the WADA code, then
you have that process built in.
Mr. Yarmuth. All right. Thank you. One of the provisions of
the bill is that there is a ban on any medication on race day.
And I know Mr. Hanrahan, you have made the case that there may
be a justification, particularly with regard to Lasix to
administer on race day. Could you kind of in the minute and 14
seconds we have left talk about that and why that may be
problematic to put in the legislation? It may be
counterproductive?
Mr. Hanrahan. As I alluded to, Lasix is in fact the only
race day medication that is allowed, with a couple of minor
exceptions for adjuncts. As the RCI's model rule exists now,
and as I am sure you are aware, Kentucky is one of the States
that follows that model rule that allows Lasix, but is only
administered by State veterinarian or regular veterinarians. It
is not issued or administered by a private veterinarian. The
dosage is limited. The time that it is given is limited. So it
has been a very effective model rule. And that is just
symptomatic of how the model rule process works in terms of
developing an industry consensus, whether it is on Lasix,
whether it is banning steroids, et cetera.
Mr. Yarmuth. And in 10 seconds, has that been successful in
terms of facilitating--not necessarily enhancing performance on
the horses, but protecting the horse on race day?
Mr. Hanrahan. I would say yes, sir. It has been very
perfective in Kentucky and those States that have it. There was
a little roughness getting it in place. But it has been very
effective. And Lasix is a very effective drug in preventing
bleeding in horses, and that protects the horse and in turn
protects the jockeys.
Mr. Yarmuth. Great. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Terry. Thank you. And now, there is about 5 minutes
left with how many people not voting yet?
Voice. Three hundred.
Mr. Terry. Three hundred and seventy-five. So we have
probably got another 5 minutes. So, gentlelady from Tennessee,
the vice chairman, is recognized.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will do my
best to not take all of my time and yield back so that others
may get in----
Mr. Terry. Why don't you yield it to Joe?
Mrs. Blackburn. And to the queue. OK. If we are not
finished, I will yield it to Joe. I think we can all agree, we
are all interested in the welfare of the animals. We are
interested in the integrity of the sports, whether it is
horseracing or walking horses or the steeple chase that we
enjoy in Tennessee, or when I was a kid and in 4H Club, the
quarter horses in the barrel racing and all of that that my
brother did. It is an important part of life for those of us
who have grown up on farms or who live on farms or have that in
our district. And so, Mr. Pacelle, I want to come to you for
just a moment and ask you a little bit about your formal
relationships, in relation primarily to the hearing we had last
week. And I would just like to know, do you all have a formal
relationship with one of our witnesses last week, Mr. Irby?
Mr. Pacelle. A formal relationship? No, we do not.
Mrs. Blackburn. Have you ever provided compensation to him
to be in here in DC, or provided expenses or travel for him to
come into DC to provide testimony or to lobby us on the bill?
Mr. Pacelle. No, not to my knowledge.
Mrs. Blackburn. Not to your knowledge. Could you confirm
that and put it in writing and submit it to us?
Mr. Pacelle. Sure. I would be happy to call your office and
tell you. Sure.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. I would like it in writing. And same
with Ms. Benefield, to know what her formal relationship is
with you all.
Mr. Pacelle. Sure.
Mrs. Blackburn. That would be wonderful. I appreciate that.
And, Mr. Pitts, I yield the balance of my time to you.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Mr. Terry. Joe, can I interrupt real quick?
Mr. Pitts. Yes, sir.
Mr. Terry. We will also give you a couple minutes. And
everyone else has said they are going to submit their questions
for the record. So at the time Joe finishes his question, we
will dismiss.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For Mr. Hanrahan and
Dr. Lyons, in my opening statement, I referred to a horse named
Coronado Heights who happened to have been trained by the
Nation's leading trainer by money, Todd Pletcher, and received
17 injections 1 week before he broke down. Mr. Hanrahan and Dr.
Lyons, how is that putting the horse first? Please explain what
could possibly be the benefit. Is this what is necessary to get
a horse to the races, and how could this be justified
especially at the top of the sport, Mr. Hanrahan?
Mr. Hanrahan. Yes, sir. I am not a veterinarian, but I
would suggest to you that veterinarians look at those horses.
Depending on the medical condition of that horse, whether the
horse had a cold, whether the horse had some lameness issue, et
cetera, would determine how that horse was treated. I would
also like to point out I believe that horse was 1 of the horses
included in the aqueduct report for the Aqueduct Commission
that was convened in light of a number of breakdowns. And with
your permission, I would like to quote something out of that
report. And this is from the executive summary of that report.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Lyons--
Mr. Hanrahan. And it says on page 4, pre-race medication
administered to the fatally injured horses was similar to that
administered to the uninjured horses that raced. And one other
thing is that on----
Mr. Pitts. I only have 2 minutes left. You can submit that
for the record? Dr. Lyons, would you comment? How is this
putting the horse first? Explain the benefit, et cetera.
Ms. Lyons. Thank you, Congressman Pitts, for the question.
It is not putting the horse first. It is putting the interest
of getting that horse over to the races over and above the
horse's safety, its well-being. And I looked at that horse's
records. And I am a veterinarian. And I can tell you that there
was nothing therapeutic about the approach or the drugs that
were used in that horse. In my opinion, that horse broke down
as a direct result of the injury-masking drugs that were
stacked for weeks in advance before that horse raced and lost
its life on the track. And I also am aware--and I am quite sure
it was with this case that the owner of that horse had
instructed that she did not want this horse to be medicated so
that the injuries would be masked. And yet, the veterinarian
did not abide by her directive. So this is how this system has
broken down so that veterinarians see themselves as having the
role of accommodating racing rather than the welfare of the
patient. So that did not take care of that horse.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you. Mr. Hanrahan, the Blood Horse
Magazine announced your being hired as the national HBPA CEO on
11/29/11. At the time, the article indicated that you were then
a handicapper and occasional tournament player. Now, recent
survey of horseracing bettors performed by Penn, Shad, and
Berland indicated that 86 percent of the biggest bettors avoid
certain tracks in States because of concerns over medication
integrity, and 79 percent of horseplayers factor in illegal
drug use when handicapping races at certain track. And these
poll numbers are insightful, because they basically say bettors
at all levels, especially at most every vested--big bettors
believe that trainers are cheating and using drugs and adjust
their betting accordingly. When you were actively wagering, did
you take into account any of these considerations? If not, why
not?
Mr. Hanrahan. No, I did not. The----
Mr. Pitts. Why----
Mr. Hanrahan. The primary thing in handicapping a race is
how competitive the race will be. You look at the size of the
field, the conditions of the race. And I would point out, as I
am sure many of you know, for horses running on Lasix, that is
published in the racing programs. Everyone knows that.
Mr. Pitts. Well, do you think this presents a perception
problem? What if Warren Buffet thought Wall Street was rigged,
quit playing? Isn't this actually driving your sport out of
business? Five years ago, nearly $15 billion was bet on races
in North America. Today, it is down to 10 billion. Sales and
purses have slumped as well. Additionally, fewer owners,
especially foreign, are buying the racing horses in America. My
time has expired. I have several questions for the record, Mr.
Chairman, that I will submit. And I have two statements for the
record, from Water Hay Oats Alliance and ASPCA, that I would
like the unanimous consent to submit----
Mr. Terry. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Terry. Thank you. And now, I will recognize Mr.
McNerney for a short statement.
Mr. McNerney. I just want to thank the witnesses for
coming. I have heartfelt statements. I support H.R. 2012, and I
will submit questions for the record.
Mr. Terry. So you have heard Mr. McNerney talk about
questions for the record. Each member of this committee and Joe
Pitts has the ability or right to send you questions. You have
an obligation, because you agreed to testify, to answer those
questions in a timely manner, which I will define as 2 weeks.
If you can get in your answers to any questions submitted to
you within 2 weeks, we would greatly appreciate it. And at this
time, I want to offer unanimous consent to put into the record
an article entitled ``Texas Compounder Draws Industry
Scrutiny,'' and a November 20, 2013, NTRA letter. Hearing no
objections, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. I want to thank you all for your great
testimony. Sorry we were rushed. We thought were going to have
about another full half-hour to ask questions. But sometimes on
getaway days, things tend to move quicker for some reason. So
thank you very much for your insight and sharing your expert
opinions with us today. And we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:13 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
