- THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES AND ACTIVITIES

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES AND ACTIVITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 18, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-82

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

87-109 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  GENE GREEN, Texas
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                      JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            Islands
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PAUL TONKO, New York
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               PAUL TONKO, New York
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  GENE GREEN, Texas
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              JOHN BARROW, Georgia
PETE OLSON, Texas                    DORIS O. MATSUI, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
CORY GARDNER, Colorado                   Islands
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  KATHY CASTOR, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan (ex
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia             officio)
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)        officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................     8

Witnesses

Ernest J. Moniz, Secretary, Department of Energy.................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Answers to submitted questions...............................   204
Regina McCarthy, Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency..    30
Prepared statement...........................................    32
Answers to submitted questions...............................   219

Submitted Material

Report, ``The President's Climate Action Plan,'' dated June 2013,
Executive Office of the President, submitted by Mr. Whitfield..    39
Invitations, dated August 6, 2013, and follow-up requests, dated
September 4, 2013, submitted by Mr. Whitfield..................    60
Hearing memorandum, dated September 16, 2013, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................   108
Supplement, dated September 2013, ``Explaining Extreme Events of
2012 From a Climate Perspective,'' Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society, Vol. 94, No. 9, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield \1\
Charts from report, ``International Energy Outlook 2013,'' dated
July 2013, Energy Information Administration, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................   113
Article, ``Making Energy Access Meaningful,'' dated Summer 2013,
by Morgan Bazilian and Roger Pielke, Jr., Issues in Science and
Technology, submitted by Mr. Whitfield.........................   116
Report, dated September 17, 2013, ``Revolution Now: The Future
Arrives for Four Clean Energy Technologies,'' Department of
Energy, submitted by Mr. Tonko.................................   135
Letter of September 11, 2013, from Jon Bruning, Attorney General,
State of Nebraska, to Gina McCarthy, Administrator,
Environmental Protection Agency, submitted by Mr. Terry........   161
Report, dated August 8, 2013, ``Human and natural influences on
the changing thermal structure of the atmosphere,'' by Benjamin
D. Santer, et al., submitted by Mr. Waxman.....................   180

----------
\1\ Internet link to the supplement is on page 112.

THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES AND ACTIVITIES

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:18 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed
Whitfield (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Scalise, Hall,
Shimkus, Pitts, Terry, Burgess, Latta, Olson, McKinley,
Gardner, Pompeo, Kinzinger, Griffith, Barton, Upton (ex
officio), McNerney, Tonko, Engel, Green, Capps, Doyle, Barrow,
Matsui, Christensen, Castor, Dingell (ex officio), and Waxman
(ex officio).
Also present: Representative Schakowsky.
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Clerk; Gary
Andres, Staff Director; Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Shawn
Bonyun, Communications Director; Matt Bravo, Professional Staff
Member; Allison Busbee, Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power;
Patrick Currier, Counsel, Energy and Power; Tom Hassenboehler,
Chief Counsel, Energy and Power; Brandon Mooney, Professional
Staff Member; Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel, Commerce,
Manufacturing, and Trade; Mary Neumayr, Senior Energy Counsel;
Andrew Powaleny, Deputy Press Secretary; Peter Spencer,
Professional Staff Member, Oversight; Tom Wilbur, Digital Media
Advisor; Phil Barnett, Democratic Staff Director; Alison
Cassady, Democratic Senior Professional Staff Member; Greg
Dotson, Democratic Staff Director, Energy and Environment;
Bruce Ho, Democratic Counsel; Roger Sherman, Democratic Chief
Counsel; Ryan Skukowski, Democratic Staff Assistant; and
Alexandra Tietz, Democratic Senior Counsel, Energy and
Environment.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call this hearing to order
this morning. Today, the subcommittee is having a hearing to
explore President Obama's Climate Change Action Plan. And I
certainly want to thank Secretary of Energy, Mr. Moniz; and
Gina McCarthy, our new Administrator at the Environmental
Protection Agency, for joining us this morning. And I want to
be sure we start the clock so that I don't speak forever
because that would be pretty boring for everybody. But I did
want to thank you two for being with us this morning.
I will tell you that I am extremely disappointed. We sent
letters to the Department of Agriculture, Department of
Defense, Health and Human Services, Department of the Interior,
Department of State, Transportation, Ex-Im Bank, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, Office of Science and Technology
Policy, and the U.S. Agency for International Development
because they are very much involved in this Action Plan as
well, and they did not send witnesses to testify.
Now, in June of this year, President Obama went to
Georgetown University and he gave his speech in which he
announced a Climate Change Action Plan for America. And in that
speech he mentioned that he was tired of excuses for inaction.
Now, I am just going to tell you I take exception to that
because in his Action Plan he included many of the component
parts of the cap-and-trade legislation that was considered by
the Congress in 2009, the Waxman-Markey bill. And that
legislation passed the House but it did not pass the U.S.
Senate. So, rather than inaction on the part of Congress,
Congress made a decision, and that was that it did not want to
adopt that legislation.
So I understand the President's view on climate change. And
I would like to predicate this by saying worldwide
CO
2
emissions last year amounted to 800 gigatons. Of
that, 30 gigatons are caused by humans. That is 3.75 percent of
all worldwide emissions come from human activity. So the
question becomes if you have a broad spectrum of action on this
plan, and we know that it is one of the President's priorities
and we know that in the last 4 or 5 years we spent $70 billion
on climate change, this year we expect to spend $22 billion.
So what we are focused on this morning is we want to know
more about the plan. Is it going to contribute to higher energy
costs? Is it going to raise unemployment rates? Is it going to
create obstacles to economic growth? Is it going to have an
impact on our ability to compete in the global marketplace?
And I specifically wanted to read from some headlines in
newspapers around Europe and elsewhere about this issue. And
all of these were within the last 3 months. ``Support for the
European Union's climate and energy policy eroded further
Friday as the Czech Republic became the latest member to
denounce subsidies for clean but costly renewable energy and
pledged to use more fossil fuels.'' ``Europe's industry is
being ravaged by exorbitant energy costs.'' ``Europe's quixotic
dash for renewables is pushing electricity costs to untenable
levels.'' ``We can't sacrifice Europe's industry for climate
goals that are not realistic.'' ``The European Union's energy
and climate policy is in disarray and losing credibility.''
``Utilities are turning to coal and cheap lignite, emitting
more CO
2
than ever.'' ``Europe faces a crisis in
energy cost.''
As you know, the new government in Australia, as their
first order of business, have decided to repeal the carbon tax
legislation. They also plan to abolish the Climate Commission,
the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, and the Climate Change
Authority.
Now, so far in the year 2012, 375 coal units at power
plants in America are closing, 294 of them because of EPA
regulations. In the first half of 2013, 151 coal mines in
America have closed.
So this is a discussion today that we recognize we have
different views on, but we are trying to make a sincere effort
to understand the ramifications, the impact of climate change.
As a Congress, we have the responsibility, with all of this
money being spent, to get a better feel of what is the
government really doing? Because it is comprehensive. It
spreads throughout the entire government. And this hearing is
about how we want to know what is going on, and we are going to
back to every one of those agencies that I mentioned earlier,
whether we sit down with them individually or as a committee.
We want to know and understand precisely what is going on.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

In late June, President Obama released his Climate Action
Plan, which broadly outlined a variety of executive actions for
Federal agencies to implement the administration's climate
policies.
On August 6, I wrote thirteen of these agencies, including
the White House science advisor's office, requesting testimony
and specific information about each agency's climate-related
activities and the coordination of that activity across the
Federal Government.
Despite six weeks' notice, we will not get many answers
today. Eleven agencies requested to testify--twice, I might
add--did not provide a witness or submit information about
agency activity to the subcommittee. That does not send a
positive message for increased public understanding of what
this administration is doing on an economically consequential
policy matter.
The point of my request was for the subcommittee to examine
the scope of Federal climate change actions that have been
tolling billions of dollars a year in spending and countless
man-hours of work since the mid-1990s, reaching over $22
billion this year alone. The State Department reports that over
the period 2010-2012, the U.S. provided over $7.5 billion in
foreign assistance to address climate change.
This is an oversight hearing. Congress needs specific
information from the administration to evaluate the Federal
Government's current and planned regulatory actions. Without
this information, the public is left out of the debate, without
knowing the extent of agency activity, whether it effectively
addresses the established risks, or what it really will
accomplish.
Whatever you think about managing future climate or global
warming risks, oversight of theadministration's plans to
respond to those risks is critical for Congress to make sound
economic and policy decisions. Federal agencies must account
transparently for the effectiveness and impact of their
actions--especially when a number of these actions collide
directly with Americans' efforts to develop our diverse energy
resources, which are so vital to economic strength and
competitiveness.
Today we will hear from the heads of two Federal agencies,
who I have a high respect for, Secretary of Energy Ernest Moniz
and EPA Administrator Gina McCarthy--both of whom are aware of
my serious concerns with the direction of the administration's
climate change policies, especially those being implemented by
the EPA.
The President's global warming agenda being implemented
through the EPA has been holding back the economy which
continues to struggle. Since 2009, the agency has been busy
imposing costly requirements on coal-fired electricity and
other fossil fuels while targeting manufacturers with new
regulatory burdens, only increasing to the economic
uncertainty. This week, EPA is expected to release their
proposal to control greenhouse gas emissions from power plants,
one that is almost certain to further the economic uncertainty
facing our Nation's utilities and have devastating effects on
our communities and most importantly, the consumers who pay
their electricity bills every month.
In my view, this is not a sound economic and climate
policy. There is a better path forward, one that stops treating
affordable domestic energy and a strong economy as part of the
problem and embraces them as a vital part of the solution.
In a number of subcommittee hearings we have explored the
ingredients for U.S. economic resurgence. This resurgence in
good part depends upon access to affordable and reliable
electricity, energy diversity, and embracing the tremendous
opportunities presented with our new-found oil and natural gas
abundance.
We've begun to see early fruits of what this resurgence
could be in the tremendous jobs creation and economic vitality
from the shale gas revolution. IHS Global Insight recently
reported that this energy revolution has already increased
average household income by an average of $1,200 in 2012, a
figure that is projected to grow to $2,700 in 7 years.
Households are spending less on electricity and less on goods
and services within the broader economy, all because of less
expensive energy.
Building on this momentum, we should set policies that
ensure energy access and establish prudent future planning,
through electric grid reliability, expanded energy
infrastructures of pipelines, roads, ports, increased R&D for
energy, agriculture, and increased coal, LNG, and nuclear
exports that carry U.S. energy access the world over.
Last week, a delegation from Bangladesh visited me to
explain their need for U.S. expertise and help particularly in
gaining access to coal-fired electricity. With only about 47
percent of their population having access to electricity,
Bangladesh is one of the most energy poor nations on the
planet, and one particularly susceptible to extreme weather
events, but the World Bank, reflecting the administration's
climate policy, had recently turned down funding for
Bangladeshi coal development. So today, I hope we can examine
how agency priorities meet our positive vision and agenda for
economic growth.
I recently read an article that stated that the arctic ice
had nearly a million more square miles of ocean covered with
ice than at this time last year. But, this hearing is not about
the failure of predictions that summer arctic would be ice-free
by this year, the 15-year pause in global temperature rise, or
the rush to call every horrible weather disaster an omen of
climate doom. Clear away the gloom and doom tactics and there
are serious issues to address, such as what is needed to build
our economy or to bring meaningful energy access to Bangladesh,
but you have to be serious about it. I look forward to hearing
from our two agencies today on exactly what the
administration's climate plan entails for a vision of economic
resurgence and energy access to all.

Mr. Whitfield. So, once again, Mr. Secretary and Madam
Administrator, thank you for being with us.
At this time, I would like to recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Waxman, for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing is the first time in a long time that this
committee is holding a hearing on climate change. I welcome
this hearing, and I want to commend Chairman Upton and Chairman
Whitfield for holding it. Climate change is the biggest energy
challenge we face and a clear and present danger to the United
States and to the world.
I also commend the administration for sending Energy
Secretary Ernie Moniz and EPA Administrator Gina McCarthy to
testify. It is unusual to have two Cabinet Secretaries
testifying at a subcommittee hearing. Your presence makes it
clear how seriously the administration is taking this hearing.
As Secretary Moniz explains in his statement, the
scientific evidence is overwhelming. That is why the President
released a comprehensive Climate Action Plan in June. His plan
is reasonable, it is affordable, and it will protect our
atmosphere for our children and future generations. It will
make our country the global leader in the clean energy economy
of the future.
In past hearings and markups and in debates on the floor,
Republicans on this committee and in the House have opposed
many elements included in the President's plan. Last Congress,
the House voted 53 times to block action on climate change.
This Congress, the House has already voted to slash funds
for research into clean energy and energy efficiency. House
appropriators voted to eliminate funding for international
negotiations on the climate treaty. And our committee even
refused to listen to the scientists. Over the last 2 years,
subcommittee Ranking Member Rush and I have written 27 letters
requesting hearings on climate change. And until today, no
hearing was ever scheduled. I hope today will mark the start of
a change in approach.
That is why my question for House Republicans is simple.
What is your plan? If you don't like the President's plan, what
is your proposal? The President has said he is willing to
listen to other ideas for protecting our planet and fulfilling
our moral obligation to future generations. What are yours?
Yesterday, I held a forum with the members of the Safe
Climate Caucus to hear from Americans who are already
experiencing the impacts of climate change. From California to
New York, from Iowa to Texas, we heard stories of wildfires,
droughts, floods, sea level rise, and record temperatures.
Their accounts were moving and powerful. These extreme weather
events are happening now and they are costing lives, destroying
livelihoods, eliminating jobs, creating billion-dollar disaster
relief legislation.
We need to start addressing this enormous threat now. The
longer we wait, the more damage we will cause, the more deeply
we will need to cut carbon pollution, the bigger the bill will
be for taxpayers, and the further we will fall behind China and
Germany in the race to develop the new energy technologies of
the future.
The President was right. We don't have time for another
meeting of the Flat Earth Society. Saying no to every solution
is not a plan. Doing nothing is not a plan. If all the
Republicans on this committee do today is criticize, they are
either denying the science or ignoring it. No one can accept
what the scientists are telling us and fail to support a plan
of action.
That is why I hope we can move past denial and start a
constructive dialogue. Secretary Moniz and Administrator
McCarthy have both told me they want to work with the
stakeholders in implementing the President's plan. They would
welcome working with Congress, especially with this committee,
which has vast jurisdiction over our Nation's energy policies.
We should listen closely to their testimony today. Where we
disagree, let's offer alternative solutions. The climate clock
is ticking and too much is at stake for more politics as usual.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this chance for an opening
statement.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
At this time, I would like to recognize the chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Upton, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing is about oversight of the President's
climate change policies and activities, and it is disappointing
that 11 agencies, which had ample notice to identify witnesses,
including scientists, and work with staff to accommodate them
on different panels, chose instead to decline our request.
Climate policy is a central feature of this administration's
energy policy, and given the tens of billions of dollars
currently being spent on climate activities, there is no good
reason for so many agencies to decide that they cannot testify
before this committee.
When the administration first attempted to impose its
climate policies on the American public through the cap-and-
trade legislation, we needed a reality check, and at that time,
it was noted that without meaningful international
participation, jobs and emissions would simply shift overseas
and there would be no meaningful impact on global carbon
emissions, or the temperature changes that may result from
those emissions. Other nations would continue to seek to grow
their own economies and would naturally take advantage of U.S.
economic and manufacturing weakness. And we heard that first
hand in this committee.
Last week, the Labor Department reported that there are
still 11.3 million people unemployed, including 4.3 million
long-term unemployed, and 7.9 million ``involuntary'' part-time
workers, whose hours have been cut back or are unable to find
full-time jobs. It makes no sense to impose an ineffectual and
economically harmful energy policy, one I would remind folks
that was rejected through the front door here in the Congress
by Senate Democrats.
Unfortunately, the administration is now working to
circumvent Congress through the backdoor, seeking to regulate
what it was unable to legislate no matter perhaps what the cost
to jobs and the economy really is. Thoughtful oversight is
necessary so that the public can understand more clearly what
is happening and what the impacts of the administration's
climate policies may be. And I believe that it is a disservice
to the public to suggest a policy approach will meaningfully
address climate risks when in fact it will not, despite tens of
billions of dollars spent and countless jobs lost.
So today, with the help of the private innovation and
America's newfound energy abundance, the U.S. indeed is the
envy of the world as it relates to energy access and the safe
and responsible development of energy resources. We stand at
the very threshold of profound economic opportunity for the
Nation and its future generations.
So we should pursue constructing a new architecture of
abundance as a central feature for future economic strength and
to provide the economic foundation to address climate risks.
There should be no question that the economic wherewithal
fostered by America's energy resurgence will provide a wide
avenue for innovation that will answer energy and environmental
challenges of the future.
Yes, it is good to have Secretary Moniz and Administrator
McCarthy before us this morning. You two stand at the center of
energy policy in this Nation and your agencies will play either
positive or negative roles to ensure a strong, vibrant, and
innovative energy sector in the future.
My interest is to understand how you intend to address the
new realities of American energy abundance, and what your
respective agencies' roles should be in promoting access to
abundant, affordable energy resources that are so necessary to
meeting future challenges in making our Nation more
competitive. I look forward to having that discussion.
And I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today's hearing is about oversight of the President's
climate change policies and activities. It is disappointing
that 11 agencies, which had ample notice to identify witnesses,
including scientists, and work with staff to accommodate them
on different panels, chose instead to decline our request.
Climate policy is a central feature of this administration's
energy policy, and given the billions of dollars currently
being spent on climate activities, there is no good reason for
so many agencies to decide they cannot testify before this
committee.
When the administration first attempted to impose its
climate policies on the American public via cap-andtrade
legislation in 2009, we needed a reality check.
At that time, it was noted that without meaningful
international participation, jobs and emissions would simply
shift overseas--and there would be no meaningful impact on
global carbon emissions, or the temperature changes that may
result from those emissions. Other nations would continue to
seek to grow their own economies and would naturally take
advantage of U.S. economic and manufacturing weakness.
Last week the Labor Department reported that there are
still 11.3 million people unemployed, including 4.3 million
long-term unemployed, and 7.9 million ``involuntary'' part-time
workers, whose hours have been cut back or are unable to find
full-time jobs.
It makes no sense to impose an ineffectual and economically
harmful energy policy--one I would remind folks that was
rejected through the front door here in Congress by Senate
Democrats. Unfortunately, the administration is now working to
circumvent Congress through the back door--seeking to regulate
what it was unable to legislate no matter what the cost to jobs
and the economy. Thoughtful oversight is necessary so the
public can understand more clearly what is happening, and what
the impacts of the administration's climate policies may be.
And I believe it is a disservice to the public to suggest a
policy approach will meaningfully address climate risks when in
effect it will not, despite tens of billions of dollars spent
and countless jobs lost.
Today, with the help of private innovation and America's
newfound energy abundance, the U.S. is the envy of the world as
it relates to energy access and the safe and responsible
development of energy resources. We stand at the threshold of
profound economic opportunity for the Nation and its future
generations.
We should pursue constructing a new architecture of
abundance as a central feature for future economic strength and
to provide the economic foundation to address climate risks.
There should be no question that the economic wherewithal
fostered by America's energy resurgence will provide a wide
avenue for innovation that will answer energy and environmental
challenges of the future.
It is good to have Secretary Moniz and Administrator
McCarthy before us this morning. You two stand at the center of
energy policy in this Nation and your agencies will play either
positive or negative roles to ensure a strong, vibrant, and
innovative energy sector in the future.
My interest is to understand how you intend to address the
new realities of American energy abundance, and what your
respective agencies' roles should be in promoting access to
abundant, affordable energy resources that are so necessary to
meeting future challenges. I look forward to having that
discussion.

Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Tonko, for a 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, Chair
Whitfield, for holding this very important hearing.
The International Panel on Climate Change will soon issue
its latest report summarizing the findings of recent climate
science. That report is likely to reiterate the message they
sent us 5 years ago. Greenhouse gases continue to rise in the
atmosphere, the planet is warming, sea level is rising, and a
significant degree of this change is attributable to human
activities. We are seeing the impacts already. Higher sea
levels create more perilous conditions when hurricanes approach
the coast. Higher temperatures enhance drought conditions,
creating significant losses for farmers and ranchers and set
the stage for more intense, widespread forest fires.
Our infrastructure, our communities, and our economy are
all vulnerable to these changes. Add to these facts that our
infrastructure is aging and we are neglecting to maintain the
very systems that we rely on to support a modern, thriving
society. We can continue along our current path leaving State
and local governments to fend for themselves, patching things
together as they wear out, are damaged, or are destroyed. Or we
can use the tremendous intellectual and entrepreneurial
resources that we have to address the challenge of climate
change.
Our current path of inaction leaves tremendous
opportunities for job creation, for social progress, and for
economic growth untapped. It wastes resources, especially human
resources. President Obama realizes this and has offered a
modest, balanced plan to reduce greenhouse gases and to rebuild
and redesign the modern and resilient infrastructure that we
require for the future.
The administration's plan seeks to realize the potential of
new, cleaner energy technologies. At the same time, the plan
recognizes the important role that fossil fuels play in our
economy. We continue to use these fuels, as will other nations,
but that does not mean we need to use them inefficiently or
without regard to the increasing risk that they pose for the
future of our planet.
Our citizens could be employed building our 21st century
transportation, energy, and water infrastructure. Our
manufacturers could be supplying the parts and equipment for a
modern electric grid, a high-speed rail, wind farms, combined
heat and power systems, energy-efficient vehicles, fuel cells,
and advanced batteries. Other nations are moving forward
incentivizing and assisting their industries and positioning
themselves and their citizens for the future. They are thinking
long-term while we subject to our Nation to unnecessary
austerity and an endless series of stop-gap funding bills. This
is not the bold and inspired thinking that created this Nation
and made it the great nation that it is.
No one set out to change the chemistry of our atmosphere
and a set our planet on a new climate trajectory, but it has
happened and we must act, act now to slow this process and
adapt to the new conditions. The President's plan is a fine
start. I am very pleased that we have Secretary Moniz and
Administrator McCarthy here with us today. These two officials
and their agencies are tasked with a great deal of
responsibility for making this plan a success. Thank you both
for being here this morning. I hope this is not our last
hearing on this topic and that we will have additional
opportunities to hear from other Federal agencies. There is a
lot of work to do and we have wasted too much time already.
Thank you again, Chair Whitfield, for holding this very
important hearing, and with that, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back. At this time, we
will begin with Secretary Moniz, 5 minutes for his opening
statement. And once again, Mr. Secretary, thanks for joining us
this morning. Be sure and turn your microphone on.

STATEMENTS OF ERNEST J. MONIZ, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY;
AND REGINA MCCARTHY, ADMINISTRATOR, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY

STATEMENT OF ERNEST J. MONIZ

Mr. Moniz. Thank you. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, and
Ranking Member Waxman, members of the committee. Thank you for
the opportunity to speak about the President's Climate Action
Plan and in particular the DOE's role in its implementation.
I will start with saying, again, the evidence is
overwhelming; the science is clear. The threat from climate
change is real and urgent. And the basic science behind climate
change is simple: carbon dioxide makes the earth warmer and we
are emitting more and more of it into the atmosphere at a rate
that has long been understood to have a material cumulative
impact on a scale measured in decades, not centuries.
This increase in atmospheric greenhouse gas above all from
the combustion of fossil fuels is affecting the climate. Carbon
dioxide is particularly important both because of the magnitude
of the emissions and because it is long lived in the
atmosphere. Again, all of this was known a long time ago. What
was not anticipated was the pace at which energy needs would
grow to serve 7 billion people on the planet with rapid
industrialization. Every ton we emit now irreversibly commits
our children and grandchildren to the risk of climate
disruption.
Now, while we cannot attribute any particular storm, for
example, to climate change, cumulatively, we can say that
rising sea levels, increasingly severe droughts, heat waves,
wildfires, and major storms are amplified by a warming climate.
This is already costing our economy billions of dollars a year,
and common sense and prudence demanded that we take action. So
that is the driving force behind the President's Climate Action
Plan, and its three pillars are to cut carbon pollution
domestically, to prepare for the worsening impacts of climate
change, and to lead international efforts to combat climate
change and prepare for its impacts.
My main focus today will be on what the U.S. can do
domestically to reduce carbon pollution, and in particular, on
DOE's role in the Climate Action Plan. Of course, many other
agencies have critical roles as well. First, we must use our
energy more intelligently. I am committed to energy efficiency
both to achieve reductions in carbon emissions and to reduce
energy bills for families and businesses. The Department of
Energy also plays a central role in developing the low carbon
technologies of the future. Coal and natural gas will remain
significant sources of energy in the years to come, and that is
why DOE has issued a draft solicitation for $1 billion in loan
guarantees for advanced fossil energy technologies that reduce
carbon emissions. In addition, DOE has already committed $6
billion on clean coal technologies all with the goal of
enabling the use of fossil fuels and a carbon-constrained
world.
Some of the most impressive energy developments in recent
years have been in renewable energy technology. DOE recently
released a paper called ``Revolution Now'' that outlines some
of these critical clean energy developments for wind, solar,
LEDs, and EV batteries. The key message is the pattern of
dramatic cost reductions, strong government RD&D and supportive
policy, and rapidly increasing deployment, much like the story
of unconventional natural gas production that unfolded over the
last 30 years.
A clear indicator of the Nation's energy system
transformation is the business model evolution taking place in
the utilities sector in response to energy efficiency and
renewable energy market trends. Changes in energy technologies
take time, sustained investment, and stable policies. Even in
this age of budget austerity we need to ensure that we continue
to invest in clean energy.
As part of the President's Climate Action Plan, the
Department of energy will also assist in the development of the
Quadrennial Energy Review.
Now, while we must take action to reduce the carbon
pollution that causes global warming, impacts from climate
change are already here and more are on the way. Let me
highlight just one project that demonstrates how we are
approaching this in terms of infrastructure resilience. In the
aftermath of Sandy, the vulnerability of our electricity and
fuels infrastructure to severe storms and flooding was evident.
Recently, I was in New Jersey to sign an MOU with Governor
Christie and the New Jersey Transit Corporation to design a
micro-grid that will provide reliable distributed power for a
critical transportation corridor. This is an example of the
sort of smart infrastructure we will need throughout the
country, and this can provide a first-of-its-kind example for
the Nation. It also exemplifies our commitment to work more
closely with State and local governments.
The third part of the President's plan is leading
international efforts to address climate change. A global
effort will be required to future climate damages. Here at DOE
we are focused on helping countries around the world expand the
use of clean energy, improve energy efficiency, and strengthen
global preparedness and resilience to climate change. While the
State Department has the lead on international negotiations
such as phasing down HFCs, domestic clean energy success will
allow America to lead by example and at the same time to open
up business opportunities for U.S. companies as a huge global
market for clean energy opens up over the next decade.
In conclusion, history has repeatedly shown that we can
grow the economy while making tremendous strides in reducing
pollution. We will need our smartest scientists, our brightest
engineers, and visionary policymakers to get this done. The
President has put forth a smart and prudent plan to slow global
warming, to prepare for worsening climate impacts, and to
ensure a safer, healthier future for our children and
grandchildren. And I might add my grandchildren are 8 and 10
years old, so I am excited to be part of the President's plan
to reduce the risks of climate change.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moniz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And Madam Administrator McCarthy, you are recognized for 5
minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF REGINA MCCARTHY

Ms. McCarthy. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Congressman
Waxman, members of the committee.
In June, the President reaffirmed his commitment to
reducing carbon pollution when he directed many Federal
agencies, including the EPA, to take meaningful steps to
mitigate the current and future damage caused by carbon dioxide
emissions and to prepare for climate changes that have been set
in motion.
Climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our
time. Over 97 percent of climate scientists are convinced that
human-caused climate change is occurring. If our changing
climate goes unchecked, it will have devastating impacts on the
United States and on our planet. Responding to climate change
is an urgent public health, safety, national security, and
environmental imperative that presents an economic challenge as
well as an economic opportunity. Both the economy and the
environment must provide for current and future generations. We
can and must embrace cutting carbon pollution as a spark for
innovation, for job growth, clean energy, and economic growth.
The Nation's success over the past 40 years makes clear that
environmental protection and economic growth do go hand-in-
hand.
The President's Climate Action Plan directs Federal
agencies to address climate change using our existing
authorities. The plan has three key pillars: cutting carbon
pollution in America, preparing for impacts of a changing
climate, and leading international efforts to combat climate
change.
EPA plays a critical role in the plan's first pillar, which
is cutting carbon pollution. Over the past 4 years, EPA has
begun to address this task. In 2010 EPA and the National
Highway Transportation and Safety Administration along with the
auto industry and other stakeholders, worked together to set
greenhouse gas and fuel economy standards for model years 2012
to 2025 light-duty vehicles. Over the life of those vehicles,
the standards will save an estimated $1.7 trillion for
consumers. It will cut America's oil consumption by 12 billion
barrels and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 6 billion metric
tons.
EPA and NHTSA's standards for model year 2014 through 2018
heavy-duty trucks and buses present a similar success story.
Under the President's plan, we will be developing a second
phase of heavy-duty vehicle standards for post-2018 model
years.
Building on that success, the President asked EPA to work
with States, utilities, and other key stakeholders to develop
plans to reduce carbon pollution from both future as well as
existing power plants.
EPA will soon propose carbon pollution standards for future
power plants, reflecting new information and the extensive
public comment that we received on our 2012 proposal. For
existing plants, we are already engaged in outreach to States
and a broad group of stakeholders with expertise who can help
inform the development of proposed standards, which we expect
to issue in June of 2014. Using these standards, States will
have the primary role in developing and implementing plans to
address carbon pollution from existing plans, allowing us to
capitalize on State leadership and innovation while accounting
for regional diversity and providing ample flexibility.
The plan also calls for the development of a comprehensive
strategy to address methane emissions. EPA will work with other
agencies to reduce these emissions through incentive-based
programs.
The President's plan also calls for a broad array of
actions to strengthen America's resilience to climate impacts.
EPA will incorporate research on impacts into implementation of
our existing programs and we will develop information and tools
to help decision-makers, including States, localities, and
tribes, to better understand and address the current effects
and the future effects that we know are coming in a changing
climate. EPA is working closely with our Federal agency
counterparts on building national resilience, including
developing the National Drought Resilience Partnership,
ensuring the security of our freshwater supplies and protecting
our water utilities.
The President's plan recognizes that we must couple action
at home with leadership abroad. Working closely with the State
Department, EPA will continue to engage our international
partners in efforts to reduce carbon pollution through
activities, including public-private partnership efforts to
address methane emissions and other short-lived climate
pollutants.
In conclusion, the President's plan provides a roadmap for
Federal action to meet the challenges of a changing climate, to
promote clean energy solutions that capitalize on American
innovation and that drive economic growth.
Thank you again and I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. McCarthy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Madam McCarthy.
And before I begin my questions, I would like to ask
unanimous consent to introduce a few relevant documents into
the record. I would like to enter, one, the President's Climate
Action Plan; two, the invitation letter sent to the Federal
agencies requesting witnesses today, the majority committee
staff hearing memorandum.
In addition, I would like to enter the special supplement
to the bulletin of the American Meteorological Society released
this month and entitled ``Explaining Extreme Events of 2012
from a Climate Perspective;'' excerpts from the Energy
Information Administration's annual Energy Outlook 2013,
including a chart reflecting world energy-related carbon
dioxide emissions 1990 to 2040 and a table reflecting world
carbon dioxide emissions by region and country for 1990 through
2040; and finally, an article entitled ``Making Energy Access
Meaningful'' published this summer in the National Academy of
Sciences' publication ``Issues in Science and Technology.''
Without objection, the documents will be entered into the
record.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The American Meteorological Society bulletin supplement is
available at http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF03/20130918/
101308/HHRG-113-IF03-20130918-SD011.pdf.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. And at this time I will recognize myself for
5 minutes of questions.
Recently, during the August break, I spent time at some
universities in the State of Kentucky, and in talking to
students, one of their major concerns was trying to find a job
upon graduation. And I started thinking about that and I went
back and I looked at the last 62 years the unemployment rate in
America, and the last 4 years, 2009 through 2012, the
unemployment rate has been higher in America than at any time
in the last 62 years except for 3 of those years.
Now, in his speech to Georgetown University, the President
specifically said that as we transition, try to make this
transition, which we know cannot be done overnight, and the
President frequently talks about an all-of-the-above policy,
but America is the only country in the world where you cannot
build a new coal-powered plant because the emission standards
cannot be met because the technology is not available. And we
know that regulations on existing plants are going to be coming
out in 2014 in June.
But in that speech, the President said in talking about his
Action Plan, that we must provide special programs for people
who lose their jobs. And as I quote it, there have been
significant closures of electricity production plants using
coal, and over 151 coalmines have been closed. So I would ask
either one of you what are the special plans in the President's
Action Plan to help address these people who are losing their
jobs because of these policies?
Ms. McCarthy. Mr. Chairman, let me begin. I just want to
indicate that I think that I am sensitive and certainly the
Environmental Protection Agency has been sensitive that as we
pursue our mission to protect public health and the
environment, we have to be sensitive to the economic
consequences of our actions----
Mr. Whitfield. Then, Ms. McCarthy----
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Particularly----
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. Do you know specifically what
plan is in effect? He talked about we are going to have the
special plans to address the concerns of these people who lose
their jobs.
Ms. McCarthy. I am not familiar with the details of those
plans, but I am familiar----
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. From reading the Climate
Action----
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Plan that the President----
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Sees this as both a challenge as
well as an economic----
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Opportunity for this----
Mr. Whitfield. Now, in looking at the organization chart
for the Climate Action Plan, I notice that there is one chart
under the Office of Energy and Climate Change Policy referred
to as the Green Cabinet. How does the Green Cabinet
differentiate from the regular Presidential Cabinet?
Mr. Moniz. Mr. Chairman, so the Green Cabinet denotes that
there are occasional meeting of principals from the agencies
who have special responsibility in the climate action plan so
we can get together and discuss coordination of programs, make
sure there are not duplications. So it is a subgroup of the
Cabinet who again meets periodically together with key White
House presidential assistants to discuss the general set of
issues----
Mr. Whitfield. Um-hum.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. Around climate change.
Mr. Whitfield. And who is the person at the Department of
Energy responsible for the coordination of all the task forces
relating to climate change in the government?
Mr. Moniz. Well, of course, I consider myself as having
ultimate responsibility----
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, but----
Mr. Moniz. The action officer----
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. You have designated a----
Mr. Moniz. The action officer, if you like, is my Chief of
Staff, Kevin Knobloch, who is keeping track of all of our
responsibilities under the CAP.
Mr. Whitfield. Kevin Knobloch?
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield. And, Ms. McCarthy, who is your designated
person for this?
Ms. McCarthy. Again, I have ultimate responsibility. We
have two primary components. We have a mitigation strategy,
which we are managing out of our office in Air and Radiation
primarily. That would be Janet McCabe, who is currently the
acting assistant administrator. On the adaptation side, which
is looking at climate resilience and preparedness we had our
Office of Policy that is directed by associate administrator
Michael Goo.
Mr. Whitfield. Now, I noticed the GAO or in the budget
there is $22 billion allocated for climate change Action Plan
for 2013. How much of that money will be allocated to EPA?
Ms. McCarthy. I am sorry. Could you repeat the question,
Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Whitfield. There is 22 billion planned to be spent in
fiscal year 2013. How much of that money was allocated to EPA?
Ms. McCarthy. I can't answer that question, sir, but I am
happy to follow it up.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Do you know from the Secretary of
Energy's position, Secretary Moniz, how much of the 22
billion----
Mr. Moniz. Well, I think the problem, first of all, is how
one counts. For example, if we count our energy efficiency
programs, which of course have the objective of saving money
and also----
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. Would be part of the solution for
climate change, well, then, let's add 1 billion there.
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Moniz. So if we talk about all the programs that are
helpful for climate change----
Mr. Whitfield. Yes.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. Then we are talking about $5
billion----
Mr. Whitfield. OK.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. Mostly in our R&D budget, but as I
say, most of that is for, you know, efficiency, nuclear power--
--
Mr. Whitfield. Um-hum.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. Clean technologies, actually, we
can throw in fusion. The one exception one might say is the
substantial resources we devote to carbon capture and
sequestration specifically to make coal competitive in a low-
carbon world.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. My time is expired. I recognize
Mr. Waxman for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Waxman. Secretary Moniz, in your testimony you describe
the dangers we face from climate change. Is it too late to
protect the planet from the worst effects of climate change?
Mr. Moniz. Well, first of all, I think it is clear we
cannot avoid implications. We are seeing them today. In my view
this decade is the critical one that we need to move out
smartly and smartly----
Mr. Waxman. How much time do we have?
Mr. Moniz. Well----
Mr. Waxman. Can we afford to wait to act?
Mr. Moniz. It will be a long-term commitment, but we have
to act in this decade because, as I said, the CO
2

problem is cumulative and every ton we emit, you can check it
off against our children and grandchildren.
Mr. Waxman. My concern is that we are facing this urgent
threat, but all Congress is doing is getting in the way.
This Congress has rightly been called the do-nothing
Congress. But on climate we are doing worse than nothing. We
are affirmatively obstructing progress.
Administrator McCarthy, you have been accused of leading a
war on coal. But in 2009 the President supported market-based
legislation to make major carbon pollution reductions while
investing $60 billion to develop clean coal technologies like
carbon capture and sequestration, isn't that right?
Ms. McCarthy. That is my understanding.
Mr. Waxman. The chairman said that this is the only country
in the world where new coal plants cannot be built. You haven't
released any regulations to prevent coal plants from being
built, have you?
Ms. McCarthy. We have not, no.
Mr. Waxman. At the time, our bill was criticized for being
too generous to the coal industry. But virtually all the
Republicans on this committee and the coal industry opposed the
legislation despite its massive investment in that industry. We
wanted to invest in innovative approaches so that coal could
still be used, but Republicans opposed us.
Last year, I tried a different approach. I wrote an op-ed
calling for an emissions fee that would put a price on carbon.
I even said that I would support using the revenues raised to
reduce other taxes. But Republicans in the House also opposed
this approach. Republicans outside the House, some of them,
supported it. In fact, House Republicans opposed every idea
that has been raised for addressing climate change.
Administrator McCarthy, you promulgated regulations last
Congress reducing carbon pollution from cars and trucks. House
Republicans voted to strip you of the authority to regulate
those emissions, isn't that right?
Ms. McCarthy. That is my understanding.
Mr. Waxman. They also voted to strip EPA of authority to
regulate carbon pollution from power plants, isn't that right?
Ms. McCarthy. That is right.
Mr. Waxman. Secretary Moniz, I have heard some Republicans
say that they like the idea of energy efficiency. But when I
look at their record, they voted to block enforcement of
requirements for energy-efficient light bulbs and they have
reported a budget for your department for next year that would
cut funding for energy-efficiency programs. The same is true
for investments in research to develop the solar, wind, and
other clean energy technologies of the future.
Secretary Moniz, within your department there is a division
called ARPA-E, which invests in advanced energy research
projects. It is widely praised by the scientific and research
communities for finding breakthrough technology. Yet this year,
the House Appropriations Committee voted to slash its budget by
over 80 percent, isn't that right?
Mr. Moniz. Yes, that is correct, sir.
Mr. Waxman. In this committee I often hear Republican
members argue against U.S. efforts to do anything about
reducing emissions because our Nation would be at a competitive
disadvantage. They say we need a global approach.
But then the House Appropriations Committee votes to defund
the U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change, which is the
international body charged with negotiating an international
climate treaty. Last Congress, House Republicans also voted to
defund not only our international efforts but defund our
government's lead climate negotiator.
Add it all up, what do you have? House Republicans have
voted against climate change legislation, they voted against
climate regulation, they have voted against climate research
and development, and they voted against international climate
efforts.
It is an appalling record. And it is why my question to
them is, What is your plan? It is easy to criticize other
people's solutions. But if all you do is criticize, you are
either a climate denier because you don't think anything needs
to be done, the science doesn't warrant it, it is not
happening, or they are ignoring the warning of scientists.
Secretary Moniz told us that we have a very narrow window to
act. We should be starting to act now, and that is why we need
to stop ignoring the scientists and start listening to them,
Mr. Chairman.
So tell us what your plan is, don't just criticize, because
we are facing a serious problem not for the future but right
now with extreme weather events.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Upton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I think that it is important as we conduct
oversight of agency actions on climate change and energy that
we also reflect on the statutory frameworks of the agencies
implementing such policy. And as an example, a point that I
like to make is, as we reflect back on DOE's energy
coordination role, it was developed frankly back at the time of
energy constraints, way back in the 1970s. I think you would
agree, Dr. Moniz, that we are currently in a new era of North
American energy abundance. Now, where I believe, and I think
the stats will show that as well, that we can actually be
energy independent for North America by using all of our
resources that are available. And I would like you to comment
on that as part of the record.
Mr. Moniz. And certainly, Mr. Chairman, the President and I
both are very supportive of all-of-the-above energy strategy
within a world where we are working to reduce CO
2

emissions.
Mr. Upton. And I know on page 10 of the President's Climate
Action Plan, the natural gas bullet, it refers to natural gas
as a bridge fuel. And is it the policy of DOE to consider
natural gas as a bridge fuel?
Mr. Moniz. Well, our policy is to do what we can to support
clean, safe production of natural gas, and I might add also of
so-called unconventional oil.
Mr. Upton. So as we look at what you may be doing as an
agency to approve or consider export applications for LNG, is
it bridge fuel? Is that part of the discussion or the debate?
Mr. Moniz. No, sir, that has not been part of the
discussion to date. I mean our approach to the LNG exports is
by law to approve them unless we rule an application as not in
the public interest. A public interest determination has many
facets. We have just given, as you know, another two
applications conditional approvals recently. I should emphasize
that the final approval will require the environmental review
through FERC and then coming back to the Department of Energy.
Mr. Upton. I just know as I look at the situation,
particularly as we try to become North American energy
independent, the new discoveries and fields that we have been
able to find of natural gas are an exciting, positive change.
We look at the advent of the manufacture of vehicles, passenger
vehicles perhaps using natural gas. We look at some of the
large fleets some of our businesses, whether they be UPS or
AT&T and others being able to convert those vehicles to natural
gas. I have a major manufacturer in my district, Eaton, which
is looking at natural gas trucks for their fleet. We even look
at locomotives, our railroads, looking at perhaps a very
positive transition from diesel to natural gas and the work of,
I know, Caterpillar and General Electric producing those and
seeing if in fact it will have a very positive impact on our
economy and to real change.
Ms. McCarthy, does EPA consider natural gas abundance as a
bridge fuel?
Ms. McCarthy. EPA views natural gas abundance as a positive
for air quality as an opportunity for us domestically to be
safe and secure in our energy supplies. Our responsibility is
to ensure that that is done as safely and responsibly as we can
working with the industry.
Mr. Upton. You know, one of the concerns that I hear,
particularly as I talk to the railroad folks and they are
looking at this potential change conversion to natural gas is
that they are concerned as they look at purchasing these, if in
fact they work, that the regulations may change, thus impacting
the ``payback period'' as it relates to the--is EPA considering
new regulations to do that?
Ms. McCarthy. Any regulations that EPA would consider are
going to be thoughtfully proposed and commented on. Right now,
sir, I think it is safe to say that EPA is investing very
heavily in opportunities to understand the sector, to gather
data, to work with the industry in a collaborative way. We see
this as a very positive collaboration moving forward. We see
this as a significant opportunity to reduce air pollutants and
to move forward in a safe and effective domestic supply. And so
I am very encouraged about the relationship we are building
with the gas industry, the rules we have already put out. I see
no reason for concern that that situation is going to change
and people won't be able to rely on this as a cleaner fuel
moving forward.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. I know my time is expired.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired. At this
time, I recognize----
Mr. Moniz. Mr. Chairman, may I just add a footnote with
your permission?
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, sir.
Mr. Moniz. I just want to say to Chairman Upton I would add
to your list marine applications, and also in fracking,
replacing diesels with natural gas engines there as well, less
oil use and better air quality.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to explore two things in my 5 minutes. First
is the confidence that you have that climate change is taking
place as a significant threat and as caused by a large degree
by human activities; and secondly, if actions taken to combat
climate change will harm or benefit the economy. So, first,
Secretary Moniz, would you address the first question? How
confident are you that climate change is taking place, that it
is a significant threat, and that it is caused to a large
degree by human activity?
Mr. Moniz. Well, again, first of all, of course the
scientific community overwhelmingly endorses those statements
and I personally do. As I have said in a previous hearing for
this committee, I think my confidence in those statements does
not rely just on the results of some very complicated computer
models but some very simple arithmetic in terms of what has
been known for a long time about the strength of
CO
2
, the greenhouse effect, and that the amount that
we are emitting is of the scale that within decades we would
reach areas such as doubling preindustrial emissions, which
have always been viewed as being highly, highly risky.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Administrator McCarthy, I would
like to address my second question to you in this form: How
have higher standards such as those as fuel efficiency helped
drive innovation and create jobs?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, we have been working with the auto
industry in particular over the past few years to understand
what they need to have certainty moving forward on air quality
standards, on fuel efficiency, on greenhouse gas standards. We
have worked together. And as a result of our rules, we have
been able to support the industry in a robust sort of
reemergence of that industry both domestically and
internationally. We are proud of the work we have done
together. We are delivering fuel-efficient vehicles for
consumers in the way they want them. We are saving them money.
We are reducing greenhouse gases. And we believe we are part of
the auto industry's efforts to gain a competitive advantage
that is to a great advantage for jobs and economy in this
country.
Mr. McNerney. So you believe the Detroit has become more
competitive with these higher fuel standards----
Ms. McCarthy. We believe so.
Mr. McNerney [continuing]. Thereby creating more jobs?
Ms. McCarthy. We know that certainty is important moving
forward. We have provided this industry a path forward until
2025. That gives them an opportunity to do research, to develop
new technologies, and to have a solid footing moving forward.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Moniz. If I may just add----
Mr. McNerney. Sure.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. Sir, on the auto side, I think it
is actually even a bigger story going back to when the auto
industry in this country looked like it was on its last legs, a
whole combination of issues from support for GM and Chrysler
assuming they had proper restructuring for the future, to loan
guarantees for Ford and Nissan; Nissan built a plant in
Tennessee because of that loan guarantee--to preparing for the
future with electric vehicle markets and the great success
story of Tesla, we could talk about Fisker, which we all know
is a different issue today, but overall, this portfolio has
taken us to an incredibly vibrant auto industry that is growing
faster than the Chinese auto industry.
Mr. McNerney. Are there any other technologies or items
that energy efficiency or work toward renewable energy has
created jobs that you would like to point to?
Mr. Moniz. Certainly. We could go through lots and lots of
those stories. First of all, on again the autos, Tesla is a
story of 3,000 jobs in California. That is way above even their
business plan. Take the solar PV business and I will go back to
our loan guarantee program. When there was no debt financing
available, those loans supported the first six utility-scale PV
projects in this country. There have subsequently been 10 with
pure private financing. That is jobs all the way from
manufacturing, to supply chain, to the installation and
operation.
Mr. McNerney. Well, do you see grid modernization playing a
role in helping reduce climate change and also in creating
jobs?
Mr. Moniz. Grid modernization is a very, very high
priority. It has multiple benefits. One would be the
integration of renewables into the system. A second is that it
can provide with intelligence embedded in the grid. It can
provide new consumer services and higher efficiency, lower
bills. And finally, it will be needed, as the example I gave in
New Jersey, to provide resilience against the extreme weather
events that we are seeing more and more of.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Barton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to welcome our two witnesses and give you the red
badge of courage for showing up. We invited 13 agencies and I
don't know if you all drew straws and got the long straws or
whatever, but you two are here and we are glad you are here. We
didn't hear from Department of Agriculture, Defense, HHS,
Interior, State Department, Transportation, Export-Import Bank,
NASA, National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration, Office of
Science and Technology Policy, or U.S. Agency for International
Development. For some reason they couldn't make it, but you two
are and you all have been here before and we are glad you all
are both here.
Each of you and the other 11 agencies got a letter dated
August the 6th, 2013, asking you to attend, and it asked you to
answer nine questions. Now, when Mr. Waxman was speaking in his
Q&A he said that the Obama administration has spent about $60
billion on climate change. The number I had was 70 billion, but
we will go with Mr. Waxman's 60 billion number. And this is
really an effort to let the Obama administration put their best
foot forward. So we asked nine questions and I asked the staff
if your agencies had answered these questions. And I am told
that they had not. So I am going to read them into the record
and then give each of you briefly a chance to see if you can
get us these answers.
The first question that we asked your agency was to
describe the climate change-related research and technology
programs that you are actively engaged in, including programs
or activities undertaken with other Federal agencies. We didn't
get an answer to that.
We asked you to describe the climate change adaptation,
mitigation, or sustainability-related activities engaged in,
including activities undertaken with other Federal agencies. We
didn't get an answer to that.
We asked you to identify all the climate change-related
interagency task forces, advisory committees, working groups,
and initiatives in which your agency is currently participating
and or has participated in since January of 2005, didn't get an
answer to that.
We asked you to identify all climate change or clean
energy-related funding, grants, or financial assistance
programs which your agency is currently participating or has
participated in and the amount of climate change or clean
energy-related funding, grants, and financial assistance
distributed by your agencies since January of 2005, didn't get
an answer to that.
We asked you to identify all the climate change-related
regulations or guidance documents, including regulations or
standards to reduce greenhouse gas emissions issued or proposed
by your agency since January 2005 or under development, didn't
get an answer to that.
We asked you to identify all the climate change-related
international negotiations, agreements, partnerships, working
groups, or initiatives in which you currently or have
previously participated since January 2005, didn't get an
answer to that.
Provide the approximate amount of annual agency funding
attributed to climate change activities of the fiscal years
2005 through 2012, didn't get an answer to that.
Describe the actions that your agency has undertaken to
respond to the Executive Order by the President, 13514,
including the approximate cost, personnel, and other resources
dedicated by your agency to implement that Executive Order,
didn't get an answer to that, Mr. Chairman.
And last but not least, to provide a list of each sub-
agency, division, and/or program office within your agency that
is currently engaged in climate change-related activities and
to provide an estimate of the approximate number of your agency
employees and/or contractors engaged part-time or full-time in
climate change-related activities. Guess what, didn't get an
answer to that.
Now, Mr. Waxman has been asking this committee and the
subcommittee to hold hearings on President Obama's climate
change efforts all year long. We asked nine questions. We
didn't get one straight answer. Are you trying to hide
something? Are you embarrassed by it? Or you just don't care to
respond to the Congress?
Mr. Moniz. Well, I will answer first at least, Mr. Barton.
Thank you.
Look, I am very happy to come and discuss any and all of
those questions. I will address a few of them now if you would
like. Certainly, well, for the Department of Energy, for
example, the question on regulations, et cetera, standards,
that is clear. It is efficiency standards is what we do in this
regard.
In terms of the programs, as I said earlier, I would say
our last budget, fiscal year 2013 enacted, the question is
ambiguous, but if we take all of the programs that help address
climate change, even if they have other objectives like
efficiency, then that count would come to about 5.4 billion.
But as I say, there are multiple objectives. There is fuel
diversity, nuclear energy, fossil energy, et cetera.
Mr. Barton. Well, my time has expired.
Mr. Moniz. OK.
Mr. Whitfield. And I think, Mr. Secretary, we do appreciate
your making an effort to answer, but I do hope that you all
would get with your staffs and try to respond to us because, as
was indicated, we asked these questions----
Mr. Moniz. We will do that, sir.
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. Some time ago and we would
appreciate you all responding to that.
Mr. Barton. Mr. Chairman, the point I am trying to make is
we are trying to have a good faith effort here to have a real
dialogue, but in order to have the dialogue, we have to have
the facts. And we are being stonewalled, which means the
American people are being stonewalled. These are not
complicated questions and they are not trick questions. If the
Obama administration has this great Climate Change Action Plan,
every one of these questions should be able to be answered in
detail and in glowing terms. So I would hope that you two
representatives of the Obama administration, you know, first of
all, both of you are good people. You are smart, you have got
integrity, you have worked with this committee. Get us the
straight facts and then we will have a debate with the other
side----
Mr. Waxman. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Barton [continuing]. Over what those facts mean.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Barton, will you yield to me just to
correct a statement----
Mr. Barton. If I have time, I will be happy to yield.
Mr. Waxman. Well, you quoted me as saying the $60 billion
has been spent, but my statement was that we proposed $60
billion to go to be spent under our legislation. Secondly, it
is unprecedented to have to Cabinet-level officials who have
the primary burden of dealing with the climate change issue
come before a subcommittee. I hardly call that stonewalling.
Mr. Whitfield. Actually, CRS said 70 billion over the last
4 years but----
Mr. Waxman. Well, we are talking about different--he quoted
me as saying 60 billion. I wasn't saying it was 60 instead of
70. My statement about 60 billion was what we proposed to spend
in the cap-and-trade bill.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I would like to recognize the
gentleman from Michigan, the distinguished gentleman, Mr.
Dingell, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy.
Administrator McCarthy, welcome back to the committee and
congratulations on your new position as EPA Administrator.
Ms. McCarthy. Thank you.
Mr. Dingell. We wish you great good luck as you take on
this new position.
And also, Mr. Secretary, we welcome you to the committee.
Gentlemen and ladies, these questions will be yes or no and
I will request that you give us some additional information as
a response after the response has been made.
So for both of our witnesses, does EPA or the Department of
Energy see a future for coal as a viable energy source in light
of the impending greenhouse gas regulations? Please answer yes
or no and then submit additional information for the record.
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Moniz. I agree. Yes. Um-hum.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Administrator McCarthy, I understand that
there will be a different proposal for modified sources, i.e.,
units that have been updated, and also for existing sources
that have not been modified. Can you tell me if EPA is reaching
out to all stakeholders concerned about both components of the
greenhouse gas rule? Please answer yes or no.
Ms. McCarthy. To the best ability we can, yes, we are.
Mr. Dingell. Would you please also, Madam Administrator,
submit more information for the record?
Now, is EPA thinking about a unit-by-unit compliance goal
for the existing and modified source carbon standards? Please
answer yes or no.
Ms. McCarthy. We are thinking about that and a number of
other different flexible strategies.
Mr. Dingell. Would you submit such additional comments for
the record as you deem appropriate?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Now, the debate about climate change is not
just about air but it is also about water. I am sure that both
you and the Secretary understand this.
Administrator McCarthy, you do all know that the Great
Lakes contain 20 percent of the world's freshwater. Luckily,
our water levels are up slightly this year after years of
inadequate ice cover on the lakes and too little precipitation,
rain and snow. Lower lake levels affect not only shipping and
boating and recreation but also make it easier for algae blooms
to form, endanger fish habitats, and threaten drinking water
sources, as well as industrial and cooling water intakes. Madam
Administrator, do you believe that the President's Climate
Action Plan provides the direction for EPA to deal with the
unique problems of the Great Lakes? Please answer yes or no.
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Moniz. Sir, may I----
Mr. Dingell. Will EPA under your leadership continue to
work with other Federal and State agencies to address climate-
related problems on the Great Lakes? Yes or no?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. In dealing with water quality, do you believe
that EPA has adequate clarification of its jurisdiction under
the Clean Water Act to ensure protection of water sources?
Please answer yes or no.
Ms. McCarthy. Not as yet but we are certainly working on
that.
Mr. Dingell. I want you to give us some additional response
on that because that is a matter of deep concern, I think, to
you, and it is to me, too.
Now, Madam Administrator, as these problems on the Great
Lakes become more frequent, do you believe EPA will need
further clarification of its Clean Water Act jurisdiction?
Please answer yes or no.
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, I do.
Mr. Dingell. And I believe you are finding, Madam
Administrator, that the actions taken by the Congress to
foreclose you and EPA from getting us additional work in terms
of rules and regulations clarifying the Supreme Court decision
are extremely unhealthy, am I correct? Yes or no?
Ms. McCarthy. We find them very difficult.
Mr. Dingell. Now, I am sure you have seen a recent map
published in the National Geographic showing what would happen
if all the world ice were to melt. While this is a somewhat
drastic scenario, it shows almost all of Florida and all of New
Jersey submerged. It was not the map, however, that intrigues
me most. The map showed little or no effect on the Great Lakes.
Do you believe that EPA along with other Federal agencies have
the tools necessary to predict what affects climate change
might have on the Great Lakes basin and the region in which
they exist? Please answer yes or no.
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Would you submit additional information for
the record as you deem it appropriate?
Ms. McCarthy. I will.
Mr. Dingell. Now, I would like to have a submission from
you, Mr. Secretary, about what it is you are going to do about
potential shortages and whether we have shortages coming on
electric power because of the actions that are going to have to
be taken with regard to global warming and matters of that kind
and how that is going to affect our future in terms of the
reliability and availability of electric power.
And I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If you would submit that for the record, please.
Mr. Moniz. And I will just note, sir, that we have a report
of vulnerabilities of the energy infrastructure that will
answer many of your questions. I might just add one factoid
that there are projections that in an unconstrained world in
terms of greenhouse gas emissions, we could see about a 2-foot
drop in the level of the Great Lakes in this century, which
would of course be very, very disruptive.
Mr. Dingell. Industry is going to make a large number of
retirements of plans because of----
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Dingell. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Hall, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hall. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
And the argument about whether or not climate change is
taking place, I know one thing by the argument that Mr. Barton
had with the gentleman from California, something that is
taking place and taxing the hard-working people of this country
is taking place.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you for your opening statement
when you set out, and it wasn't an estimate on your part. This
is from the Congressional Research Service--they usually are
pretty accurate--that the climate change funding for climate
science technology, international assistance, and adoption was
approximately 70 billion for the period 2008 to 2012.
Now, Mr. Barton, you got better answers. I counted, I
think, 12 or 15 of those people that didn't give you any answer
it all. By no answer you got a better answer than I had
received from Mrs. McCarthy about a year ago in the Science
Committee if you remember coming before our committee there.
And I may have asked you a question you didn't like and your
answer was I am not in the business of creating jobs. That is
out of the record itself. And I left word there if you wanted
to apologize to the many millions of people that were
unemployed and many of them hungry. And I have never seen that
apology to this day.
Actually, Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous
consent to submit more of my questions in writing. I have more
than the 5 minutes lets me make here.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
Mr. Hall. That is taking place at 20 billion per year and
we can figure that up however we want to. And I yield back the
time. I thank both the witnesses for appearing.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time.
At this time I would recognize the gentleman from New York,
Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Secretary Moniz, if we were going to reduce our carbon
pollution, we need to deploy more clean energy and boost energy
efficiency. Yesterday, the Department of Energy released its
report showing that wind and solar power, LED lighting, and
electric vehicles are growing rapidly in this country as a
result of well-designed Federal and State incentives and
investments in research and development. That being said, the
report finds that as a result of these measures, ``the historic
shift to a cleaner, more domestic, and more secure energy
future is not some faraway goal. We are living it, and it is
gaining force.'' I would like to ask unanimous consent to enter
this report into the record, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tonko. Thank you. The report contained a particularly
striking graph about the cost and deployment of wind energy in
the United States. Wind capacity has skyrocketed in our
country, and I believe the committee has that graph. OK. We are
posting it on the screen. Thank you.
[Graph.]
Mr. Tonko. Secretary Moniz, what has been the key to wind
power's success? As you see, we have the graph itself on the
display screen.
Mr. Moniz. Well, I think the story, as I alluded to
earlier, it is actually the same story that we saw decades ago
with unconventional natural gas. We had investment from the
Federal Government, we had public-private partnerships, and we
had time-limited, well-crafted incentive that has these things
taking off. We are seeing the same thing now with wind. As we
can see, the deployment is very, very striking. And of course
the cost certainly in good wind areas are quite competitive
with other sources.
The report has similar graphs, same kind of message, with
photovoltaics. Solar energy, it is not fully appreciated how
competitive solar is already in the right conditions, which is
typical for this stage of a technology penetrating the market.
Mr. Tonko. So is the response for solar as strong as this
wind?
Mr. Moniz. Perhaps stronger.
Mr. Tonko. Super. What can we do to----
Mr. Moniz. And also, if I may, in LEDs it is totally
incredible. It has gone from, I don't know, 50,000 to 20
million deployed in the country in a very short time, and the
cost has gone from $50 to $15 and the lifetime savings from one
LED is over $100.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. What can we do to ensure that today's
R&D is utilized fully into emerging energy technologies so that
we can achieve these same levels of success?
Mr. Moniz. Well, first of all, we need to, as I said
earlier, we need a sustained commitment to maintain the
research development demonstration and deployment push. That is
absolutely required. And these will be market-competitive
technologies again sooner rather than later.
The other thing is, of course, we would like to capture the
full value of these developments and that involves other things
that we are doing such as, for example, the advanced
manufacturing partnership to really help establish the cutting-
edge manufacturing capacity and training in this country.
Mr. Tonko. Um-hum. Energy efficiency is a key part of the
President's Climate Action Plan. Energy efficiency is one of
the cheapest and most cost-effective ways to reduce carbon
pollution while saving consumers money, and it is a big part of
the Department of Energy's responsibilities under the
President's plan. Mr. Secretary, the President's plan calls for
new energy efficiency standards for appliances and equipment.
Why are energy efficiency standards a good way to reduce carbon
pollution?
Mr. Moniz. These standards apply to reducing all of our
emissions, carbon emissions, as well as conventional pollutants
by reducing the energy needs quite substantially. But I really
want to emphasize all of our rules have a cost-benefit test and
they also save money for consumers. The upfront marginal
increases are overwhelmed by the energy savings at the consumer
level.
Mr. Tonko. Well, some believe that taking action to address
climate change will kill jobs and cost consumers money. Is that
an accurate description of these energy efficiency standards?
Mr. Moniz. No, we believe that they create jobs for one
thing by saving money in the economy that can be devoted to
other purposes.
Mr. Tonko. Um-hum.
Mr. Moniz. And in addition it gives us products that we can
sell globally.
Mr. Tonko. Um-hum. I see that my time is up, Mr. Chair. I
will yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, welcome. I am glad to have both of you here today.
Secretary Moniz, any serious plan for reducing greenhouse
gas emissions substantially must have a strong nuclear
component. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Moniz. I am sorry. Could you repeat that?
Mr. Shimkus. Nuclear power is critical and obviously having
a greenhouse gas plan----
Mr. Moniz. Yes, we are supporting nuclear power. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. Do you consider nuclear programs to be a
critical part of this administration's plan?
Mr. Moniz. Yes, it is all of the above, and nuclear is
strongly there.
Mr. Shimkus. So you probably weren't interested in
following the last licensing case before the NRC and the only
person who voted against licensing? That was the then-Chairman
Jaczko, who was appointed by this President. So the concern is
the conflicting signals we are seeing. You have got the
presidential-appointed chairman of the NRC casting the only
``no'' vote for licensing a new nuclear power plant in this
country. And so that leads to the other questions.
Under this administration how many nuclear reactors have
closed down?
Mr. Moniz. I believe there are five----
Mr. Shimkus. It is actually six. We have got one in New
Jersey, Wisconsin, California, Florida, and Vermont.
Mr. Moniz. And five being built.
Mr. Shimkus. Right, without the vote to license by the
chairman of the NRC, who was appointed by the President. So I
will give you that point, but you have to give me a point on
jobs that a lot of jobs have been lost by the shutdown of these
nuclear facilities.
Under the President's Climate Action Plan, EPA is expected
to propose a rule later this week setting greenhouse gas
standards for new power plants that will require CCS
technologies for any new coal plant built in the U.S. This is
effectively, as many of us fear and Administrator McCarthy
knows where I stand on this, a ban on new coal-fired power
plants. Do you believe, as the Secretary of Energy, that it is
defensible for the EPA to impose regulations that essentially
ban the building of new coal-fired power plants in this
country?
Mr. Moniz. Well, I certainly am not going to comment on the
ongoing----
Mr. Shimkus. But from an energy position of the baseload
demand or the requirements of this country in low-cost power,
obviously removing coal-fired power plants from the fleet will
raise costs?
Mr. Moniz. Again, our job at the Department of Energy is
to----
Mr. Shimkus. Hopefully----
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. Support the----
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Production of low-cost energy for
our consumers----
Mr. Moniz. Making technologies----
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. And our manufacturers and the
like.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. For coal in a low-carbon world. And
I might add there is lots of activity already----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, we are going to keep following on that
course of questions. Is the DOE aware of any U.S. commercial-
scale power generation plant using coal as a fuel that
captures, transports, and permanently stores carbon dioxide?
Mr. Moniz. Well, as you know, there have been a number of
demonstrations. There is the commercial----
Mr. Shimkus. That is not the question. The question is is
there one today----
Mr. Moniz. Commercial plant 75 percent complete and
Mississippi----
Mr. Shimkus. But it is----
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. And also although----
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Not generating and not storing.
Mr. Moniz. But if I may add, it is not a power plant, but I
think we should not ignore the fact----
Mr. Shimkus. That is another good point.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. That 12 years we have the Great
Plains Weyburn project, 20 million tons have been used for EOR,
and it is running on a commercial basis.
Mr. Shimkus. All right. The point, as you know, CCS takes
billions of dollars. There is no commercially available
technology to do it. It is not being conducted right now for--
and I am going to turn to the administrator, who is a friend--
but for these new rules to be promulgated, it is a signal that
we are not going to build new coal-fired power plants until
there is at least a demonstrated ability to have this
technology, and the concern is the costs are going to be great.
Administrator McCarthy, has EPA ever established a new
source performance standard for an emissions source on the
basis of technology that has not been commercially proven by
operation at commercial scale?
Ms. McCarthy. We have in the past, for example, our use of
scrubbers was seen as an innovative but----
Mr. Shimkus. But it was commercially available at that
time?
Ms. McCarthy. It was----
Mr. Shimkus. That is the whole difference between the clean
air debate and the greenhouse gas debate is in the clean air
debate technology was available. In the greenhouse gas debate
it is not available. That is really the number one concern that
we have. Do you want to----
Ms. McCarthy. No----
Mr. Shimkus. I mean do you agree with that or----
Ms. McCarthy. Congressman, the rule has yet to be issued,
but I will say that this is an issue that was heavily
discussed. That is the reason why we are reproposing. We will
have a full debate about this when the rule goes out, but I
would indicate to you that this rule is not about existing
facilities. It is about the future plants that are being
constructed. And there are four plants that are planning on and
designing in CCS at levels that would beat anything that we had
proposed in our earlier proposal.
Mr. Shimkus. And I hope you are right and I hope it is
successful. The point is it will be costly.
I am going to end on this, Mr. Chairman.
And I think you have litigation issues that are unknown.
The State of Illinois is applying for this, as you know. Mr.
Secretary, you are doing your research there. There are other
issues just than being able to, you know, get this down in deep
sequestration aquifers.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Ms. McCarthy, will you provide us a list of
those four plants you just referred to?
Ms. McCarthy. Certainly.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And like my colleagues,
I would like to welcome Administrator McCarthy and Secretary
Moniz and thank you both for appearing today and look forward
to our discussion. And I have enjoyed it so far.
Administrator McCarthy, I have been concerned in the past
that EPA has not taken DOE's concern about reliability
seriously when developing utility rules. Can you commit to
giving deference to DOE on grid reliability when drafting a
rule for existing power plants? Is that part of the
consideration with EPA?
Ms. McCarthy. We have worked hand-in-hand in developing
this proposal and we certainly will on the evaluation of
comments in moving any rule forward.
Mr. Green. OK. And I see the Secretary shaking his head,
too, so I am glad you all are working together because even
though we want as clean air as we can, we still want to be able
to turn on the lights.
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Green. And particularly in Texas have our air-
conditioning in the summer.
I generally support the research and international efforts
to address greenhouse gas emissions that the administration is
undertaking. When it comes to regulating carbon from our
industrial services, I do see that Congress should move past
its gridlock and develop a regulatory plan instead of the EPA.
I think Congress ought to do our job and particularly the
Supreme Court said the EPA already has the current authority.
But until Congress starts to legislate again, we can't sit here
and just complain about the EPA are doing what the Supreme
Court said it has the authority. Climate change is real and it
is something that Congress should act on.
Secretary Moniz, where are we with the CCS technology? I
know that the plant in Mississippi may be up and running in the
next year, but even that is not guaranteed. When do you
reasonably expect CCS to become technologically and
economically feasible?
Mr. Moniz. Well, I think we should talk about carbon
capture and sequestration. Certainly carbon capture, whether it
be for combustion plants or for gasification plants, is
demonstrated technology. We continue to invest in new
technologies that will further reduce cost, but those are used
technologies in various places, well, certainly in the
petrochemical industry, in the former case, Great Plains plant
in the second case.
And on sequestration side, storage side, as I said earlier,
this one plant, this one field in Weyburn for enhanced oil
recovery has already stored 20 million tons. And largely in
Texas actually we are using 60 megatons a year for producing
300,000 barrels of oil. So this is a growing concern so the
components are all there.
Mr. Green. Well, and I think some of our concern is that we
don't want the requirements to get past what either the
technology or what you can capitalize to be able to deal with.
And so there needs to be coordination there if that technology
is there and there are examples of it. But is the plant up in
Mississippi? Do we have a timeline on when they are going to
actually be up and running?
Mr. Moniz. I believe they are operating in 2014 or 2015. It
is quite close. It is a gasification plant again, and again,
the CO
2
will go to enhanced oil recovery in local
fields.
Mr. Green. Well, and there has been success in, you know,
the Midland area, the Permian basin for, you know, enhanced oil
recovery and we even have a pipeline from Mississippi to the
Gulf coast to use so----
Mr. Moniz. Yes.
Mr. Green [continuing]. There are examples.
Mr. Moniz. On average in Texas it has been about a half-a-
ton stored per barrel of oil produced.
Mr. Green. OK. I appreciate it because it is a beneficial
use. We can use it for----
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mr. Green [continuing]. Enhanced recovery. You testified
that in developing the GHG regulations for existing power
plants you engaged in the outreach to a broad group of
stakeholders with expertise who can inform development of
proposed standards and regulation guidelines, which you expect
to issue in June of 2014. You also said that for us to be
successful, the policy to be developed would have to promote
economic growth. Some people say that any policy to address
climate change is only going to do harm to our economy. To what
degree will utilities play a role in developing these
regulations? Is there a formal process already scheduled that
they participate in?
Ms. McCarthy. EPA has already engaged in a number of
utility- and energy-related forums talking about this issue and
we will engage with the utilities every step of the way. It is
my concerted belief and I think you will see this as we talk to
States that they are taking numerous actions already that are
reducing greenhouse gases. There are so many States that
already have renewable fuel standards, energy efficiency
standards. They are working with their mayors to make their
cities more efficient. There are ways in which we can recognize
and understand how best we can shape these plans that States
need to develop that will be beneficial to them from an
economic perspective and beneficial to the U.S. and the world
to reduce the threat of climate change.
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I know I am over time, but these
power companies are actually part of that process?
Ms. McCarthy. Very much so.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Scalise, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this hearing and, Administrator McCarthy and Secretary
Moniz, I appreciate you all being here talking about climate
change policies.
And of course a lot of this comes in the context of
economic policy, how these policies have an impact on families,
how they have an impact on the economy. We hear all the time
from small businesses I meet with, I know talking to my
colleagues the same thing. Some of the biggest impediments they
have to creating jobs right now are policies coming out of
Washington, and frankly, Administrator McCarthy, the policies
coming out of EPA seem to be at the top of that list, a lot of
the threats are coming out of EPA.
And I know you are new to the current job you have and that
you have been at the EPA in different roles throughout the
years. And I don't know if you all recognize those impacts. We
have talked about them before in our committee hearings, but
when you look at the climate policies that you are proposing, I
want to read a comment from you recently and get your take on
it. I think the administrator said this recently.
``Essentially, the President said that it is time to act. He
said he wasn't going to wait for Congress but that he had
administrative authorities and that it was time to start
utilizing those more effectively in a more concerted way.''
And so, Administrator McCarthy, when you talk about the
President's task to you to act regardless of what Congress
does, it causes a big concern not only to Members of Congress
but to people across the country who believe in a democratic
process where Republicans and Democrats work together. And
Congress is the body that is supposed to shape law and then the
President through his Secretaries, including you, are the ones
who are supposed to administer the policies that Congress
passed.
And so when you are echoing the President, who says, you
know what, I don't care if Congress didn't do it; it is time to
act anyway, I hope you understand the chilling effect that is
sent across the country. And I would like to get your
interpretation of what you think the President means and what
you think the authority you have to act is even if Congress
chooses not to go down the path you want to.
Ms. McCarthy. Let me rephrase the issue in a way that
hopefully is a bit more positive. I think the President----
Mr. Scalise. Because it is not positive when I hear those
comments.
Ms. McCarthy. I think the President has reached out and
indicated that congressional action would be something that he
would want to engage in and that he would welcome. I think what
he has also told us to do is look at the laws that Congress has
already enacted through their own public democratic process and
what have they told the agencies that their responsibility is
and their authority is. We are not doing anything at EPA or in
the climate plan that goes outside the boundaries of what
Congress has said is our mission and our authority.
Mr. Scalise. Well, and I would hope you would keep that in
mind as you develop policies because we are concerned about
some of the things that you are doing in terms of them going
against wishes of Congress. And the cap-and-trade bill that was
defeated when there was a super majority in the Senate, so
clearly Congress spoke that that is not something that we
wanted. Just a few weeks ago we in the House voted. The vote
was 237 to 176 to reject a carbon tax, an actual vote----
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Scalise [continuing]. On the House Floor to reject a
carbon tax and it passed overwhelmingly with Democrats voting
with Republicans. And in fact Barbara Boxer was recently quoted
saying, ``we don't have the votes for carbon tax or carbon
fee.'' I would hope you would take all of that into
consideration when you are looking at climate change policies.
Not only did we say we don't want it; we voted to reject a
carbon tax. And so you need to take that into consideration.
That is not an authority you have, and in fact, Congress has
now said that is something that you don't have an authority. We
reject that.
I want to also bring up when you look at the impacts of
these kind of policies how they are working in other countries.
And again it has a real impact on our economy when some of
these rules are proposed, but some of these other countries
across the globe have already tried to go down this road in
terms of climate change policy that you are looking at. There
was just a revolt in Australia in their government, a complete
upheaval because of their carbon tax. In fact, there is a
movement with this new government to repeal the carbon tax.
Read from the Telegraph just a few weeks ago, ``Brussels
fears European industrial massacre sparked by energy costs.''
The Business Report, ``Merkel warns E.U. against tough carbon
targets.'' Financial Times, ``European utilities warned E.U.
over energy risks.'' Special Online, ``Germany's Energy
Poverty: How Electricity Becomes a Luxury Good.'' It goes on
and on. And the U.K. Express, ``3,000 pounds-a-year bills on
the way as energy prices rise again.'' The Telegraph, ``Romanic
Germany risks economic decline as green dreams spoils.''
I hope you understand that in the countries that have tried
this it is failing miserably. They are having revolts in those
countries. So Congress has acted. Congress has sent a message
to you. I hope you would respect those messages that have been
sent not just here in Congress but look at what has happened in
where they have actually gone down this road in other countries
and they are seeing dramatic declines in their economy,
dramatic increases in energy costs that hurt real families.
These are the concerns we have. As you are looking at climate
policy in your agency, recognize the will of the people here in
this country.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
This time I recognize the gentlelady from California, Mrs.
Capps, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Will Mrs. Capps yield to me for 30 seconds?
Mrs. Capps. Yes, I will.
Mr. Waxman. I just want to point out that there is no
reason you should be mindful of proposals that even passed the
House if they are not law. You have got to be mindful of what
the laws are. And what you have to do is enforce the laws. So
this argument you should pay attention to what Republicans were
able to pass through the House is not a law.
Thank you for yielding to me.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you. Thank you also from me,
Administrator McCarthy and Secretary Moniz, for appearing today
and for your testimony.
Given the immediate and long-term threats posed by climate
change, I am very encouraged that we are finally having a
formal discussion on this pressing issue. With Congress's
inaction, the President's Climate Action Plan is a welcome step
forward and we need to debate it because we need to cut carbon
pollution. We need to help prepare for the impacts of climate
change.
Last February, I wrote a letter to the President signed by
40 of my colleagues urging him to create a panel to help local
communities to prepare for climate change impacts. One of our
key recommendations in this letter was to fully evaluate the
budgetary impacts of this problem. Climate change is already
costing the Federal Government tens of billions of dollars in
disaster assistance, right? By investing some of this money up
front in resiliency measures we could minimize these costly
impacts down the road and we could create jobs doing that
implementation. So I was pleased to see the President included
a similar task force on preparedness in his Climate Action
Plan.
Administrator McCarthy, can you discuss what the task force
will be working on and to what extent it will be examining this
budgetary impact? For example, will you be issuing findings
comparing the long-term costs of inaction to those of building
a more resilient infrastructure?
Ms. McCarthy. Thank you for the question. As you recognize,
the President's Climate Action Plan focused just as heavily on
the adaptation question as it did on the mitigation issues in
the international component. I think he did that recognizing
the extreme concern that communities are facing now and the
public health impacts associated with not recognizing that the
climate is changing and preparing for that and making our
communities more resilient in a changing climate.
He established a task force to look at these issues. We are
going to be working with every State and community. There is
support already that has been recently issued by the Department
of the Interior to look at resiliency projects, $100 million as
a result of the Climate Action Plan moving this forward. We all
have, each agency, developed Climate Action Plans. We are
participating on both national forums as well as developing our
own task forces to begin working with communities more
effectively to integrate what we know about a changing climate
into the work that we do. There is a great deal of work on
going. It has been nurtured over the past few years, but it
certainly has been given a boost in the action plan and will
move this forward.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
Mr. Moniz. May I just have a----
Mrs. Capps. Well, OK, but I have a question for you, too.
Let me ask the question and then maybe you can weave that in.
DOE currently focuses heavily on more mature technologies
like solar and wind. While I support these efforts of course, I
want to make sure we are not neglecting some other promising
renewable technologies. For example, there are several
companies, including Ecomerit in my district, which are
developing exciting new technologies to reliably harness energy
from ocean waves, tides, and currents. In fact, Ecomerit was
recently awarded a $500,000 DOE grant to help develop its wave
energy technology. This only scratches the surface, however, of
public and private investments that are needed.
So, Mr. Secretary, I was going to ask you, and you can
respond any way want to, what does the President's Climate
Action Plan do to expand the development of marine and
hydrokinetic energy technologies?
Mr. Moniz. Thank you. If I may just add----
Mrs. Capps. Sure.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. A note to the earlier question that
in addition to that task force, there has also been a specific
Sandy task force led by HUD. The work that I described earlier
on the micro-grid comes under that umbrella and that will be
translatable to other parts of the country.
Mrs. Capps. Absolutely.
Mr. Moniz. Finally, under FEMA we also have
responsibilities for DOE for, you know, energy infrastructure,
other agencies for other parts of our national infrastructure.
On your question to me----
Mrs. Capps. Yes.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. It is very important that we not
forget what are sometimes called the forgotten renewables, and
that includes----
Mrs. Capps. Absolutely.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. Hydrokinetic waves, tides, small
hydro, advanced geothermal, and we are looking to increase our
emphasis on those as we go forward.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you. If I could follow up, I would love
to have a written response on some of the ways that you want to
do that that I could take back to some promising industries in
my local district that would love some support like the one
that was given to Ecomerit in terms of clean energy technology.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady's time is expired.
At this time I would like to recognize the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Pitts, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Moniz, you have recently taken over leadership at
DOE and you understand the role of DOE in establishing and
coordinating national energy policy. Can you tell us whether
DOE is going to have an active role going forward in ensuring
that the climate policies pursued by other Federal agencies do
not negatively affect the affordability and availability of
energy?
Mr. Moniz. Thank you for the question. The principal way in
which we will be doing that over these next, say, 3 years is
the so-called quadrennial review process. That will be convened
out of the Executive Office of the President but the Department
of Energy will be establishing the secretariat and the
analytical underpinnings. And that will involve the entire
administration. So that will be our principal role there. And I
can also assure you, as I have in previous testimony here, that
we view our job in technology development as being to innovate
to keep lowering the costs of energy for our consumers and our
industry.
Mr. Pitts. So you will review climate policies, regulatory
initiatives of EPA that have the potential to negatively affect
the affordability and reliability of energy?
Mr. Moniz. Well, for processes--and Ms. McCarthy can
answer--I mean of course we have review processes. What we will
do in this context is help provide the threads, some of the
analytics to bring together all the agencies to discuss energy
policy broadly, environment, security, economy.
Mr. Pitts. Administrator McCarthy, I want to understand
with all the climate change-related programs that your agency
pursues such as research, technology development, grants,
education, and outreach, does your agency determine at the
outset what those programs are supposed to accomplish and then
go back and evaluate whether they actually did accomplish what
they set out to do?
Ms. McCarthy. We keep quite close track. And I would just
add that many of the programs that we run are programs that
Congress has specifically directed us to run and at specific
funding levels.
Mr. Pitts. Now, does EPA make information about what these
programs have actually achieved available to the public?
Ms. McCarthy. Very much so. We are quite----
Mr. Pitts. Can you identify for us what or where that
information is available?
Ms. McCarthy. I can certainly provide that to you.
Mr. Pitts. Now, EPA has been implementing climate policies
for a number of years. Have you evaluated what that work has
actually accomplished in terms of meaningfully addressing
climate risk and could you share that with the committee?
Ms. McCarthy. We certainly take a look at work that we do
to understand what kind of greenhouse gas reductions might have
been reduced, but as we all know, reducing climate risk is a
global effort and the U.S. is participating in that effort as
rigorously as we can.
Mr. Pitts. Now, Ms. McCarthy, does EPA coordinate with
other agencies when it evaluates the impact of its regulatory
action relating to the power sector?
Ms. McCarthy. Very much so. In every regulatory process all
agencies participate in the interagency review. Part of that is
to look at the cost-and-benefit analysis that EPA produces and
to comment on both of those. Those are----
Mr. Pitts. For example, have you consulted with the
Department of Health and Human Services about the impact of
energy poverty or higher energy prices on health or the ability
to respond to extreme weather events?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, what we have done is to ensure that we
do a complete analysis to the extent that it is available to us
and appropriate on what the economic consequences are of our
rulemaking, and we take great pains to make sure that we do not
threaten reliability, nor do we put out rules that will
significantly increase cost to consumers.
Mr. Pitts. One other question, Administrator McCarthy. The
President's Climate Action Plan says on page 10 that ``curbing
emissions of methane is critical to our overall effort to
address climate change.'' And it refers to an Interagency
Methane Strategy Group----
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Pitts [continuing]. That is identifying technologies
and best practices for reducing methane emissions. I should
also note that EPA's Web site indicates that we can cut methane
significantly by reducing reliance on landfilling and
increasing use of modern waste-to-energy facilities like the
one in my district, the Lancaster County Solid Waste Management
Authorities facility. Will you recommend to the Interagency
Methane Strategy Group or may I request that you recommend the
importance of focusing on ways to increase the United States'
use of waste energy for managing nonrecyclable waste?
Ms. McCarthy. We will raise that issue but I think if you
see the tone and tenor of the President's remarks in the
Climate Action Plan, it is an effort to understand where
methane is being generated, how effectively to work with the
industry on strategies that will reduce that methane and
recapture it because it becomes a significant financial
opportunity. Those are the kinds of things we certainly want to
capitalize on.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you.
Mr. Moniz. If I may add, the $1 billion loan guarantee
program that we will be issuing would include MSW technologies
as a possibility.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is expired.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Doyle, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator McCarthy, it is a pleasure to have you here
today.
Secretary Moniz, I just want to say your recent visit to
Pittsburgh was appreciated and well-received by all of us in
attendance and we hope to have you back there soon.
Well, your visit is very timely today because many of us
are eagerly awaiting the first rule regulating carbon pollution
from power plants, the single-biggest emitter of carbon in the
United States. And though I think the legislation to address
climate change through a cap-and-trade system would have been
an easier, more direct approach to limiting our Nation's global
warming impact, we tried that here in this committee, and
unfortunately, we were unable to get it passed.
But having said that, I want to point out that where I live
in southwestern Pennsylvania we are witnessing coal plant
retirements nearly every month, which is impacting the economy
and many of our constituents and potentially the reliability of
the electric grid. Now, whether that is because of low natural
gas prices, environmental regulations, or old age, the fact is
we are taking a lot of old power plants off-line and making it
very difficult to build new ones.
So the central tenet of the President's Climate Change Plan
is of course the new source performance standards for power
plants. And it has been widely reported that the standard for
new coal-fired power plants would require some type of CCS
technology to comply. Now, I am aware of and have supported the
creation of several demonstration projects for CCS across the
country, but I am not aware that there is anyone that would be
considered BSER, you know, the best system of emission
reductions, as defined by the Clean Air Act. Can you tell me
how CCS is going to achieve that requirement that BSER be
adequately demonstrated considering cost, energy requirements,
and environmental impacts?
Ms. McCarthy. Congressman, first of all, it is good to be
here. Thank you for the welcome.
The first thing I would say is that relative to the
retirements that you were discussing, we have been very
strongly engaged with our energy colleagues to ensure that as
retirements are happening that we work with our energy office
and our agency and others to make sure that those issues are
managed effectively, and we do not see that there is any gap in
our communication system in ensuring that we can achieve those
regulatory standards effectively without threatening
reliability.
In terms of the rule that is coming out, I do not want to
speak exactly to what the rule is going to say. It would be
inappropriate for me to do that. But I will say that on the
basis of information that we see out in the market today and
what is being constructed and what is being contemplated that
CCS technology is feasible and it is available today.
Now, that is not to give a signal about what is going on in
the rule. That needs to be put in a broader as well as a more
specific context and we will meet our regulatory obligation to
look at what is possible and what we should be doing for new
future power plants. Frankly, the challenge is that we need to
provide certainty for how you construct a coal facility in the
future that will allow investment in that technology and allow
the technologies that you are investing in to grow and become
more and more competitive and lower those costs.
Mr. Doyle. Let me ask you a little follow-up to that
because I am aware of the Kemper plant in Mississippi that has
been cited. Now, that plant is utilizing an innovative
technique that pipes the carbon dioxide emissions to depleted
oil fields and uses the CO
2
to force oil to the
surface. In Pennsylvania, that is a little less realistic for
us unless we want to build a pipeline to Texas for our
CO
2
, which I don't think is quite practical.
I am just curious. How is EPA taking into account the
regional differences that there are from, you know, different
places in our country as we look at these technologies? You
know, this seems to be working but it is not something that
could work in my neck of the woods. And are you going to, you
know, create guidelines that recognize the diverse fuel mix of
the country and specifically those regions like southwestern
Pennsylvania that are still heavily dependent on fossil fuels?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, I think we all recognize that the use
of CO
2
that is captured in enhanced oil recovery
becomes very cost-beneficial in the use of CCS. There is no
question about that. And we also see part of that being as a
result there are significant pipelines that are being
constructed to take advantage of those cost considerations.
Now, there is also an opportunity to sequester, which is, I
think, demonstration projects and investments that the
Secretary can speak to, but there are also products that are
being produced at the end of these design systems that actually
can be sold. So there is a variety of things that we see
developing that make it very promising for coal to have a
certain future as the President intends in an all-of-the-above
strategy.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I see my time
has expired.
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Doyle, I may mention to you that this
rule is expected out on Friday, I believe, by the 20th, and we
will be having a hearing on the proposed rule.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. On Saturday afternoon. Will everybody be
here on Saturday?
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Nebraska, Mr.
Terry, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Terry. What an unexpected surprise to go this early. I
appreciate that.
So I am going to start off by asking unanimous consent to
put the letter of our Attorney General from Nebraska, his
letter to Gina McCarthy and a white paper that was done with
other AGs into the record.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. And the date of the letter is September 11,
2013.
It is particularly, Ms. McCarthy, important to note that
our Attorney General is involved in this because, A) it is an
impact to our State, but B) we are a public power State so he
is a lawyer, in essence, for our public power generators. And
they have a concern on the rules that are being promulgated. I
know they aren't finalized yet but, nonetheless, in regard to
coal as a new fuel, we have old coal-fired plants that probably
aren't going to make it. They aren't going to be able to adhere
to the new rules, so the issue is can we build new plants with
coal since we are only a couple hundred miles from the Powder
River basin, and this is by far the prominent feedstock for our
generators?
So he has a question and I have the same question and that
is that does the EPA believe that it has the legal authority to
eliminate coal as a fuel for nuclear electrical generation?
Ms. McCarthy. We have the authority and responsibility to
establish standards in the case of new facilities and
guidelines where the individual States look at their own energy
mix and come back to EPA with plans on how to comply. So I do
think we believe that we are moving in a legally sound
direction, but I would also caution you that one of the reasons
we are re-proposing, Congressman, is because there were a lot
of comments on our original proposal. There were comments on
the technology, there were legal concerns, so I would ask that
we have this conversation in a more concrete way when the new
source rule comes out and to not also project what we are doing
in the new source as being either appropriate or legally
correct for existing facilities because neither is the case.
Mr. Terry. All right. And I appreciate that answer and it
would be easier if we had the final rule.
Ms. McCarthy. Well, we haven't even proposed one yet, sir.
We are planning to re-propose a rule.
Mr. Terry. OK.
Ms. McCarthy. So we will have certainly plenty of time----
Mr. Terry. Well, we certainly have concerns regarding our
ability to use the cheapest and most readily available feed
source for electrical generation----
Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Terry, I may just interject one moment.
We were truthfully so shocked by the original rule that----
Mr. Terry. Yes.
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. We are anticipating what the
new rule is, so, sorry.
Mr. Terry. Well, and to follow up on that though is with
the newly to-be-proposed rule after the comments, is there
still room for new coal electrical generation?
Ms. McCarthy. I think that the rule will provide certainty
for the future of new coal moving forward, and I think in terms
of existing facilities, we believe that coal represents now and
will continue to represent a significant portion of the energy
supply moving forward for decades to come.
Mr. Terry. All right. How about there has been several
questions regarding nuclear power as well, and can we even meet
what the new greenhouse gas standards will be without nuclear
power as part of the portfolio?
Ms. McCarthy. The new source standard isn't designed to
influence the existing portfolio. It is designed to ensure that
future power plants that are being constructed to take
advantage of technologies that will ensure that they are as
clean as they can be and have a past certain and a future that
will be carbon-constrained.
Mr. Terry. Well, it is important, I think, to have nuclear
power which has basically zero greenhouse gas emissions----
Ms. McCarthy. I think the President----
Mr. Terry [continuing]. To be part of our portfolio and----
Ms. McCarthy. The President certainly shares your concern
that we make room for all fuels and all power generation types.
Mr. Terry. Yes, we are going to grade on actions, not
words. So I appreciate that.
Mr. Moniz. And if I may add on that, sir, I would note that
we went through, in my view, a lot of years with words and not
actions and we are now seeing actions and not words, $8 billion
loan guarantees for nuclear new programs on small modular
reactors. So I would say that we are walking the talk.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentlelady from California,
Ms. Matsui, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank our distinguished witnesses for joining us
today.
I applaud the administration for taking on climate change,
and I strongly support the goals of the President's Climate
Action Plan to cut carbon pollution and better prepare our
country for the impacts of climate change. Human-caused climate
change is real, it is happening now, and it will continue to
produce devastating effects unless we take immediate action.
Failure to act in an urgent manner is shortsighted and
detrimental to our environmental and economic interests.
Some say that addressing climate change will cost too much
money but they neglect to consider the cost of inaction, as
well as the tremendous economic benefits of positioning our
country as a global leader in clean energy. Clean energy
industries currently employ hundreds of thousands of Americans
and the potential growth in this sector is enormous. My home
district of Sacramento boasts 14,000 clean energy jobs.
Throughout the United States, there are already 119,000 solar
jobs and 80,000 wind jobs. Thousands more are employed in
energy efficiency and other areas. This is a sector that could
create millions of jobs and lead to faster economic growth.
But we do have competition. According to the Pew Charitable
Trust, last year, China invested $65 billion in clean energy
compared to only $36 billion in the United States. The U.S.
ranked 10th in clean energy investments per dollar of GDP
behind China, all of Europe, Canada, Australia, South Africa,
and Japan.
Secretary Moniz, these other countries recognize the
economic potential of clean energy. What are they doing to
capitalize on it?
Mr. Moniz. They meaning other countries?
Ms. Matsui. Yes.
Mr. Moniz. Clearly, I think people are seeing frankly, you
know, trillion-dollar markets developing. They are developing
now for clean energy to address climate, to address air
pollution, just to advance technology. And certainly a country
like China, as you know, is providing significant incentives
for domestic manufacturing capacity.
Ms. Matsui. Well, you know, the United States has always
been a leader in clean energy technologies but clearly we are
really facing these competitive challenges from abroad. The
President's Climate Action Plan is a critical step to ensure
not just that we address the dangers of climate change but also
that the United States can compete and lead in the clean energy
economy of the future. Secretary Moniz, how will the
President's Climate Action Plan spur clean energy innovation in
the United States and create new clean energy jobs here at
home? Do you believe that the United States can once again lead
the clean energy revolution?
Mr. Moniz. I certainly think we can and we must lead that
revolution. And I will mention two ways in which we are moving
forward. And the one is, for example, through our continuing
loan program to bring, as I said earlier, many, many
technologies to the fore. I mentioned utility-scale solar has
been a huge success and California has been a big part of that
but also the loan program for advanced fossil and for nuclear.
It is across the board for these technologies.
Another different kind of initiative I alluded to earlier
are things like the Advanced Manufacturing Initiative where we
want to capture things like 3-D printing, which can apply to
new energy technologies, as well as a host of other
technologies. So those are some of the things that we are
moving forward.
Ms. Matsui. Um-hum. Well, thank you. Now, my Republican
colleagues are quick to argue that tackling climate change will
hurt the economy, but in reality, climate change itself poses
an enormous economic risk, and failure to address it could be
disaster for the global economy.
In May CBO released a report concluding that delaying
action to reduce carbon pollution would increase the expected
damage from climate change by increasing the risk of very
costly, potentially even catastrophic outcomes. The Clean Air
Act provides a very good example of how we can make steady
progress in cleaning up the air while growing the economy.
Since its enactment in 1970, the Clean Air Act has reduced key
air pollutants in the United States by 2/3 while the economy
has tripled in size. Administrator McCarthy, what does the
history of the Clean Air Act tell us about our ability to cut
pollution while building the economy?
Ms. McCarthy. Thank you for asking the question.
We know that in our experience under the Clean Air Act we
have been able to significantly lower pollution while at the
same time GDP has risen and the economy has grown. We know that
the economic goals do not have to conflict with our
environmental standards, and we also know, in fact, that this
country is where it is because we have both cleaned our
environment, kept it safe and healthy for our families,
recognized the public health value and environmental value that
represents, while we develop an economy that respects those
needs as well. We are asking for that same strategy to be
employed as we tackle what I believe to be the most significant
public health challenge of our time, which is climate change.
Ms. Matsui. I thank you very much and I ran out of time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from West Virginia,
Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think we can agree that the CO
2
levels are
undeniably increasing and some scientists and climatologists
have concluded that their energy models reflect that
CO
2
levels coincide with temperature increases. Now,
we were supposed to have some charts up here. These are the
models that have been suggested by many of the scientists and
climatologists, but however, as you well know, these models are
key components of developing climate change policy, but
unfortunately, as we are finding out, this is the projection
but here is the reality of temperature changes over the last 40
years. Actually, we can say over 40 years there has been almost
no increase in temperature, very slight. In fact, the
CO
2
levels even with the increased greenhouse
CO
2
level emissions, the Arctic ice has actually
increased by 60 percent as shown by the aerial view. Also that
Antarctica is expanding. But more importantly, this report
coming out of the United Nations, the IPCC report coming up is
saying that most experts, most experts believe by 2083, and 70
years, the benefits of climate change will still outweigh the
harm.
That leads to the question today. What should be done about
it? We hear the testimony from the Administration that all
climate change is manmade and America needs to reduce its
CO
2
emissions. Let's put this in perspective.
Hypothetically, let's assume that all coal-fired generation in
America were curtailed, all coal-fired generation were
curtailed. According to the United Nations and the IPCC, this
would reduce the CO
2
levels of the globe by merely
\2/10\ of 1 percent by ridding all coal-fired power in the
United States.
The Administration also needs to remind people, as you
heard from the chairman in his opening remarks, that manmade
problems, if we could, only represent 4 percent of all the
emissions of the globe. Natural emissions represent 96 percent.
So as a result, this Administration is, by virtue of this
stream of job-killing regulations, is putting our Nation at
risk all in the idea of clinging to the notion that cutting \2/
10\ of 1 percent is going to save the world environment.
Let me remind, the rest of the world is not listening. The
President's energy policy is not being followed. China, India,
Russia, and Europe are all expanding their use of coal. The
Administration is working now on a new global initiative,
exporting uncertainty. According to the President, he is not
going to allow low-interest loans to be made to developing
nations around the world. Struggling nations to come out of
poverty will continue to suffer. Lives will be lost. Children
will be sick and perish as a result of this President's support
of this policy.
One of the biggest moral responsibilities of the United
States should be to help emerging nations come out of poverty.
The most abundant and resourceful source of power is coal. For
a nation to emerge from poverty, it must have access to energy,
energy for refrigeration, for cooking, and commerce.
Just to give you an example, in the sub-Saharan of Africa,
the total amount of power that they can generate in Africa is a
60 watt light bulb per person, a 60 watt light bulb for 3 hours
a day, 60 watt light bulb for 3 hours a day. Why should they be
denied access to affordable energy so they can come out of
poverty? Please take this message back to the President.
This President must not prevent people around the globe
from obtaining affordable, dependable energy. And threatening
American jobs over \2/10\ of 1 percent of the CO
2

emissions is not an acceptable energy policy. Crushing
America's economy to reduce the CO
2
levels by \2/10\
of 1 percent is an abuse of his presidential authority.
Now, if I could in just the time, I am just curious from
both of you the issue now is we are 400 parts per million. Can
you tell me what level do you want it to be? Is it what many
people are promoting, 300 parts per million?
Mr. Whitfield. You all can respond but his time is expired.
Mr. Moniz. OK. I would like to respond, Mr. McKinley. There
were a lot of issues you raised there. If I may focus down for
the sake of response, first of all, as I have said before in
this committee, the issues in terms of the risks of climate
change are not based just upon models, as I said. It is some
pretty simple arithmetic. Number two, I don't believe anyone
has ever said that quotes ``all climate change is manmade.''
The statement is that the anthropogenic forcings from
CO
2
are clearly of the scale that have long been
expected to produce the kinds of change that we are seeing and
will see.
Third, I think we should address--there are many things but
let me focus on the hiatus, so-called, in the increase of
warming temperatures. First of all, let's not forget this
decade is the warmest decade in recorded history. So it is not
exactly like it has been cooling off.
But secondly, the issues of decadal scale changes in the
rate of increase are fully expected. El Nino, La Nina, for
example, are part of this. Those models at that time did not
include other issues such as deep water warming, et cetera.
I will give you an example. There is an article right now
in Nature whereby looking at the observed surface water
temperatures in the Pacific, putting them in in the East
Central Pacific, putting them in, it comes completely with this
hiatus and it is only a hiatus in the constant global warming.
So I believe we have to say this is a misreading of the record.
The statement stands that anthropogenic CO
2

emissions and other greenhouse gas emissions are a driver at
the level of multiple degrees centigrade in this century. We
are up .9 so far. And that is very consequential. In fact, I
remind you that we wouldn't be here if it weren't for the
greenhouse effect of water vapor, which has provided 60 degrees
Fahrenheit of surface warming. We are just tuning that by a few
degrees centigrade at great peril.
Mr. Whitfield. We are going 2 minutes and 35 seconds over
so----
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous
consent that we put in the record a study by Dr. Benjamin
Santer, atmospheric scientist at Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, where he says neither volcanoes nor the sun nor
internal variability nor any combination of those natural
factors can plausibly explain the atmospheric temperature
changes we have actually observed from space since 1979.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Whitfield. And I also would like to put in the record
your photo of how ice has expanded by almost a million square
miles in the last year in the Arctic Circle.
Mr. Waxman. Reserving the right to object. And I would like
to be recognized on my reservation.
Mr. Whitfield. Absolutely, recognized.
Mr. Waxman. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think this illustrates
why we need a committee where we bring in the scientists. I
just thought the statements that the gentleman from West
Virginia read to us were incredibly inaccurate and contrary to
everything else everybody in the scientific community has to
say, including Secretary Moniz, who is an MIT professor for 40
years, he was the Department of Physics' head of the Linear
Accelerator Center, undersecretary of DOE, a Ph.D. in
theoretical physics from Stanford University. We need
scientists to come in here and talk about science, not----
Mr. Whitfield. So, Mr. Waxman, are you objecting to this?
Mr. Waxman. Well, I just want to make that point but I will
not object.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Well, I won't object to yours, either.
And at this time I would like to recognize Dr. Christensen
from the Virgin Islands for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am really
glad we are having this hearing.
And of course I support President Obama's sensible plan to
address climate change by reducing carbon pollution and helping
communities to prepare for the impacts of climate change.
In reading your testimony and hearing your testimony I
applaud the open approach to setting the standards that has
been engaging and will engage all of the stakeholders and their
concern in the process. Despite this, we continue to hear a lot
of criticism of the President's plan from our Republican
colleagues, and like our Ranking Member Waxman, I would simply
ask, what is their plan? The President has said he is willing
to work with anyone who wants to propose alternatives. And I am
glad that if Congress won't act, he will. And I am also glad
that both of you included in your testimony that the economy
also benefits from the prior responses, has benefited from
prior responses to climate change.
My district in the U.S. Virgin Islands and the other
territories are really on the forefront of this issue of
climate change. And like our panelists from the Safe Climate
Caucus forum yesterday are already experiencing the impact of
that change. In the Virgin Islands, we have already endured a
serious coral reef bleaching event that significantly impacted
our fisheries, and by extension, our tourism product and our
economic stability. If we were to continue to do nothing, we
could expect increased ocean acidification, sea level rise,
which will impact our coastal infrastructure, and of course
more intense storms, as much of the country is experiencing.
So it is absolutely and abundantly clear that climate
change is real and that we have to act. And it is important
also, as was discussed with Congresswoman Matsui, that our
country lead on this really vital issue.
But as we respond, we also have to make sure that we
transition to cleaner energy sources in a way that is workable,
especially for communities with the greatest economic
challenges. In the Virgin Islands and the other territories, we
rely still very heavily on diesel generation, and at 53 cents
per kilowatt today, electricity prices are the highest in our
country. So we really have a strong incentive to scale up
affordable renewable energy and energy efficiency, but it is
going to take some time.
So, Administrator McCarthy, I think you have answered my
first question. I think you have made it clear that the rule
you propose on Friday will apply only to new power plants,
correct?
Ms. McCarthy. That is correct.
Mrs. Christensen. And next, you would start to work on a
rule to reduce carbon pollution from existing power plants?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mrs. Christensen. So it is going to be particularly
important for my constituents that we find cost-effective
solutions that work for our specific circumstances and I think
the same is true for all of the territories and the State of
Hawaii given the high prices that we are already paying and the
challenges related to being an island and where we are located.
So I also have read in your testimony that you plan to work
with the States and the territories to ensure that you
understand our specific circumstances as we do these things. So
under the provisions of the Clean Air Act, do States and
territories have the flexibility to achieve carbon pollution
goals in ways that work for them? Do you anticipate that that
flexibility will be there?
Ms. McCarthy. That is correct.
Mrs. Christensen. OK. And, Secretary Moniz, as we look to
the future of our energy supply system, do you see promising
technology-based solutions that will allow places like the
Virgin Islands and the other territories to meet our
electricity needs with clean as well as affordable power? And
what do you see as the most promising areas?
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum. Yes, I do and I also recognize that in
fact islands often have the biggest challenge in that
combination of risk and high energy prices. That is where,
first of all, I think not being dependent upon particularly oil
imports is very important, and that is where renewables can be
very important. And also I think there is at least one
advantage in an island setting and that is transportation based
upon electricity and/or natural gas can be more attractive
because the driving range issues are not as important. So I
think there is a real future for green islands and we would be
delighted to work with you on that.
Mrs. Christensen. Where are we with ocean thermal
conversion?
Mr. Moniz. With ocean conversion----
Mrs. Christensen. It seems like it would be a good source.
Mr. Moniz. Yes, and so we continue to do research on that.
That is a case where if you saw that curve that was shown
earlier with cost dropping and deployment, we are still in the
early stage of that curve. There is still a ways to go in terms
of cost reduction. But the research is going on and there are
some pilot projects in various parts of the world.
Mrs. Christensen. Thank you. My time is up. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
Pompeo, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. McCarthy, I want to ask a couple of questions of you.
So one of the objectives today is to identify greenhouse gas
regulations that already existed and those in the future and
how they actually impact the climate change, right? So you
would agree that we want to make sure we have a successful
climate policy as a result of those sets of rules and
regulations that you promulgate, fair? Fair baseline statement?
Ms. McCarthy. In the context of a larger international
effort, yes.
Mr. Pompeo. You bet. And on your Web site you have 26
indicators used for tracking climate change. They identify
various impacts of climate change so you would believe that the
purpose of these rules is to impact those 26 indicators, right?
So if you put a good greenhouse gas rule in place, you will get
a good outcome on at least some or all of those 26 indicators?
Ms. McCarthy. I actually think that the better way to think
about it, if I might, is that it is part of an overall strategy
that is positioning the U.S. for leadership in an international
discussion because climate change requires a global effort. So
this is one piece and it is one step, but I think it is a
significant one to show the commitment of the United States.
Mr. Pompeo. Makes perfect sense, but you think it would be
reasonable to take the regulations you promulgate and link them
to those 26 indicators the you have on your Web site and say
this is how they impacted them?
Ms. McCarthy. It is unlikely that any specific one step is
going to be seen as having a visible impact on any of those
impacts, a visible change in any of those impacts. What I am
suggesting is that climate change has to be a broader array of
actions that the U.S. and other folks in the international
community take that make a significant effort towards reducing
greenhouse gases and mitigating the impacts of climate.
Mr. Pompeo. But these are your indicators, Ms. McCarthy, so
these are----
Ms. McCarthy. They are indicators of climate change. They
are not----
Mr. Pompeo. Right. Precisely.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Directly applicable to
performance impacts of any one action.
Mr. Pompeo. How about the cumulative impact of your
actions? Certainly, you are acting in a way, you say these are
the indicators of climate change. It certainly can't be the
case that your testimony today is that your cumulative impact
of your current set of regulations and those you are proposing
isn't going to have any impact at all on any of those
indicators?
Ms. McCarthy. I think that the President was very clear
what we are attempting to do is put together a comprehensive
climate plan across the administration that positions the U.S.
for leadership on this issue and that will prompt and leverage
international discussions and actions.
Mr. Pompeo. So you are putting regulations in place for the
purpose of leadership but not to impact the indicators that
you, the EPA, says are the indicators of climate change? I am
deeply puzzled by that.
Ms. McCarthy. Congressman, we are working within the
authority that Congress gave us to do what we can, but all I am
pointing out is that much more needs to be done and it needs to
be looked at in that larger context.
Mr. Pompeo. So in 2010--it is in your opening statement--we
have gotten rid of a whole bunch of greenhouse gas, about 6
billion metric tons. For example, one of your indicators is
heat-related deaths. How many heat-related deaths have been
eliminated as a result of the 2010 NHTSA rules?
Ms. McCarthy. You can't make those direct connections,
Congressman; neither can I.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. So there is literally no connection to
the activities you are undertaking and to the----
Ms. McCarthy. I did not say that.
Mr. Pompeo. Well, you said you couldn't make the
connection, so tell me what I am misunderstanding. Can you draw
connections between the rules you are providing, the
regulations you are promulgating and your indicators or is it
just on a----
Ms. McCarthy. I think what you are asking is can EPA in and
of itself solve the problems of climate change. No, we cannot.
But the authority you gave us----
Mr. Pompeo. Right.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Was to use the Clean Air Act to
regulate pollution. Carbon pollution is one of those
regulated----
Mr. Pompeo. Right.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Pollutants and we are going to
move forward with what we can do----
Mr. Pompeo. Yes.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Is reasonable and appropriate.
Mr. Pompeo. I am actually not asking that question that you
suppose that I am asking.
Ms. McCarthy. OK. I am sorry.
Mr. Pompeo. I didn't ask if you had the capacity to solve
greenhouse gas issues. What I asked was is anything you are
doing doing any good as measured by the indicators that you
have provided for--so is your testimony today that you just
have no capacity to identify whether the actions EPA has
undertaken has any impact on those indicators? This is about
science----
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo [continuing]. Cause-and-effect. Is there any
causal relationship between the regulations you have
promulgated and the 26 indicators of climate change that you
have on your Web site?
Ms. McCarthy. The indicators on the Web site are broad
global indicators----
Mr. Pompeo. They are not broad; they are very specific.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Of impacts associated with
climate change. They are not performance requirements or
impacts related to any particular act.
Mr. Pompeo. I actually like the indicators. They are
quantifiable.
Ms. McCarthy. They are great.
Mr. Pompeo. Heat-related deaths, change in ocean heat----
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo [continuing]. Sea level rises, snow cover----
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo [continuing]. Those are great, quantifiable
things but----
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo [continuing]. Now what you are telling me is----
Ms. McCarthy. They indicate the public health impacts
associated with----
Mr. Pompeo. Exactly.
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. Climate change. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo. But what you are telling me is you can't link
up your actions at EPA to any benefits associated with those
quantifiable indicators that the EPA itself has proposed as
indicative of climate change?
Ms. McCarthy. I think what we are able to do is to show--
and I hope we will show this in the package that we put out for
comment--is what kind of reductions are going to be associated
with our rules, what we believe they will have in terms of an
economic and a public health benefit. But it again is part of a
very large strategy.
Mr. Pompeo. Awesome. My time is up. Thank you.
Mr. Moniz. If I may just----
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired. At this
time I recognize the gentlelady from--I am sorry. Did you have
a comment?
Mr. Moniz. Well, I was going to comment briefly that there
is academic literature that does associate extremely hot days
with mortality, and I would be happy to provide that paper.
Mr. Pompeo. That would be great. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentlelady from
Florida, Ms. Castor, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
very much for calling this hearing on the Obama
Administration's Climate Action Plan. And, Administrator
McCarthy, thank you very much for your leadership and
willingness to assume the challenges as EPA administrator and
it is good to see you today. And, Secretary Moniz, same goes
for you. Thank you for being here.
Now, my Republican colleagues' arguments today relating to
carbon pollution and the changing climate are reminiscent of
their arguments and the arguments of special interests in the
past when it comes to updating our standards relating to
pollution and health standards and a clean environment. They
predicted as they always do we are going to have a rise in
unemployment; the unemployment rate is going to skyrocket. They
predict the economy will go into a tailspin if America tackles
pollution and climate problems. It is an argument they raise
every time America acts to set better standards for air, for
water, for children's health.
All you have to do is think back to the 1970s. I am old
enough to remember what the mornings were like before the Clean
Air Act and how smoggy it was when you would come out of your
house and you could smell it and taste it. And then the country
had the wherewithal to adopt the Clean Air Act. And over
decades, our air has improved. Same can be said in the 1990s
when it comes to acid rain. It can be said how America tackled
the problem of chlorofluorocarbons that were depleting the
ozone layer. The same can be said when it comes to cancer-
causing chemicals in plastic. Plastic industry did not
collapse, did it? There is probably more plastic around today
than ever before.
So I would say to my Republican colleagues: have confidence
in America's ability to innovate in the face of significant
challenges, challenges like climate change. And coming from a
vulnerable State like Florida, I think what we see clearly
ahead of us is there is a greater cost to an action.
Look at what citizens across my State and all across the
country will face in rising insurance premiums when it comes to
extreme event. We are debating flood insurance right now. And
that is going to be tied more and more to the changing climate
and sea level rise in the future. Think about what local
governments and communities are going to have to do to invest
in infrastructure. In the State of Florida we are investing a
great deal now to protect our clean water supply and the
drinking water supply from the rising bays and oceans that are
going to intrude on the drinking water supply, the saltwater
intrusion. Communities are having to invest now to protect
infrastructure, just the plain old pipes under the ground that
we need to operate as a normal community all up and down the
coast.
So I see in the face of more droughts, more floods, longer
fire seasons, more intense fires, faster sea level rise, it is
very important that we take action. The costs ahead of us will
be inordinate if the Congress continues to ignore it. So I am
glad that the Administration is taking leadership here.
Secretary Moniz and Administrator McCarthy, in general,
let's talk about cost and benefits. When you propose a major
rule, you are legally required to analyze the cost and the
benefits of that rule, isn't that correct?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Ms. Castor. In fact, hasn't cost-benefit analysis been
required for agency rulemaking ever since President Reagan
signed an Executive Order on cost-benefit analysis in 1981?
Ms. McCarthy. That is my understanding, yes.
Ms. Castor. And it is called cost-benefit analysis because
you are required to estimate both the cost and the benefits of
government action, is that correct?
Ms. McCarthy. That is correct.
Ms. Castor. If you didn't look at both the costs and the
benefits, the information wouldn't help you assess the merits
of a rule. If you only looked at cost, no rule would ever be
worth it. In fact, Mr. Secretary, DOE recently issued a rule to
require microwave ovens to be more energy efficient. As part of
that rulemaking, DOE was required to estimate the cost and
benefits of the new standards by reducing the use of
electricity. The rule will reduce air pollution, including
carbon pollution. That is one of the benefits of the rule,
isn't that right? Did the rule include an estimate of cost of
the carbon pollution that would be avoided by the rule?
Mr. Moniz. Yes, it did. And indeed, the need to do that
comes from a court ruling in 2007.
Ms. Castor. And how did you get to that number? Was it
developed through an interagency process and was it based on
peer-reviewed science?
Mr. Moniz. Yes, the process formally started in 2009. It is
based upon three highly peer-reviewed models. There has been
transparency on the models back in 2009/2010, every rulemaking
that also opens up for comments going forward. The recent
change in the numbers was strictly updating the peer-reviewed
models using them with the same inputs used previously.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thanks very much, Mr. Chairman, and thanks
very much for having the hearing today. And I also want to
thank the Secretary and the Administrator for being with us
today. I have appreciated the comments today.
And, Mr. Secretary, if I could start with a question to
you. As the chairman had earlier stated in his opening remarks,
when the President came into office, Congress took into
consideration what was essentially his climate plan. Congress
considered whether we would embark on a complicated and
expensive regulatory program that was intent on massively
decarbonizing our energy supply and raising our energy costs.
And we were told the U.S. must take the lead.
Mr. Secretary, do you think it is economically wise for the
U.S. to unilaterally implement policies that will result in
more expensive energy costs for American households in
manufacturing? And this question is really important for a
district like mine because I have 60,000 manufacturing jobs.
And I spend all my time on the road going through large
meetings, small plants across my district. And what was
happening here in Washington affects these plants and it
affects jobs back home. So, again, do you think it is
economically wise for the U.S. to unilaterally implement
policies that can result in more expensive energy for these
manufacturing facilities and for American households?
Mr. Moniz. First of all, in no small part due to the shale
gas boom, we are actually seeing lower costs in many, many
industries and a growth in many----
Mr. Latta. Well, if I could just interrupt for a minute
because in the State of Ohio 70 percent of our energy is coal-
based.
Mr. Moniz. Yes. Again, across the country certainly we are
seeing more manufacturing, lower energy prices, and in fact in
Ohio there is also the issue of developing shale gas now.
Secondly, in terms of the U.S. moving forward, I would say
that, number one, American leadership is indispensable if we
are going to have international action. But secondly, there is
very much, I believe, the self-serving interest of developing
the new technologies that will in fact give us a strong
position in a future multitrillion-dollar market.
Mr. Latta. OK. Continuing on with that, if I could just
continue on with the questions to you. Again, in the Climate
Action Plan and also in your testimony, we are talking about
the three pillars that you mentioned, and the third point being
that the United States needs to lead the international effort.
And especially when we are talking about the climate issues,
what does the Administration mean by the U.S. taking that
leadership role and does this mean that we are supposed to be
the first nation that decarbonizes our energy supply on a very
large scale and expects the rest of the world to follow? Or
what is that leadership?
Mr. Moniz. I would say it means that, first of all, we do
lead in clean energy and I believe we do lead for sure in clean
energy innovation. We have to help deploy it. We are working,
for example, the Department of State in terms of the--if you
like the policy level--has made tremendous progress in the G-20
context and with China in terms of HFCs. And at the Department
of Energy we are working through a variety of mechanisms.
For example, we lead what is called the Clean Energy
Ministerial, which is advancing dialogues with other countries.
For example, in many countries now we have active dialogues
going on where our companies are working with companies in
those countries. I will mention countries I have been in,
Brazil, for example, recently, yesterday in Vienna, Monday with
Turkey, et cetera. They are very interested in our technologies
for industrial energy efficiency. This is a market for our
companies to go out there, both services and technology. That
is what we mean by leading.
Mr. Latta. Also I see from your testimony page 8 you talk
about how you are finalizing the rule covering the standby
power of microwave ovens and you go on with the proposals for
the lamp fixtures, commercial refrigerators, and commercial
walk-in coolers and freezers. And I guess the question is are
there any other appliance rules that you see that are being
planned in the future?
Mr. Moniz. Yes, indeed, and I would be happy to supply a
list of those. The next one we have said--the next proposed
rulemaking we hope to advance in November on electric motors.
Mr. Latta. OK. And if you have any other appliances that
you see coming up in the future if you could supply that to the
committee----
Mr. Moniz. Certainly. I would be happy to write a list.
Mr. Latta [continuing]. We would appreciate that.
Mr. Moniz. And I might add that in addition to the
rulemaking we are, when it is appropriate--for example, right
now with set-top boxes, we are pursuing voluntary discussions
because, frankly, when the industry and consumers can come
together and agree on a rule that we think is good, that will
actually get the rule implemented faster. So we work both on
the rulemaking and on convening voluntary approaches to
efficiency standards.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is expired and
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's
hearing.
And like you and Chairman Emeritus Barton and many
colleagues on my side of the aisle, I am disappointed that so
many of the Administration's experts that are working to
justify and put out new carbon rules decided not to educate the
public by testifying here this morning. The 2 out of 13
attendance ratio does not bode well for the most open,
transparent Administration ever. But I am sure we will find out
where these people are, these people tomorrow that do their
jobs after we leave here.
But we do have the few and the proud. Secretary Moniz,
Administrator McCarthy, welcome. My question will focus on
refineries, the U.S. energy renaissance, and power grid issues
in Texas. First of all, refineries: Ms. McCarthy, much of
today's discussion has been about the President's carbon plan,
and it has been about the power sector, but I also worry about
EPA's next steps for the refineries.
Less than 1 month ago your EPA announced that the Houston
area was on track to attain ground-level ozone standards by
2018. Your EPA put up ``these reductions are even more
impressive given Houston's rank as one of the fastest-growing
metropolitan areas in the country.'' But rather than
recognizing success, EPA is already working on more strict
ozone and so-called Tier 3 rules. And we keep hearing rumors of
new rules for greenhouse gases in the refining space. All this
could mean billions of dollars, billions in compliance costs.
These costs will hit families hard and be passed on to average
drivers across the country in places like Sugar Land, Pearland,
and Katy, Texas.
So briefly--I say briefly because I am limited time here--
can you tell me when to expect these carbon rules for
refineries, what window of time frame, ma'am?
Ms. McCarthy. I don't have a time frame for you.
Mr. Olson. No time frame, OK. Will you commit to study the
cumulative cost of all these rules when we consider the impacts
of carbon regulations on refineries?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, I will certainly commit to following
whatever protocols we are required to do, sir.
Mr. Olson. In the following what I call the Chairman
Emeritus Dingell rule, answering yes-or-no questions, yes or
no, can you guarantee that your rules will not raise gasoline
prices? Yes or no?
Ms. McCarthy. I don't know what rules you are referring to
and I would never make guarantees to anything, sir.
Mr. Olson. OK. All right. A further line of question, this
is about the U.S. energy renaissance. As you know, Ms.
McCarthy, carbon emissions from the United States have fallen
in recent years without these new regulations. And there are
many factors, but a significant reason is the increased use of
American natural gas.
Ms. McCarthy. Um-hum.
Mr. Olson. And again, the Dingell rule, yes or no, do you
agree that hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling have
created an American energy renaissance that is helping to slash
carbon emissions? Yes or no?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes or no, it is a complicated question. I
will take it very short. I believe that certainly the new
technology has advanced our ability to capture natural gas
domestically. That has been a wonderful thing from both air
quality as well as domestically, and I think that answers your
question.
Mr. Olson. I will take that leaning yes. Yes or no, would
carbon emissions be higher today if fracking were banned or
regulated out of existence? Yes or no? No fracking, higher
emissions?
Ms. McCarthy. I can't make that direct connection, sir. You
are asking me really complicated questions for yes or no.
Mr. Olson. OK. I don't think it is that complicated but the
answer is pretty clear you think it is yes.
And one final question, this is for you, Secretary Moniz,
as well. My home State, as you know, is in desperate need of
new reliable power. At a time when we are looking at blackouts
in 2014 and 2015 without more power generation, the EPA is
considering carbon rules that can essentially mandate partial
carbon capture and sequestration. Now, I am not opposed to CCS.
As we discussed earlier in my testimony, you came here a couple
months ago, my district is actually home to one of the only CCS
modifications in the country, the W.A. Parish plant outside of
Needville, Texas.
Mr. Moniz. Um-hum.
Mr. Olson. Again, another yes-or-no question. Secretary
Moniz and Ms. McCarthy, do you believe that CCS technology is
currently economic for most coal plants, not just the Parish
plant in Needville, Texas, which is valuable because we have
oil and gas right there, right on the property. They can get
the carbon there quicker.
Mr. Moniz. As we said, sir, earlier, I mean the combination
of the CCS with EOR is very attractive.
If I may just have one thing, Mr. Chairman. Since this
issue has come up many times about the two of us being here, I
just want to say that, first of all, there has been no trouble
occupying 3 hours with two of us, but secondly, I know my
colleagues, our colleagues across the Administration would be
delighted to have a conversation about all of these issues.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time is
expired.
I will say to you that you are right, it took up a lot of
time today. We are going to get back in touch with those other
agencies and either meet with them individually or through
letter exchange. So we are going to follow up with them.
At this time, I would like to recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Kinzinger, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank you
both for being here and for your service to your country and
for the last few hours have given us.
Secretary Moniz, I have heard you speak in favor of the
President's Climate Action Plan, and to that extent I
understand the concerns surrounding the reduction of greenhouse
gas emissions being expressed. That being said, statements from
energy experts have said electrical prices are projected to
have increased over 40 percent since 2001, which is well above
the rate of inflation, and it will continue to rise due to the
requirements of EPA clean air and environmental standards.
In addition to this, over 60 percent of our Nation's clean
power generation actually comes from nuclear power, which is
virtually emissions-free, and I am very concerned with the
efforts of your agency in regards to the future of the nuclear
energy sector. I believe that any serious plan to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions must have a strong nuclear component,
yet the number of nuclear plants that have announced their
retirement this year has grown to almost epidemic portions and
more are expected in the near future. Let me just ask you first
off, and keep it, you know, as brief as possible, what are your
goals for the growth of the nuclear energy sector overall?
Mr. Moniz. Well, first of all, I mean the closures
obviously have a bunch of factors. In one case there was an
equipment issue in California.
Mr. Kinzinger. Sure.
Mr. Moniz. In Vermont it is principally----
Mr. Kinzinger. But a lot of it is age. We haven't built new
plants----
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. Natural gas----
Mr. Kinzinger [continuing]. In 20 years' time.
Mr. Moniz. They are older.
Mr. Kinzinger. Understood.
Mr. Moniz. But the Department of Energy, before I was
there, have for years already been supporting things like life
extension technologies, et cetera. So that is one direction.
Another is we are still working on the provisional loan
guarantee for the Vogtle plants. It is really important to get
some of these new plants built.
Mr. Kinzinger. Has the DOE actually closed any of those
loan guarantees?
Mr. Moniz. Well----
Mr. Kinzinger. No.
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. On nuclear----
Mr. Kinzinger. Why not?
Mr. Moniz [continuing]. Just the--it is an ongoing
negotiation and a----
Mr. Kinzinger. Because it has been a while, I know, so----
Mr. Moniz. All I can say is----
Mr. Kinzinger [continuing]. I hear the discussion about
it----
Mr. Moniz. All I can say is that I have taken a direct
interest in this.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. Because I mean from our perspective I
hear the Administration use, and in fact I heard you a number
of times today use the loan guarantees as promise for, hey, we
support it, but these are all conditional. They are not
finalized. And when you have a number of plants closing because
of the age of these plants and we are very slow to replace that
capacity--and let me ask you this. Do you believe that the
greenhouse gas targets set out by the Administration can be met
without the use of nuclear power?
Mr. Moniz. Clearly, the 17 percent goal for 2020 is what
you are referring to, which we are kind of almost halfway
there. Clearly, if there are a lot of nuclear power plant
closures in that time, that will certainly make it more
difficult.
Mr. Kinzinger. And I know this is just we are asking you to
guesstimate, how many more nuclear plants do you think will be
put out of commission before those targets would become
unattainable?
Mr. Moniz. On that I do not know but I can tell you that I
am hoping to have discussions with the industry to try to
understand better where that is going. I mean nuclear power
plants that exist still do have, you know, pretty low marginal
costs, which would make them attractive, but as we know, the
lower natural gas prices has lowered the clearing price in many
parts of the country.
Mr. Kinzinger. Sure. Absolutely. And again, I want to make
the point of what we were talking about earlier, that there are
no loan guarantees in existence right now. They are
conditional.
And I will just say to finish up--I won't take all my time;
hold your applause, please--if the Administration was serious
about addressing climate change, I think it would harness the
clean energy from nuclear power, as we have been talking about.
At a minimum it would follow the law. I heard a lot of
discussion about following the law today. And it would
reconstitute the Yucca Mountain program and provide a solid
basis for the NRC to issue new plant licenses.
And so I thank you for your time today. I thank you for
your testimony. And, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Moniz. Well, we are following the law.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time, you all may have noticed Ms. Schakowsky is
over here, and we have sort of ignored Ms. Schakowsky. And she
is a member of the Energy and Commerce Committee, but she is
not a member of this subcommittee, so traditionally, we finish
all the subcommittee members before we go to Ms. Schakowsky.
And Mr. Griffith, Ms. Schakowsky, has said that he has noted
you sitting over there patiently, so I would like to recognize
you for 5 minutes if you would like to ask your questions now
because he----
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, I thank you both, especially Mr.
Griffith for that courtesy.
I believe that the threat to at least human life on our
planet is the greatest challenge that humankind has faced. And
I feel so strongly that this Congress, this Congress, is in a
moment of such great opportunity where we could take leadership
on behalf of the United States, on behalf of the countries
around the world that we could benefit economically. This is a
moment of great opportunity that I fear as a member of the
Energy and Commerce Committee that we are squandering. And I
look at some of the young people in this audience; this is
their century, and I feel an obligation that we try and do
something about this.
I would like to see if either of you have a comment about
this issue of coal and this promulgated ruling that is about to
come out. Some of the charges are that it would have basically
an insignificant effect on climate change, and that it actually
would jeopardize the economic opportunities of people in poor
countries and further impoverish them. That is a pretty heavy
charge. I wonder if you, Madam Administrator, could give us
some answer to that----
Ms. McCarthy. I would be happy to begin.
Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. And Secretary Moniz.
Ms. McCarthy. What I would say is that the reason why the
power plant sector is one of the first places to go to regulate
carbon pollution is because it is by far the largest industry
sector in terms of its generation of greenhouse gases. The
second reason is that there are opportunities to reduce
greenhouse gases, and that will position us in the energy
future. And I think there is every reason why we should want to
tee up ideas and options for how to do that effectively, taking
advantage of modern technologies that we can take advantage of
and escalate their introduction both in the U.S. as well as
internationally. That is what is going to make significant
differences, not just what we are doing here, but its impact in
moving cleaner technologies forward.
The issue of the international discussion I think that you
will see that the language in the President's Climate Action
Plan is very detailed on this issue. It in no way steps back
from both the intent of the United States and our obligation to
work with the developing countries to ensure that they mature
and provide energy for their citizens. And the language in here
is not inconsistent with that goal. It will not minimize our
efforts towards that goal. What it does say, however, is that
we need to be careful about how we are investing and we don't
want developing countries to make mistakes that we might have
made in not positioning themselves for the best technologies
available in a carbon-constrained world.
Mr. Moniz. I would just add that the Climate Action Plan,
as far as the things like the Ex-Im Bank, does have an
exclusion for the least-developed countries.
Ms. Schakowsky. I see. Let me just say how much I
appreciate your being here and the fact of having the EPA
Administrator and the Secretary of Energy at a single hearing,
I am sure we will have and I hope you will have an opportunity
to hear others, but, you know, that is not an everyday
occurrence and I want to thank you for that.
I also want to associate myself with Mr. Waxman's plea that
has been made more than once that we have scientists come in
and talk to us. And we can, you know, have the kind of forum
where the science could be challenged, could be questioned
where if there is differing opinions, but I am wondering in the
seconds I have is there really a significant difference of
opinion about the science of climate change?
Mr. Moniz. Well, again, I would argue that at the level of
the broad impacts in my view there is none. I think there is
again very, very simple arguments as to why this is expected.
I also observed that the pattern of effects was predicted
decades ago. This is not somehow being made up. Clearly, there
are specific--when you start drilling down to specific issues,
it is very complicated science. So earlier, we had a discussion
about the last several years have seen a slowdown of warming.
And as I pointed out, this is not out of the expectations on
decadal scales, but that is a case where the scientists are
still having some argument over the specific driver.
Recent papers, as one example, have links essentially the
El Nino/La Nina issues to that, but that is an example of
something that still remains to be worked out. It does not
obviate the overwhelming conclusion and the overwhelming
support for what is going on in terms of global warming.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I did appreciate the comments about using as we move
forward so that we don't impoverish the other nations and
impoverish our own Nation that we use modern technologies as we
move forward. The problem that I think we have and I would say
that the countering plan is is that we ought to make sure those
technologies are available first before we put regulations in
place that then cause us to lose an entire segment of our
population's jobs and our energy production, et cetera. And
that has been my concern all along.
And coming from a coal-producing region, I can tell you
that the policies already, not even counting the ones that are
going to come out later this week or ones that may come out in
the next few months, are devastating the economy of my
district. And it is quite moving when you see these people.
These are hardworking men and women who are out there trying to
do jobs. It is not just the coalminers. It is the jobs that are
relied upon, the coalmines, and, you know, every time I turn
around there is another manufacturing company that was relying
on the coal industry that is going out of business or needed
affordable electricity that is going out of business. There is
another coalmine about every other week and I am losing a
coalmine in my district. Those are people who are making about
$75,000 a year that aren't making it now.
And then probably the biggest blow that any of my
communities has received, and while in fairness the two first
factors they listed were the double-edged scissors of
ObamaCare, they also listed the fact that the economy is so
poor in the area, and it is a coal-producing part of my
district. And we just lost a hospital in my district. And so
now some of my constituents are going to have to drive an hour,
hour-and-a-half to get to cardiac care and hospital. This is
not a good thing.
And when we look at the cost-benefit analysis, we don't
always look at the fact that if people don't have the ability
to afford the electricity in their homes that they then have to
cut back on things and they have to cut back on some important
things. If you can't heat your home effectively in the
wintertime--and in the mountains of Virginia, sometimes it gets
pretty cold--that can affect your health. If you are having a
problem with your heart and all of a sudden instead of being
able to go to the local hospital because of policies enacted
here in Washington, you have to drive an hour, hour-and-a-half
to get to heart care, that is going to have an impact on your
health. There is just no way around that.
And I think that we need to look at these things, and when
we say that, oh, this is all going to be grand and all going to
be great, I think we have to get the science and the
breakthroughs and the technological breakthroughs out there
first before we say we are going to shut down a lot of coal-
powered plants because the technology is not out there for
everything that needs to be done in order to make them 100
percent.
And when you look at poverty, and I noticed that the
gentleman earlier referenced a German article, ``How
Electricity Became a Luxury Good,'' I don't think that the
people of the United States of America consider electricity to
be a luxury good, and I don't think we want to be at the point
where they have a minister, in this case you, Ms. McCarthy, in
equal the German environment Minister Peter Altmaier giving out
tips on how you don't preheat your oven to do cooking and maybe
if you lower the contrast and the brightness on your
television, you can bring down your electric bill because the
Germans have put themselves in a position where people can't
afford it. I don't want that for my country but it is hitting
my district hard right now. And so I hope that you would take
that into consideration.
And along with those things, I know that the President
outlined the goal of 17 percent reduction in 2005 greenhouse
gas levels by 2020, and he mentioned that also at a climate
speech in June at Georgetown University, and I heard Mr.
Secretary say earlier that we are about halfway there. I guess
my question is is that from programs from the EPA or is that
from plant shutdowns? And how much of the programs that the EPA
has enacted brought down those greenhouse gases in the last 5
years? Can you quantify how much the programs have brought
down?
Ms. McCarthy. Let me just put the goal in a little bit of
perspective. I think that that goal clearly was stated in the
Climate Action Plan but in no way does that Climate Action Plan
say that those actions are going to add up to that 17 percent.
It is a start at looking at the most economically viable
opportunities----
Mr. Griffith. And you know that the 17 percent----
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. To grow the economy and address
greenhouse gas----
Mr. Griffith. And I apologize, my time is running out. The
17 percent, was that just a number that was picked out of the
air or was there some scientific basis for it and can you give
me that basis?
Ms. McCarthy. I believe that it was an international goal
that was stated.
Mr. Griffith. All right.
Ms. McCarthy. There was certainly some analytics but it was
not directly associated with that plan, but it remains a goal
that we would like to achieve.
Mr. Griffith. I mean I understand we know we are going to
try to reduce greenhouse gases, but do we know specifically how
much each program will give us? And that being said, if you
could get that to me later because my time is just about out.
Ms. McCarthy, I truly believe when you are here to testify,
and I have told people in my district that I think you do care
about the plight of folks----
Ms. McCarthy. I do.
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. And so I would ask you to commit
whether it is my district or one of the other districts in
central Appalachia that has been hit so hard, if we set up a
trip, would you come down and see what is happening in the
district of the people and where the jobs are just disappearing
and there are lots of towns with empty storefronts and----
Ms. McCarthy. Congressman, I will follow up----
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. It looks like a ghost town?
Ms. McCarthy. I will follow up directly with you on that.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate that very much.
And, Mr. Chairman, with that I yield back.
Mr. Moniz. If I could just say that about half of the
reductions so far have been from the shale gas revolution,
purely market-driven, and another part of it has been,
especially in the transportation sector, the efficiency
standards holding demand down.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is----
Mr. Waxman. Which were based on regulations, isn't that
correct?
Mr. Moniz. Correct.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I would like to recognize the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me say that I am applauding our committee for finally
having a hearing on climate change. I want to say that it is
obvious to me and to everyone else the science is undeniable
and it is time for us to act. And Congress has been ducking
this issue even going so far as to deny the basic science
behind climate change. I have seen the devastating affects
right in my area when Hurricane Sandy hit New York, New Jersey,
and Connecticut, and my district suffered huge devastation.
Rising seas, stronger storms, and greater flooding will only
increase if we choose to do nothing.
So if Congress unwilling to act on the issue, I am very
happy the President has decided to act. And though some may
deny the existence of climate change, the science is clear. If
people object to the specifics of the President's plan, then
they should propose their own plan for curbing carbon pollution
and climate change and the committee should actively pursue
this matter.
We also know from experience that government can regulate
pollution without hurting the economy. In fact, many of the
ideas that will help reduce carbon pollution will also grow new
industries in renewables, carbon capture technology, and other
new technologies that will help mitigate climate change.
So, Secretary Moniz, let me ask you, you mentioned in your
testimony the devastation that Sandy wrought upon New York, New
Jersey, and Connecticut. One of the major issues arising from
that was the loss of power and the length of time that it took
to return. Can you speak to what the Department of Energy is
doing in regard to electricity reliability and how that works
with the President's Climate Change Plans?
Mr. Moniz. Yes, thank you. I will mention two areas. One is
in the context of our general work on kind of the electric grid
of the 21st century we are folding in very heavily resilience
issues, as well as the kind of renewables and other drivers of
that technology. And I mentioned earlier that one specific
project we just had announced in New Jersey looking at a micro-
grid to support a major transportation corridor, which by the
way would also be an important evacuation route for New
Yorkers.
The second thing, which is very important, and we are
working closely with industry with API, the American Petroleum
Institute, and the EEI. What we learned in Sandy a little bit
the hard way was how the electricity infrastructure and the
transportation fuels infrastructures are so interdependent. So
we are working on that and being positioned for any future
event.
Mr. Engel. So implementation of these plans is ongoing? We
can expect that soon?
Mr. Moniz. Yes, it is. We hope to have a product that we
will put out at the end of the month, for example.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. I have been a long supporter of
alternative fuels for transportations. Besides electric
vehicles that you mentioned, what are other alternative fuels
is the Department of Energy working on?
Mr. Moniz. Well, we certainly support--and particularly for
heavy vehicles--looking at the issue of natural gas as a
transportation fuel. We of course have a very extensive program
on advanced biofuels moving to cellulosic biofuels, for
example. And these are again a case where costs are coming down
quite dramatically, not quite there yet but coming down
dramatically.
And of course electrification again costs have dropped
dramatically, not yet for the long-range vehicle for the mass
market but the penetration is happening much faster than it did
at the comparable stage for hybrid vehicles, looking very, very
interesting.
And then more to the future, the hydrogen economy and fuel
cells, that remains kind of a little bit earlier in the
development. But I would say alternative liquid fuels and
electricity are looking actually quite interesting.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. I know you both have been here a long
time so, Administrator McCarthy, I am going to submit a couple
of questions for you and spare you from having to answer it.
But I thank both of you----
Ms. McCarthy. Thanks.
Mr. Engel [continuing]. For your hard work----
Mr. Waxman. Would the gentleman--
Mr. Engel [continuing]. And----
Mr. Waxman. The gentleman from New York, if----
Mr. Engel. Yes?
Mr. Waxman [continuing]. You have completed your questions,
I would like to just make a--
Mr. Engel. Certainly.
Mr. Waxman [continuing]. Yield to me the time?
Mr. Engel. Yes, sir.
Mr. Waxman. I just want to make a comment on the hearing,
which I think has been an excellent hearing.
We are at a critical crossroads in this country in our
energy policy, and if we decide to do nothing, which I sense is
what the Republicans want is to do nothing, it is going to lead
to more carbon pollution, more droughts and floods, and other
extreme weather events, more billion-dollar disasters and
relief bills to pay for them by the taxpayers. If we take that
path, history will not treat us kindly. We will be the
generation that ignored the warnings of scientists and left
future generations a violent and inhospitable climate.
On the other hand, there is another path. We have a
shrinking window for action but we still have a window to act.
And Secretary Moniz told us that this is the critical, crucial
time this decade. If we act now, if we invest in solar, wind,
and other clean energy sources, if we unleash American
ingenuity, we can stop carbon pollution and protect our
atmosphere and create millions of new clean energy jobs.
I want to thank the two witnesses who have been very, very
helpful and terrific in being here all this time. I hope we
will all put aside our partisan differences to help achieve
these goals. They are very important ones for the future of our
country and the rest of the world.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
And I would also say how much we appreciate the two of you
being here today. We do think it is a major accomplishment that
our CO
2
emissions are lower than they have been in
20 years. And as we move forward, I think we all want a
balanced approach. We want to protect the environment but we
also want to make sure that we have a strong, viable economy
and that we don't want to be left in a noncompetitive position
in the world marketplace.
And I hope that you all look as forward to being with us in
the future as we look forward to being with you again here. We
spent 3 or 4 marvelous hours together. And that will----
Ms. McCarthy. We will be back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield [continuing]. Conclude today's hearing, but I
would remind Members that they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record, and I ask that the witnesses all
agree to respond promptly to the questions that we submit to
you all.
So thank you again and we look forward to working with you
as we move forward.
Mr. Moniz. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
Mr. Moniz. We appreciate it very much.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you. That concludes today's hearing.
[Whereupon, at 1:22 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


