- THE FTC AT 100: WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FTC AT 100: WHERE DO WE GO FROM
HERE?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 3, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-104

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

____________

U.S. Government Publishing Office
93-483               WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  GENE GREEN, Texas
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                      JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            Islands
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PAUL TONKO, New York
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

7_____

Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

LEE TERRY, Nebraska
Chairman
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JERRY McNERNEY, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              PETER WELCH, Vermont
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JIM MATHESON, Utah
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Islands
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)        officio)

(ii)
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Lee Terry, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Nebraska, opening statement....................................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Marsha Blackburn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, opening statement..........................     4
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................     7

Witnesses

Edith Ramirez, Chairwoman, Federal Trade Commission..............     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Answers to submitted questions...............................    62
Julie Brill, Commissioner, Federal Trade Commission..............    20
Prepared statement \1\
Answers to submitted questions...............................    86
Maureen K. Ohlhausen, Commissioner, Federal Trade Commission.....    21
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Answers to submitted questions...............................    98
Joshua D. Wright, Commissioner, Federal Trade Commission.........    28
Prepared statement...........................................    30
Answers to submitted questions...............................   108

----------
\1\ Ms. Brill did not offer a written statement for the record.

THE FTC AT 100: WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?

----------

TUESDAY, DECEMBER 3, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:06 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Lee Terry
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Terry, Lance, Blackburn,
Harper, Guthrie, Olson, Pompeo, Kinzinger, Bilirakis, Johnson,
Long, Barton, Upton (ex officio), Schakowsky, Sarbanes,
McNerney, Welch, Yarmuth, Dingell, Matheson, Barrow, and
Christensen.
Staff present: Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Kirby
Howard, Legislative Clerk; Nick Magallanes, Policy Coordinator,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Gib Mullan, Chief Counsel,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Shannon Taylor, Counsel,
Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; Michelle Ash, Democratic
Chief Counsel, Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade; and William
Wallace, Democratic Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Terry. All right. We are going to go ahead and get
started or start this hearing, and I just want to say at the
beginning before I start my statement that I am just really
pleased that all of our Commissioners are here today. And we
have Chairwoman Edith Ramirez, sworn into office as a
Commissioner in April 2010 and designated Chairwoman in March
2013. And prior to joining the Commission, Chairwoman Ramirez
was a partner in the law firm of Quinn Emanuel Urquhart--close
enough--and Sullivan--as an Irishman, the Sullivan is a lot
easier to pronounce--LLP in Los Angeles.
And then we have Commissioner Julie Brill. Thank you. She
was sworn into office in April 2010. Previously Commissioner
Brill was the Senior Deputy Attorney General and Chief of
Consumer Protection and Antitrust for the North Carolina
Department of Justice. Prior to that she served as Assistant
Attorney General for Consumer Protection and Antitrust for the
State of Vermont for more than two decades.
Thank you for being here.
Maureen Ohlhausen, Commissioner, sworn into office April
2012. Commissioner Ohlhausen previously has served for 11 years
at the Commission and held the position of Director of Policy
Planning under Chairman Kovacic. She is the most recently a
partner at Wilkinson Barker and Knauer.
And then last but not least, our Commissioner Joshua
Wright, sworn into office January 13th. Commissioner Wright was
a professor of law at George Mason University School of Law
focusing on antitrust and competition law. He holds a Ph.D. in
economics and served at the FTC as its scholar-in-residence at
the Bureau of Competition from 2007 to 2008.
And we are glad to have you here, and now we are going to
start our opening statements. I think a lot of you have been
through our hearings before. Commissioner Wright, you may be
the only one that is new to this position as a Commissioner.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LEE TERRY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEBRASKA

So good morning, and welcome, everyone here, to this
hearing, which is aptly titled, ``The FTC at 100: Where Do We
Go from Here?'' And that is a good question. We all have a
stake in the FTC's current mission to promote consumer welfare
by ensuring that business practices in the United States are
fair and transparent, while also addressing any market
collusion or anticompetitive activity that could unfairly fix
prices at a higher level than the market would otherwise
demand.
To achieve these goals, the FTC has a wide mix of
instruments at its disposal, such as administrative
adjudication, law enforcement, and rulemaking authority.
However, like all entities in the Government, prioritization of
goals is critical. Not only are the FTC's resources finite, but
they also--the sheer breadth of the FTC's jurisdiction makes it
necessary.
To that end I am concerned with various issues that the
FTC, some recent and others long standing, that not only may
take the Commission away from the scope in which Congress
legislated, but it also add to the regulatory uncertainty many
businesses feel already.
One clear example is the Commission's use of Section 5
authority under the FTC Act, which allows the Commission to
address unfair and deceptive trade practices. I understand that
authorities under this section represents an important
enforcement tool for the agency, especially in tackling
entities like patent trolls. However, absent a coherent
statement of policy on how the Commission plans to enforce
Section 5, many businesses, large and small, are left to
examining past decisions to see how they may fit into a certain
set of facts.
I think one area under Section 5 that warrants review is
how the Commission uses its authority to address the use of
security of data. Commercial entities are finding new ways of
using data, invaluable ways, that can help bring new products
to consumers. For example, Google may sell some of our
information, but we get free cloud-based email service in
return. The FTC's job is to police the actions of companies in
its use of personal information. Essentially this means
enforcing Section 5's requirement that companies don't make any
misrepresentations to consumers about what the companies do
with personal information.
But we wouldn't be doing our job in Congress if we didn't
examine whether the arrangement continues to work to the
benefit of consumers and businesses alike. The exchange in
monetization of data is valuable. According to a recent Harvard
study and Columbia, the data-driven marketing sector created
about $156 billion in revenue and contributed to about 675,000
jobs. But the exchange of our data could only be done with our
consent, and that consent should be meaningful choice. We
should examine the other consent decree paradigm, you know, the
right answer for both consumers, for companies trying to comply
with FTC policies.
Now, another example is the recently established Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau. At first blush it seems that many
of the actions undertaken by this agency were formerly under
the purview of the FTC, and I have been vocal with my distrust
of the CFPB and my concerns with this obscure agency further
compounded by the possibility that they may be duplicating the
efforts of the FTC, or hindering your efforts in the FTC. This
is something that I hope to address during this hearing.
Lastly, I just want to again thank all of you for being
here. And who wants a minute 28?
I yield to the vice chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Terry follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Lee Terry

Good morning and welcome to today's hearing, which is aptly
titled, ``The FTC at 100: Where do we go from here?''
And that's a good question. Over the past century, the
commission has seen its authority grow and the industries it
regulates change dramatically. So on the eve of this 100-year
milestone, I want to first to take a glimpse into the past and
better understand what has prompted certain actions by the
commission.
Understanding where we've been will provide the roadmap for
where we go. This will be helpful for Congress, and this
committee in particular, to know what we can do to ensure that
the FTC stays focused on its statutory mission while also
maintaining the necessary nimbleness needed to protect
consumers and ensure competitive markets at a time when
business practices are evolving at a remarkable pace.
We all have a stake in the FTC's current mission to promote
consumer welfare by ensuring that business practices in the
United States are fair and transparent-while also addressing
any market collusion or anti-competitive activity that could
unfairly fix prices at a higher level than the market would
otherwise demand. To achieve these goals, the FTC has a wide
mix of instruments at its disposal, such as administrative
adjudication, law enforcement, and rulemaking authority.
However, like all entities in the Government,
prioritization of goals is critical. Not only are the FTC's
resources finite, but also the sheer breadth of the FTC's
jurisdiction makes it necessary.
To that end, I am concerned with various issues at the FTC-
some recent and others longstanding-that not only may take the
commission away from the scope in which Congress legislated,
but also add to the regulatory uncertainty many businesses
already feel.
One clear example is the commission's use of its Section 5
authority under the FTC Act, which allows the commission to
address ``unfair and deceptive trade practices.'' I understand
that the authorities under this section represent an important
enforcement tool for the agency--especially in tackling
entities like patent trolls. However, absent a coherent
statement of policy on how the commission plans to enforce
Section 5, many businesses-large and small-are left to examine
past decisions to see how they may fit into the specific facts
of that case.
I think one area under Section 5 that warrants review is
how the commission uses its authority to address the use and
security of data. Commercial entities are finding new ways of
using data in valuable ways that can help bring new products to
consumers. For example, Google may sell some of our
information, but we get free, cloud-based e-mail service in
return.
The FTC's job is to police the actions of companies like
Google in its use of personal information. Essentially, this
means enforcing Section 5's requirement that companies don't
make any misrepresentations to consumers about what the
companies do with personal information. But we wouldn't be
doing our job in Congress if we didn't examine whether this
arrangement continues to work for the benefit of consumers and
businesses alike.
The exchange and monetization of data is valuable.
According to a recent study by Harvard and Columbia, the data-
driven marketing sector created about $156 billion in revenue
and contributed to about 675,000 jobs. But the exchange of our
data should only be done with our consent, and that consent
should be a meaningful choice. We should examine whether the
consent decree paradigm is the right answer for both consumers
and for companies trying to comply with FTC policies; and if
so, whether it can be improved upon.
Another example is the recently established Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau. At first blush, it seems as though
many of the actions being undertaken by this agency were
formerly under the purview of the FTC. I have been vocal with
my distrust for the CFPB. My concerns with this obscure agency
are further compounded by the possibility that they may be
duplicating efforts of the FTC. This is something I hope will
be addressed in your testimony today or fleshed out by some
questions.
Lastly, I would like to thank all of you. I have had the
opportunity to meet personally with most of you, and hope to
continue building a positive relationship, particularly because
this is hopefully the first of many hearings on the FTC that
our subcommittee will hold in the next few months, as we
continue looking at the agency and potential legislation to
modernize the FTC.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The FTC is turning 100 in less than a year, and I think it
is wonderful that we are assembling today to explore your
current role in jurisdiction over protecting consumers and
competition in what we want to have remain a dynamic
marketplace. The Federal Government's propensity to constantly
overreach is a huge concern, and it is important that our
regulators respect the rule of law. That means making their
case in courts instead of creating back-door informal
regulations without judicial oversight.
Something else we should be mindful of is that if the DC
Circuit strikes down the FCC's open Internet order, it will
become clear that the FTC is the de facto arbiter of the Net
neutrality concerns, which will dramatically increase
policymakers' attention on this agency. We need to understand
whether the Commission is as well suited to effectively enforce
its core mission as it can be? Is the Commission rigorous in
its analysis of our markets, technologies, and economies? Is it
prioritizing its resources appropriately? How can Congress and
the FTC work better together to maximize consumer welfare?
We welcome you and appreciate your time today.
I yield back.
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
And I now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee,
Ms. Schakowsky, for her 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing today on the Federal Trade Commission's nearly
100th birthday and to discuss the future of the agency. We have
a real power panel today, and I want to welcome all of them for
being here.
The FTC is on the front line of protecting both consumers
and businesses from unfair, deceptive, fraudulent, or
anticompetitive practices. Since taking over the head of the
FTC in March, Chairwoman Ramirez has maintained a strong agency
and pushed to increase standards in the marketplace to protect
consumers and strengthen our economy. As a lifelong consumer
advocate, I appreciate the work that has already been done at
the FTC, and I look forward to Chairwoman Ramirez's continued
leadership.
I am particularly pleased that the Chairwoman has focused
on access to life-saving drugs, which I believe is one of the
most important roles of the agency. The FTC has fought for pay-
for-delay agreements in recent years, and the Supreme Court's
decision in FTC is that Actavis----
Ms. Ramirez. Actavis.
Ms. Schakowsky. Actavis--that reversed payment agreements
can violate antitrust laws was a big win for consumers. The
Commission's recent filing of an amicus brief in opposition to
using risk evaluation and mitigation strategies to delay the
creation of generics is another strong step towards protecting
consumers. I look forward to the continued progress of the
Commission in ensuring access to safe, affordable drugs.
The FTC's role continues to expand as our social networks,
shopping, banking, and other forms of communication and
business, move to the Internet. At the same time, as its role
is expanding, the FTC is struggling with less and less funding
which has been worsened by the 5 percent sequester cuts. The
Commission's prepared testimony points to, quote, ``resource
constraints,'' unquote, and the need to leverage those
resources through, quote, ``careful case selection,'' unquote.
We should not be asking one of our country's most important
agencies to always choose which consumer protections it will be
able to enforce. Priorities are important, but we don't want to
shortchange consumers. We should, instead, work to ensure that
the FTC has the resources it needs to maintain consumer
protection and a fair marketplace.
The growth of the Internet has presented us with new
questions about privacy rights and expectations, and that is
why Chairman Terry and I decided earlier this year to form a
Privacy Working Group, which is cochaired by Congress Members
Blackburn and Welch. The group is tasked with exploring the
current privacy landscape and considering possible solutions to
challenges that we find.
A major concern for me within the privacy framework is the
issue of privacy agreements. The FTC has the power to hold
companies to the privacy agreements they offer their companies,
their customers, visitors, and users, and it does hold bad
actors accountable. But there is no law requiring online
businesses to offer specific privacy protections, or even to
have privacy policies, and the FTC can't enforce what isn't
promised. And it is also true, I think, that what is promised
is often in a form not really meaningful to average consumers,
if you have read any of those privacy agreements or found them,
and you have the eyesight to actually see them. I look forward
to hearing from our Commissioners as to whether a minimum
online privacy standard is needed or would at least be helpful
to the agency as it continues its important work.
Again, I look forward to your testimony today and to
working with all of you Commissioners and my colleagues to
support the FTC in its mission going forward.
Mr. Terry. You have got an extra minute. Do you want to
yield?
Ms. Schakowsky. Oh, I would be happy to yield a minute. Any
of the Members?
Then I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Terry. The gentlelady yields back.
At this time I recognize the full committee chair, Mr.
Upton of Michigan.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, want to thank
each of our Commissioners for being here this morning. Today we
are going to examine the important role of the FTC, its impact
on jobs in the economy, and what to look forward to in the
agency's next century.
The FTC's grasp reaches far and wide, and it is the only
Federal agency with both consumer protection and competition
jurisdiction. From the smallest independent corner store to the
largest industry, from online data collection to multimillion-
dollar merger reviews, the FTC is charged with ensuring
industry players play fair, competition thrives, and the
consumers enjoy the fruits of that competition as well as
protection from fraudsters. Of course, with such great power
comes equal concern about the appropriate use of that power and
potential consequences for job creation and economic growth.
Through a broader lens this committee is taking an agency-
by-agency approach to review the state of Government. How do we
operate? How can we function better, more efficiently, and more
effectively? Chairman Terry often puts it best when he calls it
``clearing the underbrush''; clearing the bog that slows us
down and makes us less efficient.
Our duties are twofold: Pursue policies that protect the
public, while also allowing us to work to ensure job creation,
innovation, and economic growth are allowed to flourish. The
FTC can play and does play an important role as we seek to
improve our economic recovery.
And I yield to any other Member on our side wishing time.
Mr. Barton.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Today we will examine the important role of the Federal
Trade Commission, its impact on jobs and the economy, and what
to look forward to in the agency's next century.
The FTC's grasp reaches far and wide, and it is the only
Federal agency with both consumer protection and competition
jurisdiction.
From the smallest, independent corner store to the largest
industry, from online data collection to multimillion-dollar
merger reviews, the FTC is charged with ensuring industry
players play fair, competition thrives, and that consumers
enjoy the fruits of that competition as well as protection from
fraudsters. Of course, with such great power comes equal
concern about the appropriate use of that power and potential
consequences for job creation and economic growth.
Through a broader lens, this committee is taking an agency-
by-agency approach to reviewing the state of Government. How do
we now operate? How can we function better, more efficiently,
and more effectively? Chairman Terry puts it best when he calls
it ``clearing the underbrush''--clearing the bog that slows us
down and makes us less efficient.
Our duties are twofold--pursue policies that protect the
public while also working to ensure job creation, innovation,
and economic growth are allowed to flourish. The FTC can play
an important role as we seek to recover fully from the Great
Recession.
I thank each of the commissioners for being here today and
I look forward to our discussion. I know a number of my
colleagues have comments they would like to share so I yield
the balance of my time.

Mr. Terry. Mr. Barton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, first of all, an early happy birthday. As I
understand, this is the FTC's 100th anniversary next year, so
happy birthday to the Commissioners.
I have been on this committee almost 30 years. It is very
rarely that we have the time and the inclination to study an
agency in depth, but we do want to take a real look at the FTC
as it enters its second century of existence. And I will focus
in my questions on the role of the FTC in protecting privacy of
American citizens, with a special emphasis on children's
privacy.
I have participated with the Commissioners of the FTC over
the last several years on a number of panels, and we have
looked at the issue of privacy and what the industry is doing,
what the standard practices are, and, looking forward, what
they need to be.
I look forward to listening to the Commissioners. I look
forward to participating with the members of the committee in
this subcommittee hearing, and I hope that very soon we will be
working with the FTC to implement some new protections for our
children's privacy, and our general citizens' privacy.
And with that I would be happy to yield to anybody.
Anybody? If not, then I yield back to the subcommittee
chairman.
Mr. Terry. The gentleman yields back.
Now the other side has 5 minutes. Mr. Dingell, emeritus,
would you like any of that time? You are entitled to it.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you. I will let you
allocate the time, and I thank you.
Mr. Terry. All right. Does anyone else on the minority side
wish the time?
Seeing none, then all time has been yielded back.
And I think all of you know how this works. And so,
Chairwoman Ramirez, you are now recognized, and we will not
gavel at 5 minutes. We will let you finish.

STATEMENTS OF EDITH RAMIREZ, CHAIRWOMAN, FEDERAL TRADE
COMMISSION; JULIE BRILL, COMMISSIONER, FEDERAL TRADE
COMMISSION; MAUREEN K. OHLHAUSEN, COMMISSIONER, FEDERAL TRADE
COMMISSION; AND JOSHUA D. WRIGHT, COMMISSIONER, FEDERAL TRADE
COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF EDITH RAMIREZ

Ms. Ramirez. Chairman Terry, Ranking Member Schakowsky, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting us to
testify regarding the Federal Trade Commission's work as we
approach our 100th year. We appreciate this opportunity to
discuss the FTC's unique, dual, and complementary role in
promoting competition and protecting consumers.
The FTC has a tradition of working at the forefront of the
most important emerging issues of the day. We do so using a mix
of law enforcement, advocacy, research, and business and
consumer education. Changes to the marketplace, like rapid
technological innovation and globalization, drive much of our
work. However, over the last century our goals have remained
fundamentally the same, to prevent fraud and deception, ensure
that companies keep their promises to consumers, and remove
barriers to competition, all of which promote an even playing
field that allows law-abiding businesses to flourish.
With a staff of approximately 1,200 and a fiscal year 2013
budget of $296 million, the FTC has delivered results that
belie its modest size. Over the last 3 years, we have returned
over $196 million to victims of deceptive and unfair conduct,
and delivered an additional $117 million in several penalties
and ill-gotten gains to the U.S. Treasury. We have also saved
consumers approximately $3 billion in estimated economic injury
by stopping anticompetitive practices and mergers.
The hallmark of the FTC's consumer protection work is
anticipating and tackling new marketplace issues and problems.
In the 1960s, we were the first Federal agency to act on the
health threat created by cigarettes, forcing manufacturers to
implement health warnings in their advertising.
In the 1980s and 1990s, we used our congressional authority
to launch a law enforcement program which continues today;
obtaining Federal Court restraining orders, consumer redress,
and permanent prohibitions against thousands of consumer
deception schemes. And in the early 2000s, the agency took
action against unwanted telemarketing calls by implementing the
Do Not Call Registry, which kicked off our role as an early
protector of consumers' privacy both offline and online.
The FTC continues to combat scams most familiar to
consumers, such as harassing telemarketers, sham weight-loss
cures and fraudulent business opportunities, and newer harms
associated with emerging technologies and business practices.
As in our consumer protection efforts, we have a long
history of promoting competition in the marketplace, using
enforcement, advocacy and research. We have issued the
influential Horizontal Merger Guidelines along with the
Department of Justice, advanced merger and monopolization law
with many important victories in crucial cases, and released
reports that have helped shape competition policy and
enforcement in critical areas to consumers and the economy such
as technology and health care.
In more recent years we have turned our attention to those
emerging activities that posed the greatest threat to vigorous
competition. For example, we have worked to stop drug companies
from stifling the entry of generic drugs by entering into pay-
for-delay agreements, including obtaining a significant victory
for consumers at the Supreme Court last term in Actavis. We
have fought against anticompetitive healthcare provider
consolidation that threatens higher cost without better care,
and in doing so we achieved another important victory in the
Supreme Court in the Phoebe Putney case, clarifying the scope
of the State action doctrine. And we have acted to protect
competition and innovation in the technology sector.
In fiscal year 2013, we brought 27 new competition cases
and continued to enforce compliance with our existing orders
and obligations under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act. Beyond our law
enforcement, we promote competition and educate stakeholders
with workshops, reports, and advocacy. For example, our staff
recently submitted comments to the District of Columbia Taxicab
Commission, cautioning that rules it has proposed may restrict
consumers from using new SmartPhone software applications to
hail cabs. And as businesses become increasingly global, the
FTC has coordinated closely with international counterparts in
both our enforcement and policy efforts.
The Commission has benefited from a culture of
bipartisanship, collegiality, and consensus in our
decisionmaking that yields a balanced and consistent approach
to our work, and we are fortunate to have a truly expert and
dedicated staff, one that, despite being asked to do more with
fewer resources, has consistently rated the FTC as among the
top agencies to work for. Given this rich reservoir of talent,
commitment, and energy, we are confident that we can meet the
challenges of our second century.
And with that background, it is my pleasure to introduce my
fellow Commissioners. First, Julie Brill, who will be providing
more details on some of the Commission's current priorities,
including our efforts to stop scams targeting financially
distressed consumers, protect privacy and data security, and
address anticompetitive conduct in the healthcare industry.
Next, Maureen Ohlhausen, who will describe the FTC's
efforts to address and adapt to external changes and
challenges, including technological advances, evolving markets,
and globalization.
And Josh Wright, who will discuss our unique research
capacity, the expertise of our Bureau of Economics, and our
ongoing efforts to review and update our rules and guides.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ramirez follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Commissioner Brill.

STATEMENT OF JULIE BRILL

Ms. Brill. Good morning. My name is Julie Brill. I will
highlight some of the significant substantive work under way at
the Federal Trade Commission as we approach our 100th
anniversary.
Let me begin with our consumer protection mission. The
Federal Trade Commission is taking effective actions to protect
consumers in a recovering economy. Aggressive enforcement plays
a key role, and we actively monitor the marketplace to
identify, understand, and eliminate financial scams. Recently
we have focused on putting an end to scams that falsely
promised to reduce consumers' mortgage payments, prevent
foreclosure, or ease credit card debts. And we have stopped
debt collectors who violated the law in their efforts to obtain
payments from consumers, some of whom did not even owe a debt
in the first place. We pay particularly close attention to
schemes that target vulnerable consumers, such as the elderly,
and military service members and their families.
The FTC is also the Nation's top cop on the consumer, data
security, and privacy beat. Our enforcement and policy work in
these areas helps to ensure that consumers have confidence in
the dynamic and ever-changing marketplace for personal
information. We enforce the Fair Credit Reporting Act, and we
pay particularly close attention to children's online privacy
as mandated by Congress in the Children's Online Privacy
Protection Act.
For over a decade, under both Republican and Democratic
leadership, we have challenged deceptive and unfair data
security and privacy practices. In that time period, we have
brought 47 cases against companies that failed to properly
secure consumer information, and more than 40 cases relating to
the privacy of consumer data. Some of these cases involve
household names such as Google and Facebook, but we have also
broad myriad cases against less well-known companies that
spammed consumers, violated commitments in their privacy
policies, installed spyware on consumers' computers, or
otherwise crossed the lines of deception or unfairness in their
data collection and use practices.
In all our work we recognize the need to stay abreast of
fast-paced technological changes. As the world has moved to
mobile, we have focused on the effects of data collection and
use practices, as well as the variety of mobile payment systems
in this complex and evolving marketplace. We just held a
workshop on the Internet of Things to explore data security and
privacy issues related to connected devices, smart cars, smart
medical devices, and smart appliances.
Moving to our competition mission, here are some
highlights, some recent highlights, from our work to promote
competition and free markets. In the high-tech marketplace, the
Commission has examined difficult issues at the intersection of
antitrust and intellectual property laws; issues related to
innovation, standards setting, and patents. The Commission's
policy work in this area is grounded in the recognition that
intellectual property and competition laws share the
fundamental goals of promoting innovation and consumer welfare.
With respect to the healthcare market, the Commission
devotes significant resources to ensure that competition will
enable market participants to deliver cost containment,
excellence, and innovation. Using enforcement as its primary
tool, the Commission works to prevent anticompetitive mergers
and conduct that might diminish competition in health care.
This year, as both Ranking Member Schakowsky and Chairwoman
Ramirez have noted, the FTC won an important pharmaceutical
enforcement case in the Supreme Court. The Actavis case
involved so-called reverse payments between branded and generic
pharmaceutical firms. These payments had the effect of keeping
lower-priced generic drugs off the market to the detriment of
consumers. The Supreme Court ruling that these payments should
be subject to the antitrust laws was an important win for
consumers. The Actavis decision vindicated the balanced and
bipartisan goal of the Hatch-Waxman Act to increase the rewards
of branded pharmaceutical manufacturers for bringing new drugs
to market, and increase the incentive of generics to challenge
invalid drug patents.
Thank you.
Mr. Terry. Commissioner Ohlhausen, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF MAUREEN K. OHLHAUSEN

Ms. Ohlhausen. Chairman Terry, Ranking Member Schakowsky,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to appear before you today. I am Commissioner Maureen
Ohlhausen, and my statement will briefly address the FTC's
ongoing efforts to address technological change, evolving
markets, and increasing globalization, as well as the agency's
important international activities.
I will first highlight some of our recent efforts to stay
abreast of competition and consumer protection issues in high
tech and other rapidly evolving areas, which include law
enforcement as well as other tools. For example, using our
authority under Section 6(b) of the FTC Act, we can obtain
information under a compulsory process for market participants
and pursue a study of a particular competition or consumer
protection issue.
As we announced in September, the FTC plans to perform such
a study of the impact of patent assertion entity, or PAE,
activity on competition and innovation. This study should
provide us with a better understanding of the activities of
PAEs and its various costs and benefits.
The Commission may also form an internal task force to
examine the competition or consumer protection implications
raised by a particular policy proposal. The FTC did this in in
2007, when former Chairman Majoras formed the Internet Access
Task Force, which I had the honor of heading. The task force
issued a set of recommendations regarding network neutrality
proposals that were being debated at the time, and which
continue to be debated today.
Finally, one of the FTC's most effective means of obtaining
information is holding public workshops, and as Commissioner
Brill already mentioned, we recently held a workshop on the
Internet of Things.
The Commission is also devoting significant resources to
addressing the mobile phenomena. The FTC has a Mobile
Technology Unit which conducts research; follows various
platforms, app stores and applications available to consumers;
trains FTC staff on mobile technology issues; and develops law
enforcement cases involving mobile technologies.
Before concluding my comments on the FTC's efforts in the
high-tech space, I would like briefly to discuss an area in
which expanding our existing statutory authority would be in
the public interest.
Although the FTC has nearly a century of experience
protecting consumers across many industries, the exemption from
our jurisdiction for communications common carriers frustrates
effective consumer protection with respect to a wide variety of
activities, including privacy, data security, and billing
practices. With the convergence of telecom, broadband, and
other technologies, I urge Congress seriously to consider
removing this antiquated limitation on our jurisdiction and
putting these competing technologies on an equal footing. The
Commission has testified in favor of repealing the
Communications Common Carrier Exemption in the past, and I
would like to take this opportunity to express my support for
such repeal.
Another key change for consumers and competition is our
increasingly global economy. Thus, the FTC's international
efforts are critical to the agency's competition and consumer
protection missions. I would like to highlight two important
areas of focus in our bilateral efforts: our use of the U.S.
SAFE WEB Act and our interactions with the Chinese competition
agencies.
The U.S. SAFE WEB Act enables the FTC both to share
information with foreign law enforcement agencies and to obtain
information on their behalf. And this is vital to strengthening
the culture of mutual assistance, but enables law enforcers to
achieve greater results for consumers. And one example of this
cooperation is the six cases the FTC filed last year against
mostly foreign-based operators of a massive tech-support scam.
I applaud Congress' decision to reauthorize this important law
enforcement tool last year.
On the competition side, the FTC has an increasingly
important bilateral relationship with China and its three
competition agencies. In July 2011, the FTC and the DOJ signed
a Memorandum of Understanding with the Chinese agencies, and
since then we have met on multiple occasions to discuss
enforcement and policy issues.
Even before the signing of the MOU, the FTC and the DOJ had
devoted considerable resources to working with Chinese
officials on developing the Chinese antimonopoly law which went
in effect in 2008, and our efforts to convince the Chinese
agencies to pursue sound competition policies will ultimately
benefit U.S. businesses and consumers.
One of the top priorities of the FTC's international
program is its work with multilateral fora, including in
particular the International Competition Network, in developing
best practices for the world's competition agencies. The ICN
has a chief consensus on recommended practices in several
areas, including merger review procedures, substantive merger
analysis, and the criteria for assessing abusive dominance.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on the
Commission on the opportunities and challenges our agency will
face as we enter our second century. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ohlhausen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you.
And now, Mr. Wright, Commissioner Wright, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSHUA D. WRIGHT

Mr. Wright. Thank you, Chairman Terry, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, for
this opportunity to speak to you today about the FTC at 100. I
want to begin by discussing some of the unique institutional
advantages and expertise at the Federal Trade Commission.
As both an economist and a lawyer, I appreciate the unique
structure of the FTC and how its organization enhances our
ability to protect consumers. As you know, the FTC has three
bureaus: Competition, Consumer Protection, and Economics. The
Bureau of Competition endeavors to promote and protect free
markets and vigorous competition, and the Bureau of Consumer
Protection works to prevent fraud, deception, and unfair
business practices in the marketplace.
The FTC's dual missions complement each other in promoting
consumer welfare, encouraging the disclosure of accurate
information to consumers in the marketplace, which, in turn,
facilitates free and healthy competition. What is sometimes
lost in that discussion, however, is the vital role played by
the Bureau of Economics in achieving both of those missions.
The Bureau of Economics provides guidance and support to
the agency's antitrust and consumer protection activities.
Working with the Bureaus of Competition and Consumer
Protection, the Bureau of Economics participates in the
investigation of mergers and alleged anticompetitive, deceptive
or unfair acts or practices. The Bureaus provide an independent
recommendation on the merits of antitrust and consumer
protection matters to the Commission. The Bureau also
integrates economic analysis into enforcement proceedings and
works with the Bureaus to divide appropriate remedies.
The Bureau of Economics also conducts rigorous economic
analyses of various markets and industries. Some recent
examples include its consumer fraud survey, which provided
insight into the frequency of certain types of consumer fraud
and how the incidence of fraud has changed over time. The
Bureau of Economics conducts merger retrospectives that help
the agency assess how a particular transaction affected the
market, and allows the agency to evaluate enforcement decisions
to improve future analysis and decisionmaking.
Finally, the Bureau also analyzes the economic impact of
Government regulation, and provides Congress, the executive
branch, and the public with policy recommendations relating to
competition and consumer protection issues. Recent examples
include the Bureau's work on children's online privacy and
protection rule and the endorsement and testimonials guides.
Analyzing the impact of regulations also is one of the main
components of the FTC's modernization efforts. To ensure the
Commission's regulations and compliance advice remain cost-
effective, the agency has engaged in a systematic regulatory
review program for the last two decades. Pursuant to that
program, the Commission has rescinded 13 trade rules and 24
guides, and updated dozens of others since the early 1990s. The
FTC is committed to continuing its systematic regulatory review
program in order to reduce burdens on the business community,
while providing real benefits to consumers.
As the FTC enters its second century, it is an appropriate
time to reflect upon whether the agency's enforcement and
policy tools are being put to the best possible use to help the
agency fulfill its mission. One of these tools, the
Commission's authority to protect--to prosecute unfair methods
of competition as stand-alone violations of Section 5 of the
FTC Act, is particularly suitable, in my view--is a
particularly suitable candidate for evaluation. The historical
record reveals an unfortunate gap between the theoretical
promise of Section 5 as articulated by Congress and its
application and practice by the FTC.
The gap has grown large in part due to the persistent
absence of any meaningful guidance articulating what
constitutes an unfair method of competition. For at least the
past 20 years, Commissioners from both parties have
acknowledged that a principal standard for application of
Section 5 would be a welcome improvement and have called for
formal guidelines. With that goal in mind, I have offered a
detailed policy statement articulating my own views on how best
to modernize the agency's Section 5 authority.
The fundamental problem with the Commission's Section 5
enforcement in the unfair methods context is caused by a
combination of the agency's administrative process advantages
and the vague nature of the Section 5 authority governing
unfair methods of competition. This combination gives the FTC
the ability in some cases to elicit a settlement even when the
conduct in question may benefit consumers. This is because
firms typically prefer to settle Section 5 claims rather than
go through the lengthy and costly administrative litigation in
which they are both shooting at a moving target and may have
the chips stacked against them.
Indeed, the empirical evidence documents a near perfect
rate at which the Commission rules in favor of FTC staff after
administrative adjudication. The evidence also reveals that the
FTC's own decisions are reversed by Federal courts of appeal at
a much greater rate than those of general district court judges
with little or no antitrust experience.
Formal guidelines would help the Commission's mission by
focusing the Commission's unfair methods enforcement upon
plainly anticompetitive conduct and provide businesses with
important guidance about what conduct is lawful and what
conduct is unlawful under Section 5. Indeed, the FTC has issued
nearly 50 sets of guidelines on a variety of topics, many of
them much less important to our mission than Section 5. The
Commission can and should, in my view, provide similar guidance
for its signature competition statute.
In closing, the FTC is committed to effectively updating
and modernizing to achieve its goals of protecting consumers
through its consumer protection and competition missions.
I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wright follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you, Commissioners and Chairwoman. I
appreciate your testimony. And at this point it is the
question-and-answer part where we get to do a little deeper
dive into your testimonies. And as I telegraphed in my opening
statement, and when we had time to chat beforehand, I am
concerned about the CFPB having what appears to be
substantially similar jurisdiction, although without the
maturity of 100 years of testimony and cases to work from.
So in regard to the FTC's interpretation and guidance on
how it interprets unfair and deceptive, are there any
indications that they will or will not--the CFPB is going to
follow any of the historical interpretations by the FTC,
Chairwoman?
Ms. Ramirez. Chairman, let me say that we have worked very
closely with the CFPB. We entered into a Memorandum of
Understanding back in January of 2002--2012, excuse me, in
which we set out processes and procedures specifying how we
would coordinate to avoid duplication of effort, and to avoid
double teaming any one company. I also think that--so we
consult in connection with enforcement actions as well as
rulemakings and other policy work.
The statutory definition of unfairness tracks--that is in
Dodd-Frank tracks what is in the FTC Act, so I do believe that
the CFPB will be informed by the relevant case law, as well as
the relevant work that the FTC has engaged in when it comes to
its use of its----
Mr. Terry. Do you have any experiences so far, though,
whether to determine if CFPB will use or will not use those
historical precedents from the FTC?
Ms. Ramirez. At the end of the day, I think the agency will
do what is appropriate under their statutory----
Mr. Terry. That is what I am afraid of.
Ms. Ramirez [continuing]. Authority. However, again, I do
believe that they will be informed by the work of the FTC. We
cooperate very closely, and we certainly, you know----
Mr. Terry. But no evidence of that that you can point to?
Ms. Ramirez. I haven't seen any evidence that they are
doing anything inappropriate.
Mr. Terry. OK. And I want to dive down a little deeper on
the duplication, because some of the fears of the entities that
are under--particularly financial institutions where there may
be an FTC review, let us take mortgages, for example, or debt
collection, that it could be under both the jurisdictions, and
there is an FTC pathway, and then there is going to be a
duplication or maybe even a slightly different standard under
CFPB.
You mentioned that you kind of have an agreement on
jurisdiction. Can you give us more details regarding the--that
agreement on how you are going to work through those shared
jurisdictions?
Ms. Ramirez. I wouldn't call it an agreement on
jurisdiction, but rather it is an agreement to put in place
processes and procedures to ensure that there is no
duplication, and to ensure that we collaborate effectively and
efficiently. We did--under Dodd-Frank the FTC lost certain
rulemaking authority relating to the financial sector, which
now is housed and is under the province of the CFPB. So it is
really on enforcement matters where we are primarily
collaborating. And, again, we make a great effort and we are in
contact with them on a regular basis to ensure that we are both
effective agencies.
And let me also just say that we have a very strong history
and a good track record of working with sister agencies to
collaborate and have shared jurisdiction.
Mr. Terry. Well, but CFPB is, A, new, and, B, has been
given a wide berth without too many regulatory barriers to that
jurisdiction. And one of the issues that we have discussed is
on their unfair and deceptive actor or practice guidance that
seems like it may be different than FTC.
Have you worked with the CFPB on the issuance of their own
use of----
Ms. Ramirez. It is not a topic that I have addressed with
them directly. We, of course, have our own policy statements
addressing unfairness and their deception authority.
Mr. Terry. Right.
Ms. Ramirez. Again----
Mr. Terry. You haven't had any conversations----
Ms. Ramirez. I personally have not engaged on that
particular issue, but I know that staff is in discussions, and
this is no doubt a subject that was addressed.
Mr. Terry. OK, staff are in discussions.
Any of the other three Commissioners in 29 seconds have any
concerns with CFPB?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Chairman Terry, I do think that it is
important that the FTC and the CFPB try to interpret and apply
similar authority in a similar way. So I completely agree with
what Chairwoman Ramirez said.
The CFPB has not had the enforcement history that the FTC
has had thus far, but I am concerned that in one of the
complaints that they did issue, they did seem to apply
unfairness in a very--possibly in a very broad manner to reach
pricing in particular. So if that were to be an actual
representation of their enforcement position, that would create
concerns for me down the road, because I don't think that is
consistent with how the FTC is interpreted.
Mr. Terry. And I appreciate that.
One last question, Chairman: Do you want to move out of
your building?
Ms. Ramirez. No, we do not.
Mr. Terry. All right. Thank you.
I now recognize the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I first want to correct a word in my opening statement. I
mistakenly said that the FTC has fought for pay-for-delay. It
has actually fought against pay-for-delay. I wanted to clarify
that.
But I did want to ask more questions about pharmaceuticals.
Pharmacy benefit managers, or PBMs, are middlemen between
insurers, drug manufacturers and patients, as well as to
negotiate discounts and rebates with pharmacists and drug
manufacturers to lower the cost of medicines for patients. In
2005, the FTC conducted an analysis of competition among PBMs
and determined the market was competitive.
In the wake of the 2005 report, there have been a number of
large PBM mergers, either mergers between PBMs or vertical
mergers between PBMs and pharmacies. CVS Caremark was created
by the merger of Caremark Rx with AdvancePCS. Last year the FTC
allowed the PBM giant Express Scripts and Medco to merge. Now
the new Express Scripts and CVS Caremark account for more than
80 percent of the PBM market.
So, Commissioner Brill, I want to ask you a question. Given
these recent PBM mergers, is it perhaps time for the FTC to
revisit the PBM market to ensure that it remains generally
competitive and free of pervasive anticompetitive behavior?
Ms. Brill. Thank you, Ranking Member Schakowsky.
I have had a long history dealing with PBMs at the State
level, as well as at the Federal Trade Commission, and I have
been involved with State laws and State efforts to enact laws
to increase transparency around PBMs. This is an issue where
some of the States have had an intellectual disagreement with
the traditional position of the Federal Trade Commission.
I think that it is important to examine the ways in which
PBMs do operate and to ensure that they are being as
transparent as possible, yet still maintaining competition with
respect to their clients; that is, us, employers, whether large
or small, or other types of entities that hire PBMs.
With respect to concentration in the market for PBMs, as
you know, I dissented in the Commission's decision to allow the
most recent merger to go forward, and the reason I dissented is
that I felt the parties said themselves that they did not need
to merge in order to gain any further economies of scale. And
as a result, I was looking at their other activity, and I saw
some evidence of coordination, and I worried a great deal about
coordination in this market.
And as a result, at the close of the case, I did suggest
that it would be appropriate for the Federal Trade Commission,
given what our resources are, given the other issues that we
have to examine, for instance, patent assertion entities,
patent trolls, if you will, and others, that if we do have the
resources, I think it would be appropriate to take a look at
concentration in the PBM industry and whether or not some of
the concerns that I have seen are going to bear fruit. And that
would be something that would probably--should take place not
necessarily right now, but maybe in a few years.
Ms. Schakowsky. In a few years.
Ms. Brill. A year or two, yes. I think we need to see how
the market matures, given the now even greater concentration in
the market.
Ms. Schakowsky. Chairwoman Ramirez, we have heard from
experts that there are particular concerns in the area of
specialty pharmacy where patients are using more expensive
drugs with more complicated treatment regimens that require
special attention from pharmacists that are specially trained.
Do you have any concerns about the impact that the mergers
will have on patients' choice of specialty pharmacists?
Ms. Ramirez. We are aware of the concerns that have been
raised in connection with the merger that you just mentioned,
Express Scripts and Medco. This was an issue that we looked at
very closely. We issued a closing statement in which we
explained that we did not believe that there were any adverse
impacts on the availability of specialty drugs that would
result from the merger, and I believe that that is the case.
However, we are aware of the concerns, and this is going to be
an area that we will continue to look at closely.
Ms. Schakowsky. I am going to see if I can get in one more
question on the privacy front.
Really quickly, I wanted to ask you, Chairwoman Ramirez, I
agree with the general conclusion of your November 19th
workshop that the Internet of Things brings great potential for
innovative, useful technologies, but also new challenges. At
the workshop you stressed that companies taking part in the new
Internet of Things ecosystem have a great responsibility to,
quote, ``build in consumer privacy protections from the
outset.''
Could you please address why you believe that this approach
to data collection, where privacy is hard-coded into new
technologies, is the right one?
Ms. Ramirez. This is an approach that the Commission has
advocated since we issued a privacy report in March of last
year. We advocate three broad principles that we believe should
be--are good best practices for companies to abide by. That
includes privacy by design, which means that companies ought to
think about and incorporate privacy protections as they develop
products. I also think that it is important to provide both
simplified notice and choice so that consumers can exercise
greater control over their personal information. And then
finally, it is also critically important that companies be open
and transparent about how they collect and use personal
information from consumers.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, we are following up as a committee on
that as well, so we look forward to working with you.
Mr. Terry. Appreciate that. And there may even be more
privacy questions from our gentlelady from Tennessee. You are
now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will stay
right with that line of questioning.
Commissioner Brill, let me come to you on the Internet of
Things issue, and this is something as a committee and a
working group that we are looking at. And I have to tell you, I
was a little bit, I guess, befuddled would be the word about
the FTC's intended approach to the Internet of Things, and I
would like for you to speak to this.
You wrote a New York Times piece saying the FTC should
guide the development of the Internet of Things, and you did
that 2 months before the FTC's workshop on that topic. And I
would like to know if you think it was appropriate to write
such a piece when you were holding an exploratory workshop,
and, therefore, now some people have come forward and said that
your workshop was just outcome driven. You were meant to lay
the groundwork for new regulations, and so is this a good
approach, or should you all be listening and learning from
these workshops and those that are participating in that before
trying to drive policy in the New York Times on very complex
and dynamic technologies?
Ms. Brill. Thank you for the question. I appreciate being
able to respond to that.
Yes, I think it was very appropriate for me to place that
piece in the New York Times. I was asked by the New York Times
to write a very short piece about what some of the issues
around the Internet of Things were, and I wrote the piece to
raise questions about the kinds of things that I was
individually thinking about.
Mrs. Blackburn. So you did it to raise questions and not to
drive outcomes?
Ms. Brill. Absolutely not.
Mrs. Blackburn. So you did not want to predetermine what
the outcome from the workshop would be?
Ms. Brill. Absolutely not. And I think a close and fair
reading of my piece would show that it is raising questions,
and it is certainly not----
Mrs. Blackburn. It has raised questions for some of us, but
we want to make certain, and this is one of the reasons we are
looking so closely at the Internet of Things and privacy.
I want to move on with the time that I have. Commissioner
Wright, I would like to come to you. Can you tell me why
antitrust is a better way to address net neutrality concerns
and why you think the FTC is the appropriate agency to handle
the so-called net neutrality bucket of issues?
Mr. Wright. Absolutely, and I appreciate the question.
With respect to the concerns raised in and around the net
neutrality space, in general most of these concerns involve
what antitrust economists and lawyers call vertical agreements
or vertical contracts, contracts between complement providers.
And these are the types of contracts which antitrust law and
antitrust agencies like the FTC have looked at and evaluated
and developed a framework through the common law under the
Sherman Act for nearly 100 years; developed a set of tools for
identifying which of these agreements pose problems and
actually harm consumers, and which can be beneficial. And quite
a few can be beneficial to consumers rather than harm.
So the FTC and the antitrust institutions generally, I
believe, have a framework that, from an analytical perspective,
is asking the right questions: Which of these agreements will
help consumers? Let us allow the consumers to get the benefits
of those. Which of these will harm? Let us investigate further,
bringing enforcement action with respect to those agreements.
That is precisely the framework that we have, and I have argued
in my personal capacity that it is a better framework.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Let me stop you there. Just a yes or
no. In your opinion, has the FTC ever really explained what its
unfair methods of competition covers that antitrust does not?
Mr. Wright. No.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you.
Chairwoman Ramirez, if I could come to you. I have got a
question on Magnuson Moss, that warranty act, and I am about to
run out of time on this, and I want to be sensitive to the
clock, but I have some questions on this related to the tying
prohibition, and I know that it has been nearly 2 years since
the release of the request for comments and 3 years since the
first complaint had been filed with the FTC by the aftermarket
groups and there has been no further comment and no public
action taken by the FTC. So, since we are about out of time, if
you would submit to me where you are on that, I would like to
know if you have an anticipated timeline for the review for
that, for the complaints and the answers to those from the
aftermarket groups.
Ms. Ramirez. Well, let me just say quickly that we do
anticipate completing that review in the coming year, and I am
happy to provide you more detail about the status of that.
Mrs. Blackburn. I appreciate that.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Lance [presiding]. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes the Dean of the Congress, Mr.
Dingell.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy.
I note that the agency is approximately 100 years old, for
which I extend my congratulations. I want to particularly
welcome the commissioners, especially Chairwoman Ramirez. I
have some questions which I hope will be answerable in the yes
or no.
To you, Madam Chairman, would consumers and industry
benefit from having one Federal agency enforcing a uniform set
of national data breach notification requirements? Yes or no.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes, I believe so.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Now, in your
opinion, should that agency be the Federal Trade Commission?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. I happen to concur. Now, Madam Chairman,
provided they are strong enough, should Federal data breach
notification requirements supersede State requirements? Yes or
no.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Chairman, should State attorneys general
be allowed to enforce such requirements? Yes or no.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Chairman, does the Commission believe
that a violation of Federal data breach notification
requirements should be deemed an unfair or deceptive act or
practice in commerce, thus subject to the commission's
authority under section 18(a)(1)(b) of The Federal Trade
Commission Act? Yes or no.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Chairman, would a uniform Federal data
breach notification law enforced by the Commission as well as
State attorneys general provide a significantly greater level
of protection for consumers than that which now exists? Yes or
no.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Chairman, does the Commission believe a
business should notify consumers of a data breach within a
reasonable time certain provided the Commission may extend such
time based on a reasonable demonstration of necessity by a
business? Yes or no.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Chairman, should a data breach occur, do
you believe a business should be required to notify credit
reporting agencies without unreasonable delay?
Ms. Ramirez. Yes, I do, particularly if the breach involved
Social Security numbers.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Now, I understand the Commission is currently conducting a
study on data brokers, including how they collect information
about consumers and consumers' ability to dispute the veracity
of such information. Do you anticipate that the Commission will
complete that study in the near future? Yes or no.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Chairman, does the Commission believe
any uniform Federal data breach notification requirements
should include a safe harbor for businesses subject to
mandatory risk assessments to be submitted to the Commission?
Yes or no.
Ms. Ramirez. I am a bit unclear as to how the safe harbor
would work, so I will defer an opinion on that.
Mr. Dingell. Do you want to submit your further thoughts at
a later time?
Ms. Ramirez. That would be terrific. Thank you.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Chairman, does the Commission believe
that it would require additional authorization of
appropriations in order to enforce uniform Federal data breach
notification requirements?
Ms. Ramirez. No.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Madam Chairman, should the Commission be
permitted to promulgate rules and regulations appropriately
tailored for the enforcement of any uniform Federal data breach
notification requirements subject to The Administrative
Procedure Act, yes or no.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Your responses have
been most helpful.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working with you and my
Democratic and Republican colleagues to write a commonsense law
to establish uniform data breach notification requirements. The
administration has proposed a sound basis for moving forward in
this particular regard and I note that similar such legislation
has been proposed and even considered by this committee in
successive recent Congresses. I believe we should avail
ourselves of this opportunity to do thorough bipartisan work
for which this committee has been traditionally known under the
leadership of yourself, my old friend Mr. Barton, and, of
course, our current chairman, Mr. Upton.
I thank you, and I yield back one second.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Mr. Dingell.
The Chair now recognizes the chairman emeritus of the full
committee, Mr. Barton of Texas.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The FTC has made numerous revisions to the current law on
children's online protection, the COPA Act. Most recently,
about this time last year, the FTC had a rulemaking that
modified the list of personal information that can't be
collected without parental notice and consent. It closed a
loophole that allowed children directed apps and Web sites to
permit third parties to collect to personal information from
children through plug-ins without parental notice and consent.
It extended the COPA rule to cover persistent identifiers that
recognize users over time from across different Web sites or
online services. It strengthened some data security protections
by requiring that covered Web site operators and online service
providers take reasonable steps to release the children's
personal information only to companies that are capable of
keeping it secure and confidential. And it strengthened the
FTC's oversight of self-regulatory safe harbor programs.
Having done those things, does the FTC or would the FTC
support or at least consider supporting additional protections
such as are included in a proposed piece of legislation that
myself and Congressman Rush of Chicago have offered, the
Children's Online Protection Act of 2013?
In other words, in spite of what the agency has done, do
you support even more secure privacy for our children? I will
start with the chairman and then go right down the line.
Ms. Ramirez. I do support the aim of giving more control to
teenagers and children over their personal information, so I am
generally supportive of that, yes.
Ms. Brill. And I, too, am supportive of the goals of your
bill and particularly am interested in exploring the
feasibility of the eraser button concept that you have
incorporated in that bill.
Mr. Barton. Thank you.
Ms. Ohlhausen. To echo my colleagues, I definitely support
the aims of the bill. I would like to get more deeply into the
issue of what, given the COPA rule revisions and some of the
self-regulatory options that are out there, what remains to be
done in the market to extend those kind of protections.
Mr. Barton. Thank you.
Mr. Wright. I echo the sentiments of my colleagues on the
Commission that I am certainly supportive of the goals of the
bill and would certainly be open to considering further
details.
Mr. Barton. Good. Well, we have, under Chairman Terry's
leadership, he has created a privacy task force, a bipartisan
task force, Chairwoman Marsha Blackburn is very active on that,
as I am, and hopefully, we will be holding a legislative
hearing on Mr. Rush's and my bill sometime in the spring.
Another privacy question, and this one is not quite as
obvious, but we heard yesterday Amazon's efforts to use drones
to deliver packages. It opens up a whole new realm of privacy
issues if that does occur. Most of the attention has been
focused on what the FAA would do. But my question to the FTC,
if and when companies like Amazon.com want to use drones
commercially in the public sector, does the FTC have a role to
play in issuing privacy guidelines? I will start with the
chairwoman.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes, thank you. Let me say that, as was
discussed earlier, I do believe that we have a role to play and
the agency has been very active, of course, when it comes to
privacy. But in addition to enforcement work that we have done
pursuant to our Section 5 authority, we have also engaged in
extensive policy work in this area. I mentioned earlier the
policy framework that the Commission issued a year and a half
ago, and I would say that for any emerging technology, we
believe that it is an appropriate lens through which companies
should examine any product or service that implicates
individual privacy.
At the same time, let me also note there are limits to what
the FTC can do under our authority, and I do believe, I
personally am supportive of baseline Federal privacy
legislation because we can't do everything when it comes to
privacy.
Mr. Barton. Anybody else?
Ms. Brill. I agree wholeheartedly with what the chairwoman
just said, and I think in particular our report in 2012
outlined concepts that are applicable with respect to different
technologies, privacy by design, transparency, simplified
notice in choice. These are the kind of concepts that could be
imported into the drone framework. But, again, it would be
helpful to have clear lines of authority with respect to that
issue.
Ms. Ohlhausen. I think this is a great example of how new
technologies are surprising us, and it is hard to forecast
where things will be going. So I think the FTC's approach of
having clear principles or deception or unfairness authority
that we have applied very actively in enforcement, coupled with
using our policy tools to get an idea of what new technologies
are occurring, what particular risks and benefits they may
offer and getting a good understanding of that and perhaps
issuing some sort of guidance based on really having a full
knowledge of what that new technology is, is a very appropriate
path, one we have followed in other technologies. And, who
knows, maybe we will have a workshop on drones sometime in the
future.
Mr. Wright. I will note very quickly just that I had not
had the opportunity to think about drones and packages in this
job until yesterday, so I don't have much profound to say about
what our approach might be, but I want to echo my colleagues'
sentiments here and particularly Commissioner Ohlhausen. One of
the advantages in our approach, both on the competition and the
consumer protection side, is these principles coupled with a
framework and the tools that allow us to get at what the
consumer welfare implications are, what the cost and benefits
of various approaches are, is in the intellectual blueprint of
the agency and I think is very helpful for addressing new and
sometimes surprising technologies.
Mr. Terry [presiding]. Thank you.
And at this time, I recognize the gentleman from Maryland
for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Chairman Terry, for pulling this
hearing together, and I want to thank the panelists. Listening
to your testimony, it is amazing how broad the jurisdiction of
the FTC is and your testimony has given me confidence certainly
that that jurisdiction is being managed in an efficient and
fair way. So thank you for your testimony today. I have a
couple of broad questions to ask, but before that, I hope you
would indulge me in sort of a parochial question.
Chairman Ramirez, we have exchanged some correspondence
relating to ongoing review by the FTC of a merger of two large
funeral home companies, SCI and Stewart Industries, and I have
gotten a lot of inquiry and communication, as I think the FTC
has as well, from members of the Jewish community in the
greater Washington, DC, area who have expressed some concern
that that merger might reduce the access of the Jewish
community to certain affordable funeral services that comport
with rights and rituals of the Jewish faith.
I just wanted to ask you while I had you here today, can
you tell me if and how the FTC is taking those concerns into
account as this merger is being reviewed and evaluated?
Ms. Ramirez. I appreciate the concerns. Unfortunately, I
can't comment on an ongoing investigation. But what I can say
is that we are certainly aware of your concern as well as a
similar concern that has been expressed by others. And that is
really all I can say at this time.
Mr. Sarbanes. I appreciate that. I would urge the
Commission to give serious attention to the concerns that have
been expressed. Right now, these special services are available
on an affordable basis. It would be a shame for that to fall by
the wayside as a result of the merger. So I thank you for your
attention to that.
I wanted to ask, given that this is kind of an overview
hearing as we come up on the 100th anniversary of the FTC, a
couple of questions about, and anybody can answer this, one
relates to the kind of rhythms of your jurisdiction, depending
on the state of the economy. So I would presume that when times
are bad, or perhaps maybe that is not the case, maybe it is
when things are getting better and certain people have
resources that they didn't otherwise have, that the kinds of
scams you see increase, the number of scams increase. So I
would be curious to get some response to that question.
Also, as you know, there is a demographic wave coming at us
of seniors and I would imagine as a result of that you are
seeing obviously many more seniors coming into a certain
cohort, and I imagine the kinds of scams that are being
perpetuated against our seniors is increasing as a result of
that because there is also a tremendous amount of resources
there. So if you could speak to either or both of those issues,
those who would feel comfortable responding, that would be
great.
Ms. Ramirez. Why don't I lead things off, if I may.
Unfortunately, fraud flourishes at all times, when the economy
is distressed as well as in good times, but we do see
differences in the types of fraud. So, for instance, over the
last several years, we have seen particular frauds that have
been targeted at financially distressed consumers, and it does
impact seniors and other underserved communities, so we have
been particularly vigilant when it comes to that and we place
significant resources in addressing those times of frauds.
Those continue, but we are seeing them a bit diminished in
light of the economic recovery. But, unfortunately, there is
ample fraud, regardless of what the economy looks like, and we
are vigilant at all times.
With regard to your question about seniors, we are very
much attuned to scams that may affect seniors in particular and
that does include work at home scams, prize and lottery type of
scams. We are attuned to those issues. We held a workshop
earlier in the year addressing identity theft as it pertains to
seniors. So we are working with other enforcement partners as
well as with members of the community, community organizations,
AARP, to do what we can both to press forward with enforcement
efforts as well as to educate seniors with how to avoid fraud.
Ms. Ohlhausen. Just to augment what the chairwoman said, I
wanted to mention one of the great strength that I see that we
have at our disposal at the FTC is how we are able to collect
and analyze data to help drive our enforcement priorities. And
your questions brought to mind how we use Consumer Sentinel,
which is a database that we collect complaints so we find out
where particular frauds or what types of particular frauds are
trending, so we can turn our enforcement tools that way. And
also we did a fraud study last winter that looked at what
groups were vulnerable to what particular frauds, and this
included seniors. And these are both great tools for us to
better target our enforcement efforts to particular groups that
are experiencing certain problems.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much.
I would love to get a copy of that fraud study if it is
available. Thank you.
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
Now the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Mr. Lance, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
As I understand it in the antitrust context regarding
adjudicative process, first, there is the ALJ, then an appeal
to the Commission, and then finally to the Federal courts. Is
it true that the FTC staff has never lost a case before one of
its ALJs or an appeal to the Commission?
Ms. Ramirez. I think the statistics I think that have been
stated in this arena really can be misleading. I think it is a
much more nuanced picture. There have been times when both the
ALJ takes a different view than the staff that is prosecuting a
case. The Commission has also taken a different view on certain
claims as regards the arguments that are being made by
complaint counsel.
Mr. Lance. So you have lost? The staff has lost?
Ms. Ramirez. With regard to certain claims, yes. But you
need to look--you can't just look at the case as a whole, but
you need to look at and evaluate particular claims. Let me just
also observe that before a matter even gets to the
administrative process, there is a lengthy and thorough
investigation that is conducted by staff. Then there is a
decision by the Commission as to whether or not to move forward
with a particular complaint. So that ends up really weeding out
any weak cases.
Mr. Lance. And this process is different from the process
at DOJ. Is that accurate?
Ms. Ramirez. We have the ability to use both the Federal
court or to use in the alternative the adjudicative process.
The Department of Justice only has the avenue of the Federal
court.
Mr. Lance. Would any of the other commissioners like to
comment? Yes, Mr. Wright.
Mr. Wright. I want to make one small correction, but I
think it is one that will help us focus on the right issue. The
statistic, it is not whether the staff wins or loses in front
of the ALJ. The record in front of the ALJ is actually fairly
similar to what you get in Federal Court, a little bit
different. But the FTC staff wins and loses cases in front of
ALJs, either as Chairman Ramirez was saying, on a whole count,
on some counts, on part of the case, all of the case. The
statistic that I think raises some questions and that I alluded
to in my testimony which I think is interesting with respect to
the process is that when the ALJ decision has been reached, the
historical trend for the past, at least past couple of decades,
has been if the ALJ rules in favor of the FTC staff, the
Commission affirms. If the ALJ rules against the staff, the
Commission reverses. Now, there are nuances in the data, but
the rate is near 100 percent.
So there are potential explanations of the differences, and
I certainly don't have any qualms to folks raising them. But
100 percent is an impressive number, and it is a number----
Mr. Lance. It is indeed.
Mr. Wright. And it is a number quite different from the
processes and institutions that folks face when they go into
Federal Court, and I think there is a question about what to do
about that.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. I am sure we will continue to have a
discussion on that.
Last week, the Wall Street Journal noted the Commission
opened an investigation of the Music Teachers National
Association and found its longstanding code of ethics contained
a provision that members should not seek to poach other
members' clients, and I understand this is currently under
investigation and I am sure you can't comment on the specific
facts of that situation. But to the Chair, what is the FTC's
jurisdiction over nonprofits and does that include nonprofit
membership associations?
Ms. Ramirez. We do have jurisdiction over nonprofits where
the membership and the trade association would be organized for
the purpose of monetary gain and profit for its members, so in
that circumstance, we would have jurisdiction. And I can't
comment on the specific----
Mr. Lance. Yes, I realize that. Does the FTC have any
evidence that the code of ethics hurts consumers or has raised
prices?
Ms. Ramirez. Again, I can't comment on that particular----
Mr. Lance. I am not asking on that case. Generally
speaking.
Ms. Ramirez. Let me just say, generally speaking, the FTC
is concerned when there are code of ethics that amount to
agreements not to compete. That would be a fundamental
violation of the antitrust laws. Our job is to promote vigorous
competition, and that is what we aim to do.
Mr. Lance. I see. Any other members like to comment on
that?
Thank you. With 10 seconds, let me say when I was in
college at the fraternities, you were not supposed to poach on
your fraternity brothers' girlfriend. You were not to ask her
for a date.
Mr. Terry. That is a different type of trust.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Terry. So, with that enlightened statement, I will
recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney, for 5
minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to say your presentation was well-crafted and
coordinated, I appreciate that, and it shows that you are
working together, which is important in terms of protecting
consumers and carrying out the tradition of stopping the old--
before the Commission--``let the buyer beware'' philosophy that
ruled this country. So thank you for carrying on that great
tradition.
Commissioner Brill, you mentioned the privacy issue. What
are one of the things that I am working with Mrs. Blackburn and
Mr. Welch and other members of our privacy working group was
that the companies are telling us that if they have specific
policies that are stated and that they don't follow those
policies, that the Commission will go after them, and that that
is the best thing that could happen as opposed to us imposing
some sort of regulatory framework over privacy. Would you
comment on that? Do you agree with that?
Ms. Brill. I think it is important that we police whether
or not companies are abiding by their commitments to consumers
that are contained within privacy policies, so I do think that
is an important part of what we do. However, there is another
aspect of what we do which is our unfairness jurisdiction,
which I think is equally important. And we have brought many
cases, dozens of cases, involving whether or not companies'
practices, leaving aside what they State what they are going to
do, whether or not their practices are harmful to consumers and
should be subject to our jurisdiction.
I have actually had conversations with companies, tech
companies, that have said that they think that our unfairness
jurisdiction is important because it at least has a measure of
harm in it. If you look at our unfairness statement, there is
some aspect of harm that we have to demonstrate.
So I think it is important actually to have both aspects of
our jurisdiction, not just focusing on whether or not a company
is abiding by its privacy policies, which is an important
aspect.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Ms. Ohlhausen, I want to talk about patents for a minute.
You mentioned the word ``patent assertion entity.'' Another
more derogatory word that has been going around lately is
``patent troll.'' I am a patent holder, innovations that I
developed, and I have a suspicion that there is a large company
that is violating my patent, that is infringing on my patent. I
talked to another engineer that had a similar situation in the
past, and he said, well, it is going to cost you about $5
million to $10 million to go up against the companies that do
this. And he says, I have some investors I will put you in
touch with if you want to pursue that.
Well, obviously, I am not in a position to do that. But I
think we need a balanced approach in terms of going after
patent assertion entities to make sure that they have a certain
amount of protection for patent holders and innovators. Would
you comment on that, please?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Yes. Thank you. You raise a very important
point, which is that our patent system, it is important that
there are protections for patent holders and that one of the
things that we need to keep in mind, and I am glad the FTC is
doing a study on this, is to get a very clear sense of what
problems are really being created and what isn't a problem. So
it is important that the patent holder does the have the
ability to protect its rights, and sometimes to protect the
small patent holder, they would be able to sell their patent to
another entity that might be better suited to capitalize on it,
to enforce it, to create around it.
So that is one of the reasons why I was very supportive of
the agency doing our patent assertion entity study, to get a
better idea of what is really happening in the market and what
the interests are. Because we do need to proceed very carefully
in this area to make sure that the rights of particularly small
patent holders are protected.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Thank you. Mr. Wright, one of the things
you mentioned was the analysis of the impact of government
regulations on business, and that is something that I think on
both sides of the aisle we are quite interested in. We don't
want too much regulation, but we want a level playing field for
good competition.
What do you see the long-term impact and long-term goal of
that study and of that work is with the agency?
Mr. Wright. I think for me the right way to think about
that study from the FTC's perspective is that it is an ongoing
commitment. The commitment to continually review our rules and
regs is something that we do; we do on a regular basis; we have
done for 20 years. It involves older regulations that are no
longer relevant that we pared down--I think I gave the numbers
of 24 rules and 13 regs over just the last 23 years or so--in
addition to updating rules that we have that are still relevant
moving forward.
So what we do, and I think the economic capacity in the
agency to do, is internal cost-benefit analysis to make sure
that we are keeping the rules that have a high rate of returns
for consumers, that we are getting rid of the ones that have
zero or negative rate for consumers, and that we are
continually asking those questions. I think that is a long-
standing commitment of the agency, one that will continue and
one that has been very successful.
Mr. McNerney. Does that effort apply to other agencies,
like the EPA or other agencies that are having an impact on
businesses out there?
Mr. Wright. If you mean whether we review their regs, no.
But I am not very familiar with what the other agencies are
doing in terms of their own review, of course, or how they go
about conducting any internal evaluation of their rules.
Mr. McNerney. So this only refers internally to the FTC.
Mr. Wright. That is the only thing I can speak to with any
knowledge.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Terry. I think we will step stipulate that the FTC
probably does a better job with that than any other.
Mr. Wright. Here, here.
Mr. Terry. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Mississippi, Mr. Harper.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you each for
being here and providing this insight into a lot of important
issues and responsibilities that you have.
If I may start with you, Chairwoman Ramirez, and you
touched on this earlier, at least on the workshop issue and
some other things that were ongoing, but today it is no secret
that the Internet has opened up a lot of new doors and provided
new tools for a lot of fraudulent and predatory businesses to
prey on consumers. You see it in the form of fraudulent work at
home programs, which you have mentioned, fraudulent advertising
of such things as weight loss products, or fraudulent price
promotions and others and many other scams through the Web that
are most threatening to the American consumers this year.
As you mark and approach the 100th anniversary, is the
Commission taking sufficient action to protect consumers from
online scams, such as those fraudulent work-at-home programs?
Ms. Ramirez. I think we are doing an effective job of
monitoring the marketplace when it comes to both our mission to
protect consumers against fraud as well as guarding against
anticompetitive practices. So, yes, we ultimately are
constrained, of course, by the resources that we have. We are a
small agency, but I think that we are doing an effective job.
Mr. Harper. In particular, I guess as a follow-up, what is
the FTC doing to crack down on the deceptive use of Internet-
based lead generation, in which email addresses are sold to
people running multilevel marketing distributions at premium
prices, and in fact, the so-called lead is simply the email
address of someone who has clicked on to a Web site and maybe
isn't a bona fide potential customer?
Ms. Ramirez. I think your question implicates a number of
things we do. One includes the work that we are doing in
connection with both privacy and data security. I personally
have advocated for the implementation of a do-not-track system
that would allow consumers to opt out of online tracking. I
think it is just fundamental that consumers ought to have more
control over their data. We are also, again, vigilant when it
comes to any other promises that are not maintained and
fulfilled by companies.
So, again, I think we are doing an effective job. We are
paying particular attention to the mobile arena where we see a
lot of scams as people migrate to increasingly the use of smart
phones and tablets.
Mr. Harper. And, of course, it is a challenge to stay ahead
of a lot of those abusive practices and stay up on the
technology.
Ms. Ramirez. It is a challenge, but that is another reason
why we hold workshops and we are also constantly engaging with
the business community as well as with consumer advocates, so
that we make sure that we learn about what is happening on the
ground and stay attuned to all of those issues.
Mr. Harper. And if I could shift gears a little bit,
Chairwoman, and ask you to elaborate on the FTC's expertise and
experiences with privacy and data security, do you think the
FTC has unique expertise for protecting information collected
and/or stored online, and are you satisfied with where you are
on that?
Ms. Ramirez. We certainly are the primary law enforcer in
this arena in the United States. I think we are doing a he
effective job with the tools that we have under Section 5. But,
as I mentioned earlier, there are limits to what we can do, and
I personally believe it would be appropriate for Congress to
enact baseline Federal legislation in the privacy arena.
Mr. Harper. Commissioner Brill, if I may ask you, do you
think the FTC has enhanced companies' data security efforts
through the agency's enforcement actions and, if so, give us an
example.
Ms. Brill. Sure. Thank you for the question. I do believe
that our enforcement work has raised the issue with respect to
data security and privacy protection for companies, and I
think, as a result, companies have really taken up the mantel
and developed policies. They have put into place chief privacy
officers, have brought them into the C suite in certain
circumstances, and I think the privacy and data security issue
has been enhanced with respect to corporate practices as a
result of our enforcement work. So, yes, I do think that our
enforcement work has played a key role in enhancing the issue
in corporate America.
Mr. Harper. Thank you, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Terry. At this time, we recognize Donna Christensen for
your 5 minutes.
Ms. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome to the commissioners. It is great to you have
here for this hearing. I want to ask some questions about
Reclaim Your Name and data brokers.
Dozens and dozens of information brokers exist that have
detailed profiles about each of us; data is collected,
aggregated, analyzed and used and disseminated for a wide range
of commercial practices. The Web site NextMark, for example,
offers 60,000 customer lists for sale on topics that range from
mundane and innocuous issues to more sensitive topics. There
are consumer lists for sale that target people with addictions,
mental illnesses, reproductive concerns, weight loss issues and
dozens of other physical and mental health conditions. The list
is categorized by past purchase history, including so-called
impulse purchases.
So, Chairwoman Ramirez, should there be categories of
information, such as health conditions or sexual preferences,
that should not be collected?
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you for your question. This is an issue
that we addressed in our privacy report that we issued last
year, and I believe that when it comes to sensitive
information, health information would be among information that
I would consider sensitive. I believe that consumers ought to
have greater control and I think there ought to be an opt-ion
these numbers, it is not surprising that most Internet users
express that having control over their personal information
online was important to them.
Commissioner Brill, can you elaborate on your Reclaim Your
Name program and why it is so important for consumers and also
for those who hold the data?n mechanism when it comes to
sensitive information.
Ms. Christensen. Thanks. Can you also clarify why purchases
of over-the-counter medicines at stores such as target and CVS
are not protected by HIPAA?
Ms. Ramirez. HIPAA only provides limited protection and is
only aimed at healthcare providers. So that is why we are
particularly concerned about both online and offline collection
of health information. We do think that it is sensitive
information that ought to be especially protected.
Ms. Christensen. I agree. And often data collection is done
without consumers' knowledge. For example, you might think you
are sharing information with only your favorite store when you
agree to carry a customer loyalty card, but that store often
sells your purchasing habits to other stores and data brokers,
and some data brokers have taken steps toward opening their
data bases to the public. However, in most cases, data brokers
do not share their stockpile of information.
A recent Pew Research report showed that 68 percent of
Internet users believe that current privacy laws do not provide
adequate protection and 50 percent of users were concerned
about the amount of personal information about them or us that
is online. Based
Ms. Brill. Sure. Thank you for your question. One of my
chief concerns with respect to data brokers is that their
practices are largely invisible to consumers. Consumers don't
understand that when they go to WebMD or when they go to other
online sites and provide sensitive health information, that
that information may be culled and provided to others and may
become part of a profile that then characterizes them as they
move through the Web and, frankly, as they move through other
transactions, whether online or offline.
This is an issue where I think much more transparency needs
to provided to consumers. I would like to see data brokers
provide to consumers information about the types of information
that they collect and to give to consumers information about
the choices that consumers may have with respect to the data.
Chairman Ramirez referred to our 2012 report, and in that
report, we talked about the need for giving consumers some kind
of choice with respect to data that is used for eligibility
decisions and whether or not consumers ought to be given the
right to suppress information that is used for marketing
decisions. The information won't go away, but at least to give
consumers some kind of choice as to whether their data that is
collected online and offline is used for marketing purposes.
I just believe that much more transparency needs to be
brought to this issue, and I encourage and am working with the
industry so they can provide these tools to consumers.
Ms. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
Now the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair.
And welcome to all the witnesses. The topic of this hearing
is ``The FTC at 100: Where Do We Go From Here?'' But before we
determine where we go, let's take a look at where we have been.
The FTC was created on September 26, 1914, with one sole
mission, to promote fair competition. It was a very different
world in 1914. A couple of examples. Interstate commerce
industry took a huge blow on September 7th when the last
passenger pigeon, Martha, died in Cincinnati. Market access was
changing dramatically. The Panama Canal was opening. The first
steam vessel came through on the 7th of January, and the first
ship coming from the East Coast to San Francisco came through
on August 7th. And the most important invention for the
prosperity of my State, the patent for W.H. Carrier, who
patented the air conditioner, happened on April 29, 1914. In
1938, the consumer protection mission was added to FTC's
jurisdiction, but since that time, I have concerns that the
enforcement actions are going beyond those congressional
limitations.
I want follow up on some of the questions from the vice
chair about the actions that the FTC has taken about the
company that promotes--a nonprofit that promotes music
competition, the Music Teachers National Association, in the
Wall Street Journal article. That raised a bright red flag for
me.
I am looking at their Web site right now and per the Web
site, it looks pretty innocuous. They have two missions: To
provide guidelines for music performance competition and music
composition competitions. They start out in the States. They
have seven divisions across the Nation and finals in five
categories: piano, string, chamber music string, chamber music
wind, and woodwind.
Chairman Ramirez, in your written testimony, you state that
one of the challenges facing the FTC is constrained resources
and a growing workload, less money, growing workload. You also
say that one way to mitigate this challenge is to, quote,
``leverage resources through careful case selection.''
Do you think that the action against the Music Teachers
National Association, a nonprofit with 12 employees and a $2
million budget, is that ``careful case selection?''
Ms. Ramirez. I can't address the particular matter that you
have mentioned because it is a nonpublic investigation, but
what I can tell you is that we will address it at an
appropriate time. And I will say that I believe we do use our
resources effectively. There are certain investigations that we
are as efficient as we can with investigations when it is
appropriate, and when parties also feel it is in their
interests, we end up revolving them through consent orders and
not having to litigate. But I do believe that we have used our
authority quite effectively. We examine evolving markets every
single day, and we are well equipped and well positioned to do
so, and I think we do an effective job at promoting
competition.
Mr. Olson. Commissioner Brill, Ms. Ohlhausen, Mr. Wright,
do you have any comments about what the chairwoman said?
Ms. Brill. I agree with the chairman.
Mr. Olson. Surprise.
Ms. Ohlhausen. I would just also like to mention, not
commenting on any particular investigation, but the FTC has
brought a series of these kinds of cases going back to the
1970s, and it has been across administrations, and one of our
functions I think is to give guidance to the broader industry.
So a particular case might be useful in that it gives guidance
to a lot of other different associations across a variety of
industries.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
Commissioner Wright?
Mr. Wright. I concur with the chairwoman's comments. In
general, I will say, with respect to, again not commenting on
any particular case, but with respect to trade association
guidelines and codes of ethics, the history of the Sherman Act,
going back beyond the history of the FTC is replete with
examples of price fixing arrangements that harm consumers
dressed up in the guise of codes of ethics or trade
associations. They are not uncommon cases in that sense and can
establish an important principle in cases small or large that
harm to consumers arising from price fixing, whether written
down in a document or verbally committed to between
competitors, are worthy of the agency's attention.
Mr. Olson. I am out of time. I yield back balance of my
time. Thank you.
Mr. Terry. Thank you. At this time, let's see, oh, Mr.
Welch.
Mr. Welch, you are recognized, cochair of the privacy
working group. You are recognized for your 5 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to thank all of you. The FTC, it is so
important, as my colleague from Texas went through the history,
100 years and things have really changed. But it is a tough
world out there for consumers. They really don't have an
advocate. With I think computerization and with information,
there is a lot of opportunities, but there is also an immense
amount of power that can be consolidated in the marketers and
in the market where in order to have competition that is fair,
we need a very strong and a very cooperative FTC. So I just
want to thank each and every one of you for your service.
You are entrusted with this extraordinary responsibility to
provide for fair competition, but that means that consumers
have to be, obviously, their interests have to be respected.
And it is really tough where technology has changed so many
things and where, in this privacy working group that several of
us are on, there is an enormous desire to maintain the benefits
that come from technology, the choice and the opportunity and
the ease of access and the market opportunities, but on the
other hand balance that with protecting consumers who have no
say over how they are treated frequently. So, I understand the
incredible importance of your job, each and every one of you,
and I am glad to see how well you work together.
One of the issues that has come up in the Privacy Working
Group has been about the impact with the European Union and
their reaction to reports about the acquisition of information
through our own intelligence efforts. And one of the concerns
that has been expressed to me by some of our companies that are
major companies that are very important players in our economy
is that some of these EU issues on the privacy question may
actually start to interfere with their ability to have market
penetration in the EU.
So I would actually be interested in hearing a little bit
about your thoughts on that and what suggestions you would make
for Congress to make certain there is a level playing field for
our Internet providers. I want to get both sides of on this,
but I would start with Commissioner Ohlhausen. Could you speak
to that?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Certainly. It is an issue that has certainly
been in the news a lot and the FTC through our Office of
International Affairs in particular has tried to engage the
Europeans quite actively on that. In fact, Commissioner Brill
and I went to the Data Protection Authority Conference in
Warsaw together just this past fall, and we got an earful on
these issues.
One of the things that I think we have been able to do is
to sort of make the case about we have the safe harbor
provision, which really focus on interoperability between the
European system and the U.S. system, and that has worked fairly
effectively for a number of years. And I know personally I
would be concerned if Europe were to depart from that because I
think it could hurt competition. I think it ultimately could
hurt consumers. So we have tried to engage with them to address
some of their concerns, but also to maintain some of these
important principles.
One of the things we have done over time at the FTC is for
companies that have claimed that they are adhering to this safe
harbor principle, we have brought enforcement actions against
companies that claim they were adhering and haven't, and so we
provide some important enforcement backstop to that.
Mr. Welch. Let me just ask Commissioner Brill--thank you
very much. I only have a minute.
But Commissioner Brill, a Vermonter, I am very proud of
having a good Vermonter. I worked with you when you were in the
Attorney General's Office, and you were good there, and you are
doing a great job here. If you could comment.
Ms. Brill. Thank you. So I have been working very hard to
express to my European counterparts as well as Vice President
Reding and others in the European Commission that the national
security issues need to be separated from the commercial
privacy issues. And I have been a very strong advocate of
maintaining safe harbor, which is one of the tools, as
Commissioner Ohlhausen mentioned, one the tools that companies
in the United States use in order to transfer data across the
pond.
I have said to my European counterparts that safe harbor is
one of the tools that we at the Federal Trade Commission use to
protect, not only U.S. citizens but also European citizens.
When we bring an enforcement action against Google and Facebook
and we find out they have been violating the safe harbor, we
can incorporate provisions that deal with these kind of safe
harbor principles, and we have done so. So not only are we
looking at the enforcement work that Commissioner Ohlhausen
mentioned where people are falsely claiming to be members of
the safe harbor, but in fact our entire privacy and data
security agenda focuses on enhancing privacy and data security
for citizens all around the world.
So I have been a very strong advocate of maintaining safe
harbor. Having said, that as Chairwoman Ramirez said in a
letter recently to Vice President Reding, there is always room
for improvement. It is a good program. It works very well.
There is room for improvement, and we will be having
discussions about that.
Mr. Welch. Thank you. I have to yield back, but I think all
of us would be interested in continuing to work with you on
those issues. Thank you.
Mr. Terry. Yes, we would.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
Pompeo, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner Ohlhausen, you recently delivered a speech, it
was back in June, focused on the impacts and ramifications of
potential privacy legislation. You said, quote, ``I believe
however that a voluntary self-regulatory process should operate
without undue Government involvement. Otherwise, industry may
lose the incentive to participate and instead would take a
wait-and-see attitude to see whether Congress would ever impose
such requirements through legislation,'' end of quote.
A couple other folks have mentioned they are on the Working
Group on Privacy. I am participating in that as well. I would
be interested in your thoughts on how industry reacts when we
even begin to discuss putting in place a top-down Washington-
centered set of privacy rules on top of what is already out
there today?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Thank you for your question. I think it
certainly gets their attention when Congress starts to pay
attention to these issues. I think that, you know, the FTC's
approach of bringing our enforcement actions, brining guidance,
having discussions is helpful, but one of the things that I
personally think we need too look at is also what is happening
in the marketplace, and are there options out there for
consumers that would give them the choices that they are
seeking in things like interstate advertising or targeting?
So I do have some concerns though that if, in particular,
my agency were to play too forceful a role in what is supposed
to be a self-regulatory process, that it interfere with the
incentives of the different participants to come to an
agreement on their own. So that is what I was expressing in
that speech.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that and I share your concerns. My
observation, as I watch consumers, and I hear from them when
they call our office. I run into them at church, at the PTA
meetings, all of those wonderful places; they are very focused
in privacy. In fact, we see it with the Affordable Care Act,
right? We see customers very aware of the risk to their data
when they put into this thing they call a computer on their
desk.
I think private sector companies will compete, just like
they compete on value and price and delivery and all of those
things, I think they will compete on privacy as well, trying to
match exactly what it is consumers want and deliver that to
them in a way that they are deeply aware that that privacy is
provided them. Otherwise, these folks will go someplace else.
So I think that is self-regulatory system has an enormous
opportunity to work and do a great good for consumers.
Chairwoman Ramirez, I wanted to ask you about an unrelated
issue. The FTC recently released its draft strategic plan for
fiscal years 2014 to 2018. However, the draft strategic plan
section on consumer protection did not mention weighing burdens
on business or competition or assessing economic analysis or
avoiding unnecessary burdens on innovation. In contrast to
that, the strategic plan for the Commission's work on
competition did address those issues. In fact, while the plan
for the Bureau of Competition described its coordinated work
with the FTC's Bureau of Economics, the plan's consumer
protection section didn't even mention the Bureau of Economics.
Can you tell me going forward what steps have been taken
and will be taken by the Bureau of Consumer Protection to
analyze the impact of regulatory activities on businesses and
competition, including greater integration and cooperation with
the FTC's Bureau of Economics?
Ms. Ramirez. I appreciate the opportunity to address that
question. It is something that we take into account in all of
the work that we do, and Commissioner Wright touched on this in
his opening remarks. We do have a Bureau of Economics that
supports both our competition mission as well as our consumer
protection mission, and I can assure you that in every matter
we look at, enforcement, rulemaking, we are always--I am
getting the advice of our economists, and we are absolutely
looking at both how to most effectively protect consumers but
also looking at the costs that would be imposed on the business
consumer.
Mr. Pompeo. Maybe, Mr. Wright, maybe you can tell me then
why wasn't it even mentioned, why in the consumer protection
provisions was the Bureau of Economics not even mentioned? It
was expressly done so in the others. That can't be an accident.
Mr. Wright. I think it can be. I can't say much about how
or why the asymmetry and the treatment of incorporated
economics on the Bureau of Competition side and the Bureau of
Consumer Protection side resulted in the draft. I can say from
my experience at the agency and as somebody who cares very
deeply about integrating economics into everything we do that
it is certainly the case that on the Bureau of Consumer
Protection side, we do in fact, with respect to law enforcement
matters, with respect to rules and regulations, take the work
of BE very seriously, the Bureau of Economics, very seriously,
and I suspect that the asymmetry in the draft will be resolved
upon the next opportunity.
Mr. Pompeo. That is great. Thank you.
Ms. Brill, go ahead.
Ms. Brill. I was just going to add it is an absolute
oversight and that our strategic plan is out for comment, and
we will make sure that we correct it.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you very much. I appreciate those
answers.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Pompeo.
Now the Chair recognizes the full committee ranking member.
The gentleman from California is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
welcome the members of the Federal Trade Commission that are
here today to make a presentation to us on the hundredth
anniversary of the FTC.
I, in my opening statement, which I made part of the
record, I acknowledged the fact that FTC has a dual mission,
and it is a very important one for our economy, prevent
business practices that are anticompetitive and also to protect
consumers from unfair or deceptive actions. I want to ask you
about an issue that is important to me because it involves a
law that I helped write in 1984, the Hatch-Waxman Act, which
created the generic drug system.
And Chairwoman Ramirez, in 2007, the law was changed so
that the Food and Drug Administration made several landmark
improvements to our post-marketing drug safety system. And one
of the most important new tools that that law provided was a
so-called risk evaluation and mitigation strategies, or REMS.
One condition of a REMS that FDA could impose might include
restrictions on how a brand manufacturer will distribute and
sell a particular product. For example, FDA could require that
a brand manufacturer only provide a particularly risky drug to
patients via certain qualified physicians or pharmacies, and
that makes a lot of sense from a patient safety perspective.
But even back in 2007, when we were working on this
legislation, we were concerned about the possibility that brand
name companies could use this kind of restrictive distribution
REMS program as a tool for delaying generic competition. In
fact, the House passed a version of the legislation containing
some very strong language that could have gone a long way to
preventing these kinds of abuses. But after we conferenced the
bill with the Senate, that strong language was watered down and
was not as effective as I would have hoped. And I understand
the FTC shares my concerns about these abusive practices.
Chairwoman Ramirez, I would like to ask you to briefly
explain in more detail how the practice has been used to delay
generic competition and discuss potential effects on the
ability of consumers to get access to generic drugs. Has the
FTC witnessed a proliferation of these kinds of abuses over the
years?
Ms. Ramirez. Thank you for the question.
This is an area, as you noted, in which we have been--that
we have been looking at very closely, and we are concerned. I
can't discuss any particular companies, but I will say that we
are all worried that branded companies may use--as a way of
impeding the generic from getting on the--and what I can tell
you is that we are looking at it very closely, and if we find a
violation of the antitrust laws and if we find that these
restrictions are being used in an anticompetitive manner, we do
intend to take action.
Mr. Waxman. Well, I appreciate that. I think part of the
problem is the differences of the two agencies, the FDA, and
the FTC. FDA has indicated that absent a specific legislative
directive, it can't prevent brand companies from abusing these
REMS protocols to restrict access of generic developers, and
the agencies noted that the FTC is the more appropriate agency
to ensure, quote, ``that the marketplace actions are fair and
do not block competition.''
Chairwoman Ramirez, can you explain why the language of the
2007 act that attempted to give FDA the ability to prevent
these abusive practices has not been sufficient to curb these
kinds of behaviors?
Ms. Ramirez. I can't speak to what is happening at the FDA,
and I don't have in mind the particular language, but again,
what I can assure you is that we take these issues very
seriously. As you know, the agency has been very active when it
comes to trying to ensure that generic drugs enter the market
in order to provide low-cost drugs for consumers.
Mr. Waxman. Do you agree--yes, excuse me.
Ms. Ramirez. I can assure that you we will be looking
closely at the issue, and we will take action, but I can't say
what is happening----
Mr. Waxman. Do you agree with the FDA that the FTC is the
more appropriate agency to oversee anticompetitive practices
like these, and would the FTC need additional tools or
resources to help enforce the current statute?
Ms. Ramirez. Given our long history as a law enforcer, I
believe that we are very well positioned to address these
issues. I don't believe that we need new authority. I believe
that we have authority under Section 5 to take action against
these types of practices if they are found to be violative of
the antitrust laws.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much. I look forward to working
with you on this.
Mr. Terry. Thank you. Good questions.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank our witnesses for being here today
also. I come from a region of the country where trade is
critically important. Appalachia, Ohio, is the home to many,
many small family-owned manufacturing companies and their
ability to play on a level playing field is extremely
important. So I applaud the Commission for its advocacy
efforts, especially in the area of pro-competition or against
anticompetitive policies that emerge, such as, for example, the
recent attempts by States and localities to create Government-
imposed obstacles to new technology-delivered services, such as
the Uber car service. Consumers benefit from more choices and
more competition, and the FTC should continue this practice.
What is on the Commission's current advocacy agenda? And
more broadly, how is the agenda established, and how does the
office's activities compare to years past? I will just open it
up from left to right.
Ms. Ramirez.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes, and as you noted, we do have an active
staff that is engaged in advocacy work, and this is an
important part.
Mr. Johnson. What's on the agenda?
Ms. Ramirez. We focus on a number of different issues we
are looking at, and frankly, some of the issues may come to our
attention just merely by staff.
Mr. Johnson. Do you have any specifics? I don't want to use
the whole 5 minutes.
Ms. Ramirez. We are paying particular attention to scope of
practice issues in the healthcare arena. For instance, there
may be paraprofessionals, nurses, dental hygienists, who might
be able to help lower costs, improve access to health services,
so we pay attention to what is happening at the local level.
There sometimes may be proposals that are aimed to restrict
activities of these type of professionals. And we opine and we
submit comments asking legislators to----
Mr. Johnson. How is the agenda established?
Ms. Ramirez. Health care is a priority for us, so we are
looking at that primarily, but we also welcome comments from
stakeholders. If they become aware of an issue that they
believe we should be commenting on, we are open to suggestions
because oftentimes we don't have the resources to be examining
everything that takes place at a local level.
Mr. Johnson. Commissioner Ohlhausen, previously in your
career, you were director of the Office of Policy Planning. How
many policy planning offices does the FTC currently have, and
is it accurate that there are now three different policy
offices--if my understanding is correct, a Commission level
Office of Policy Planning, a General Council Office of Policy
Studies, and the Bureau of Competition Office of Policy and
Evaluation--so is it necessary to have more than one?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Thank you for your question. Yes, I did run
the FTC's Office of Policy Planning from 2004 to 2008. And some
of the functions that were previously in the Office of General
Counsel and in the Bureau of Competition have been consolidated
into a bigger Office of Policy Planning that was done under
previous Chairman Leibowitz' tenure, which I think was a good
development. There are still some staff in the Office of
General Counsel and in the Bureau of Competition, but they play
somewhat of a different role. The FTC's Office of Policy
Planning, one of its primary missions is overseeing the
Competition Advocacy Program, as you mentioned. And the focus
has been on things like health care, and new technologies, and
reaching some underserved communities. One of the things that
drives our responses also is foreign advocacy. The FTC needs an
invitation from a policymaker to comment. So that also helps
shape what we are able to comment on.
The other policy staff that are in the Bureau of
Competition, they help consult on cases, on enforcement work,
and in the General Counsel's Office, they do a little bit more
of like sort of very deep studies, things like the patent
issues. So there is a separation of functions that makes sense.
Mr. Johnson. OK, I have time for one more question. The FTC
has seen its budget authorization and resources double over the
past decade, and by most accounts, a budget that has more than
doubled in the last decade would not garner much sympathy for
being resource constrained. If you had to explain to the
American taxpayers what they have received for their money, how
would you respond to that? Ms. Ramirez?
Ms. Ramirez. I think the American taxpayer receives quite a
bit for their money. We are a small agency. We have
approximately 1,200 employees. Our budget is under $300
million.
Mr. Johnson. But it doubled over the last decade. How do
you justify that?
Ms. Ramirez. There was a point in time when the agency's
staff did expand. We are now at a lower number than we have
been in the past. I think that we do quite a bit for consumers.
In my opening remarks, I noted some of the monetary savings
that consumers receive just by--in enforcing our competition
mission alone, we have saved consumers approximately $3 billion
over the course of the last few years. So I think that the
American taxpayer gets quite a bit.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Illinois Mr.
Kinzinger for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for being here. I appreciate it. I was
pleased to see that the Securities and Exchange Commission
issued in October an investor alert warning investors to beware
of pyramid schemes posing as multilevel marketing programs. As
the investor alert notes, investors should be aware of
companies that do not show revenue from retail sales, that
offer easy money, that have complex commission structures or
require buy-in to participate.
In fact, the three most common types of fraud were 7.6
million incidents, I believe, of fraudulent weight-loss
products; fraudulent prize promotions, 2.9 million incidents of
that; and fraudulent work-at-home programs, 2.8 million
incidents.
We will start with you, Chairwoman Ramirez. Do you
coordinate with informal working groups formally on enforcement
actions or otherwise with the FCC on investigating and stopping
pyramid schemes?
Ms. Ramirez. We do coordinate and work with other agencies,
certainly. On any specific matters, I can't talk about
particular companies or matters.
Mr. Kinzinger. Sure.
Ms. Ramirez. But I will say that we work very effectively
with a number of different sister agencies as appropriate.
Mr. Kinzinger. Does anybody else on the panel have anything
to add to that?
Just throw it out there. What has the FTC done lately to
combat these pyramid schemes?
Ms. Ramirez. It is an issue that we looked at and have
looked at closely in the past and what I can tell you is that
we continue to be vigilant in looking at and monitoring the
marketplace to ensure and guard against----
Mr. Kinzinger. Can you give me something beyond just I am
continuing to be vigilant? I mean, what has been done lately? I
know you can't name names.
Ms. Ramirez. I apologize, I can't give you particular
companies.
Mr. Kinzinger. I am not asking for names.
Ms. Ramirez. But I think our most recent case, I can't
remember. I am happy to provide that detail to you.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK, hopefully, we can get that done.
Ms. Ramirez. Yes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Maybe you can give me this answer without
answering names. How many cases have you brought within the
last year against pyramid schemes?
Ms. Ramirez. Within the last year, we have not brought any
enforcement actions against pyramid schemes, but I will provide
you the prior activity that the----
Mr. Kinzinger. How come not in the last year?
Ms. Ramirez. I may be mistaken about that. My colleagues
are correcting me. There may be one enforcement action against
a pyramid scheme. But we can provide you further accurate
information about that.
Mr. Kinzinger. All right, because I am--yes, I am looking
at, as I mentioned in the beginning, something like 13 million
incidents, and so we have maybe one case you said that is
going?
Ms. Ramirez. I can provide you----
Mr. Kinzinger. You can provide me the information, but I
just want to--but I think it is important to----
Ms. Brill. Can I just mention? So sorry for interrupting.
Mr. Kinzinger. No, please.
Ms. Brill. Just to augment what the chairman has said,
pyramid cases are incredibly complex. I actually began my
career at the State AG's officedoing a pyramid case, and they
are very resource intensive. So although we might have only
done one case--and we will get you those details--it is a
tremendous amount of work, and each one of those cases is very
important in sending appropriate messages to the community,
both the investor community and consumer community.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK, and I will go to a bit of a different
subject here. Some have raised concerns because the FTC faces a
lesser burden in obtaining a preliminary injunction from a
Federal judge than does the Department of Justice Antitrust
Division. Merging parties can reasonably anticipate the
possibility of different substantive outcomes depending on
which agency has jurisdiction to review the matter. To avoid
the potential for these different outcomes, why shouldn't
Congress require the FTC to litigate merger challenges in
Federal Court, just as the DOJ is required to?
Ms. Ramirez. So the FTC, when it seeks as preliminary
injunction, it does go to Federal Court. The standard for
obtaining a preliminary injunction is differently stated as
between the Department of Justice and the FTC.
In my view, however, as a practical matter, the standards
end up being about the same. I don't see a material difference,
and I don't believe that the difference in words have led to
any disparate outcomes. So that is between the two agencies.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. Well, thank you all for serving your
country.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Terry. Well, thank you for your service to our country.
Well, that concludes all of the question and answer period,
so that it brings us to the end of this hearing. But I just
want to tell you that I think it is a really tribute to the FTC
and your importance that we had 22 members show up at this
hearing. Lots of interest, as I mentioned before the hearing,
from our outside folks, and so I look forward to working with
you, continuing to work with you over the next year to ensure
that you will have equally or even a better 100 years at the
FTC.
So, also, as you probably know, we have the ability, or
right to submit written questions to you. And I am going to
guarantee you, you will get written questions. In fact, I am
going to send one that is a generic question that just says
looking back, as Mr. Olson did, and now looking forward, what
is the underbrush that needs to be cleaned out? I am sure that
is something every agency could and should do.
So I will telegraph that is one of my questions to you.
What I would appreciate is when we receive all of the questions
from the members, we will send them to you and if you could, in
a timely manner, I have asked others to--timely, means to me,
14 days-ish; 14 days to get those back to us. I would greatly
appreciate that.
With that, Mr. McNerney, anything for you to close?
Mr. McNerney. No.
Mr. Terry. All right, then we are adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:14 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
