- FERC PERSPECTIVES: QUESTIONS CONCERNING EPA'S PROPOSED CLEAN POWER PLAN AND OTHER GRID RELIABILITY CHALLENGES

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FERC PERSPECTIVES: QUESTIONS CONCERNING EPA'S PROPOSED CLEAN POWER PLAN
AND OTHER GRID RELIABILITY CHALLENGES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 29, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-168

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

93-274 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey                Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               PETER WELCH, Vermont
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PAUL TONKO, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina
Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               PAUL TONKO, New York
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                LOIS CAPPS, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN BARROW, Georgia
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      Islands
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     7

Witnesses

Cheryl A. Lafleur, Acting Chairman, Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.....................................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions...............................    86
Philip D. Moeller, Commissioner, Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.....................................................    17
Prepared statement...........................................    19
Answers to submitted questions...............................   114
John R. Norris, Commissioner, Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.....................................................    29
Prepared statement...........................................    31
Answers to submitted questions...............................   132
Tony Clark, Commissioner, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission...    37
Prepared statement...........................................    39
Answers to submitted questions...............................   145
Norman C. Bay, Commissioner, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission    46
Prepared statement...........................................    47
Answers to submitted questions...............................   162

Submitted Material

Report entitled, ``Addressing Climate Change Without
Legislation,'' University of California, Berkeley School of
Law, \1\ submitted by Mr. Waxman...............................     8
Statement of American Public Power Association, submitted by Mr.
Whitfield......................................................    78
Majority memorandum..............................................    82

----------
\1\ The report is available at http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/
IF03/20140729/102558/HHRG-113-IF03-20140729-SD008.pdf.

FERC PERSPECTIVES: QUESTIONS CONCERNING EPA'S PROPOSED CLEAN POWER PLAN
AND OTHER GRID RELIABILITY CHALLENGES

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 29, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Whitfield
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus,Pitts, Burgess,
Latta, Olson, Gardner, Kinzinger, Griffith, Barton, Upton (ex
officio), Rush, McNerney, Tonko, Yarmuth, Green Capps, Doyle,
Barrow, Matsui, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff Present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Clerk; Gary
Andres, Staff Director; Charlotte Baker, Deputy Communications
Director; Sean Bonyun, Communications Director; Matt Bravo,
Professional Staff Member; Leighton Brown, Press Assistant;
Allison Busbee, Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Annie
Caputo, Professional Staff Member; Patrick Currier, Counsel,
Energy and Power; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and
Power; Brandon Mooney, Professional Staff Member; Mary Neumayr,
Senior Energy Counsel; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator,
Environment and Economy; Jeff Baran, Staff Director for Energy
and Environment; Phil Barnett, Staff Director; Caitlin
Haberman, Policy Analyst; and Alexandra Teitz, Chief Counsel
for Energy and Environment.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this morning.
And I certainly want to thank all of the FERC commissioners
for joining us at this morning's hearing in which we are going
to get your perspectives on questions relating to EPA's
proposed Clean Power Plan and its impact on reliability, as
well as other challenges. I know that you all have a very busy
schedule, and we do appreciate very much your being with us
this morning to explore this very important issue.
At this point, I would like to recognize myself for 5
minutes for an opening statement. As I said, this is our second
hearing on EPA's proposed Clean Power Plan, which would change
the way electricity is generated, transmitted and consumed in
each State.
Our first hearing focused on the EPA itself, and I must say
that it was obvious from that hearing that EPA does not have
the expertise on the intricacies of electric markets and
reliability implications of this radical transformation that
they are proposing for the electric generation sector.
As I noted before, we are also seriously concerned with
this proposed rule; for one thing, EPA's unprecedented use of
the Clean Air Act is questionable on legal grounds. Legal
experts, and we always know there are conflicting legal
experts, but many legal experts see nothing in the Clean Air
Act that empowers EPA to commandeer State decisionmaking
authority over how each State produces, delivers, and uses
electricity.
The EPA is also embarking on a comprehensive effort to
Federalize electric generation, even though the Agency, as I
said, has absolutely no energy policy setting authority or
expertise. That is why it is important today to hear from the
Federal body that actually does have that authority and
expertise. Although, I might add that the top-down command and
control efforts of EPA go far beyond even FERC's jurisdiction.
As a preliminary matter, I would like to better understand
FERC's level of participation in this proposed rule. Is FERC an
equal partner with EPA, a junior partner or hardly a partner at
all in promulgating this rule? And what would be FERC's role in
implementing this rule? We are also interested in tapping into
FERC's considerable expertise on electric reliability. As I
suspect, many reliability concerns with this proposed rule that
have not been considered by EPA.
As it is, the Agency has already promulgated a number of
different rules that have contributed to coal-fired power plant
shut downs. This proposed rule would lead to more of the same.
So we are interested in learning from FERC whether it believes
coal-using states can abruptly and quickly move away from this
base-load source without raising significant reliability
concerns.
I am also worried by many of the assumptions of EPA that
they make as to how States can meet electricity demand while
complying with the rule. For example, the Agency suggests that
States can easily ramp up natural gas-fired generation to help
meet the target goals, but we know from the experience of last
winter that several regions of the country have natural gas
pipeline capacity constraints.
Similar questions about EPA's optimistic assumptions
regarding the ability of renewables to help fill the void,
especially given the many challenges that come with integrating
intermittent resources into the grid. And the limitations of
renewables will be exacerbated, if affordable and reliable
base-load supplies, like coal and nuclear and even natural gas,
face a constrained future as they do under the Obama
Administration.
Overall, we see great risk in EPA trying to overrule the
State's choices as to the best electricity mix as well as risk
in constraining a State's ability to change its generation
portfolio and as you know, at a certain timeframe within this
proposed rule, States can't change, even if they might want to.
So EPA's proposed efforts dictating electricity use is quite
troubling. This is an area where the reach of the Federal
Government has been limited, and for good reason, since these
local resource decisions are best left to States.
So we look forward to your testimony today. I know we have
a lot of questions for you, and certainly, as I said, you all
have the expertise and we look forward to your opening
statements.
And with that, I would at this time recognize the gentleman
from Chicago, Mr. Rush, for his 5-minute opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

This morning we will be conducting our second hearing on
EPA's proposed Clean Power Plan targeting each state's carbon
dioxide emissions from electricity generation and use. Our
first hearing focused on EPA itself, and I must say that our
discussion with Assistant Administrator Janet McCabe left us
with more questions than answers. Today, we solicit the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission's expertise and perspective, and I
welcome all five Commissioners to this subcommittee.
As I have noted before, I find much reason for concern with
this proposed rule. For one thing, EPA's unprecedented use of
the Clean Air Act is on very questionable legal ground. I see
nothing in the law that empowers EPA to commandeer state
decision-making authority over how it produces, delivers, and
uses electricity. But aside from the legal questions of whether
EPA can do this to the states, there is the equally important
question of whether the agency should do it. I have serious
doubts whether this scheme is advisable or even workable.
Ironically, EPA is embarking on this comprehensive effort
to federalize energy planning even though the agency has
absolutely no energy policy-setting authority or expertise.
That is why it is important to hear from a federal body that
actually does have such authority and expertise, although I
might add that the top down, command-and-control efforts of EPA
go far beyond even FERC's jurisdiction. As a preliminary
matter, I would like to better understand FERC's level of
participation in this proposed rule--is FERC an equal partner
with EPA, a junior partner, or hardly a partner at all in
promulgating this rule? And what would be FERC's role in
implementing it?
I am also interested in tapping into FERC's considerable
expertise on electric reliability, as I anticipate many
reliability concerns with this proposed rule that have not been
considered by EPA. As it is, the agency has already promulgated
a number of rules that have contributed to coal-fired power
plant shutdowns. This proposed rule would lead to more of the
same and indeed is seen by some as the nail in the coffin for
coal. I am very interested in learning from FERC whether it
believes coal-using states can abruptly move away from this
base load source without raising significant reliability
concerns.
I am also worried by many of the assumptions EPA makes as
to how states can meet electricity demand while complying with
the rule. For example, the agency suggests that states can
easily ramp up natural gas-fired generation to help meet their
targets. But we know from the experience of last winter that
several regions of the country have natural gas pipeline
capacity constraints. I look forward to hearing the
Commissioners' thoughts on the achievability of EPA's
assumptions about natural gas-fired generation.
I also have similar questions about EPA's very optimistic
assumptions regarding the ability of renewables to help fill
the void, especially given the many challenges that come with
integrating intermittent resources into the grid. And the
limitations of renewables will be exacerbated if affordable and
reliable base load supplies like coal and nuclear face a
constrained future as they do under the Obama administration.
Overall, I see great risks in allowing EPA to overrule each
state's choices as to the best electricity mix, as well as
risks in constraining a state's ability to change its
generation portfolio as circumstances warrant.
I also find EPA's proposed efforts dictating electricity
usage to be troubling. This is an area where the reach of the
federal government has been limited, and for good reason since
these local resource decisions are best left to states.
Most of all, I am very concerned what this proposed rule
would do to electricity costs for consumers and for job-
creating businesses. In my view, EPA has not been taking these
concerns into account, which is another reason why I believe
this hearing is important.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this important hearing on FERC perspectives, questions
concerning EPA's proposed Clean Power Plan and other grid
reliability challenges.
Mr. Chairman, as the title suggests, we are here today to
hear from the FERC commissioners on the impact that we can
expect President Obama's Clean Power Plan to have on a variety
of issues related to fuel diversity, the integration of
variable energy resources, natural gas, electricity generation,
and grid reliability, among many other topics.
Mr. Chairman, last month, this subcommittee heard testimony
from Acting Assistant Administrator of the Office of Air and
Radiation, Janet McCabe, that in developing the
Administration's Clean Power Plan, EPA consulted on
reliability-related issues with DOE, FERC, State, public
utility commissioners, as well as the Independent System
Operators Regional Transmission Organization Council.
In fact, when determining the best system of emission
reduction, or BSER, reliability was one of the key factors that
EPA considered and the Agency made sure to allow flexibility
for States to design and implement their own programs in order
to ease pressure on the system reliability.
Additionally, Mr. Chairman, the EPA proposed to give States
a 10-year period to achieve their final goals, which allows for
measures to be phased in to ways that protect reliability. But
why is it so important that we act at all? Well, Mr. Chairman,
a series of assessment reports have come out recently,
including the third national climate assessment, the fifth
intergovernmental panel on climate change assessment, the EPA's
climate change indicators in the U.S. 2014, and the bipartisan
risky business, the economic risk of climate change in the U.S.
Each of these reports highlights the devastating
consequences of climate change on both public health and the
environment, and each urging policymakers, you and I, Mr.
Chairman, to act. And what have we learned from all of these
telling studies, Mr. Chairman? We have learned that 7 of the 10
top warmest years on record have occurred since 1998 and
dangerous heat waves have become more and more frequent.
We have learned that extreme storms threaten to flood
coastal communities, risking lives, and that cyclone intensity
has increased over the past 20 years, where 6 of the 10 most
active years since the 1950s occurring during that period. We
have learned that dangerous wildfires continue to intensify,
reducing air quality, threatening forests, threatening
property, and risking the lives of firefighters. We have
learned that the area of land burned by wildfires annually has
increased since the 1980s and that 9 of the 10 years with the
most land burned have occurred since 2000.
We have learned that by mid-century, farmers in the midwest
will face crop year decline of up to 19 percent and by the end
of the century, States like Oregon, Washington, and Idaho could
experience as many hot days over 95 degrees Fahrenheit as
currently expected in the State of Texas. We have learned that
as climate warms, labor productivity in key sections including
construction, agriculture, and utilities would likely be
reduced and that these reductions and labor productivity may be
the greatest in the southeast.
So Mr. Chairman, it is for all of these reasons that
President Obama has decided to act and fill the void left by
this very same Congress in hopes of mitigating some of the most
devastating effects on climate change due in large part to
emissions from some of the Nation's oldest and dirtiest power
plants.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to this hearing on the FERC
commissioners' responses to questions and on the FERC
commissioners to the President's plan, their response to the
President's plan. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I want to yield
back all the time that I might have.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Rush. Right on time.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I would like to recognize the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Upton, chairman of the full
committee for a 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A couple weeks ago, EPA's Acting Assistant Administrator
Janet McCabe told this subcommittee that the Agency's proposed
rule for existing electricity generation is not an energy plan
but rather it is a pollution control rule. Then last week,
Administrator Gina McCarthy made the exact opposite argument
during her testimony before the Senate that the proposal is not
about pollution control but, in fact, it is about energy and
spurring investments in the EPA's preferred energy choices.
This comparison of exchanges by the two top officials at
EPA demonstrates the Agency's current dilemma. After failing to
push comprehensive cap-and-trade legislation through a
Democratic Senate because of legitimate fears that it would
hamstring our economy and make energy more expensive, the
Administration is now pursuing a plan B approach by stretching
the Clean Air Act to accomplish the exact same goals.
Assistant Administrator McCabe's answer is the one that the
agency will likely stick to when the rule gets challenged in
court, as EPA has no explicit energy policy setting authority
under the law. But Administrator McCarthy had the more candid
response, as this rule clearly is an effort by EPA to assert
control in new regulatory authorities over States' electricity
decisionmaking.
EPA's Clean Power Plan requires States to submit for
approval individual or regional energy plans to achieve the
agency's carbon dioxide emission targets. EPA is systemically
Federalizing under the Clean Air Act what was once in the clear
purview of the States or the markets. If the States are truly
the labs of democracy, then why assert the Federal Government
over their energy planning?
FERC is the agency charged by Congress with regulating
electricity in interstate commerce, which is why it is so
important to gain FERC's perspective today. Even this Agency,
with explicit authority over electricity matters, does not have
the expansive reach envisioned by EPA's Clean Power Plan. I am
particularly concerned about the Clean Power Plan's impact on
energy diversity. Maintaining a diverse energy portfolio is a
core component of this committee's vision for America's energy
future, a vision that we call the architecture of abundance.
Consumers and businesses are best served by an electricity
supply that can be generated from a variety of sources: Coal,
nuclear, natural gas, obviously, as well as renewables, and in
the proportion that each State deems best to suit its unique
circumstances.
Maintaining diversity, both diversity in our electricity
generation portfolio as well as the diversity of strategies for
meeting a State's electricity needs is critical to affordable
and reliable energy, but EPA's top-down Clean Power Plan will
give us less of both kinds of diversity.
I thank the FERC commissioners today and certainly welcome
Mr. Bay for his first appearance before us. And I yield the
balance of my time to Mr. Shimkus.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Several weeks ago, EPA's Acting Assistant Administrator
Janet McCabe told this subcommittee that the agency's proposed
rule for existing electricity generation is not an energy plan,
but rather is a pollution control rule. Then, last week,
Administrator Gina McCarthy made the exact opposite argument
during testimony before the Senate--that this proposal is not
about pollution control but is about energy and spurring
investments in the EPA's preferred energy choices.
This comparison of exchanges by the two top officials at
EPA demonstrates the agency's current dilemma. After failing to
push comprehensive cap-and-trade legislation through a
Democratic Senate because of legitimate fears that it would
hamstring our economy and make energy more expensive, the
administration is now pursuing a Plan B approach by stretching
the Clean Air Act to accomplish the exact same goals. Assistant
Administrator McCabe's answer is the one the agency will likely
stick to when this rule gets challenged in court, as EPA has no
explicit energy policy-setting authority under the law, but
Administrator McCarthy had the more candid response, as this
rule clearly is an effort by EPA to assert control and new
regulatory authorities over states' electricity decision-
making.
EPA's Clean Power Plan requires states to submit for
approval individual or regional energy plans to achieve the
agency's carbon dioxide emissions targets. EPA is
systematically federalizing under the Clean Air Act what was
once in the clear purview of the states or the markets. If
states are truly the ``laboratories of democracy,'' then why
assert the federal government over their energy planning? FERC
is the agency charged by Congress with regulating electricity
in interstate commerce, which is why it is so important to gain
FERC's perspective today. Even this agency, with explicit
authority over electricity matters, does not have the expansive
reach envisioned by EPA's Clean Power Plan.
I am particularly concerned about the Clean Power Plan's
impact on energy diversity. Maintaining a diverse energy
portfolio is a core component of this committee's vision for
America's energy future--a vision we call the Architecture of
Abundance. Consumers and businesses are best served by an
electricity supply that can be generated from a variety of
sources--coal, nuclear, natural gas, as well as renewables--and
in the proportion that each state deems best to suit its unique
circumstances.
Maintaining diversity--both diversity in our electricity
generation portfolio as well as a diversity of strategies for
meeting a state's electricity needs--is critical to affordable
and reliable energy. But EPA's top-down Clean Power Plan will
give us less of both kinds of diversity.
I thank the FERC Commissioners for their testimony today,
and welcome Mr. Bay for his first appearance before us. We look
forward to a continued dialogue as we conduct oversight of the
Clean Power Plan.

Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Reliable low-cost energy is a critical and key asset to
this country and for job creation. We appreciate what you do to
help maintain that.
In my sole region this winter, we came very close to the
demand meeting supply, and I think that is a thing that
hopefully you will help focus on. Base load is a key component
of that, and as these rules drive some generating facilities
out of the market closure, then we are going to have these
concerns, and woe be it to the member of Congress that has
brownouts during the hottest time of the summer or the coldest
time in the winter.
There is also the big debate, you guys are involved with it
on the transmission grid. As we pick and choose winners and
losers and electricity generation, we have to move electricity
larger distances and that stirs up the public. I think there is
a credible debate about localizing generation and then not
having these transmission fights.
As you have heard me before numerous times, I am also
concerned about the physical security aspects. As a former Army
officer during the Cold War, we worried about the Soviets doing
electromagnetic pulses that would knock out transmissions and I
know that is not the focus of this hearing, but security
aspects of that, and maybe it is not a terrorist attack, maybe
it is just a solar flare that really causes great concerns, and
I am going to be watching that and involved with that in this
year and the next couple years.
The last thing I would like to, with this time, is just,
Chairman LaFleur, and I will follow up with my questions, when
you last appeared for us, you said you would keep your fellow
commissioners in consultation with you. I think some of the
testimony kind of questions that, based upon meetings with the
EPA, and I hope we get clarification on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time we will recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Waxman, for a 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like
to thank each of the commissioners for being here today, and I
especially want to congratulate and welcome Mr. Bay, who has
just been confirmed to the commission.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission plays a key role
in maintaining the reliability of electric grid and protecting
electricity consumers. That is what makes your job so
important. The Republican members of this committee deny the
existence of climate change or pretend it doesn't exist. They
see the EPA's Clean Power Plan for the power sector as a threat
to grid reliability, and that is why they have called you here
this morning. They hope you will say something that will give
them ammunition.
But those of us who are listening to the overwhelming
scientific consensus see carbon emissions from power plants,
not EPA regulations, as the real threat to the grid. The facts
are sobering. Last year the levels of heat-trapping carbon
pollution in the atmosphere exceeded 400 parts per million for
the first time in millions of years. Last year was the fourth
hottest year on record, 7 of the 10 hottest years on record
occurred in the last decade, and all 10 occurred since 1998.
Wildfires in the west have gotten much worse. Droughts are
setting records and devastating harvests. Sea-level rise and
fierce storms are threatening our coast. These, and many other
indicators, tell us that global warming is harming us now, and
it is going to get much worse. The power sector will feel these
impacts. Intense storms will disrupt power delivery. Droughts
and rising temperatures will force plant shutdowns.
Transmission systems will lose capacity at high temperatures.
And that is why the Clean Power Plan is so important for
the grid and for our future. It was issued by EPA, but I am
sure it went through an interagency review, because it is
important to get FERC's perspective. A significant transition
is under way in the power sector. Market forces and public
policies are driving a shift to renewables, demand side
efficiency and natural gas fire generation. We have doubled our
capacity to generate renewable electricity from wind and solar
in just 5 years.
Wind power is already cost competitive with fossil fuel
generation in parts of the country and the cost of solar power
is plummeting. Natural gas costs less than coal and even coal
boosters acknowledge that it is not cost effective to build new
coal plants today because of the competition from natural gas,
not because of any regulations by any government agency.
These changes in the electricity sector are bringing
Americans cleaner air, new jobs, lower bills, and more choices.
The Clean Power Plan will advance these positive developments.
FERC, too, should make its own contribution. The statutory
standards that FERC administers, gives the agency many tools to
help combat climate change and create the clean energy economy
of the future.
And I want to bring to the members' attention, the
University of California Berkeley Center for Law, Energy, and
the Environment report that was recently issued on this
subject, authored by Steven Weissman and Romany Webb, which I
ask unanimous consent to insert in the record.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection. \*\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\*\ The information has been retained in committee files and is
also available athttp://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF03/20140729/
102558/HHRG-113-IF03-20140729-SD008.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Waxman. I hope all the commissioners will give these
ideas serious consideration. As this new report shows, we don't
have to choose between protecting the environment and reliable
electricity. FERC grid operators, State public utility
commissions and power plants, even progressive power companies
are already planning for the changes that are under way.
Our nation has a proven track record of adapting to new
environmental requirements without adverse impacts on
reliability. We don't have to cling to the past, and we don't
need to be afraid of the future. We can protect our
environment, strengthen the grid, and leave our world a better
place for our children.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my time.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back.
At this time, we look forward to the opening statements of
the commissioners of the FERC. And we have with us this
morning, the Honorable Cheryl LaFleur, who is the Acting
Chairman; we have the Honorable Phillip Moeller, who is a
Commissioner; we have the Honorable John Norris and Tony Clark;
and our newest member, Mr. Norman Bay of New Mexico.
So at this time, Chairman LaFleur, we will recognize you
for 5 minutes for your opening statement. Make sure your
microphone is on, and we look forward to your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF THE HON. CHERYL A. LAFLEUR, ACTING CHAIRMAN,
FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION; THE HON. PHILIP D.
MOELLER, COMMISSIONER, FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION;
THE HON. JOHN R. NORRIS, COMMISSIONER, FEDERAL ENERGY
REGULATORY COMMISSION; THE HON. TONY CLARK, COMMISSIONER,
FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION; AND THE HON. NORMAN C.
BAY, COMMISSIONER, FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CHERYL A. LAFLEUR

Ms. LaFleur. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Whitfield,
Ranking Member Rush, and members of the subcommittee.
I am honored to serve as the acting chairman of the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission, and I appreciate the opportunity
to be with you this morning.
As this subcommittee is well aware, the Nation's resource
mix is changing in response to a number of factors, including
the increased availability of domestic natural gas, growing use
of renewable generation in response to State and Federal
policies, and new environmental regulations. Although these
drivers of power supply changes are themselves outside the
commission's jurisdiction, we must be aware of and adapt to
them to carry out our responsibilities to promote reliability
and ensure just and reasonable rates for customers.
Our work supports reliability in three primary ways. First,
FERC supports the timely development of needed energy
infrastructure. The commission has permitting authority over
natural gas pipelines, LNG terminals, and non-Federal
hydropower. We also support new infrastructure through our rate
authority over those facilities and over electric transmission.
Second, FERC oversees wholesale power markets that support
reliability. We work to ensure that centralized capacity,
energy, and ancillary services markets send correct signals to
support the procurement and retention of resources needed for
reliability.
Finally, FERC directly oversees the reliability of the grid
by establishing mandatory standards for the bulk power system
under Section 215 of the Federal Power Act. It has been almost
10 years since Congress enacted Section 215, and I believe the
commission has established a solid track record not just on
day-to-day reliability, but on emerging issues, like
cybersecurity, physical security, and geomagnetic disturbances.
As I mentioned, one of the key drivers of changes in our
resource mix are new EPA regulations regarding air, water, and
solid waste pollution. EPA is, of course, responsible for
promulgating environmental regulations under the statutes it
implements. We, in turn, are responsible for helping ensure
that reliability is sustained as new environmental regulations
are carried out. Our work in this area is not limited to
interactions with EPA but includes collaborations with states,
industry, and other stakeholders.
One recent example is our work on the mercury and air toxic
standards where we issued a policy statement outlining how we
would advise EPA on when additional time might be needed to
comply with the mercury and air toxics in order to avoid a
reliability violation. We also established a regularly-
scheduled public forum with NARUC, co-led by my colleague,
Commissioner Moeller and myself and our State colleagues, to
regularly collaborate with EPA and other stakeholders on how
the MATS rule and other rules were being implemented.
I have closely followed the development of the Clean Power
Plan because I believe it will have implications for the
operation of the grid and require FERC engagement to ensure
that reliability is sustained. FERC staff commented on the
proposal through the OMB interagency review process from a
reliability perspective. Among other recommendations, FERC
staff emphasized the need for the development of natural gas
pipeline and electric transmission infrastructure to enable
compliance with State compliance plans. FERC staff also
emphasize the importance of regional cooperation to promote
efficient compliance with the Clean Power Plan.
I appreciate that the plan gives considerable flexibility
to the States to use the different building blocks it outlines,
but I believe FERC will have at least three important roles:
First, to support the development of pipelines and transmission
that will be needed to attain the goals of the plan; second, to
consider how market structures need to adapt to support the
research choices that states make under the plan; and finally,
to continue to be closely engaged with EPA and the states and
others to identify any problems and help to make sure they are
addressed.
Reliability has been my top priority in my time at FERC,
and I believe it is job one for anyone involved in electricity.
I have seen many changes to the Nation's resource mix in the
past 30 years, but the central importance of reliability is
unchanged, even as new technologies and new environmental
challenges and aspirations emerge. As FERC chairman and as a
commissioner, I will continue to champion these issues.
I thank the subcommittee for giving me the opportunity to
appear, and I welcome your questions.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Ms. LaFleur.
[The prepared statement of Ms. LaFleur follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I recognize Mr. Moeller for
his 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PHILIP D. MOELLER

Mr. Moeller. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush, and members of the committee.
I am Phil Moeller. I have been on the commission since
2006. Thank you for holding this hearing on a very important
subject, the EPA's Clean Power Plan. As its name indicates,
this is essentially power or electricity policy, so it is very
relevant that we are here talking about it because we have the
job under Section 215 of the Federal Power Act to assure the
reliability of the Nation's bulk power grid.
And reliability should not be, and I don't think it is, a
partisan issue, but it has to be our job, number one, so we
have to look skeptically at these kinds of proposals to make
sure that we can keep the lights on, and more importantly the
heating and the cooling on when consumers need it.
The biggest challenge, I think, in this rule is that it
treats states individually in terms of compliance, but
electricity markets are fundamentally interstate in nature and
that just creates some challenges that may not be
insurmountable but need to be looked at very closely. In my
written testimony, I have noted a few examples of states that
certainly have concerns about how they will be treated.
Idaho, for instance, consumes coal power but doesn't
generate it, so what does that mean for its baseline now in
going forward? We have states like Wisconsin and New Jersey
that spend significant amount of money, billions of dollars to
clean up their fleet, but they don't get credit under the Clean
Power Plan. And then there are stranded assets, such as the one
I note in Mississippi, where $1 billion of scrubbers is
essentially not counted under the plan. So those are issues you
will hear about as the comments come in on the rule.
The rule is based on compliances on four building blocks.
You have probably gone into them. I will point out one that has
a little bit of concern to me, which is essentially getting the
gas fleet up to 70 percent dispatch. Now, the challenge there
is that we have traditionally gone under something called
economic dispatch where the cheapest power plants are called in
the merit order of dispatch. This would change it to
environmental dispatch. You can do that with a carbon fee and
mesh the two, but obviously the prices go up. It is a
fundamental change, not only with how we regulate power but
actually how the system is operated, and it needs to be
examined very closely.
The related issue that concerns me has to do with the
example we have in New England. Almost everybody in the
country, not universally, but almost everyone believes that we
need more pipeline into New England because of the pipeline
constraints. The challenge is financing it, because pipelines
have traditionally been financed under long-term contracts with
local distribution companies, but the new customer class for
pipelines is basically power plants that may or may not be
called on a daily basis based on the market they are in.
So with that, the challenge is how do you get long-term
financing with power plants that aren't going to sound
essentially long-term contracts. Now, these are not
insurmountable problems, but it is a real issue in New England.
We haven't been able to solve it and I am concerned that if we
move to a system where there is a lot more gas generation to be
dispatched, are we going to have the pipeline capacity? Can we
finance the pipeline capacity to meet that need? It is a real
conundrum, one that we need to take a look at more closely.
Essentially, what I have been calling for is a more formal
role for our commission as we deal with EPA on these issues,
kind of an open and transparent role, so that basically we can
get the engineers together to discuss the challenges involved
because it really comes down to a very granular level with
reliability. The laws of physics will trump regulations. There
are always unintended consequences when we shut down power
plants because, although they may not produce a lot of power,
they may be producing other products, ancillary services that
maintain reliability in the grid. And the location of those
plants is key, and sometimes you can't replicate a plant in
that location.
So the granular level of analysis is very important, and I
think it should be open and transparent because, engineers can
disagree, but we need kind of an open forum for them to do it.
I am also not here to say that we shouldn't do anything. I
think we can do a lot of good by essentially improving and
modernizing the pricing of electricity. Under the leadership of
Acting Chair LaFleur, the FERC has opened up a proceeding on
price formation in the wholesale markets. This is overdue, it
is a good effort. I am kind of impatient. I want this to move
forward, because we have some inefficient pricing right now.
Similarly, at the retail level, I urge my colleagues at the
State level to consider more realtime and dynamic pricing at
the retail level because that will send more accurate pricing
to consumers, and hence, they should use their power more
efficiently.
Again, thank you for having us, and I look forward to any
questions you have.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Moeller.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moeller follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Norris, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN R. NORRIS

Mr. Norris. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
share with you my thoughts on how EPA's proposed Clean Power
Plan will work. The fact that we are here today having this
discussion on reducing carbon emissions, to some degree, tells
me it is already working.
As you may have read in my written testimony, I believe the
EPA's proposed Rule 111(d) can work. The flexibility provided
in the rule, along with the continuous communication and
cooperation between EPA, FERC, NERC, the states, RTOs, industry
and others to make appropriate adjustments along the way to
ensure reliability lead me to the conclusion that we can reduce
carbon emissions and keep the lights on. If the question is, is
this the most efficient way to reduce carbon emissions in our
electric sector? I would give you a firm no, it is not.
I applaud the EPA for this action but recognize that this
was the only option available to curtail harmful greenhouse gas
emissions because Congress has failed to act. Placing a cost or
a value on carbon consistent across the country would, I
believe, be a far and away more efficient and fair way to
address carbon emissions. While the EPA's proposal does provide
more certainty on energy investment than before an industry
struggling with uncertainty, it is nowhere near the clarity and
direction legislation establishing a national energy policy on
carbon would provide.
Let me share with you an excerpt from an interview from a
former Republican colleague of yours. He tells of a
conversation he had with an elderly gentleman about the need
for a carbon policy, and I quote: I was talking to him about,
``What about your grandkids?'' And he said, ``I think they can
get by on their own.'' I don't think that caring fellow really
meant it quite that bluntly. I think what he meant was somebody
will figure something out.
And, of course, my response to him is, ``Well,
technological innovation will sure work better if we set the
economics right, because what we believe as conservatives and
people who believe in free enterprise is if you get the
economics right, somebody chasing the dollar would deliver to
me a better product. They will make money and they will serve
my needs. That is what makes our system go around.
``But if you can't get to that next step of getting the
price on carbon, because if you attach that price, the external
hidden cost of the product, it changes economics and all kinds
of exciting things happening for the enterprise system.'' But
he wants to stick at that point of saying it is not a cost,
that CO
2
is not a cost; it is not a negative. If it
is a negative externality, it is a value of zero. If you attach
a zero to it, there is no change in the pricing structure. So
for him, it is very important to continue to deny the science
because he wants to assign a zero to the cost of carbon.
That was former Congressman Bob Inglis, who is providing a
strong, conservative economic voice on this issue, a voice
worth listening to. I, too, believe the best way to address
climate change is to first recognize the overwhelming evidence
provided by scientists throughout the world that our planet
faces severe consequences if we do not take action. The U.S.
can and should help lead a worldwide effort to reduce carbon
emissions, and that our innovative and entrepreneurial spirit
will seize the opportunities to tackle this problem.
If we are here today to debate whether the EPA's proposal
will work or not, I fear Congress is missing the point, again.
A rule that is not yet finalized but empowers 50 states with
significant flexibility to address the proposed regulations and
then grid operators to work to incorporate those State
decisions into their operations, it will nearly be impossible
to be proved today that it will or will not work.
But if the EPA and every other entity involved commits to
making it work, I am confident it is achievable. But for the
sake of our consumers, our utility businesses and America's
entrepreneurs and innovators, we as a Nation could take a
better course of action and enact a national energy policy to
begin the transition to a low-carbon economy.
Reliability will always be one of my highest priorities as
a commissioner. It is my responsibility, and I will not
hesitate to step forward and take appropriate action if grid
security is threatened by this proposed rule or any other
threat or action. But this rule is a very gradual transition,
and I believe a very necessary transition, for I believe my
responsibility as a citizen and public servant is to also speak
up for my children, the children of America and the world. We
are talking about action that threatens their future.
Much talk, I think, is spent on addressing the financial
debt we are leaving our children, and I commend all of you here
today who are addressing that issue. But I hope you will also
consider the atmospheric debt we are not adequately addressing.
This is a debt I believe even more devastating but also deadly.
Thank you. That concludes my testimony. I look forward to
your questions.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Norris.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Norris follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Mr. Whitfield. Mr. Clark, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TONY CLARK

Mr. Clark. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member
Rush and members of the committee.
I hope you will allow me a point of personal privilege for
an introduction that I have today which is, in probably the
half a dozen or so times that I have testified in front of
Congress, I have never had my boys be able to join me. They
have always been in school or back home in North Dakota, but
today they are here. So Alex and Thomas.
Mr. Whitfield. We will have some questions for Alex and
Thomas.
Mr. Clark. I am sure they look forward to them. They can
now look 30 years into the future being able to look back into
a Congressional Record and see their names are in there.
Out of respect for your time, I won't repeat the testimony
that I submitted, but instead will probably just extend a
little bit upon it. It is quite clear from the questions that
we received from all of you, the pre-hearing questions that
preeminent in the minds of the committee are, can FERC answer
questions related to the EPA rule and whether there will be a
concern about either cost or reliability.
I think, hopefully, what you gathered from my responses
were that it is probably too early to know with specificity
exactly what those impacts will be and the primary driver for
that is that we simply don't know what the potential State
implementation plans, compliance plans might look like, and we
also don't have a sense for what a Federal implementation plan
or a Federal compliance plan would look like.
Typically, as the EPA has proposed rules, there would be a
marker for what a Federal plan might look like; in this case,
we don't have that. So it is a little tougher for us, I think,
as a commission, to model it. But I think we can make some
general comments about the trendline that we might at least
wish to keep in mind, especially as a commission as we work
through some of these issues.
And what really got me thinking about it was an article
that I read in the Washington Post last Friday, actually, after
I had submitted my written testimony, which was about the
challenges that a community in Colorado was having with regard
to changing over their fleet in a relatively short amount of
time, and there were some costs concerns that were taking place
in that community. It happened to be Pueblo. And it got me
thinking about the EPA proposed rule and what might be pathways
to it.
It is quite clear, although the EPA has said that they will
offer flexibility to states, a pathway that they have offered
up as a potential one that might be compliance, relies in some
part on a combination of perhaps cap and trade, like a regional
gas house initiative like they have in the northeast, some sort
of reliance on energy efficiency and demand response resources,
a shuttering of coal plants and, at the same time, pivoting
towards heavier reliance on natural gas, perhaps some sort of
renewable portfolio standard in the State.
So you put all these things together, and it actually looks
very much like what one of the regions has already been going
through, which is the one that Commissioner Moeller mentioned,
which is New England. I think one of the things that FERC and
Congress will need to keep its eye on as we potentially move
forward in these rules is, at least from my perspective, if
someone were to ask me which area of the country do you have
the most concern about both as a matter of cost and
reliability, I would probably point to New England. Not solely
because of some of the things that have happened already with
regard to carbon regulation, but certainly some of those things
do play into it.
So should the EPA rule come to pass? I would think that
FERC would need to ensure that as it moves forward, we would
want to make sure that some of the concerns that we have seen
already happen in New England with the pipeline constraints and
the rapid conversion to gas and the very tight reliability
system and sometimes very high cost for electricity aren't
exported to other regions of the country, and overcoming that
could be, indeed, a challenge.
With that, I will end my testimony, yield back the
remainder of our time, and look forward to your questions.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Clark.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Clark follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Mr. Whitfield. At this time, we will recognize the
gentleman from New Mexico, Mr. Bay, for a 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. NORMAN C. BAY

Mr. Bay. Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Norman Bay, and I
currently serve as the Director of the Office of Enforcement at
FERC.
On July 15, it was my honor to have been confirmed by the
Senate to serve as a member of the commission. I anticipate
being sworn in once all the necessary arrangements have been
completed. Thank you for inviting me to testify at this hearing
regarding EPA's proposed Clean Power Plan and other grid
reliability challenges. I look forward to working with this
committee in my tenure on the commission.
One of FERC's critical responsibilities is the regulation
of electric reliability. As the Director of the Office of
Enforcement, I have been involved in investigations of
potential reliability violations and inquiries into major
reliability events, but I have not been involved in the EPA
rulemaking.
While the EPA has responsibilities under the Clean Air Act
and other legislation, the commission has similar and no less
important responsibility to promote the reliability of the bulk
power system.
One way that I believe the commission can help to ensure
reliability is through open communication and a strong working
relationship with the EPA; the Department of Energy; the States
and NARUC; the North American Electric Reliability Corporation,
or NERC; regional transmission organizations; independent
system operators; and industry. It is my understanding that
FERC staff, EPA, and DOE have communicated at various times
regarding the EPA's power sector regulations. The agencies
should continue this effort to ensure that the EPA is aware of
any potential impacts its regulations may have on the
reliability of the bulk power system.
To the extent necessary and appropriate, commission staff
should continue its communications with EPA and industry
participants subject to FERC's regulation, including RTOs and
ISOs and public utilities. Once I am sworn in, I look forward
to meeting with my colleagues to discuss in greater depth these
issues and to examine how we can work collaboratively within
the commission's authority to promote the reliability of the
bulk power system.
Thank you for inviting me to testify here today. I look
forward to remaining engaged with the committee and the EPA,
DOE, NERC, the states and industry on these important issues.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Bay, and thank all of you for
your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bay follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Mr. Whitfield. At this time, we will recognize the panel
for questions, and I will recognize myself to start off for 5
minutes of questioning.
It is quite clear that anyone who has examined the Clean
Power Plan views it as a fundamental change and President Obama
frequently talks about Congress being obstructionist, and Mr.
Norris made the comment this is necessary because Congress has
failed to act. And I would point out that Congress did act by
deciding not to act. When Mr. Waxman was the chairman of this
committee, the Cap and Trade Bill was reported out of the House
of Representatives. It went to the Senate, and the Senate did
not adopt it. So Congress did act in the sense that it did not
adopt the cap and trade.
One of the frustrating--and I am sure that President Obama
is frustrated, and it is great that we have hearings like this
to bring all of this out into the open, to have a discussion
for the American people. Because one of the frustrating parts
for the American people is when they see decisions affecting
basic services like electricity and the impact that that has on
our economy being made by the courts and by regulators, and
they view that as not really being transparent.
So we in Congress, we do not intend to just lay down and
let the President do whatever he wants to on climate change or
any other issue without having a public discussion about it.
And so CO
2
emissions, by the way, today are the
lowest from energy sources that they have been in 20 years.
Lisa Jackson even made the comment that even if we move
vigorously forward as we are attempting to do here on
CO
2
emissions, it would make no difference unless
other countries do the same.
And we see in Europe today, they are mothballing natural
gas plants because natural gas prices are so high coming out of
Russia that they are building coal plants today. And we, under
this plan, would not have the flexibility to build a new coal
plant if natural gas prices go up because the technology is not
available to be able to do it in an economic way that would
make it possible to do it. We don't have enough money to build
Kemper plants all over America the way they are attempting to
do in Mississippi, and it is not being done without Federal
dollars.
So this kind of discussion, I think, is invaluable. Mr.
Rush had made the comment about the drought and the impact on
farmers, and I would tell you, the price of corn has fallen
from $8.10 a bushel down to $4 a bushel because corn is so
abundant right now. So there are lots of different perspectives
on this.
But Ms. LaFleur, everyone is concerned about reliability,
and we have asked the EPA about this and we ask this question
of you in our written questions: Did the EPA request a written
document from FERC relating to reliability? Do you have a
written report that was given to EPA on reliability issues?
Ms. LaFleur. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Whitfield.
No, they did not request written comments. My
understanding, this is the first time I have been through the
interagency review, but there were a number of staff meetings
and then a kind of formal debrief where we made our comments
over at the OMB with a number of EPA people there. And we kept
a memo, but we did not turn them in in writing because that has
not been the practice.
Mr. Whitfield. I personally think that is disappointing
because reliability is such a key issue.
Mr. Moeller, I don't have a lot of time left, but would you
just comment briefly on this economic dispatch versus
environmental dispatch and how that might get to a cap and
trade system?
Mr. Moeller. Well, that is one of the four building blocks,
and the building block is an aspiration to get the gas fleet up
to 70 percent dispatch, which has been very rarely done in this
country, only in very limited circumstances. So there are some
operational questions.
But essentially, the only way, if you have to hit your
target by increasing your gas fleet production, that is going
to trump what is normally economic dispatch of the cheapest
plant. Now, the only way you can reconcile that is then put a
fee on the other sources, and it is talked about in the rule,
you put a fee on the other carbon emitters so that they are
less competitive to gas. So that is how it would be done.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you. My time is expired.
At this time, I recognize Mr. Rush for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, the American people are tired of the finger
pointing, they are tired of the excuse after excuse, the blame
that goes from one to another. They are really, really tired of
the inaction and the inertia that seems to be the standard of
this Congress.
There is no question, Mr. Chairman, that we need to reduce
our carbon pollution if we are going to avoid the worst impacts
of climate change. No question about it and the power sector is
the largest source of carbon pollution in the U.S. There is no
question about this. Mr. Chairman, I believe that the EPA's
Clean Power Plan is a reasonable approach to reducing emissions
from power plants in light of the unending excuses, in light of
this Congress' failure to act.
Commissioner Norris, do you agree that a Clean Power Plan
is a reasonable approach since this very Congress has failed to
act?
Mr. Norris. I think the EPA plan is, as I mentioned, the
most feasible, reasonable one that they can do out of their
authority, that it is workable. It would be more efficient if
we would remove the uncertainty around carbon and enact a
policy that would provide more certainty and more efficiency in
this transition.
Mr. Rush. Again, commissioner, how will EPA's proposed rule
affect investment in renewable energy and energy efficiency
resources?
Mr. Norris. It is a much-needed signal to both renewable
energy and other technologies that can provide demand side
management energy efficiency and new technologies for
generation, that, I think, there is a great hunger, an appetite
for investing in new clean air energy technologies. This will
help spur more investment which will create more technology
opportunities for us to make this an efficient transition.
Mr. Rush. What about nuclear power? With the low price of
natural gas, some nuclear power plants are struggling
financially. How could the proposed rule help keep those
nuclear plants running?
Mr. Norris. Well, again, I think it provides a much-needed
signal to the value of nuclear plants because they are
noncarbon emitting. It has been a real concern of mine that we
maintain our nuclear fleet because it is noncarbon emitting and
a solid base load source of generation. So I think the EPA rule
will assist in providing a better market, if you will, for
nuclear resources.
Mr. Rush. Yes. Again, commissioner, what do you think about
whether industry and regulators can rise to the challenge and
achieve the carbon reduction set out in the Clean Power Plan
without sacrificing electric reliability?
Mr. Norris. I am sorry?
Mr. Rush. Without sacrificing electric reliability.
Mr. Norris. Without jeopardizing electric reliability?
Mr. Rush. Sacrificing.
Mr. Norris. Yes, I think, as I said, you are not going to
prove it is or isn't going to work because it is still in
development. The key thing going forward is the communication
and cooperation between the EPA, FERC, NERC and all the other
entities that we--everyone wants to keep the lights on,
including the EPA. And so what it is going to take is just a
continuous effort going foward to make sure reliability needs
are addressed if and when they occur.
Mr. Rush. Chairman LaFleur, do you agree?
Ms. LaFleur. I certainly agree that it is going to take a
ongoing effort of communication to identify issues that
specific states or regions might be having. As with all, I
believe, and I testified on MATS before this committee, I said
the two things you need for change are flexibility and
coordination and that is even more true in this rule. We need
coordination to make sure the State plans work and protect
reliability.
Mr. Rush. Commissioner Bay, what are your thoughts? Do you
agree?
Mr. Bay. I think that there could be challenges.
Mr. Rush. Turn your mike on, please.
Mr. Bay. I am sorry.
I think that there could be challenges, but I think that
the challenges are manageable. I would note, for example, that
with the 2005 baseline that the EPA used, there has already
been a 15 percent reduction in carbon emissions from generators
so that an additional 15 percent needs to be achieved over the
next 16 years.
And even under the EPA proposal, it estimates that in 2030,
gas-fired generation will constitute more than 30 percent of
generation and coal will be more than 30 percent, as well. And
with the regulatory certainty provided by the rule, I agree
with Commissioner Norris that it will incent innovation. And
industry is amazing when they know that there is something to
be improved upon and that can result in better or more profits.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, we recognize the gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Barton for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank the commission for being here. We
rarely have all the commissioners, so it is an honor to have
each of you. I was really going to rip Mr. Clark today, but
since his two boys are in the audience, I am going to have to
give him a pass on that. But no, not really.
I have a general question that I would like each of the
commissioners to have the opportunity to answer. You don't all
have to, if you don't wish to. With this new EPA carbon rule,
would seem to me to be at variance with the FERC's stated
responsibility to provide electricity at a reasonable cost. I
don't buy the argument that you can close all these power
plants and you are going to miraculously replace them with
either natural gas, nuclear power or this clean coal technology
which really only exists in the laboratory. It hasn't been
proven in a commercial scaled-up facility yet.
So, my general question is, can the FERC have any impact to
guarantee that we continue to provide electricity at a
reasonable cost to the consumer if this rule goes forward?
Ms. LaFleur. Well, thank you, Mr. Congressman.
I do not think the rule itself is inconsistent with FERC's
responsibilities. As I see it, the EPA makes environmental
rules and those become the baseline within which the system is
planned, and we have to make certain that within those rules
the rates are done in a just and reasonable way and that we
will be paying attention to that as well as paying attention to
reliability.
I think all transitions cost money and so the transition to
a new resource mix, whether it is because of the environment or
because of anything else, to build pipelines, to build
transmission is going to cost money. The long run costs are
really unknown. They depend on the relative cost of the fuel,
and we also don't know the long run cost of leaving climate
change unattended to, which is not free. So, but we will be
working to make sure that the transition costs of the
pipelines, the transmission, the things we regulate are done in
a reasonable way.
Mr. Moeller. Congressman Barton, I agree with Acting Chair
LaFleur about we have to react to an environmental rule. I
suppose there is a possibility that EPA could put some kind of
a safety valve in from an economics perspective. That is not in
the rule right now, but that is a potential. Even they admit
that this is going to cost consumers money and raise rates.
The question is how do we transition? And my concern is do
we have the right market signals to actually allow for these
types of investments, particularly in pipelines, if we are
going to expand the gas fleet so much.
Mr. Norris. Thank you, Congressman. First of all I agree
with you, there are no miracles here, but we are talking about
accounting for all the costs including the external costs. I do
have great faith in America's technology innovation. The costs
for renewable energy are coming down dramatically in this
country. Technologies for a demand site management and energy
efficiency are going up dramatically in terms of their
capability.
And finally, the fuel costs for renewable energy is zero.
We know that is a constant going forward. That gives me great
hope that we can make this transition in a very manageable way
for the economy. In fact, a very positive way for the economy
because of the world wide market that is out there for clean
energy technologies.
Mr. Clark. Congressman, as I indicated in my testimony,
FERC has allowed costs that are legally incurred by a business
to be bid into the markets themselves. So to the degree that it
is just bidding in costs that are otherwise legally incurred,
that may not directly implicate FERC markets from a
jurisdiction standpoint.
There is potentially though one, what I referred to as a
potential jurisdictional train wreck between EPA and FERC, and
it would be this; if EPA through the Clean Air Act required
utilities to go down the path of environmental dispatches,
we've talked about, and depart from economic dispatch, that
could potentially be challenging for FERC in this way.
Our authority comes not through the Clean Air Act, but
through the Federal Power Act, which requires just and
reasonable rates and non-discriminatory rates. We have always
judged that by economic dispatch. So to depart from economic
dispatch and move to something else could potentially be
challenging for the Commission, I think.
Mr. Bay. Congressman Barton, I think you raised an
important issue, and certainly FERC under the Federal Power Act
has to do its best to help ensure that rates remain just and
reasonable. I think the commission has taken some actions to
examine price formation in the energy markets as well as in the
capacity markets that could be very helpful in addressing the
issue that you raise.
Mr. Barton. My time is expired, Mr. Chairman.
I want to just make a statement real quickly. In 2005 the
then chairman of the FERC, Chairman Keliher, complained to me
that FERC didn't have the authority to enforce some of its
rules, and we gave the FERC some additional authority. We
changed the penalty structure.
That authority has been used in a way that many people
think has not been normal due process, so I hope to work with
the subcommittee in the next Congress to put in a reform
package to provide more transparency and more of a balanced
playing field on some of the things that, some of these
investigations that FERC has been engaged in, in the last 4 or
5 years.
With that I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The world's leading scientists have repeatedly confirmed
that climate change is already happening. It is caused by human
carbon pollution and will get much worse if we do not act. So,
this is a question for all the commissioners. Do any of you
believe that there is no need to act on climate change? If any
of you believe there is no need to act on climate changes,
raise your hand, and I will call on you. Otherwise, I have
other questions.
So seeing no one jumping to that bait, it sounds like all
of you believe that there is some need to deal with climate
change. Just this morning the President's Council of Economic
Advisors released a new report on the cost of inaction on
climate change. They estimate that just one degree celsius
additional warming could cost the U.S. economy $150 billion per
year. It is getting harder and harder to deny the imperative of
action, and we cannot make meaningful progress on climate
change without controlling carbon pollution from our largest
source, power plants. Several of you discuss in your written
testimony the ongoing transition in the power sector as natural
gas, renewables and energy efficiency are playing larger roles
in meeting our power needs.
Chairman LaFleur, what is driving this shift?
Ms. LaFleur. Thank you for the question, Congressman
Waxman. I actually think the biggest driver of change is the
abundance of domestic natural gas. Up in New England where we
have heard about the challenges of pipelines, there are coal
plants that have been under attack by the environmental
community for 20 years.
Mr. Waxman. Natural gas is a driving force.
Ms. LaFleur. And second is, as has been mentioned, the new
renewable technologies and the technological improvements and
policy support.
Mr. Waxman. The new renewable portfolio standards, and how
about improvements in renewable technologies?
Ms. LaFleur. Yes.
Mr. Waxman. And new environmental regulations?
Ms. LaFleur. Yes, that is the third.
Mr. Waxman. So environmental standards play a role, but we
would be facing a shift in the power sector even without these
regulations that EPA is proposing.
Commissioner Norris, how do FERC and other involved
entities such as regional transmission organizations and State
public utilities commissions work to ensure reliability in our
power system? Do you try to ensure that generation and
transmission infrastructure remain frozen in time, or do you
work to ensure that as inevitable changes occur, the impacts on
reliability are addressed?
Mr. Norris. The states and RTOs are empowered with that
responsibility now and no reason why they would not continue to
be empowered with that responsibility, to choose their means,
set the reserve margin and choose their means for meeting the
adequate resources in the way that best fits their State and
their economy. I see no reason that it change.
Mr. Waxman. Chairman LaFleur and Commissioner Bay, do you
agree that the goal for FERC is not to stop change, but to
ensure that the system responds appropriately as changes occur?
Ms. LaFleur. Yes, I think we have to adapt the part of the
system that we regulate as new environmental regulations occur.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Bay?
Mr. Bay. I agree with that as well.
Mr. Waxman. Now opponents of the Clean Power Plan claim
that it is a complete departure from how the power sector has
regulated and will threaten grid reliability.
Commissioner Norris, is this proposal a sea change from
everything that has come before, or does the plan build on
regulatory structures already in place and trends that are
already occurring?
Mr. Norris. Referring to the proposed EPA plan as the
change?
Mr. Waxman. Yes, EPA plan.
Mr. Norris. No. Like I said, it is a gradual transition
that is already occurring. We are already not building coal
plants because the science is not changing. We are already
having, as Commissioner LaFleur said, the advent of gas coming
that is impacting the system, that is as a result of
technology, the fracking technology, so science and technology
is driving this change, not EPA.
Mr. Waxman. State PUCs, RTOs, and ISOs already regulate
electricity markets and, along with FERC and NERC, work to
assure reliability. The power sector has dealt with many
environmental regulations in the past, most recently the
Mercury and Air Toxic Standards, and has maintained
reliability. The shift to cleaner electricity is already
underway. The Clean Power Plan will accelerate these changes
and may pose greater challenges, but they are challenges that
we already must and will address. I would assume you agree with
that, Mr. Norris?
Mr. Norris. Do I agree that we can maintain reliability
through this transition?
Mr. Waxman. Yes.
Mr. Norris. Yes----
Mr. Waxman. Chairman LaFleur, and Commissioner Bay, what do
you think? EPA's Clean Power Plan is eminently, in my opinion,
reasonable and quite modest proposal. It provides tremendous
flexibility and ample time to the states and industry to reduce
carbon pollution in the least burdensome way possible.
Do you, as Commissioner Norris stated, the question is not
whether we reduce carbon pollution, but how, and EPA has an
answer embodied in the Clean Power Plan, and that is what they
are proposing as a start. So rather than ask that as a
question, I want to make that comment.
And, Mr. Chairman, one last thing. The EPA is acting under
the Clean Air Act which was adopted by the Congress. They are
acting under decisions by the U.S. Supreme Court. There have
been five to four decisions that I have not liked, and there
have been five to four decisions that you haven't liked, but
Supreme Court decisions are the law of the land.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for today's
hearing, and also to the commissioners for being with us today.
It is great to have you all here before us.
And if I could, I would like to start with Commissioner
Clark if I may. And what are the implications of the State
energy laws and regulations if they are included as part of an
EPA-approved State implementation plan to comply with the Clean
Power Plan?
And I just wondered if that could tie into your testimony,
where you had mentioned that when you are looking at some of
the, when this relationship is occurring, that States might get
into a mother-may-I relationship with the EPA that never
existed before. Would that tie into that?
Mr. Clark. Congressman, it does. The concern that I raised
is I do think there is a risk that this is a rather dramatic
change jurisdictionally, and States will at least need to
consider it as they decide whether they are going to go down
the path of a State compliance plan. The reason I say that is
in the past, EPA might just be regulating emission sources
either by source or a fleet, but not the entire regulatory
regime in an integrated resource plan standpoint that a State
might have.
So to the degree that a State goes down the path of
creating effectively a carbon integrated resource plan, they
will be putting into that things that have traditionally been
set by State legislatures, renewable portfolio standards,
building codes, energy efficiency standards, in addition to
traditional sort of power plant decisions.
To the degree that then becomes blessed by EPA and
submitted and approved by EPA, it is a much different
jurisdictional relationship than has existed before because if
a State goes back and decides maybe the RPS should be 25
percent instead of 30 percent, or maybe our State building
codes should be adjusted because something isn't working, in
many ways it will have lost that opportunity because it will
have become a part of a Federally-approved plan and would then
need to seek approval from the EPA, depending on how it is
structured to----
Mr. Latta. Let me follow up. What would that do to costs in
those States, especially when you are dealing with a district
like mine that has 60,000 manufacturing jobs, and is that going
to drive costs up? Is there going to be less flexibility that a
State could do in the future? What would happen out there?
Mr. Clark. Congressman, again, I think it is a bit too
early to tell specifically because we don't know what the
compliance plans would look like or what a Federal compliance
plan would look like. I would just point to the trend lines
which is in those States that have moved more aggressively and
have been first movers on some of these issues, the trend line
has been toward an increasing electric rate environment.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Chairman LaFleur, if I could turn to you, recently I have
been hearing that in a number of States in competitive markets,
electricity generators and electric distribution companies are
seeking State public utility commission approval for the
purchase power agreements or the PPAs, as a means to guarantee
a contract between the power provider and the regulated utility
company.
States are considering these because they are concerned
about the impacts to their retail customers if those plants
were to shut down. So the question is, if capacity markets were
ensuring reliability and preserving essential base load
capacity, then it seems that these PPAs would not be necessary.
Are these actions by the State an indication of the market
inadequacies out there?
Ms. LaFleur. Well, right now the capacity markets are under
a lot of pressure because of all the changes in resource mix,
and something that we are looking at very hard is how we make
sure the capacity markets properly compensate all the
increments that are needed for reliability, and I think that
will continue to be important, but there will still be a role
for the States which regulate generation within their own
authority.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask you, when you say that they might be
under pressure out there, what is causing the pressure out
there in the capacity markets?
Ms. LaFleur. I think some of the factors I already said.
The first is the gas price being very low has really driven
down the marginal revenues, so it is hard for some of the coal
and nuclear units to recover their costs in the market and
other resource changes as well.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
Mr. Moeller, if I could turn to you, in your testimony you
were talking about what could be happening out there is we
could have higher costs involved out there. When you look at
those higher costs again when you look at the States out there
like the State of Ohio that is 70 percent generated by coal
right now, if you look in that crystal ball down the road, what
would happen to States like Ohio for costs when you look at
what is happening with the EPA right now?
Mr. Moeller. I wouldn't want to predict how much rates
would go up, but, again, even EPA admits that rates will be
going up based on this rule. It would depend a lot on how they
chose to come up with their State implementation plan. They
could go the energy efficiency route, but that gets more and
more expensive as you get more efficiency out of the system.
Transition to gas would probably be expensive because a lot
of those coal units are relatively low cost. There are other
ways to perhaps get there, but, again, this will result in
higher rates, which I don't think is denied by anybody.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman. I see my time is expired and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well I thank the chairman for holding the
hearing and the commissioners for your testimony. I
congratulate Mr. Bay on your confirmation.
Mr. Moeller, you had an interesting discussion of the
pipeline challenge in New England because I assume it is from
return on investment concerns of investors, the pipelines
wouldn't be fully utilized. What would improve that financial
barrier situation?
Mr. Moeller. Well, traditionally the pipelines have been
paid for by the local distribution companies with 20 and 30
year contracts. They are the ones selling gas at retail. The
new customer base is power plants, and in that market power
plants don't know on a daily basis whether they are going to be
called or not. They bid in. Sometimes they are taken. Sometimes
they are not.
The pipes are basically full in New England. Almost
everybody agrees that we need more pipe in New England, but how
do you finance it under a new model? There are three proposals
out there, one from the governors, one from the investor-owned
utilities, and a recent one from a municipal group and we are
hoping that part of this discussion can lead to a solution, but
it is a concern we don't want replicated in other markets.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Another question. You mentioned your
concern about EPA not having the capability to do the granular
analysis needed. I would assume the EPA does have that
capability, so basically would you reiterate that you don't
think they have that capability?
Mr. Moeller. Well in my opinion, I don't expect them to
know electric markets like we do, just like we wouldn't know
the details of Clean Air Act either. That is not really their
job, but that is why I think we need a more formal relationship
because we have the expertise. NERC has the expertise. The
people that run the markets do and it is really drilling down
into some very detailed engineering analysis, and it can be
done.
Mr. McNerney. Well, you and other of the commissioners
mentioned that you think one of the requirements for success of
the rule, and I think it is cute that it is called the rule, is
that you need open and transparent relationship between
yourselves and the EPA and also the DOE. How can we achieve
that, Chairwoman LaFleur? How can we achieve that transparency?
Ms. LaFleur. Well, I agree that we need an open and ongoing
relationship with the EPA. I think the model that we adopted on
the Mercury and Air Toxics Rule where we have regular monthly
staff calls with the EPA, as well as meetings at the
Commissioner level, is one we should follow here. I think we
will know much more where the challenges are and what we need
to do once the State implementation plans are done.
Mr. McNerney. Do you need a higher authority to make that
transparency happen?
Ms. LaFleur. Well, I always love more authority, but I
think we have the ability to be transparent within our existing
jurisdiction.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Waxman established that each of you feel
there is a need for reduce carbon emissions. What do each of
you feel, briefly if you would, would be the most efficient way
to achieve that, the rule or some other method?
Ms. LaFleur. Well, I agree with Commissioner Norris that
from the standpoint of reducing a pollutant most effectively, a
nationwide cap and trade or some sort of nationwide system
would probably be the most efficient. Given the structure of
the Clean Air Act that we have, I think the EPA did a good job
building in flexibility to use the authority they have.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Moeller?
Mr. Moeller. Well, because carbon is ubiquitous in its
concentration throughout the world, we have got to solve this
on a worldwide basis, and I really think we should do it
through market forces. As I mentioned in my testimony, getting
prices more accurate at the wholesale and retail level
throughout the world. Energy is subsidized I think a trillion
dollars a year. Those are the kind of things that if we send
the right pricing signals, people will use their energy more
efficiently.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Norris. Thanks. I partially agree with Mr. Moeller.
Sending the right price signal is right, but you have got to
get the external cost in that price. I think the most efficient
way to do that personally is a carbon tax. I am not opposed to
a cap and trade, but it takes a lot more pages for you all to
write, and a carbon tax would be a lot simpler.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Clark?
Mr. Clark. Congressman, from my standpoint, research and
development is really the key in future energy technologies,
and I am a supporter of government-supported research and
development into those new technologies, the idea being that if
new sources of energy can be developed in a way that no Nation
or no developer would want to do anything but because it is
both the cleanest and the most cost effective, then that solves
both answers for you, and you don't have to worry about as much
government intervention into the markets themselves because on
its own----
Mr. McNerney. So that would take Federal or some higher
source of funding for that research?
Mr. Clark. There can be all sorts of ways of developing
those research dollars, yes.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Bay?
Mr. Bay. At this point 14 seconds or less, I would say
innovation. I would say research and development. And I would
say markets.
Mr. Whitfield. We are always willing to talk about those
issues.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair, and welcome to our witnesses.
A special welcome to you, Dr. Bay, as our next chairman.
Welcome.
As you all know, our grid faces many challenges. You have
to coordinate gas with electric power, and sometimes that can
be difficult. Wind is plentiful but not at times when we need
it, at times we don't need it. Subsidies distort the market and
help shutter nuclear power plants, reliable nuclear power
plants, And, as we have heard today, EPA adds to those
challenges.
My first question is for the entire panel. In the Mercury
Rule, the EPA included a way to pause the rule if reliability
is threatened. It is called, as you all know, a relief valve.
As you all know, too, most of America's grid is run by
impartial groups called ISOs. Now, the ISOs are asking EPA to
include a reliability relief valve in the carbon rule. Yes or
no, do you all agree that this could be a valuable part of the
final rule?
Commissioner LaFleur.
Ms. LaFleur. I don't think it could be designed by the
reliability safety valve in MATS, but I think there should be a
way to consider reliability as a last resort if there is an
issue.
Mr. Moeller. I think some kind of a safety value would be
very helpful.
Mr. Olson. Commissioner Norris?
Mr. Norris. I apologize. I was not very clear on capturing
the question, but if it is a safety valve, I am for safety
valves.
Mr. Olson. Yes. Safety valves, there is one for
reliability. And so they want something for a reliability rule
in the Carbon rule, some sort of safety valve. It is out there
for the ISOs. ISOs want to make sure they have that thing. It
is part of the Mercury rule. It has been done with mercury.
They just want to make sure that, hey, that is a good idea. Can
we have that as well, just a safety valve for reliability as
opposed to mercury.
Mr. Norris. Reliability is paramount, and we should do
whatever we can to maintain reliability but not use a safety
valve to empower people to push back what they are trying to
achieve.
Mr. Olson. Commissioner Clark?
Mr. Clark. Congressman, yes, and I think it needs to be one
that is done by an independent third party so that they can
have greater visibility into the entire grid itself so as the
State and regional plans are stitched together, someone
independently is able to look at how they all work together and
whether it will impact reliability.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Bay?
Mr. Bay. Congressman Olson, I certainly think it is an idea
worth considering.
Mr. Olson. OK, thank you.
My second question is for you, Commissioner Moeller. When
power plants close we focus on the number of megawatts lost,
but large power plants like coal and natural gas just don't
provide bulk power. They also protect the grid with what is
called ancillary services.
Unlike wind and solar, they can ramp up or ramp down
immediately if needed. They can keep their power balanced at 60
hertz, right there 60 hertz, not 59.99 or 60.001. It is more
important than reliability having that power, it is having the
right power. And so my question is, are these EPA rules closing
down the most important kinds of power on the grid, ones driven
by coal and natural gas?
Mr. Moeller. Well, it is very location-specific,
Congressman. I can think of a big power plant in Montana that
provides voltage support, a lot of power. If you were to take
that out of the grid, it would have big impacts on the rest of
the northwest system, and I am sure that that is the case in
low pockets throughout the country.
And that is why I think drilling down into the granular
nature of the reliability of closing plants is necessary, and
we can take EPA's chart. They have projected which plants are
going to be shut down, so the reliability study shouldn't be
that difficult.
Mr. Olson. Yes, so one further question. As EPA's second
pillar of the carbon rules calls for a massive increase in
power from natural gas, but they don't seem to realize that
coordinating natural gas and electric power is a very delicate
balance, and even worse now, the environmental groups are
attacking FERC Using Greenhouse Gas Rule to try to turn around
and stop FERC from approving natural gas pipelines. You can't
have natural gas without the pipelines.
And so my question is, do you think EPA understands how
difficult some of these assumptions are? Are they realistic?
That is for you, Mr. Moeller.
Mr. Moeller. I don't think they fully appreciate the
challenges we have with getting more pipeline infrastructure.
At least I haven't sensed that they do, because as I noted in
my testimony, this set of new consumers of pipelines as power
plants, not the traditional ones, local distribution companies
that have provided the financing through long-term contracts,
and we have got to address that and solve that issue or else
the assumptions on pipeline expansion, I think, will be faulty.
Mr. Olson. My time I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our commissioners, both new and old, for
testifying today.
Reliability of transmission electricity is the backbone of
our economy. Our industrial, commercial, and residential
customers never need to question whether the power they need
will be delivered when they need it. It is FERC's
responsibility to maintain the reliability of the grid and FERC
has quite a few other responsibilities, including pipelines,
LNG facilities, and oil pipeline rates, to name a few.
Chair LaFleur, in your testimony you gave EPA's Mercury and
Air Toxic Standards, or MATS, you state that EPA sought the
advice of FERC upon the issuance. You stated that FERC issued a
policy statement on potential violations MATS may induce based
on FERC's reliability standard. Did the EPA respond to that, to
FERC, and what you submitted?
Ms. LaFleur. Yes, Congressman Green. The EPA, in fact, we
based our policy statement on a policy guidance memo they put
out that indicated that power plants could seek a fifth year to
comply with the advice of FERC and other reliability experts.
Thus far we are just in the fourth year, so we haven't had any
fifth year applications, but we anticipate a few.
Mr. Green. Well, Congressman Olson and I actually have
passed a bill through the House that doesn't deal with FERC but
deals with EPA and the Department of Energy, H.R. 271, that
deals with the conflict that exists between EPA and the
Department of Energy. That bill passed the House, and it may
emerge sometime in a different form over in the Senate, but it
also puts reliability as the most important.
Because again, I am from Texas, and Houston right now where
it was 99 degrees when I left last week, and so reliability is
important for our air conditioning to run in the summer just
like it is for heating in the north in the winter.
Given the increasing complexity of EPA's regulations, does
FERC anticipate additional conflicts with reliability?
Ms. LaFleur. I believe it is our responsibility to make
sure that reliability is sustained. I think we will know much
more when we see the different State plans, but there will
undoubtedly be issues to work through as we work through the
transformation, that is what we will do.
Mr. Green. You also discussed EPA's proposal and gas
pipeline adequacy in your testimony, stating FERC emphasized
capacity factors and existing constraints. Do you believe EPA
adequately incorporated FERC's input?
Ms. LaFleur. I think EPA referenced in the rule the
considerable need for new pipeline capacity to facilitate the
Clean Power Plan, but it is going to be up to us to help get
that pipeline capacity in the ground.
Mr. Green. OK. Do you anticipate FERC's handling increased
permitting requests for natural gas pipelines if States choose
the EPA's regional policy option, which since FERC is a
national agency.
Ms. LaFleur. I think our pipeline work will continue to
grow for a number of reasons, yes.
Mr. Green. OK.
Director Bay, until you are at least sworn in, as Director
of Enforcement in your office and responsible for violations
and inquiries in market manipulation, however unlike other
Federal agencies, FERC does not have an office of compliance or
any other resource or regulated community to address questions
and concerns. Mr. Bay, do you believe that the office of
compliance would benefit the regulating community, someone to
just call and say we are looking at this option before it ends
up in enforcement action?
Mr. Bay. We actually tried to do that, Congressman Green.
There is a no action letter process whereby an entity can
submit its question to FERC for consideration by staff on
whether or not there would be a violation if the entity engages
in a certain form of conduct.
In addition, we have a help line that is staffed to answer
questions from the regulated community. And certainly we are
often speakers at conferences in which we----
Mr. Green. OK. I only have about 40 seconds left, but I am
concerned that maybe we could use some more transparency on the
enforcement and maybe an additional office of compliance.
Let me get to my last question. Mr. Clark, EPA's rule seems
to assume transmission grade will not require much, if any,
changes as a result of retirements, decreased margins, or
renewable sources whether they be large or small. In different
regions of the country, what entities are responsible for
building and maintaining new and existing transmission, and
what challenges are they going to face under this new EPA
model?
Mr. Clark. Congressman, there can be different entities in
different parts of the country, either incumbent utilities or
competitive utilities that are attempting to get into the
transition business. Who plans that and makes the calls differs
substantially in different parts of the country, and in more
regulated, less restructured regions of the country, like the
southeast and most of the west, it tends to be still
traditional monopoly and vertically integrated utility
companies regulated by States. In more market regions of the
country, it tends to be probably an ISO or an RTO.
Mr. Green. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know I have run out of time.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time the chair recognizes the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. LaFleur, if I understood your testimony earlier, and I
wrote down part of it but I don't want to put words in your
mouth, given the structure of the Clean Air Act that we have,
the EPA I think you said did a good job or something similar to
that. I got it to that point and then I couldn't write fast
enough. Is that an accurate statement of your opinion?
Ms. LaFleur. That is basically what I said. The question
was what's the most efficient way to regulate carbon, and given
the authority they have----
Mr. Griffith. Yes, ma'am. That wasn't my question. My
question is, is that a statement of your opinion that the
structure of the Clean Air Act that we have, under the
structure that we currently have, the EPA did a good job in
coming up with these regulations?
Ms. LaFleur. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. And so then I would ask you to reconcile for
me when you take a look at Section 111 of the Clean Air Act
where in Section D it says, the Administration shall prescribe
regulations which shall establish a procedure under which each
State shall submit to the administrator a plan which
establishes standards of performance for the existing source
for any air pollution for which air quality criteria have not
been issued or which is not included on a list published under
Section 108 A, and the critical part, or emitted from a source
category which is regulated under Section 112 or 112 B.
And how do you reconcile that with the fact that electric
generation units are currently regulated under 112, and
therefore the EPA does not appear to have authority under the
Clean Air Act to propose the regulations which they have
enacted, and what they are relying on is a scrivener's error
that took place in the redraft in, I believe, 1990, but in a
case which I would cite for you all to go back and look at with
your lawyers, in a case New Jersey v. EPA 517 F.3d 574, 2008,
it appears that the EPA acknowledged that they didn't have this
authority.
And the court ruled accordingly in view of the plain text
in structure of Section 112, we grant the petitions and vacate
the delisting rule, which was a previous lawsuit. This requires
vacation of camera regulations of both new and existing EGUs,
electric generation units. EPA promulgated the camera
regulations for existing EGUs under Section 111(d), but under
EPA's own interpretation of the Section, it cannot be used to
regulate sources listed under Section 112.
So it is not just my reading, but apparently the EPA in a
court case made that same reading, and the EPA thus concedes
that if EGUs remained listed under Section 112, as we hold they
do, then camera regulations for existing sources must fail. So
it would appear that the EPA is reaching way out, and under the
existing law I would submit they don't have the authority and
that they are asking for litigation.
Doesn't that make your job harder in trying to figure out
where you are going to go when the EPA is stretching the law so
far that they disagree currently with the decision of the court
that they conceded was the correct reading of the law as late
as 2008? Yes or no.
Ms. LaFleur. The legality will be decided by the courts,
but we are going to do our job to try to keep the lights on in
the meantime.
Mr. Griffith. And I appreciate that you all are going to
try to keep the lights on, and that brings us to this whole
pipeline issue and I worry about the EPA and folks filing
lawsuits on trying to lay down new pipeline to get it to the
power sources, and all of a sudden we have EPA regulations
coming in and saying to us, wait a minute, wait a minute, you
can't put the pipeline there, or we have lawsuits that last
longer.
And, Mr. Norris, you said earlier you were confident in the
American innovations and so forth, and I am too. The problem is
the EPA apparently is so confident they believe that we can get
it done in 2 years. We know from the Department of Energy, and
I sometimes wish that all of you all would sit down and talk on
a regular basis. The Department of Energy has told us the new
clean coal technology will not be available for approximately
10 years even if what we are working on now works, and I think
there are some really exciting things. I love chemical looping,
but we are looking at 10 years. I think with some money we
might be able to shorten it to 7 years.
But under these proposed regulations, assuming that they go
into effect, the States have to come up with their plan. Even
though they have 10 years to hit their target, their plan has
to be completed with one year. That doesn't seem very
reasonable to me. Do you believe that States really can come up
with a plan not knowing where the pipelines are going to be,
not knowing what technology is going to be available that can
hit all of these very rigorous standards, come up with the plan
now for 10 years later? Yes or no. Thank you.
Mr. Moeller. I do.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you. You do.
Well, we only have 5 minutes, so I got to hurry to get it
all in. I got more than I can handle here.
Somebody said earlier it is not the EPA regulations that
are putting the coal power plants out of business; it is the
price of natural gas. The problem is that coal and natural gas
compete about even at $4 a unit, and for most of this year, it
is true in the last week or so it has dropped back down under
$4, but for most of 2014, the natural gas price has been over
$4.
And so if it is not the price, I would submit to you all it
must be EPA regulations which are in fact killing jobs across
this country, and we are doing it at a time when this country
can't afford it. The people in my district can't afford it. The
consumers are the families of middle class America. We are the
ones being hurt. It is great to have all these lofty ideas, but
I don't see it working, and I fear that we are going to have
rolling brownouts in the future, and I fear that you all are
going to have a really tough job because of these EPA
regulations.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I see my time is up, and I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the gentlelady from
California, Ms. Capps, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to all of the
commissioners, thank you for your testimony today.
Despite what some have argued, it is clear to me that EPA
engaged in unprecedented outreach in developing its Clean Power
Plan. EPA met with public utility commissioners, grid
operators, and utilities of all types among many others.
Chairwoman LaFleur, to emphasize it for the record, I would
like to ask you about EPA's outreach to you and to FERC staff.
In your written response to questions posed by the majority,
you indicated that FERC staff met with EPA staff on several
occasions while the proposal was being developed. Is that
correct?
Ms. LaFleur. Yes, it is, Congresswoman Capps.
Mrs. Capps. And during these conversations, did FERC have
an opportunity to flag issues that you all believed that EPA
should be considering while developing their proposal?
Ms. LaFleur. Yes.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
As far as you know, did anyone at FERC tell EPA that the
proposal would significantly undermine reliability?
Ms. LaFleur. That was not the sum of our advice. As I said
in my testimony, our staff really emphasized that the pipeline
and transmissions would need to be there to facilitate the
plan, that that was a key driver as well as a need for regional
cooperation.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
Another topic. One of the written questions from the
majority asked whether FERC prepared the resource adequacy and
reliability analysis that EPA released with the proposed rule.
Would FERC normally prepare the supporting documents for
another agency's rulemaking?
Ms. LaFleur. Not to my knowledge. I think that was prepared
at EPA.
Mrs. Capps. So there is nothing unusual about EPA
conducting its own supporting technical analysis for a proposed
rule?
Ms. LaFleur. I honestly don't know what their normal
practice is, but they did not come to us for that.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
And again moving on, we have heard arguments that FERC
should immediately complete an independent reliability
assessment of EPA's proposal. Chairwoman, in your testimony you
indicated you don't think it makes sense for FERC to prepare
such an analysis at this time. Why is that?
Ms. LaFleur. First of all, the rule is just in draft, but
even if the rule were final, the way it is structured, there is
49 different States, have to come up with plans using four
different building blocks, and some of them will do it on a
State level, some regional, so there would be so many
combinations and permutations we would need to go through, I
think it would be more productive for us to focus on doing our
jobs of getting the infrastructure built and then zero in if
there are issues in a State.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
Again moving on, our power sector is already transitioning
towards energy efficiency and renewable energy, and EPA's Clean
Power Plan will accelerate that transition. That is my summary
of it. If regulators in industry do the necessary planning and
maintain focus on implementing the Rules targets, is this
transition manageable, and can you elaborate on that a bit?
Ms. LaFleur. I think on balance it should be manageable. As
I said, I think there is a lot of infrastructure we need to get
built, and we need to have a process if there are specific
issues. But from what I hear, many of the States are already
well situated.
Mrs. Capps. Thank you.
You know, Mr. Chairman, I think it is clear that EPA sought
and received FERC's input on the development of the Clean Power
Plan, and that EPA will certainly continue to seek FERC's input
as it finalizes the rule as it moves from the draft into the
final rule stage. EPA's Clean Power Plan is a critical step to
reducing carbon emissions and combatting climate change, and I
hope we can all work together in the various agencies and
Congress to ensure that these rules are as strong and as
effective as possible.
And I know I have a minute left, but I am prepared to yield
back.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentlelady yields back.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, welcome. We are actually glad to have you here, and
I missed some of the impassioned questions, but the reality is
there are people in coal countries of this nation that since
this Administration was elected there has been a war on coal.
And I always refer people to President Obama's then meeting
with the editorial board of the San Francisco Chronicle in 2008
when he said, I am just going to make it so costly to use coal,
that they will move out of the market and I think we are living
in that world. Your job is living in that world, how do we keep
the lights on.
And I also would hope that your job would be trying to make
sure there is enough base load and that we have competitive
prices because if prices go up, then the whole economy is
challenged by that. But the passion is sincere for those people
who live in coal country and have the majority of their
generation from coal-fired power plants.
Now I am from Illinois, so we have a big nuclear portfolio,
too. We are fortunate in that, but I would say nuclear power is
challenged today also.
So, Chairwoman LaFleur, I filed this question, and in your
statement you talked about the FERC staff working on the
operational grid, pipeline, transmission, regional cooperation,
and I understand the work that commission staff has done, but I
was intrigued by Commissioner Moeller's statement when he
talked about requesting a more formal role.
Commissioner Moeller, can you explain to me what that
means, and maybe that might address some of these questions
about how much time, who is reviewing, who is making decisions.
And what do you mean by a more formal role?
Mr. Moeller. Well Congressman, as Acting Chair LaFleur
mentioned there were meeting between FERC staff and EPA, but it
is kind of up to whoever heads the agency as to whether that
information is going to be disseminated.
Now, to her credit, she did. But I like these issues. They
may not be very glamorous, but they are very important in terms
of the reliability implications of transitioning this fleet in
a very short amount of time.
And so I don't want to endorse staff meetings and paperless
meetings. I would prefer a more formal open, transparent
process, where frankly we can get engineering expertise which
will often probably disagree among themselves as to the
reliability implications, and I don't think it is that hard
because EPA even gave us the list of power plants that they
project to shut down. So the information is out there, courtesy
of EPA.
Mr. Shimkus. So in that statement, and not trying to sow
discord, but it is your opinion that there hasn't been an open,
transparent system?
Mr. Moeller. I was never invited by EPA to either review
the proposal or comment on it. It was done strictly----
Mr. Shimkus. Let me ask to all the commissioners here and
the acting Commissioner, was anybody else invited to any of
these meetings with the EPA? Obviously the commission, the
staff is yours, but----
Ms. LaFleur. There are two different things going on. In
the interagency review process, we were under strict
confidentiality requirements about Xeroxing and releasing
information, although I did offer the excerpts to all of my
commissioner colleagues. Now that the rule is out, we can have
all the open meetings we want.
Mr. Shimkus. And I only have a minute left. So I know
Commissioner Moeller, you weren't. Commissioner Norris, were
you involved in any of this prior?
Mr. Norris. Well, I was involved----
Mr. Shimkus. Or Commissioner Clark?
Mr. Clark. No.
Mr. Shimkus. Commissioner--you weren't around yet. So
welcome, I guess I should say.
And I will just end on this, again we appreciate it. You
all know where we stand. I talk to a lot of people in the
generating sector, and I was involved with public policy that
moved us to competitive generating facilities instead of a, in
regulated markets. I think there is now a question under this
new regime of is it better for reliability, do you go back to
regulated markets? How are merchant facilities going to
survive?
Commissioner Clark, you are shaking your head. Do you want
to comment real quick, and then I will end on that, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Clark. Congressman, you raise an intriguing point, and
one that I have thought of from time to time, which is there is
the potential in some restructured markets to have, to the
degree that you are requiring a State-led basically integrated
resource plan to be put on top of the market construct, that it
is a form of almost soft re-regulation in some of those markets
that had traditionally been trending in a much different way in
a restructured environment.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I recognize the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Doyle, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Doyle. I thank my friend.
Commissioners, thank you and welcome. You have provided a
great deal of insight and thought, and your responses to the
majority's written questions were certainly exhaustive.
We are embarking on a fundamental shift in our energy
sector, and I share the goal of reducing emissions of
greenhouse gasses that are contributing to climate change, but
we have to do it in a way that is prudent. Traditional energy
sources, nuclear, coal, they are still going to play a critical
role in ensuring reliability, and as we move forward toward
supporting cleaner types of energy, we have to make sure we
have the capability and the infrastructure to support them. The
most recent proposed rule from the EPA on existing power plants
is going to force a sectorship with a fairly expedited time
frame, and the impact is real, particularly in my home State of
Pennsylvania. So I appreciate your time today as we continue
this critical conversation.
Chairwoman LaFleur, let me ask you, as you know, the 111(d)
proposed rule includes both binding interim goals beginning in
2020 and final compliance goal in 2030. Now, if there is no
hiccups or delays or extensions, many States will have their
completed plans in place by hopefully 2017.
By 2020, my State, Pennsylvania, will have to reduce its
carbon emissions from the 2012 baseline by 28 percent. That is
just 3 years to make a 28 percent reduction. This will require
swift action from utility planners, rather than long-term
planning that could ease reliability concerns.
My question is by keeping the 2030 compliance goal in place
but allowing States to determine the appropriate interim glide
path, could EPA achieve the same carbon reduction goals while
providing utility planners the necessary timeline to avoid
reliability impacts and unnecessary stranded assets, and is
this an approach that FERC would support?
Ms. LaFleur. I would want to think more about that,
Congressman, and perhaps take it as a question for the record.
It is not something that we discussed with EPA during the
process. I do think that your State is well served--
Pennsylvania has the advantage of being well served with gas
pipelines and also being close to a region that--being in a
regional transmission organization where there might be
regional solutions that would both afford more time and more
options to the State; but, of course, it is not up to me to
make their plan.
Mr. Doyle. Let me ask all of the commissioners. A recent
Brattle study noted that looking at forward market prices and
recent 5-year cost trends, about half of merchant nuclear
plants are not profitable. This is not a future problem. This
is a problem that is staring at us right now today.
What happens to reliability if nuclear plants retire,
especially when you factor in the number of coal plants
shutting down because of EPA's MATS rule and the fact that the
remaining base load coal fleet is under the same market
pressures as nuclear? It seems to me that this is a real
problem today long before the rule could impact the grid. What
are the RTOs doing, particularly PJM in my area, to address
this problem today?
Ms. LaFleur. Well I think it would be a problem if we lost
our nuclear fleet. It is a very important part of our fleet.
PJM, as well as FERC, are looking at both the capacity markets
to make sure they properly compensate the reliability
contribution of base load plant, as well as Commissioner
Moeller referred to we are looking at price formation in the
energy markets to make sure that those plants are getting fair
market prices to support them.
Mr. Doyle. Would any other of the commissioners like to
make a comment on that?
Mr. Moeller. Congressman, your specific question about what
happens if we lose the fleet, the entire fleet would be
devastating because it is so important to our grid. Individual
plants, it really depends on the load pocket involved, and I
know that New England is struggling with the closure of Vermont
Yankee, and there are lots of ramifications of that.
But as Acting Chair LaFleur noted, both the RTOs and as a
commission, we are looking at ways to better compensate the
reliability implications of on-site fuel and trying to get the
prices right in the price formation effort, which will better
compensate those units.
Mr. Doyle. I am trying to understand when EPA says that the
rule will preserve at-risk nuclear plants, how exactly does
that work? I mean how will they preserve at-risk nuclear
plants, and how soon does that happen?
Mr. Clark. Congressman, I share your concern. I think the
answer is easier in certain regions of the country than others.
If you come from a region that still happens to be a State-
regulated monopoly, vertically integrated utility environment,
it is probably less of a concern in that those public utility
commissions can build in some of the those base costs into base
rates.
In market regions of the country though, you are exactly
right. We are struggling with that issue where there doesn't
seem to be enough revenue from the market to support some of
these, what I think most people acknowledge are very important
nuclear plants.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
I see my time is up. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Burgess, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to our
commissioners. We are really so grateful you spent the time
with us.
Mr. Moeller, let me ask you a question because you caught
my attention in your opening statement and of course you were
talking about the commission has a responsibility to promote
the reliability of the Nation's bulk power system, and then you
specifically referenced heating and cooling. We talk a lot in
this committee about public health concerns, about things. I
mean, that is a major one, isn't it? We forget about, I mean,
everyone understands that there can be cold-related deaths, but
heat-related deaths actually can be more significant, at least
in my experience.
Mr. Moeller. Absolutely. We talk about the lights staying
on, which is great, but it is really heating and cooling that
keeps people alive during extreme weather events, and
particularly in your State, it gets mighty hot.
Mr. Burgess. Well, and even in States where it is not. I
mean, we saw in France in 2003, when I forget the number, but I
think it was in excess of 10,000 deaths during a heat wave that
they had in France that they were unprepared to deal with, so
it can be substantial. The effects on public health can be
substantial.
You know, I think you point out in your testimony that the
Federal Power Act restricts the duties of the commission, the
authority to regulate interstate electricity transmission,
wholesale electricity prices, and leaves the questions of
electricity generation and intrastate distribution to the
States, but with the proposed Clean Power Plan, this separation
seems to be changed and puts the EPA in control of intrastate
electricity matters.
Is that concerning to you as commissioner of the FERC that
the EPA is claiming authority through really the regulatory
process that Congress did not grant to you as a commission
through statute?
Mr. Moeller. I think Commissioner Clark may want to
elaborate more specifically to that point. But, I try to point
out the fact that these are interstate markets, and if you
impose a State-by-State enforcement solution, that is very
challenging, particularly when you have States that, for
instance, Idaho, that consumes a lot of coal-generated power
but doesn't actually produce any within their State. The
baseline how it works now going forward, very challenging.
Mr. Burgess. Commissioner Clark?
Mr. Clark. Sure. I would just reiterate what appeared in my
presubmitted testimony, which is, just that this is a big
change potentially as States enter into these compliance plans
wherein they may be putting into the compliance plans all sorts
of integrated resource planning type mechanisms like renewable
portfolio standards and efficiency codes, as well as decisions
that their State public utility commission is making and then
seeking approval of those from the EPA.
To the degree that they later try to change that, depending
on how inflexibly that is written in their particular
compliance plan, it could cause issues where they later need to
go and seek approval from the EPA, or if they depart from that,
subject some entity in their State, either a generator, the
State itself, to either an EPA complaint in enforceability, or
even private citizens lawsuits against the plan that they have
locked themselves into. So it is a jurisdictional issue that I
think States will need to think about as they work through this
process if the rule is upheld.
Mr. Burgess. They need to think about it, but it also
strikes me that they may not have, I don't know. Are they going
to have the protections that they need in order to do their
job.
I just have to say as a father and a grandfather, I admire
the forbearance of your sons to hang with you through this. I
don't know what you promised them, but I suspect it must be
substantial.
Mr. Clark. Thank you. I have a 7-year-old that is at home
that we didn't risk this with.
Mr. Burgess. So noted.
Let me just ask you a question on, the reductions in actual
capacity, the EPA seems to assume a reduction based on
efficiency measures.
The EPA really cannot force citizens, though, on their
purchase of electricity or power, so how can the EPA rely upon
reductions in usage based upon efficiency without the ability
to mandate how much power is consumed or not consumed?
Mr. Clark. Congressman, I think what is envisioned by the
EPA's plan is that that is the sort of thing that would go into
a State compliance plan. It does raise the question about, in
my mind, who would be the entity that EPA would then enforce
that standard against?
An energy efficiency measure is not like a power plant that
EPA can go in and specifically tell to ramp down or up. If
there is something that is not being met in the State energy
efficiency goal, who would be the compliance entity that is
targeted? Would it be the State itself, the installers of the
energy efficiency? I just struggle a little bit to understand
in the context of the Clean Air Act exactly how that would be
enforced, but I appreciate the question.
Mr. Burgess. And I appreciate the very provocative answer
in the form of a question.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time the chair recognizes the
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Barrow, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barrow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to talk about
something we haven't talked about much today. To fully develop
and deploy renewable energy in some remote areas is going to
require infrastructure upgrades to get that energy from where
it can be generated to where it is going to be needed.
And I know until 2011, the rule was pretty set.
Infrastructure upgrades had to be paid for by those who were
going to benefit from them. There was a direct benefit test.
Back in 2011, you all released a regulation, it is called Order
1000, that basically proposes to broaden, to reallocate the
cost of infrastructure upgrades to allow for the greater
development of renewables in remote locations by spreading it
across a broader base, including folks who won't benefit from
it, won't consume the energy that is being produced.
Now, personally I am all for them paying the cost who get
benefits, myself. But I want to ask each of you all, and direct
this question to each of you in turn, what do you say to folks
who are skeptical about spreading the cost of infrastructure
upgrades beyond the base of those who are going to benefit
directly from it?
Ms. LaFleur. Well, Order 1000 preserved the principle that
those who benefit are the ones who should pay for transmission.
But it suggested a new type of benefit beyond reliability,
which is well understood and why you build transmission.
Economic benefits of reducing congestion, getting a cheaper
power by building transmission.
And the third was enabling States to comply with State laws
such as buying renewables, so the premise of the rule is that
if a State passes a law requiring extra set renewables, then
the transmission to facilitate compliance with that law does
benefit that State. So it is a different type of benefit but
still one that we believe the people who receive the benefit
should pay.
Mr. Barrow. Commissioner LaFleur, am I correct in
understanding, then, that a State like Georgia, which does not
mandate the purchase of renewables in a certain quantity would
not in any way be required to subsidize or contribute to the
cost of upgrades elsewhere in order to provide for the----
Ms. LaFleur. That is correct. Georgia would be part of a
region, there is a southeastern regional planning and only
Federal, State and local enacted laws and regulations would be
public policy requirements around which transmission had to be
built. So if Georgia had no renewable requirement, they
wouldn't have to build for renewable requirement.
Mr. Barrow. How about you, Commissioner Moeller, do you
agree?
Ms. LaFleur. Excuse me?
Mr. Barrow. How about you, Commissioner Moeller, do you
agree?
Mr. Moeller. There are parts of Order 1,000 I supported,
parts that I wasn't supportive of--it is in the courts now. But
generally speaking, the concept of beneficiary pays is one that
we try to embrace. The challenge with these assets is that they
are often 30-, 40- or 50-year assets and the power flows change
and so who is paying for them now, other entities can benefit.
So there is some art and there is some science in cost
allocation. It is difficult, but most importantly, we want to
get it built.
Mr. Barrow. Commissioner Norris, do you think those who pay
bills----
Mr. Norris. Yes, the board supports the principle
beneficiary pays, and I agree with both the previous
commissioners. This is not an exact science. But you get
reliability benefits, you get economic benefits, and you get
the access to renewable energy where it shows and by that plan.
I would just add to what Commissioner LaFleur said is that the
public policy only requires that that be considered in the
regional plan. It does not require that that be a part of the
plan. It only enables public policy considerations to be a part
of the process but does not require them to be in the plan.
Mr. Barrow. And what does that mean for folks who are
served by companies that don't----
Mr. Norris. That means the regional planning process has to
have in their planning process, a mechanism in which public
policy laws or requirements get on the table for consideration.
It doesn't require that they be adopted in the plan, only that
there is a process by which they get considered.
Mr. Barrow. Commissioner Clark?
Mr. Clark. I would agree that the concept of beneficiary
pays is a sound one. There have been a number of cases, Order
1,000, which I, too, have agreed with parts and disagreed with
parts, but also specific cost allocation cases that have been
taken to court, some of which I have agreed with, some of which
I have not.
I think the courts are beginning to hem in the Commission
in terms of what is considered within bounds and what is
considered without, outside of the lines. In a recent MISO
case, it determined that the Commission had made a sound
judgment in terms of beneficiary pays and I thought the court
was right. In the case of a recent PJM case; the Commission had
decided it was outside of the bounds and had not tied down that
beneficiary pays analysis enough, and I agreed with the court
in that case, as well.
Mr. Barrow. Commissioner Bay, last word.
Mr. Bay. The only thing I would add is that the 7th Circuit
has said that the cost must be roughly commensurate with the
benefits, and the commission has adopted that principle, as
well in Order 1,000, and also has said that if you don't
benefit, you don't pay.
Mr. Barrow. Thank you.
My time is up.
Mr. Whitfield. Time has expired.
At this time, recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Pitts, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Administration's Clean Power Plan that we are reviewing
here today provides four emission reduction strategies, fuel
switching from coal to natural gas is a potential component of
two of these strategies.
One advises the coal firing of coal plants with natural gas
or outright conversion to natural gas firing; the other
involves increasing the dispatch rate for natural gas combined
cycle power generation units. Pipeline companies are expanding
their infrastructure to meet demands for clean burning natural
gas, and in Lancaster County, which I represent, there is a
proposal for a new line that would run through most or some of
the most pristine farmland in the Nation.
Chairman LaFleur, I have two questions relating to this.
Since many other communities will see similar projects in the
coming years, what procedures do you have in place to make sure
environmental concerns and the rights of property owners are
given full consideration when reviewing these proposed roots
for pipelines? And secondly, do you believe the Clean Power
Plan would lead to a proliferation of new pipelines across the
country?
Ms. LaFleur. Well, thank you for the question, Mr.
Congressman.
The way our pipeline approval process works, we do a
complete review of the environmental safety and community
aspects, which includes scoping meetings, opportunities for
public comment, open houses in communities around the
pipelines. We are often asked why the process takes so long,
and it is because of all the opportunity for comment that are
fed into the process. I do believe we will have more pipelines
as a result of the greater utilization of gas, but they have to
be built with sensitivity to the concerns of the people whose
communities we are crossing.
Mr. Pitts. Commissioner Moeller, right now, some States
average a natural gas utilization rate in the single digits.
Given that the EPA assumes that an average 70 percent
utilization rate for natural gas is feasible, do you think that
many States may fall short in this goal and that many consumers
will simply be left with a larger electricity bill?
Mr. Moeller. Well, I think it would be extremely
challenging, Congressman, to reach those 70 percent levels,
generally. I will be looking forward to the comments on the
rule that talk about particularly the operational aspects of
that aspiration, and we will need to get the pipeline in place.
And the question is, does the timing of a new pipeline sync
up with the enforcement timeline?
Mr. Pitts. Commissioner LaFleur, my understanding is that
the proposed rule factors in new nuclear plants but only
factors in 6 percent of the existing nuclear plants; in other
words, if an existing nuclear plant shuts down, the impact on a
State's ability to comply is limited to 6 percent of the energy
that comes out of that plant, which doesn't seem like much of
an incentive to take actions that will value the carbon-free
energy that nuclear plants provide all day, every day.
Don't you think customers benefit from having plants that
have 18 to 24 months of fuel on site, particularly when those
plants can run at 97 percent of their capacity even during
conditions like the polar vortex or the hottest day of the
summer?
Ms. LaFleur. I think nuclear plants bring a lot of benefit
to customers, including reliability benefits, the fuel security
you mention. I don't believe that the EPA mandated what
percentage any State could or could not rely on nuclear. That
was a building block that was put out that a State could put
together. If a State wanted to rely more on nuclear, less on
something else, my understanding of the plan, it would be
allowed.
Mr. Pitts. Mr. Moeller, would you like to comment?
Mr. Moeller. Well, I have talked to a few nuclear companies
about it, and I think they are still analyzing it, but there is
one train of thought that despite EPA's intention, that the 6
percent could actually be counterproductive to nuclear. It has
to do with the calculations and replacing it with gas to meet
your baseline better. But it is certainly worthy of further
discussion. I admire EPA's attempt to try and booster the
nuclear units, but there is a train of thought that actually
could be counterproductive the way they proposed it.
Mr. Pitts. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back.
At this time, I recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Yarmuth for 5 minutes.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to all the commissioners for this discussion. I
think it has been a very thoughtful and interesting one.
I want to thank the chairman, my fellow Kentuckian, for
returning us to the days of yesteryear with the discussion of
Waxman-Markey, which, by the way, did not become law because a
Republican minority in the Senate wouldn't let it become law,
because it did have a majority of votes in the Senate after
passing the House. But when I was considering whether to vote
for that bill or not in the House, my primary concern was how
it would affect the cost to my consumers, both business and
residential.
And I talked to a lot of the businesses, all the big users
of power; they were all kind of either for it or neutral on the
bill. And then I talked to our utility company and asked them
how it would affect residential rates, and they said that they
projected that over 10 years the average residential user would
experience a rate increase of 15 percent if they did nothing
else, and so they didn't engage in any conservation practices.
And I think, understandably, this hearing is focused on the
supply side of the energy equation, but the demand side of the
energy equation is also critical to our ongoing consideration
of our energy future.
And Mr. Norris, you talked about innovation primarily on
the supply side, but there is an incredible amount of
innovation going on on the demand side, which is going to
affect supply and whether or not we have adequate energy in the
future. So when we talk about rates, rates don't necessarily
mean billing amounts, is that correct? And there are huge
amounts of the things going on out in the world of innovation
right now which could dramatically affect what the bills are
regardless of what the rates are. Is that not true and would
you elaborate on that?
Mr. Norris. Very true. When I was the chairman of our State
commission, we had a utility, MidAmerican, who hadn't raised
rates over 10 years, but I got complaints all the time about
people's utility bills going up, and it is very simple: You are
plugging more stuff in and turning more stuff on. So the demand
side is a very important part of this equation.
As I said in my written testimony, the deployment of smart
grid and smart meters are already taking place, and that
continues to be a technological innovative area where we can do
a lot more to make our consumption of electricity much more
efficient, and we should.
Mr. Yarmuth. And, I mean, I am not aware of any decent-
sized business that is not very much focused on reducing their
energy costs and doing the types of things, whether it is
turning their computers off at night or whether it is putting
solar panels on their roofs or doing any number of things to
reduce those costs.
Have you seen examples of can you gauge what the
opportunity in terms of utilization reduction on the demand
side would be because of technology, just current technology
right now? How much can an average business save by
implementing--or an average homeowner save by implementing some
of the techniques that already exist?
Do you have an estimate on that?
Mr. Norris. How much is the potential, you say, for demand
side reduction? Well, no, I don't have a number. I know that
there is still a great opportunity for putting price
responsiveness and demand response in both our retail and
wholesale system. For consumers to get the right price signal,
putting elasticity in our demand curve, I think there is a
great potential, but I don't have an exact number for you.
Mr. Yarmuth. Right. And we know that, for instance, rates
on solar panels have come down approximately 75 percent just in
a matter of 5 years or so. So it is reasonable to expect that
those kinds of technologies will make it much easier for
consumers and for businesses to keep their cost in line, their
energy costs in line, even if rates happen to rise at some
significant rate.
Is that not true, Ms. LaFleur?
Ms. LaFleur. Yes, that is definitely true. And much earlier
in my career, I used to run conservation programs for an
electric company and there are a lot of things that businesses
and residences can do, first of all, when they build in the
first place to build inefficiency, but also retrofitting,
lighting, motors, and so forth.
Mr. Yarmuth. OK. And we are actually seeing that in the
automobile segment of the energy industry, too. Innovation has
now vastly increased the amount of mileage, and unfortunately,
that is having repercussions in the Highway Trust Fund because
people are not buying as much gas and paying as much tax.
But anyway, I appreciate the discussion, and your work.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back, and that concludes today's hearing.
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I have a unanimous consent request.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. What is it?
Mr. Rush. Mr. Chairman, I would ask that the record reflect
that Commissioner Clark's two sons have been the most attentive
and intense listeners we have had before this committee in
years and years and years.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Clark. Mr. Chairman, and ranking member, I appreciate
the compliment, but you realize when you make it it is going to
cost me a lot more money somewhere down the line paying them
back. So thank you.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, I am sure that their classmates are
going to be excited for them to tell about this hearing that we
had on FERC and the clean plan, and they will be the most
popular students in school.
And I am also going to ask unanimous consent that we enter
into the record a statement from the American Public Power
Association on this hearing.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Whitfield. And that will conclude the hearing.
I want to thank all of you for being here. We also thank
you for your responsibility in what you do for our country. We
look forward to working with you because we don't really have
any easy answers here. There are many challenges facing all of
us, and I know that even though we have philosophical
differences, we do have the same goal and that is to have a
strong economy and reliable abundant electricity.
So thank you all again. The record will remain open for 10
days.
And for the Clark children, I hope you will come back and
see us again soon. Thank you very much.

[Whereupon, at 12:16 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

[all]
