- CYBERSECURITY: AN EXAMINATION OF THE COMMUNICATIONS SUPPLY CHAIN

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CYBERSECURITY: AN EXAMINATION OF THE COMMUNICATIONS SUPPLY CHAIN

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 21, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-46

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
85-436                     WASHINGTON : 2014
____________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          LOIS CAPPS, California
Vice Chairman                      MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JERRY McNERNEY, California
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             PETER WELCH, Vermont
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 JIM MATHESON, Utah
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California, ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio
FRED UPTON, Michigan, ex officio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     3
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................   137

Witnesses

Mark L. Goldstein, Director, Physical Infrastructure Issues,
Government Accountability Office...............................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Answers to submitted questions...............................   139
Stewart A. Baker, Partner, Steptoe and Johnson, LLP, Former
Assistant Secretary for Policy, Department of Homeland Security    62
Prepared statement...........................................  6473
Answers to submitted questions...............................   142
Jennifer Bisceglie, President and CEO, Interos Solutions, Inc....    71
Prepared statement...........................................    73
Answers to submitted questions...............................   145
Robert B. Dix, Jr., Vice President, Government Affairs and
Critical Infrastructure Protection, Juniper Networks, Inc......    82
Prepared statement...........................................    85
Answers to submitted questions...............................   147
David Rothenstein, Senior Vice President, General Counsel and
Secretary, Ciena...............................................    99
Prepared statement...........................................   101
Answers to submitted questions...............................   150
John Lindquist, President and CEO, Electronic Warfare Associates.   111
Prepared statement...........................................   113
Answers to submitted questions...............................   153
Dean Garfield, President and CEO, Information Technology Industry
Council........................................................   118
Prepared statement...........................................   120
Answers to submitted questions...............................   156

CYBERSECURITY: AN EXAMINATION OF THE COMMUNICATIONS SUPPLY CHAIN

----------

TUESDAY, MAY 21, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:02 p.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Greg
Walden (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Walden, Latta, Shimkus,
Terry, Blackburn, Lance, Guthrie, Gardner, Long, Ellmers,
Eshoo, Matsui, Welch, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Carl Anderson, Counsel, Oversight; Ray Baum,
Senior Policy Advisor/Director of Coalitions; Neil Fried, Chief
Counsel, C&T; Debbee Hancock, Press Secretary; David Redl,
Counsel, Telecom; Charlotte Savercool, Executive Assistant,
Legislative Clerk; Kelsey Guyselman, Telecom; Roger Sherman,
Democratic Chief Counsel; Shawn Chang, Democratic Senior
Counsel; Margaret McCarthy, Democratic Staff; Patrick Donovan,
Democratic FCC Detail; and Kara Van Stralen, Democratic Policy
Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. We are going to call to order the Subcommittee
on Communications and Technology for our hearing on
``Cybersecurity: an Examination of the Communications Supply
Chain.'' And just for the benefit of our witnesses--I don't
know if benefit is the right word--but in about 10 minutes we
are probably going to get called to the House Floor for votes.
So don't flee when we do. We will plan to return and be sure
and get your testimony in and our questions. But we will begin
with our opening statements and, as you know, things around
here aren't always certain so, who knows, we may get everything
done, but I doubt it. So we will go ahead and get started, but
we want to thank you all for being here and for submitting your
testimony.
Our communications networks strengths--its ubiquity and
interconnected nature--may actually also be a weakness. Those
who wish to harm our Nation, to steal money or intellectual
property, or merely to cause mischief can focus on myriad
hardware and software components that make up the
communications infrastructure. And they can do so anywhere in
the design, the delivery, the installation, or the operation of
those components. So today's hearing will focus on securing
that communications supply chain.
We are fortunate to have as a member of this subcommittee
the full chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, Chairman
Mike Rogers. The experience and resources he brings were
invaluable to the bipartisan Cyber Security Working Group last
Congress, as well as to this subcommittee's three prior cyber
hearings.
Many of us have concluded that promoting information-
sharing through the Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection
Act, CISPA, that he and Representative Ruppersberger have now
twice assured through the House with large bipartisan votes, is
pivotal to better securing our networks. It was also in large
part this committee's 2012 report on the communications supply
chain that prompted this hearing. Supply chain risk management
is essential if we are to guard against those that would
compromise network equipment or exploit the software that runs
over and through it.
Understanding that you can never eliminate these risks, how
do you minimize them without compromising the interconnectivity
that makes networks useful? How secure is the communications
supply chain? Where are the vulnerabilities? How much should we
focus on securing physical access to components as they make
their way from design to installation? How much on the internal
workings of the components themselves? How do the risks and
responses differ for hardware and software? What about for
internationally sourced products as opposed to domestically
sourced products? What progress has been made through the
public-private partnerships, standards organization, and the
development of best practices, and what role should the
government play?
These are among the questions we will examine in this
hearing, as well as through the bipartisan Supply Chain Working
Group that we launch today. Representative Mike Rogers and my
colleague and friend from California, Anna Eshoo, will co-chair
this group, which will also include Representatives Latta,
Doyle, Terry, Lujan, Kinzinger, and Matheson.
As I did last Congress, I will urge that we abide by a
cyber Hippocratic Oath and first do no harm as we consider the
tools available to the public and private sectors in making our
communications supply chain secure.
With that, I would yield to the vice chair of the
subcommittee, Mr. Latta.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Our communications network's strengths--its ubiquity and
interconnected nature--may also be weaknesses. Those who wish
to harm our nation, to steal money or intellectual property, or
merely to cause mischief, can focus on myriad hardware and
software components that make up the communications
infrastructure. And they can do so anywhere in the design,
delivery, installation or operation of those components.
Today's hearing will focus on securing that communications
supply chain.
We are fortunate to have as a member of this subcommittee
House Intelligence Committee Chairman Mike Rogers. The
experience and resources he brings were invaluable to the
bipartisan cybersecurity working group last Congress as well as
this subcommittee's three prior cyber hearings. Many of us have
concluded that promoting information sharing through the Cyber
Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act that he and Rep.
Ruppersberger have now twice ushered through the House is
pivotal to better securing our networks. It was also in large
part his committee's 2012 report on the communications supply
chain that prompted this hearing. Supply chain risk management
is essential if we are to guard against those that would
compromise network equipment or exploit the software that runs
over and through it.
Understanding that you can never eliminate these risks, how
do you minimize them without compromising the interconnectivity
that makes networks useful? How secure is the communications
supply chain? Where are the vulnerabilities? How much should we
focus on securing physical access to components as they make
their way from design to installation? How much on the internal
workings of the components themselves? How do the risks and
responses differ for hardware and software? What about for
internationally sourced products as opposed to domestic ones?
What progress has been made through public-private
partnerships, standards organizations and the development of
best practices? What role should the government play?
These are among the questions we will examine in this
hearing, as well as through the bipartisan supply chain working
group we launch today. Reps. Mike Rogers and Anna Eshoo will
co-chair the group, which will also include Reps. Latta, Doyle,
Terry, Lujan, Kinzinger, and Matheson. As I did last Congress,
I will urge that we abide by a cyber Hippocratic Oath and first
do no harm as we consider the tools available to the public and
private sectors in making our communications supply chain
secure.

#  #  #

Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate you
yielding and holding this hearing today on a very critical and
important topic. I want to thank our witnesses for being here
and I look forward to your testimony today.
Not a day goes by that I don't seem to pick up a newspaper
and read about a cyber attack or the vulnerability on the front
page of a newspaper. Cyber crime and cyber warfare can affect
any individual or business since we all depend on our
interconnected communication networks. This is an issue not
just of national security but economic security.
Again, I thank our witnesses for being here. I look forward
to your comments on the communications supply chain. I also
thank the Chairman for convening a bipartisan working group on
this topic and I look forward to being part of the start of a
very thoughtful and serious discussion on the threats of the
supply chain and possible solutions. And with that, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Walden. Anyone else on the Republican side seeking to
make a comment on the final minute-and-a-half of my time? If
not, I yield back the balance and recognize my friend, the
ranking member of this subcommittee, Ms. Eshoo, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this very important hearing. Welcome to all of our
witnesses.
Mr. Chairman, the implications of foreign-controlled
telecommunications infrastructure companies providing equipment
to the U.S. market, I think, really presents a very real threat
to our country. As the Office of the National
Counterintelligence Executive has noted, ``the globalization of
the world economy has placed critical links in the
manufacturing supply chain under the direct control of U.S.
adversaries.''
Just last month, despite press reports suggesting that
Huawei was leaving the U.S. market, the company now denies such
reports and has stated that, ``Huawei has no connection to the
cyber security issues the U.S. has encountered in the past,
current, and future.'' That is quite a statement.
These are not new threats. It in fact, more than 3 years
ago as a member of the House Intelligence Committee, I wrote to
the director of National Intelligence asking for an assessment
of the national security implications of Chinese-origin
telecommunications equipment on our law enforcement and
intelligence efforts, as well as on our switch
telecommunications infrastructure. While I can't discuss,
obviously, the results of that assessment in an unclassified
hearing, suffice it to say, the answers were troubling.
Since that time, I have reiterated my concerns with the FCC
Chairman Genachowski and in late 2011 I joined colleagues in
requesting that the GAO study the potential security risks of
foreign manufactured equipment. The newly released GAO study
recognizes that multiple points within the supply chain can
create vulnerabilities for threat actors to exploit. But a
combination of initiatives by both the public and private
sector are being established to fight back.
The President's Executive Order issued in February is an
example. NIST has been tasked with developing a framework to
reduce cyber attacks to critical infrastructure, and as NIST
undertakes the development of this framework, supply chain
security should be a component. In fact, this morning, Chairman
Walden and myself raised this very issue with Dr. Gallagher.
Moving forward, I am very pleased to co-chair, at the
chairman's request, the subcommittee's newest working group
focusing on supply chain security and integrity with
Representative Mike Rogers, who chairs the House Intelligence
Committee. And through stakeholder meetings, I think we will be
able to better understand what additional steps can be taken to
protect U.S. telecommunications infrastructure from
inappropriate foreign control or influence.
So again, I thank each one of our witnesses that are here
today for your important testimony that you are going to give,
the important answers that you are going to give to our
questions, and for your steadfast commitment to securing the
communications equipment supply chain for our Nation.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. If you want to yield to----
Ms. Eshoo. Does anyone want me to yield my remaining time
to them? Ms. Matsui or--OK. Sure.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Ms. Eshoo. I would like to
also thank the chairman for holding today's hearing.
This year alone, we have seen significant cyber breaches to
our economy. We know rogue states and skilled hackers are
relentless and continue to pose a real threat breaching
sensitive information stored by both the private and public
sectors, as well as the American consumer.
To address the cyber threats I believe industry and
government must be partners. It is not a one-way street. We
live in a digital world where information is readily available
on the internet and can be accessed from just about anywhere.
We also live in an innovative economy where America's
innovative spirit has led to new devices, equipment, and
communications that penetrate the global marketplace.
This has also created an international supply chain of
technology components. Today, it is not surprising if a product
and its components originate from several different countries.
That is why it is critical for industry to continue to be
vigilant in assuring their manufacturing and distribution
processes are not compromised. We should also be mindful of
hackers trying to circumvent the supply chain by infecting
botnets and malware onto popular mobile apps.
Addressing mobile security should be a priority moving
forward, particularly as millions of Americans download their
favorite apps, which in some cases includes personal
information.
Again, I thank the chairman for holding today's hearing and
I yield back the remainder of my time.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back the remainder of her
time. And seeing no one on our side seeking time, I would yield
now to the gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman, for 5
minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
today's hearing on cyber security risks in the communications
supply chain.
This morning, our full committee heard a wide range of
perspectives on the cyber threats to our critical
infrastructure, including broadband networks.
While the Executive Order on cyber security protections for
critical infrastructure was an important step forward, this
morning's hearing demonstrated that there is much more work to
be done to protect the networks that undergird the American
economy.
One key area of vulnerability--the long supply chains for
communications network equipment--is the subject of this
afternoon's hearing. The globalization of the supply market for
information and communications technology has undoubtedly
created many benefits for our economy and coincided with
incredible investment, competition, and innovation in the
communications marketplace.
But it has also made it possible for our adversaries to
exploit weaknesses during the design, production, delivery, and
post-installation servicing of communications network
equipment.
Industry and the federal government are working to respond
to these threats.
As several of our witnesses this afternoon will discuss,
companies are taking action to respond to supply chain risks.
Voluntary industry consortia and public-private partnerships
are also seeking to minimize these cyber exposures and I
applaud these efforts.
But we should consider all options that could help minimize
the cyber threats in the supply chain.
I look forward to hearing from GAO about its analysis of
what other countries are doing in this area, as well as the
potential benefits and drawbacks of adopting new review
processes for purchases of foreign-manufactured communications
equipment.
And I am pleased, Mr. Chairman, that the Subcommittee is
convening a working group to examine supply chain security in
more depth. The co-chairs of the working group--Representative
Mike Rogers, who is the chairman of the House Intelligence
Committee, and Representative Anna Eshoo, who has served on
that committee, as well as the ranking member on this
subcommittee--have great expertise from their service, as well
as on both committees.
I look forward to our continued bipartisan work in this
area. I thank all of the witnesses for being here and for their
testimony. I want to apologize in advance that the conflict in
schedule will keep me from being here to hear everything that
is said, but I have staff listening in, I have got the
testimony that I can review, and when the questions are asked
and answered, I will be able to get a sense from those as well
of the views that this very distinguished group will be giving
to our subcommittee.
Thank you for this opportunity to give an opening
statement. I thank all of you for being here today.
Mr. Walden. And the gentleman yields back the balance of
his time. The good news is the votes now aren't going to come
until 2:25 to 2:30, so we may actually get to hear from some of
our witnesses.
And so we are going to start with Mr. Goldstein, who is the
director of Physical Infrastructure Issues for the Government
Accountability Office. Turn on your microphone, pull it close,
and the next 5 minutes are yours, sir. Thank you for your work.

STATEMENTS OF MARK L. GOLDSTEIN, DIRECTOR, PHYSICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE;
STEWART A. BAKER, PARTNER, STEPTOE AND JOHNSON, LLP, FORMER
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR POLICY, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY; JENNIFER BISCEGLIE, PRESIDENT AND CEO, INTEROS
SOLUTIONS, INC.; ROBERT B. DIX, JR., VICE PRESIDENT, GOVERNMENT
AFFAIRS AND CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, JUNIPER
NETWORKS, INC.; DAVID ROTHENSTEIN, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
GENERAL COUNSEL AND SECRETARY, CIENA; JOHN LINDQUIST, PRESIDENT
AND CEO, ELECTRONIC WARFARE ASSOCIATES; AND DEAN GARFIELD,
PRESIDENT AND CEO, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY COUNCIL

STATEMENT OF MARK L. GOLDSTEIN

Mr. Goldstein. I will try not to take all of it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee. I
am pleased to be here this afternoon to discuss issues
surrounding the communications supply chain.
The United States is increasingly reliant on commercial
communications networks for matters of national and economic
security. These networks, which are primarily owned by the
private sector, are highly dependent on equipment manufacturers
in foreign countries. Certain entities in the Federal
Government view this dependence as an emerging threat that
introduces risks to the networks. GAO has requested review
actions taken to respond to security risks from foreign
manufactured equipment.
This testimony addresses how network providers and
equipment manufacturers help ensure the security of foreign
manufactured equipment used in commercial communications
networks, how the Federal Government is addressing the risks of
such equipment, and other approaches for addressing those risks
and issues related to these approaches.
My testimony today is the public version of a national
security sensitive report that GAO issued in May 2013.
Information that the Department of Defense deemed sensitive has
been omitted.
Let me briefly discuss the findings of the report that I
may talk about today. First, the network providers and
equipment manufacturers GAO spoke with reported taking steps in
their security plans and procurement processes to ensure the
integrity of parts and equipment obtained from foreign sources.
Although these companies do not consider foreign manufactured
equipment to be their most pressing security threat, their
brand image and profitability depend on providing secure,
reliable service.
In the absence of industry or government standards on the
use of this equipment, companies have adopted a range of
voluntary risk management practices. These practices span the
lifecycle of equipment and cover areas such as selecting
vendors, establishing vendor security requirements, and testing
and monitoring equipment. Equipment that is considered critical
to the functioning of the network is likely to be subject to
more stringent security requirements according to these
companies.
In addition to these efforts, companies are collaborating
on the development of industry security standards and best
practices and participating in information-sharing efforts
within industry and with the Federal Government.
Second, the Federal Government has begun efforts to address
the security of the supply chain for commercial networks. In
2013 the President issued an Executive Order to create a
framework to reduce cyber risks to critical infrastructure, the
National Institutes of Standards and Technologies, responsible
for leading this effort, which is to provide technology-neutral
guidance to critical infrastructure owners and operators.
NIST published a request for information, which it is
conducting using a comprehensive review to obtain stakeholder
input and develop the framework. You heard testimony on this
effort this morning. NIST officials said the extent to which
supply chain security of commercial communication networks will
be incorporated into the framework is dependant in part on the
input that they receive from stakeholders.
The Department of Defense considered the other federal
efforts GAO identified to be sensitive to national security,
and I cannot talk about them in a public forum.
And third, there are a variety of other approaches for
addressing potential risks posed by foreign manufactured
equipment and commercial communications networks. For example,
the Australian government is considering a proposal to
establish a risk-based regulatory framework that requires
network providers to be able to demonstrate competent
supervision and effective controls over their networks. The
government would also have the authority to use enforcement
measures to address noncompliance.
In the United Kingdom, the government requires network and
service providers to manage risks and network security and can
impose financial penalties for security breaches.
While these approaches are intended to improve supply chain
security of communications networks, they may also create the
potential for trade barriers and additional costs which the
Federal Government would have to take into account if it chose
to pursue such efforts.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my oral statement. I would be
happy to respond to comments. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goldstein follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.053

Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Goldstein. We appreciate the
work of your team and you----
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you.
Mr. Walden [continuing]. And we appreciate your being here.
I will now go to Mr. Stewart A. Baker who is a partner in
Steptoe & Johnson, LLP, and we appreciate your being here and
look forward to your comments, sir. Go ahead.

STATEMENT OF STEWART A. BAKER

Mr. Baker. Chairman Walden, Ranking Member Eshoo, members
of the committee, it is a pleasure to be before you again. I
was at the Department of Homeland Security and in charge of the
CFIUS process until 2009, so I have been here before to talk
about that.
I would like to start with the problem that we have. We are
under massive cyber espionage attacks. There is no one who is
immune against these attacks. I am willing to bet that
everybody on this panel and everybody on the committee has
already been the subject of intrusions aimed at stealing
secrets on behalf of the People's Liberation Army or some other
foreign government.
We do not know how to keep people out of our systems
effectively. And that is despite the fact that we have, by and
large, an IT infrastructure that is designed by U.S. companies
who are doing their best to give us security. We simply have
not been able to find all of the holes in the code or all of
the flaws that can be exploited. That is with the best will in
the world.
At the same time, in the last 20 years, I think, as the
President's efforts to name and shame China and other attackers
have demonstrated, there is plenty of name but not a lot of
shame on the other side. This has been an enormously productive
intelligence source and it is an enormous weapon that can be
used against the United States if we get into a shooting war
that our adversaries would like to get us out of. Everything
that can be exploited for espionage purposes can be exploited
for sabotage purposes.
Our systems can be made to break causing great harm to
Americans, including potentially deaths here. And we will have
to face that prospect in the next serious conflict that we face
internationally because the ability to cause that harm is
moving down the food chain to the point where Iran and North
Korea are significant powers in causing this harm.
So that is the situation that we face. The question is we
are deep in a hole. Are we going to stop digging? And here is
the question that we need to face as we look at our supply
chain. If American companies looking at their own code and
trying to give us security can't find a way to do that, how
comfortable are we having companies from countries that are not
our friends provide the code, provide the hardware? We are not
going to find those problems. We can't even find all of them in
the products that we make ourselves here in the United States,
as witnessed through all of the exploitable vulnerabilities we
face.
And so we face the prospect that some of this equipment
simply is not going to be safe. As we have asked ourselves, how
do we deal with that problem? It turns out that our tools for
dealing with it are remarkably limited. I ran the CFIUS
process; I ran the team telecom process for DHS. Those are very
limited tools. CFIUS only applies if somebody buys something.
If they want to sell something here, there is no restriction
whatsoever. So telecommunications gear can be sold in the
United States without any review whatsoever.
We got to the point, I think, actually in the stimulus bill
where we had provided subsidies to buy telecommunications
equipment to carriers and they were buying, with our money,
Huawei and ZTE gear because we had no way to prevent that, but
at the same time that the U.S. Government was telling Verizon
and AT&T don't you buy that stuff. So we clearly lack an
ability to address the problem of infrastructure equipment
being sold to the United States that we don't think is secure.
That is the first thing that I think the committee should
examine.
Beyond that, I think we have also discovered as we have
begun looking at this problem that our procurement laws do not
take into account sufficiently supply chain risk, do not
require that our contractors take enough account of supply
chain risk. So if there were two things that I would urge the
committee to address, it is, one, the limited nature of team
telecom and CFIUS remedies and the still remarkably limited
ability of government procurement officers to take account of
this risk.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Baker follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.060

Mr. Walden. Mr. Baker, thank you for your testimony.
We are going to go now to Jennifer Bisceglie, who is
President and CEO of Interos Solutions, Incorporated. We
welcome you and look forward to your comments.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER BISCEGLIE

Ms. Bisceglie. Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
members of the subcommittee.
Mr. Walden. I am going to have you move that microphone a
little closer and make sure the light is on.
Ms. Bisceglie. It was on.
Mr. Walden. OK.
Ms. Bisceglie. Can you hear me now? Good afternoon, Mr.
Chairman and members of the subcommittee. My name is Jennifer
Bisceglie, President of Interos solutions. Thank you for
inviting me to testify on behalf of our industry peers focused
on supply chain risk management, or SCRM, as we like to call
it.
My company Interos is built on 20 years of global supply
chain and IT implementation experience. Over the past 6 years,
we have seen the discussions turn from simple compliance to
resiliency, which is ensuring business operations would
continue even if the supply chains were interrupted; and now to
product integrity, which is caused by a manmade malicious
attack.
In response to this, Interos has set up a SCRM global
threat information Center, which offers capabilities to help
both the public and private sector organizations implement SCRM
frameworks, conduct supplier audits, and conduct open-source
research to identify potential threats with current or future
suppliers.
I will first share some of our observations and then follow
those with some recommendations. First, a common definition for
supply chain risk management and cyber security does not exist,
nor is there a standard way to measure either challenge. To us,
the definition of cyber security extends deep into the supply
chain as cyber capabilities are increasingly reliant on
globally sourced, commercially produced information technology
and communications hardware, software, and services.
To us, cyber security means transparency of where things
are coming from, where they are going to, and who has access to
them along the way. That is also the definition of supply chain
risk management.
Our second observation is that supply chain risk management
must be viewed as an investment versus an expense. Interos is
working with the Department of Energy on their enterprise SCRM
program. With only three Interos team members supporting the
entire Department of Energy enterprise, they have an
infrastructure they can share resources and information
throughout their entire enterprise now.
In this case, it is a relatively low-cost investment and
yields tremendous benefits. Much of the success of this program
can be attributed to a strong DOE leadership, as well as having
the ability to work with the Department of Defense's trusted
systems and network SCRM roundtable and their interagency
working groups.
Third, we feel supply chain risk management is successful
when it is a cultural shift that supports current business
process and reduces the need to develop new stovepipe processes
that increase costs and create additional work for the risk
owner. It is not an issue of being too expensive to do it. It
is an issue of being too expensive to ignore it.
Now to our recommendations: from our perspective, Congress
can take four steps to better protect our Nation's critical
infrastructure. First, awareness and education has to start at
the top in order to be adopted by those actually executing the
mission. In our experience, the level of awareness of the
challenge varies across federal agencies, as does their level
of attention to managing their supply chain risk. Awareness and
education is critical to communicate that supply chain risk
impacts everyone within the federal infrastructure.
Second, fund the program, assign someone within each agency
to own the issue, and measure the success. We have seen SCRM
focal points, as directed by the Bush and the Obama
Administrations, being implemented in different areas within
the agencies. Without the top-down support within the agency,
without an owner of the concern, and without funding, these
programs are being bootstrapped and implemented in various
fashions, not conducive to effective protection.
Three, the low-cost, low-price technically acceptable
environment is in direct opposition to a safe and secure
critical infrastructure unless we are able to accurately define
our acceptable supply chain risk tolerance at the beginning of
an acquisition cycle. While we understand the federal budget
constraints and the temptation to fund program objectives with
simply the lowest bid, when it comes to cyber security, it is
not a good strategy. Failure to protect our critical
infrastructure and educate risk owners on the threats that are
brought into an organization by buying from unverified sources
will result in continued and increasingly harmful attacks.
Last, implement contractual language that works. We
understand that as part of Executive Order 13636, GSA, NIST,
and DOD are working with potential recommendations to update
the FAR language. In addition, there are multiple industry
associations working on standards for supply chain risk
management. Doing as much as possible via internal policy
changes and contractual language as a way to inform suppliers
of how to do business with you and to mitigate risks coming
into your organization is a much less expensive way to approach
the problem than regulation and legislation.
In conclusion, the solution needs to be viewed as an
investment in national security, not just another expense. The
key for industry and government is to work separately on their
internal enterprise risk tolerance levels through good business
practices, including awareness training and contractual
agreements. This will enable each to meet collaboratively and
have informed discussions about where vulnerabilities lie and
what it will take to protect our country.
Thank you for the opportunity to present our views. I look
forward to answering any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bisceglie follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.069

Mr. Walden. Thank you very much for your testimony.
We will now go to Mr. Robert B. Dix, Jr., Vice President of
Government Affairs and Critical Infrastructure Protection,
Juniper Networks, Incorporated. Mr. Dix, pull that microphone
right up and thanks for being with us today. We look forward to
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT B. DIX, JR.

Mr. Dix. Good afternoon, Chairman Walden, Ranking Member
Eshoo, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting
me to be a participant in today's hearing on the security of
the communication supply chain.
As indicated, my name is Bob Dix and I serve as the Vice
President of Government Affairs and Critical Infrastructure
Protection for Juniper Networks, a publicly held private
corporation headquartered in Sunnyvale, California, in
Congresswoman Eshoo's district.
I will attempt to address three aspects of this important
subject of security and integrity of the communication supply
chain: first, the risk created by government procurement
practices utilizing unauthorized equipment providers; second,
supply chain integrity initiatives by industry; and third,
several recommendations where the government can help improve
both government and private sector supply chain integrity.
The government views its commercial supply chain rightly as
a major element in its risk profile, but many of its risk
management efforts are not coordinated and were not developed
in collaboration with industries that share legitimate concerns
about supply chain security. Today, there are more than 100
different initiatives around supply chain in the government.
Also as we sit here today, the government continues to make
purchases from untrusted and unauthorized sources. The urge to
save money pushes agencies to brokers and other gray market
suppliers that are not part of the authorized or trusted supply
chain for original equipment manufacturers. This is in also an
area where much mischief takes place for both counterfeiters
and those attempting to penetrate the government supply chain
with malicious intent.
Interestingly, when the government purchases equipment and
then identifies it as counterfeit, it often assumes the OEM has
a gap in its supply chain, pointing fingers at the private
sector when in many cases they need to be looking in the
mirror. The government does not instead ask why it bought
sensitive ICT products from an untrusted source.
I have included in my written statement several real-life
examples just that Juniper Networks has experienced which are
illustrative of this challenge, but time today does not permit
me to go through each one of those. But I hope you will take a
chance to look at those.
While Juniper understands the importance of improving
supply chain assurance for the Federal Government, it often
appears that the government itself does not understand the
enormous investment that many in the private sector make to
protect the integrity of their supply chain. It is in our
business interest. It is a market differentiator. Juniper, like
many companies, has a supply chain assurance and brand
integrity program for securing our products and supply chain.
We employ best practices for security from organizations
including the Open Groups, Trusted Technology Forum, AGMA, and
Safeco to name a few. This includes component integrity,
traceability of products, anti-counterfeit measures, and much
more.
As is clear from the variety and breadth of the standards,
bodies, and organizations that industry relies on, many
companies believe that a variety of standards and best
practices contribute to supply chain integrity. But as
discussed earlier, there is also compelling evidence that there
are gaps and contradictions in the government's policies and
practices that contribute to supply chain risk. Here are a
couple of proposals that, if addressed, could have immediate
impact on securing the communication supply chain. First, the
Executive Branch, at the urging of this committee, of course,
should issue a directive requiring federal departments and
agencies to purchase only from trusted and authorized sources,
especially for mission-essential functions, unless there is
some compelling reason to go outside of that channel. If there
is such a compelling reason, the purchaser should be required
to put a justification and authorization in writing. It is low-
hanging fruit; we should do it immediately.
Second, the government should require that small business
vendors be certified as authorized resellers and partners.
Requirements pertaining to small business set-asides also have
the secondary impact of causing procurement officers to pursue
acquisitions through providers who are not part of the
authorized and trusted supply chain.
We all understand the importance of small businesses to the
government's industrial base and to the economy in general. It
is important to recognize that bad actors also exploit our
reliance on small business as a means of entry. Counterfeiters
and others attempt to introduce their tainted equipment into
our critical infrastructure through small business enterprises.
Third, members of this committee have been involved in
attempting to pursue better information-sharing. We support
CISPA and we appreciate all the good work here and hope that
you will support moving that bill through the Senate.
While we are working on legislation to break down barriers
to improve timely, reliable, and actionable situation
awareness, there is a step we could take immediately. We
continue to hear that the government has significant concerns
about supply chain and the threat to national and economic
security. The government has access to case studies of
successful, unsuccessful, interrupted, or disrupted attempts to
perpetrate network intrusions through the supply chain. We
should take those lessons learned from those experiences and
share the tactics, techniques, and procedures, not sources and
methods that cross over into the classified space that we can
learn from and better inform the community in their own risk
management decision-making.
There are a couple of others in my testimony I hope that we
will get to in the questions. But on behalf of the 9,000 proud
employees of Juniper Networks, I thank you again for the
opportunity to participate in this important discussion.
Industry looks forward to continuing the collaborative
relationship with Congress and the Administration on this
important issue. I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dix follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.083

Mr. Walden. Mr. Dix, thank you very much.
They have called the votes. I believe they have, right? And
so we will recess at this point. So close, Mr. Rothenstein, so
close. And then we will come back and start with you and get to
our other two witnesses, and then Q&A. So thank you for your
patience and we will be back shortly.
[Recess.]
Mr. Latta [presiding]. I would like to call the
subcommittee back to order. And I believe next in order of our
witnesses is Mr. Rothenstein, and thanks very much for being
here today. We appreciate your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DAVID ROTHENSTEIN

Mr. Rothenstein. My pleasure. I hope that delay only served
to build anticipation of my testimony.
Vice Chairman Latta, Ranking Member Eshoo, members of the
subcommittee, my name is David Rothenstein and it is my
pleasure to appear before you today. I serve as senior vice
president and general counsel of Ciena Corporation, a publicly
held Maryland-based provider of equipment software and services
that support transport and switching, aggregation management
and voice, video, and data traffic on communications networks.
Our products are used by communications network service
providers, cable operators, governments, and enterprises across
the globe.
Today, a number of current market trends, including the
proliferation of smartphones, tablets, and mobile devices, are
substantially increasing the demand on networks. This means
that Ciena must deliver faster, more efficient, and more secure
equipment to our customers to help them meet their end-user
requirements.
As with most technology companies, our success is largely
driven by our innovation. Our global patent portfolio is our
lifeblood and it enables us to develop leading-edge solutions
and get new products to market quickly. In order to support
this continuous innovation and because our equipment sits in
critical infrastructure networks around the world, Ciena's
executive team spends a lot of time looking at the intersection
of cyber security and supply chain.
Because our customers demand best-in-class product delivery
lead times, quality and performance, security of supply, and
product security and integrity, we have taken steps during the
past few years to transform and optimize our supply chain
operations. These changes have enabled us to use our supply
chain as a differentiator in the market.
One example of these changes has been our focus in
designing and manufacturing equipment and software that meets
or exceeds the security needs of our customers. For years, our
customers have generally inquired with us about the security,
integrity, and assurance of their networks. With this in mind,
in 2011 we performed a detailed analysis of our supply chain
that considered a range of factors.
As a result of this analysis, we decided at that time to
begin a gradual exit from China of key elements of our supply
chain. This was not an easy decision. China represents one of
the largest and fastest-growing markets for communications
equipment in the world. And the country is home to the
fabrication facilities that produce many of the components that
go into our products. However, based on what we knew about our
products, our customers, and the business and security
environment in China, we decided to make this change.
In contrast to some of our peers, we weren't as concerned
about the potential adverse impact of this decision on our
sales opportunities in China. Several years ago, because of the
significant barriers to entry and the technology transfer
requirements to do business in China, we decided not to pursue
a go-to-market sales strategy in that country. We are now
almost 2 years into our supply chain transformation. By the end
of 2013, we will have transitioned all of the manufacture and
assembly of our products and a sizable portion of our global
spend on finished and semi-finished assemblies from China to
other jurisdictions, primarily Mexico and Thailand. In so
doing, we have increased the velocity of our supply chain,
solidified our security of supply, and insured the security and
assuredness of our products. At the same time we have remained
very competitive in the market from a cost standpoint.
There are some parts that we continue to source from China.
We are in active discussions with our major vendors as to their
plans for transitioning out of China, largely to address issues
relating to counterfeit goods and intellectual property
infringement. We are less concerned about the security
vulnerabilities of these products even if they are primarily
passive products that are neither programmable nor capable of
being embedded with damaging computer code or malware.
At the same time, we have taken extensive steps to ensure
the integrity of the active or programmable components in our
products. We require now that these components are sourced from
outside of China. We maintain rigorous and internal practices
and capabilities that enable us to identify any issues with
respect to the security of our components. And by implementing
strict controls over our own software developments and by
ourselves performing the final testing and validation of the
software loaded on to our products, we ensure the integrity of
our software, which is the critical element that controls and
manages our products and our customer's networks.
In conclusion, Ciena applauds the Subcommittee for taking
on this issue. In our case, we proactively elected to make
changes to our supply chain and not to wait for legislation,
regulation, or the Administration's implementation of the
recent Executive Order on cyber security. Instead, we talked to
our customers, conducted a thorough business analysis and risk
assessment, and made a decision that we continue to implement
today. While this strategy may not necessarily work for others,
it has worked effectively for us. It makes good business sense
and delivers additional security for our customers and for
their networks.
With that, I conclude my remarks and am pleased to take any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rothenstein follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.093

Mr. Latta. Well, thank you for your testimony.
And our next witness is Mr. John Lindquist, President and
CEO of EWA Information and Infrastructure Technologies, Inc.
Good afternoon and thanks for testifying.

STATEMENT OF JOHN LINDQUIST

Mr. Lindquist. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman, members of the
committee. Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify.
As we all know, the security of our telecom systems is in
fact very critical. We are aware of the myriad threats to the
U.S. and the threat is real but is not limited to a single
country, geographic area, or organization. Protection is made
difficult because the supply chain for electronic systems and
devices in general and specifically telecommunication systems
is truly global. Most of the telecom system vendors have very
large footprints in China and elsewhere around the globe, and
many of these worldwide locations are easily and directly
accessible by the various threat nations and organizations.
Furthermore, it is the nature of the system development to
make use of software routines and hardware components that are
generally available in the market, and it is virtually
impossible to determine the pedigree of all of the hardware and
the software that goes into a telecommunications system. Our
adversaries are professional, highly technically capable
intelligence organizations or sophisticated criminals, neither
of which would have any difficulty circumventing a trusted
supplier system.
To address the security dilemma effectively, an evidence-
based security process should be applied, that enables an
informed judgment that an adequate level of assurance has been
provided that the system is free of malicious features and does
not contain serious security defects; and that is without
regard to origin of the system.
IIT had been selected by several telecommunications
carriers as an independent evaluator to implement such a
process. The process we are implementing is comprised of two
major phases. The first is an in-depth security assessment of
the system software, hardware, and firmware to include all
patches, upgrades, and modifications as they occur.
The second phase is a delivery process that ensures that
the deployed system and all patches, upgrades, and
modifications are exactly the ones that were evaluated and
determined to be suitable and acceptable. The key features of
the process include: willing participation of the developer and
vendor; a trusted independent evaluator; direct coordination
between and among the stakeholders, particularly the telecoms
and the concerned government agencies and the evaluator without
interference or necessarily knowledge of the vendor; correction
of unintentional defects before deployment; immediate
involvement of law enforcement if evidence of malicious intent
is discovered; and a delivery system that ensures that the
system delivered matches the evaluated system and prevents the
vendor or any other un-presented party from accessing the
system during or after delivery; and finally, a scheme for
monitoring the system after deployment.
In our case, the vendors have been very willing to comply
because compliance was a condition of the sale to the
telecommunications carrier. Under those contracts, they provide
us the design documentation, source code, the complete set of
sample components, replication of the compilation environment
for their software and firmware, advance notice of all design
changes, patches, and modifications, and access to their
development facilities to provide us the understanding of their
process.
We were selected because of our intimate knowledge of the
threat. We have a comprehensive process with clear analytical
and reporting criteria that explicitly addresses the evolving
threat. We have secure facilities. We use exclusively U.S.
personnel, who have been vetted through the U.S. security
clearance process, and we have a staff fully qualified and
equipped to perform the evaluations.
The contracts in each case specifically provide for the
direct private communication between the evaluator and
stakeholders. Telecommunication carriers, by contractual
mandate, are the primary beneficiary of our work. A condition
of acceptance is a report from us describing what we did, the
faults found, the correction implemented, and any residual
risk, and we are free to discuss any issues directly with the
telecom and the government.
In our lab, we subject the system to a detailed analysis,
both a static analysis of the software and a dynamic testing of
the software and hardware. There have been thousands of defects
found and mitigated, not all of these in Chinese systems; as a
matter fact, many of them in systems that currently exist in
the telecommunication system.
The software is delivered directly from us to the networks.
The hardware is subjected to a random sampling process, and the
firmware is either delivered directly from us or the boards are
re-flashed by us, all again to make sure that the delivered
software is what we evaluated. Our recommendation is that some
evidence-based security process like this is included in the
government's approaches, including the NIST security framework
and other programs across the government.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lindquist follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.098

Mr. Latta. And thank you very much for your testimony.
Our next witness will be Dean Garfield, President and CEO,
Information Technology Industry Council. And Mr. Garfield, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DEAN GARFIELD

Mr. Garfield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, since I see him
walking back in, Mr. Vice Chairman, and Ranking Member Eshoo.
On behalf of the world's most dynamic and innovative companies,
I would like to thank you for all that this subcommittee and
committee does on the issues that are most important to us and
for spotlighting this issue today.
Supply chain integrity and assurance is core to who we are
and what we do. It is a business imperative. And so we are
encouraged to see the formation of a bipartisan working group
and look forward to working with you. Your first principle,
which is do no harm, is a good credo for all of the work that
we do in this area.
I submitted testimony for the record and so I will focus my
oral testimony today on three areas: one, providing a window
into our supply chains; two is sharing some of the things we do
both as individual companies and as a sector to ensure supply
chain integrity; and then, third, to make some recommendations
where Congress can be helpful.
I have the privilege of working for companies that are
truly transforming the world. The products and mobile devices
that we all walk around with every day are more powerful today
than ever before. In fact, the mobile device that we all carry
around has more processing power than the Apollo 11, or even
more recently, the Mars rover. Those mobile devices are
presented under a singular brand but they include hundreds, and
in some cases, thousands of components.
To ensure that we are providing our consumers with the best
products at the best prices, those components are sourced in
the United States and in fact around the world as well to
ensure that the services and the products that we deliver are
consistently of the highest quality and that our global supply
chains are highly integrated.
With that in mind, any change, risk mitigation, or
otherwise around supply chain assurance is carefully calibrated
and we would highly encourage that any advocacy or policy
advance in this area be carefully calibrated as well.
The industry engages--both as individual companies and as
well as a sector--in a number of steps to both manage and
mitigate risk. As individual companies, they adopt and
integrate best practices on a continuous and systemic basis
that includes instilling and teaching secure sourcing,
instilling and teaching secure coding, instilling and teaching
identification authentication among a host of steps that are
taken, some of which have been talked about by the other
panelists generally.
As well, those individual steps that are taken by specific
companies are complemented by industry-wide, sector-wide
activities both through standards activities, and also through
consensus-based voluntary global standard-setting
organizations, such as ISO and IEC, which have advanced a
number of standards that are quite relevant in this area,
including the common criteria which is focused on product
assurance or through standards that are focused on not products
but the processes as well that complement those products,
including the Open Group Trusted Technology Forum.
It is important to note that in both instances our
government and other governments have an important role to play
and do engage in those consensus-based voluntary global
standards-setting organizations. In fact, over 26 countries
have adopted the common criteria as a part of their government
procurement practices. And so while eliminating or not
mandating requirements on the private sector, which we strongly
discourage, they are able to ensure that the government
procurement processes benefit from the best practices of the
private sector.
So where are the gaps and what can government do? We would
recommend four things: one is ensuring that where you are and
we are creating the proper incentives for the effective
implementation of the cyber security Executive Order from the
White House that was issued earlier this year. That Executive
Order charges the DOD and the General Service Administration,
GSA, to look at ways of integrating best practices and
standards from the private sector into the government
procurement practices. It would be useful to create incentives
to make sure that happens appropriately.
Second is your oversight power. As Mr. Dix pointed out,
there are hundreds of initiatives within the public sector
focused on product assurance, gaining some order and ensuring
that the private sector input is integrated into those efforts
is critically important.
Third is through sourcing. Ensuring that through government
procurement, the government is sourcing from original equipment
manufacturers and their authenticated suppliers is critical in
order to have the kind of products assurance that we all have
in mind.
And then fifth and final is making sure that we get an
information-sharing bill similar to the one that has made its
way through the House passed through the Senate as well.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garfield follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.105

Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Garfield, for your testimony.
And, Mr. Chair, do you want to resume the chair?
Mr. Walden. Or I can just ask questions from here if you
want to wield that big gavel there.
Mr. Latta. Yes. Well, with that then the vice chair will
recognize the chairman of the subcommittee for his 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, sir, and thanks for filling in and
getting the hearing going back from the votes. I got detained,
as occasionally happens on the floor.
Mr. Garfield--first of all, thank you to all of our
witnesses--but I appreciated your comments. Our networks and
the threats they face are varied, as you know, and they are
ever-changing, as you reference in your testimony. So how do we
secure our supply chain without losing the flexibility that is
critical to both how our communication networks function and
then how to defend them? What do you recommend here?
Mr. Garfield. You put your finger on the idea of the point
of drawing balance. I think building on the best practices that
are being developed in the private sector and integrating those
into the government procurement efforts. There are a number of
standards-based initiatives that are moving forward,
specifically focused on product assurance in supply chains. And
so I would strongly encourage taking advantage of those best
practices and integrating them into our government procurement
practice.
Mr. Walden. You know, I have another question here that
plays on this a bit for Ms. Bisceglie and Mr. Baker and you,
Mr. Garfield. Sometimes it appears the government sort of has
an ad hoc process if you will when it comes to protecting the
supply chain. A high-ranking official will place a call or
write a little letter to a company suggesting that the company
not do business with a particular vendor or a particular piece
of equipment. I have actually had experience with that with a
constituent. So do we need a more formalized process, which
raises all kinds of questions as to who is making those
decisions and all, but both as a matter of good process for
equipment buyers and sellers to ensure that the measures are
effective? And then how would you formalize that process?
And I don't want to hobble, you know, the fast-paced
communications industry with a lot of bureaucracy, and red
tape, and approval processes either. We fight that in other
sectors and you certainly don't want it here. And it gets back
to the hearings that we held that said, you know, first do no
harm in this area. Bad guys will get ahead of us and we will be
locked into old laws and rules. So is there a way to strike a
balance here? And what do you recommend?
Ms. Bisceglie. I am happy to go first.
So I do agree we need to have--I think it is a separate
slippery slope----
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Ms. Bisceglie [continuing]. As you just mentioned. And I
think that there are different levels. There is a varied way to
put in a formalized process and I personally believe or we
personally believe there is no one-size-fits-all, but we like
to talk about frameworks.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Ms. Bisceglie. And that framework consists of training and
awareness, which I talked about earlier----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Ms. Bisceglie [continuing]. Which is a very big thing.
Folks need to understand what the risk is that we are all
talking about.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Ms. Bisceglie. Additionally, I think that the thing that we
have seen over the last 6 years is that organizations, both
public and private, really struggle with understanding their
internal risk tolerance. So how much risk can I actually accept
into my organization----
Mr. Walden. Like anything else.
Ms. Bisceglie [continuing]. And that is not necessarily a
single risk number of 1 to 5. It can be based on the essential
function of that organization and if it has multiple functions,
then it gets prioritized, if you will, into the different
programs that that organization conducts as well as the systems
that support that. And then underneath that, I think you do
have some sort of a formal process. It gets really simple to us
and that it really goes back to just really good business
practices and understanding who you are buying from.
Mr. Walden. Right.
Ms. Bisceglie. But unless you can look at an organization
and understand where their vulnerabilities exist and have a
process to go through that, I think it is a very difficult
place to go. I do think that that last-minute, that 3:00 a.m.
phone call is again a very dangerous place to be.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Baker?
Mr. Baker. So I completely agree we can't just start
regulating----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Baker [continuing]. The private sector and tell them
how to do this. At the same time, if we rely exclusively on the
government communicating informally about its concerns, you run
the risk that the people who want to make these sales will just
keep lowering the price and lowering the price.
Mr. Walden. Right, we have seen that.
Mr. Baker. Hard to resist. And so I would suggest that
there needs to be authority for the government at a minimum to
ask questions. What is in your supply chain?
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Baker. You know, what products are you buying? And to
communicate where they have a strong basis, that is not
acceptable. We know enough to know that that is a risky place
to buy your equipment, so don't do it.
Mr. Walden. I will show a little ignorance here, but is
there sort of a range of equipment in the system that there is
some that is more important to make sure you get right than
others, or is it just everything matters?
Mr. Baker. There is a view abroad and in the industry as
well in telecommunications that the core is your most important
product----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Baker [continuing]. And you cannot compromise the core
and that the edge is less risky because fewer people are----
Mr. Walden. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Baker [continuing]. For any particular system. I am not
sure in an internet world as the edge gets smarter and smarter
that that is a distinction that holds up as well as we would
like it to. But that is certainly something that we have seen
in other telecommunications decision-making.
Mr. Walden. I know Mr. Garfield didn't get a chance to
respond but I also know my time has run out so--yes, you have
got to watch this vice chair. He is mean with that gavel. Do
you have anything to add to that, Mr. Garfield?
Mr. Garfield. I do. I think there are two specific
processes----
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Mr. Garfield [continuing]. That would be useful. One is a
process that is being set up through CISPA if it is passed
through the Senate----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Garfield [continuing]. Which is a formal process for
information-sharing through the government with the protections
necessary to make sure that information-sharing takes place.
The second is that the Executive Order sets up a process
through the Department of Defense and General Service
Administration. And so creating ways to incentivize the success
of that, which Congress can still do, I think is critically
important.
Mr. Walden. All right. Thank you very much and I yield back
the deficit balance of my time.
Mr. Latta. The chairman is so recognized. The chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from California and the ranking
member, Ms. Eshoo, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is nice to see you
in the chairman seat, and you are always a gentleman and I
appreciate that.
Mr. Walden. Reserving the right to object.
Ms. Eshoo. Well, the same applies to you Mr. Chairman. The
same applies to you. Not to worry, not to worry. Thank you to
all the witnesses. Let's see, two, four, six, seven people
have, you know, each in your own way have come in with
something that has some refinement to it that helps to not
necessarily bring closure but get us to focus on the areas that
are really important for us to focus on when it comes to a
public role of national security and the integrity of the
supply chain. So I thank you.
I have a lot of questions. Let me start with--and Mr.
Lindquist is probably not going to be surprised with the
Electronic Warfare Associates, that is quite a name. Warfare
Associates. How about Peace-fare Associates? But I guess that
doesn't work as well. Now, I understand that your company
vetted Huawei's equipment and you gave it your seal of
approval. I might add that the more I have heard witnesses
speak, the more I think the government really needs to have
some kind of list of essentially a good housekeeping seal of
approval on it because small companies especially really need
to have some help and direction so that they are not caught in
some kind of seamless web.
But can you explain the service you provided Huawei and
what ongoing monitoring you have conducted to maintain your
certainty that their equipment is safe to use? And did Huawei
pay you for this? And, I mean, if they did, you know, I don't
know where that places the veracity of the report. I mean, it
could be--I am not saying that is--but it could be the
equivalent of what happened on Wall Street when the rating
agencies were paid to give some of these, you know, too-big-to-
fail great, great ratings. But they paid for them. And so, you
know, in the aftermath and the rubble of the aftermath, that
didn't sound so good. It didn't feel so good and really wreaked
a lot of havoc. Did Huawei pay you for the report? And then the
rest of my question.
Mr. Lindquist. First of all no, Huawei did not pay for----
Ms. Eshoo. You did this voluntarily for them?
Mr. Lindquist. No, the telecommunications carrier paid for
it.
Ms. Eshoo. And who was that?
Mr. Lindquist. I am not at liberty to disclose that because
we have an NDA with them. If I get their permission, I can tell
you easily who it is.
Ms. Eshoo. I see. That is interesting.
Mr. Lindquist. But it is one of the major----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Lindquist [continuing]. Telecommunications companies.
And----
Ms. Eshoo. An American telecommunications company?
Mr. Lindquist. American telecommunications company.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Lindquist. Secondly----
Ms. Eshoo. Can you tell us this? Is it an American
telecommunications company that buys equipment from Huawei?
Mr. Lindquist. They are in the process of doing that. The
equipment, in answer the second part of your question----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Lindquist [continuing]. We are in the process of
evaluating their system. The evaluation is by no means complete
and we are only evaluating the radio area network portion of
it. There are numerous reports. We do not give a seal of
approval. What we do is take the known threats and we have very
good access through some of our work within the government to
the agreed list of cyber threats and what----
Ms. Eshoo. Well, do you get your information from the
intelligence community or Homeland Security?
Mr. Lindquist. The intelligence community.
Ms. Eshoo. This is so interesting. So you do a report that
vets Huawei, who wants to more than get a toehold which have
for years and it is very public and deeply concerned about. You
are paid by an American major telecommunications corporation
that is looking to buy Huawei's equipment and you work with the
intelligence community to see with the shortfalls are and vet
it and say that the equipment is terrific for the American
market. Have I gotten that straight?
Mr. Lindquist. Well, except that we don't say it is
terrific or----
Ms. Eshoo. What did you say?
Mr. Lindquist. What we do say is what we looked at and what
we found, and if we found things, what corrections were made.
Ms. Eshoo. I see. See, my issue on all of this is not
whether their equipment is good or not. That is not the point.
The point is that our infrastructure is so precious to this
country and it is a part of our national security. There is no
question about it. And so does it pose a threat? If so, how?
You know, maybe they make some of the best equipment in the
world but that is not my point. That is not my point at all. So
it is interesting what you just said.
And let me ask all the witnesses and you can just give me a
yes or no. Should there be transparency requirements, including
divestments in state ownership placed on companies seeking to
sell telecommunications infrastructure equipment to U.S.
network providers? And should this be a U.S. or an
international standard? Maybe it is hard to answer yes or no
but----
Mr. Goldstein. I don't think I can give you a yes or no,
ma'am. I think, particularly from our perspective, we didn't
look at those issues specifically. It is something we are happy
to talk to staff about.
Ms. Eshoo. I want to thank you for your work, too.
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Baker. I do think that as we adjust to a world where
there really are no telecommunications integrators in the
United States, we need authority to ask for quite a bit of
information from the people----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Baker [continuing]. Who are supplying that technology.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you.
Ms. Bisceglie. I absolutely agree. I think transparency is
the key and you liken it to--if you look at what is happening
with the pharmaceutical agencies within your actual State----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Ms. Bisceglie [continuing]. That the pharmaceutical law,
the E-Pedigree law of 2015 that has everybody looking at
transparency, I think there are lessons to be learned there.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes. OK.
Mr. Dix. Transparency is important and having a standard
that provides certification and accreditation like a
whitelisting type of opportunity would be very valuable to this
process.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you.
Mr. Rothenstein. Yes, we would agree. We would support some
level of transparency and I think, frankly, Ranking Member
Eshoo, you hit the nail on the head. It is less about the U.S.
Government and about the large service providers who have a lot
of know-how----
Ms. Eshoo. Yes.
Mr. Rothenstein [continuing]. The resources, and are
knowing smart buyers of telecom equipment understand the risks.
It is more about other critical infrastructure owners and
operators, the alternative operators, the enterprises who may
not have the same level of understanding and resources where
the transparency really is going to be important.
Ms. Eshoo. It is helpful. Yes.
Mr. Lindquist. As I said earlier, I would reiterate
transparency is important. That is why in the process that we
implement we are looking at all the design documentation behind
the various systems to ensure that there is no inexplicable
capability or functionality within the system.
Mr. Garfield. I work in the tech sector so, of course, we
believe in transparency. I don't have an answer as it relates
specifically to this issue.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your
patience. Thank you to all the witnesses.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields back
and the chair recognizes himself now for 5 minutes.
And if I could start with Mr. Goldstein, I found it kind of
interesting in your testimony on page 5 where you state that
other countries such as Australia, India, and the United
Kingdom are similarly concerned about emerging threats to the
commercial communication networks posed by the global supply
chain, have taken actions to improve their ability to address
this security challenge. What exactly have those three
countries done?
Mr. Goldstein. There are three countries--there are many
others----
Mr. Latta. Right.
Mr. Goldstein [continuing]. That we don't get into here.
But Australia has developed a regulatory reform proposal that
they expect to put in place shortly that would allow the
government to have more authority to examine what companies are
doing, what they are buying, how they document their purchases,
take a look to make sure that those companies are competent in
putting networks together, and if the government does not feel
that they are doing it in a way that can be secured, that they
can ask them to do more. They can require them to do more than
they are doing and it has enforcement powers and potential to
find those companies that don't do it. That is a proposal that
is likely to pass soon.
India has a very similar reform program in place. Where it
differs is that they have also proposed requiring--certainly
encouraging and in many cases requiring much of their equipment
to be made and tested in the country and could not be obtained
elsewhere. That particular part of the proposal has been put on
hold because the United States and some other countries have
objected because of potential barriers to trade.
And the United Kingdom has put in place a very similar
program to the one that Australia is now contemplating to have
a greater regulatory review over the practices and actions of
companies putting networks in place, which also has authorities
for them to go in and look very specifically at what they have
done and how they are going to get assurance that those are
secure networks, as well as to be able to enforce actions that
they feel would be necessary if those companies did not do as
much as they probably should be doing.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Mr. Rothenstein, if I could turn to your written testimony.
I thought it kind of interesting where you had also had
mentioned that in 2011 your company had made a conscious
decision to gradually exit key elements of your supply chain
from China. And at the time over 1/5 of your global chain at
that time originated in China. You go on to state that, you
know, you are looking at other jurisdictions that you are
moving into now in Mexico and Thailand. I am just curious. How
is that working out, and what have you found so far with that
transition?
Mr. Rothenstein. So in terms of the actual specific--so you
are right. About 20 percent at the time of our manufacturing
assembly of our supply chain originated in China and it is now
down to less than 1 percent. And in terms of the procurement to
finished to semi-finished assemblies, that was about 65 to 70
percent of the supply chain 2 years ago. That is now below 50
percent. The part that we attacked, as I mentioned in my
testimony, was that relating to active or programmable
components.
In terms of how it has gone, it has gone very, very well.
We have partnered effectively with two of our long-standing
contract manufacturers in Mexico and one in Thailand. We have
improved the velocity of our supply chain. It is a lot quicker
to get equipment to our key North American market when you are
driving it by truck over the border as opposed to the slow boat
from China. We have been able to essentially achieve cost
parity in terms of labor rates and landed cost rates largely
because those contract manufacturers had existing facilities in
those locations.
And as a result of that, we have been able to, in addition
to velocity maintaining cost parity, we have gotten tremendous
positive feedback from our customer base in terms of that
supply chain strategy. They viewed very positively our thought
process, our decision, and they have given us direct feedback
that they view with a greater level of comfort, security, and
assuredness of the risk profile of our equipment to their
networks.
Mr. Latta. And in the balance of my last 27 seconds if I
could turn to Mr. Lindquist, what are the different challenges
in protecting the software and hardware supply chain and is one
more vulnerable than the other?
Mr. Lindquist. What are the different challenges in
protecting it?
Mr. Latta. In protecting the software and hardware supply
chains and is one more vulnerable than the other?
Mr. Lindquist. I think the current state of affairs--and it
is referring to the second question first--I think the software
is more vulnerable. I think there are more people who have
perfected techniques for exploiting software than in the
hardware. It is also easier to do at any stage in the process.
And what we are endeavoring to do is to separate the vendor
from the products so that once the system has been determined
to be secure enough, and there is always some residual risk,
that the vendor no longer has access to that system to
introduce any new malicious capability into the system.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. And my time has
expired.
And the chair would now recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. It is a great committee with high-tech things. I
always joke that for my colleagues who don't have teenagers,
then the government ought to issue them one because that helps
you figure out how this stuff works.
The hearing this morning was on cyber security, too, with
the electric grid and the like. So we had a little debate about
the cloud, which I understand are server farms and that brings
some, especially when the government is contracting. And my son
and I are together on concerns about the cloud. You know,
everybody thinks it is--but, you know, there are some issues
there, cyber security and especially if the government is being
involved and really contracting that space.
We differ on CISPA and we have had numerous debates. So the
last time we cast the vote I was home that next morning and he
comes into the room and he is all grouchy and he is reading all
of his internet stuff. And he says I don't have to ask how you
voted on CISPA, Dad. I know how you voted--which I supported.
And he was none too pleased.
But my debate or discussion with him is information-
sharing, really on the code system so you could have firewalls.
And if our intel communities or you guys know something is
crazy going on out there, you can build a firewall. At least
you have an idea of what you might expect.
So, Mr. Garfield, I don't know if it was in your statement
but in question-and-answers you also talked about information-
sharing. And were you referring to that in the supply chain
debate that we are having here, that there ought to be
information-sharing like we would have in firewall protection a
la like CISPA?
Mr. Garfield. Yes is the simple answer. Information-sharing
and passing of risk mitigation information is critical to
protecting our cyber security generally but also for risk
assurance in the context of supply chains as well. And so, I
think, moving CISPA and the information components of that was
critically important and getting it through the Senate is
critically important----
Mr. Shimkus. But the CISPA bill that we are passing--you
know, correct me if I am wrong--I thought it was just on code.
Was it also on the supply chain? It could be?
Mr. Garfield. Yes, it is around sharing actionable
intelligence----
Mr. Shimkus. Here on----
Mr. Garfield [continuing]. On threats and mitigating
threats.
Mr. Shimkus. I got another good point for my son then,
right? I got another good point.
Mr. Garfield. You can give him my phone number.
Mr. Shimkus. Good. Great. Good, I always need a little
help.
And Ms. Bisceglie, SCRM, now, I have got a new acronym.
Just what we need, another acronym here in Washington, SCRM,
which was supply chain----
Ms. Bisceglie. Risk management.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Risk management, which is all
tied into this. I want to follow up with you on this cost
pressure issue that you raised and how do you think we can
really address it? I mean if you really want to make sure that
your equipment is secure, you are willing to pay for it, but if
you are in a competitive, very fast-moving technological field
and you want to get market entry and you want to have a low-
cost provider, there is risk involved in that, correct?
Ms. Bisceglie. There is, and actually, that is when the
chairman asked his question earlier when we talked about
putting a framework in place, something that is repeatable and
scalable. I personally think that is the key, an effort to keep
the acquisition costs down, because I totally understand the
need to get procurements done faster, technology to the street
faster, and into users' hands faster. But unless we have ways
of understanding what our organizational risk tolerance is so
that we know what protectionisms we already have in place, it
is going to be very difficult to really take risky endeavors
like you are mentioning.
Mr. Shimkus. And I was also caught by the whole debate.
There was a pharmaceutical reference which we are involved with
and the Track-and-Trace legislation----
Ms. Bisceglie. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. In maybe some States. Just for
the record, when some States move to a very controlled system,
they have to then postpone the enactment date because they
can't do it----
Ms. Bisceglie. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. In that time, which then would
affect the market in delivery of goods and services. So the
question is--because what the chairman said to begin with was,
first do no harm.
Ms. Bisceglie. Yes.
Mr. Shimkus. So does the Executive Order and its process
have the opportunity to do harm in this process? Does anyone
want to comment? Is there a concern that the Executive Order
and this rollout and their involvement has an opportunity to do
harm? Mr. Garfield?
Mr. Garfield. Yes, there is always risk, right? We are in
the business of risk mitigation but overall our view is that
the Executive Order actually creates a framework that advances
the ball in a very positive way. The fundamental question for
us is how can Congress complement that and that is what I tried
to articulate in talking about the things that Congress can do
to ensure it continues to move in a positive direction.
Mr. Shimkus. Mr. Chairman, my time is up but I think there
are a couple more that want to comment.
Mr. Dix. I would just add many of us want to approach the
answer to that question with an open mind, but we are taking a
wait-and-see approach because it is not at the endgame yet and
there are opportunities along the way for this not to be as
good as it might be.
Mr. Shimkus. Always good to trust but verify.
Mr. Dix. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. If no one else wants to jump in, I yield back
my time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. Now, I will turn to the gentleman
from Colorado, Mr. Gardner, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for joining us today.
And, Mr. Baker, I will direct this question to you.
Questions raised by foreign-directed cyber attacks on U.S.
institutions suggest that the United States Government must
give careful consideration to how the national security
interests are controlled, monitored, and regulated. How
concerned should we be by the prospect that any critical
infrastructure provider that serves the core of our national
security interests could come under foreign control and
therefore outside the supervision of the U.S. Government?
Mr. Baker. We have to be concerned about that. It is not
likely that we will be able to stop globalization of this
industry so the idea that we can simply say no I think is not
realistic. But we have to then put in place transparency and
regulatory authority that makes sure that those companies do
not serve other nations' interests when they supply us with
that equipment.
Mr. Gardner. And in keeping those kinds of concerns in
mind--and we have seen in the past the mergers of U.S.
companies with foreign companies--what are some of the national
security implications of such a purchase then?
Mr. Baker. So I did this a lot when I was at DHS and indeed
when I was at NSA. In the telecommunications industry we have a
well-developed set of rules in which we negotiate a mitigation
agreement with the buyer if the buyer is a foreign buyer, which
gives us some control. It is not perfect by any means, and I am
often unenthusiastic about the results. But it is the tool that
we have.
In the context of companies selling products to the United
States, we have none of those controls unless they actually buy
a U.S. company so that any company can sell products into our
critical infrastructure without any regulation or transparency.
It is only when they try to buy a U.S. company that we have any
authority at all.
Mr. Gardner. Reports of stories of foreign-directed cyber
attacks against U.S. institutions provoke difficult questions
about the control reaching oversight of the United States
national security interests. Do you agree that the idea of
surrendering control of a critical infrastructure provider like
Sprint to a foreign entity Softbank beyond full U.S. oversight
deserves very careful consideration and should not be hurried?
Mr. Baker. It certainly deserves careful consideration. I
would point out, as I answered to the last question, for many
the security agencies there will be a temptation to say the
only way we will be able to tell Sprint the products they can
buy, what they can have in their infrastructure, is if we enter
into a negotiated agreement. That is a negotiated agreement
with a foreign buyer. They have no authority at all in the
other context so it is an odd set, currently, of incentives for
the U.S. Government in which they might actually have more
regulatory authority if they let the transaction go through.
Mr. Gardner. You mentioned in your testimony a little bit
about CFIUS, whether it is adequate or not. That is relied on
by Congress, by the FCC. Where are the pitfalls? What are the
problems?
Mr. Baker. The problem is that if you want to introduce
products that are not reliable into the U.S. market, you can
just walk in and start taking orders. Even if it is going right
into the core of the telecommunications industry, there is no
authority anywhere in the U.S. Government to say no to that
today. Only if an unreliable buyer or seller actually tries to
acquire a U.S. company is there any authority at all.
Team Telecom at the FCC has some authority over foreign
carriers but not over foreign suppliers of equipment. CFIUS
gives authority only over buyers of U.S. companies. So there is
a real regulatory gap there with respect to some of this
equipment that we have not yet found a solution for.
Mr. Garfield. May I weigh in on this?
Mr. Gardner. Please.
Mr. Garfield. I think we have to be exceptionally careful
about developing prophylactic rules around private sector
agreements as it relates to supply chain assurances. India was
used as a reference earlier in talking about an example of
countries moving in a particular direction. There are a whole
host of companies that I represent in the technology sector
that are being foreclosed from the Indian market because of
those types of rules. And so I just think that those types of
rules have to be carefully calibrated and, from my perspective,
discouraged.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Walden. I thank the gentleman. I thank all of our
witnesses and committee members for their participation today,
really a superb panel of witnesses. Your information that you
shared has been very, very valuable. Your written testimony is
helpful to us and to our staffs as we wrestle with this issue
going forward in protecting the country and trying also not to
stifle innovation and technology being developed in America. So
we have got to get this right. And your depths of experience
and your willingness to come here and share that with us is a
great benefit to the American people. And so we thank you for
your participation; we thank you for your assistance.
And the record will remain open for additional questions, I
am sure. And we hope that you will accept our invitation to
work with us even further as we go forward. We want to get this
right. So thank you very much. With that, the Subcommittee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:12 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Wired and wireless technologies are increasingly becoming
the medium over which we manage our lives, our government, and
our country. As a result, national security, economic security,
and personal security are now also matters of communications
security. Where once it may have been sufficient to guard the
doors to our homes, our banks, our offices, our factories, and
our utilities, today we must also guard the virtual doors to
our networks.
This hearing will look at the locks we place on those
networks throughout the communications supply chain. Just as
the networks and the cyber threats they confront are varied and
ever evolving, so too must be our defenses. A one-size-fits-all
solution is likely to be as successful as fitting every lock
with the same key.
What means are at the disposal of the private sector and
government to secure our networks? What's working? What isn't?
Where are the threats coming from? What kind of risk and cost-
benefit analyses should we be engaging in to find the right
solutions? I ask the witnesses to help frame the issues for us
today so we can determine where we-and the nation-should focus
attention. If no one watches the door, surely someone will walk
in who shouldn't.

#  #  #

----------

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5436.127


