- CHALLENGES FACING AMERICA'S BUSINESSES UNDER THE PATIENT PROTECTION AND AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CHALLENGES FACING AMERICA'S BUSINESSES UNDER THE PATIENT PROTECTION AND
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 26, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-60

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

85-450                    WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          LOIS CAPPS, California
Vice Chairman                      MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JERRY McNERNEY, California
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PETE OLSON, Texas                    G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   PAUL TONKO, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 GENE GREEN, Texas
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)        officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Tim Murphy, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the state
of Colorado, opening statement.................................     4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the state of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the state
of California, opening statement...............................     8

Witnesses

Michael Brey, Owner, Hobby Works.................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    13
Answers to submitted questions...............................   118
Jeffrey S. Kelly, CEO, Hamill Manufacturing Company..............    15
Prepared statement...........................................    17
Answers to submitted questions...............................   121
Steve Lozinsky, Vice President, Sparkle and Shine Cleaning
Services, Inc..................................................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Hugh Morrow, President, Ruby Falls, LLC..........................    26
Prepared statement...........................................    28
Answers to submitted questions...............................   124
William Daley, Legislative and Policy Director, Main Street
Alliance.......................................................    57
Prepared statement...........................................    59
Katie Mahoney, Executive Director, Health Policy, U.S. Chamber of
Commerce.......................................................    68
Prepared statement...........................................    70
Answers to submitted questions...............................   128
Michelle R. Neblett, Director of Labor and Workforce Policy,
National Restaurant Association................................    89
Prepared statement...........................................    91
Answers to submitted questions...............................   131
Neil Trautwein, Vice President and Employee Benefits Policy
Counsel, National Retail Federation............................   102
Prepared statement...........................................   104
Answers to submitted questions...............................   137

CHALLENGES FACING AMERICA'S BUSINESSES UNDER THE PATIENT PROTECTION AND
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 26, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Tim Murphy
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Murphy, Burgess, Blackburn,
Gingrey, Scalise, Harper, Olson, Gardner, Griffith, Johnson,
Long, Ellmers, Barton, Upton (ex officio), DeGette, Schakowsky,
Butterfield, Welch, Tonko, Green, and Waxman (ex officio).
Also Present: Representative Sarbanes.
Staff Present: Sean Bonyun, Communications Director; Karen
Christian, Chief Counsel, Oversight; Andy Duberstein, Deputy
Press Secretary; Julie Goon, Health Policy Advisor; Brad
Grantz, Policy Coordinator, O&I; Sydne Harwick, Legislative
Clerk; Brittany Havens, Legislative Clerk; Sean Hayes, Counsel,
O&I; Andrew Powaleny, Deputy Press Secretary; Brian Cohen,
Minority Subcommittee Staff Director, Senior Policy Advisor;
Hannah Green, Minority Staff Assistant; Stephen Salsbury,
Minority Special Assistant; and Matthew Siegler, Minority
Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIM MURPHY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Murphy. Good morning. I convened this hearing of the
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations entitled
``Challenges Facing America's Businesses Under the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act.''
Today, we will hear firsthand from business owners about
the impact the healthcare law and its costs and requirements
are having on their employees and their families, the people
they care about deeply.
First, I'm pleased to introduce a constituent from my
district, Mr. Jeffrey Kelly. Mr. Kelly is a CEO and owner of
Hamill Manufacturing Company, a 62-year-old company based in
Penn Township, Pennsylvania. Like many small businesses across
the country, Hamill is loyal to its employees, and Mr. Kelly
recognizes that providing benefits to employees is not only the
right thing to do, but attracts better employees and helps to
drive success for all.
Yet as Mr. Kelly will testify today, since passage of the
healthcare law, his companies premiums have risen 46 percent--
that's 46 percent. And as Mr. Kelly and other business owners
look forward to full implementation of the Affordable Care Act
in a few months, their brokers and insurance agents have warned
them to brace for the higher fees and taxes associated with the
healthcare law.
Questions remain for families, workers and employers
because there is a huge gap between what they hoped for and
what they got. Good intentions do not guarantee good results.
Today, I'm sure the witnesses will continue to hear the
same promises from supporters of the Affordable Care Act. Mr.
Kelly, I don't think you'll find much comfort in the fact that
even though your premiums keep going up, supporters of the law
today will tell you that if you look at the numbers the right
way, premiums are going down.
In addition to the rising costs for businesses, the
witnesses today will also explain how the law's requirements
will directly impact workers. Steve Lozinsky operates a
cleaning service that he has grown from 1 employee to over 200.
Mr. Lozinsky's business is run on a tight margin. When he bids
on contracts, the costs of his service is often the determining
factor. With less than 6 months to go until the Affordable Care
Act is implemented, Mr. Lozinsky is weighing three options for
his company. Option one is to reduce every employee's hours to
less than 30 hours per week. Option 2 is to fire 100 employees.
And there's a third option: going out of business. Mr. Lozinsky
is a real-world example of how the employee mandate is causing
havoc for American families.
Members on this committee may have their own opinions on
whether the passage of the Affordable Care Act was the right
decision, but we cannot disagree on the facts. The costs and
the requirements of this law are forcing many businesses across
the country to make difficult decisions, decisions that will
impact the strength and growth of their companies, the wages of
the workers, their ability to hire new staff.
And the witnesses before us today are not outliers. Last
week a Gallup poll revealed that 41 percent of small businesses
have frozen hiring because of the Affordable Care Act.
Meanwhile the same Gallup poll found that 19 percent of small
businesses have reduced their number of workers because of the
law. And that is remarkable. Nearly one-fifth of the Nation's
small businesses have reduced employment because of the
Affordable Care Act.
Uncertainty over the impact of this law is building a mere
months from full implementation. The nonpartisan Government
Accountability Office told this committee last week that
implementation of the law is behind schedule. Premiums continue
to climb, although this hasn't stopped the law's defenders from
claiming otherwise. Competition has failed to materialize as
well, and not only are we hearing stories about insurers
sitting out exchanges in places like New Hampshire, North
Carolina and California, last week we learned that one of the
Nation's largest insurers was simply going to exit California
because of the individual insurance market altogether.
Meanwhile stories continue to break about cash-strapped
local governments cutting hours of workers because they simply
cannot afford the healthcare law.
Again, I want to thank our witnesses before us today, and
it takes courage to come here and talk about the nuts and bolts
of your businesses. And we all greatly appreciate your taking
the time to do so.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Murphy follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Tim Murphy

Today, we will hear firsthand from business owners about
the impact the health care law and its costs and requirements
are having on their employees and their families--the people
they care about deeply.
First, I am pleased to introduce a constituent from my
district, Mr. Jeffrey Kelly. Mr. Kelly is the CEO and Owner of
Hamill Manufacturing Company, a 62-year-old company based in
Penn Township, Pennsylvania. Like many small businesses across
the country, Hamill is loyal to its employees. Mr. Kelly
recognizes that providing benefits to employees is not only the
right thing to do, but attracts better employees and helps to
drive success for all.
Yet, as Mr. Kelly will testify today, since passage of the
healthcare law, his company's premiums have risen 46 percent.
And as Mr. Kelly and other business owners look forward to full
implementation of the Affordable Care Act in a few months,
their brokers and insurance agents have warned them to brace
for the higher fees and taxes associated with the healthcare
law.
Questions remain for families, workers, and employers
because there's a huge gap between what they hoped for and what
they got.
Good intentions don't guarantee good results.
Today, I'm sure the witnesses will continue to hear the
same promises from supporters of the Affordable Care Act. Mr.
Kelly, I don't think you'll find much comfort in the fact that
even though your premiums keep going up, supporters of the law
today will tell you that if you look at the numbers the right
way, premiums are going down.
In addition to the rising costs for businesses, the
witnesses today will also explain how the law's requirements
will directly impact workers. Steve Lozinsky operates a
cleaning service that he's grown from one employee to over 200.
Mr. Lozinsky's business runs on a tight margin. When he bids on
contracts, the cost of his services is often the determining
factor. With less than six months to go until the Affordable
Care Act is implemented, Mr. Lozinsky is weighing three options
for his company. Option one is reduce every employees' hours to
less than 30 hours per week. Option two is fire 100 employees.
There is a third option--go out of business. Mr. Lozinsky is a
real-world example of how the employee mandate is causing havoc
for American families.
Members on this committee may have their own opinions on
whether passage of the Affordable Care Act was the right
decision but we cannot disagree on the facts: the costs and
requirements of this law are forcing many businesses across the
country to make difficult decisions, decisions that will impact
the strength and growth of their companies, the wages of their
workers, and their ability to hire new staff. The witnesses
before us today are not outliers. Last week a new Gallup poll
revealed that 41 percent of small businesses have frozen hiring
because of Obamacare. Meanwhile, that same Gallup Poll found
that 19 percent of small businesses have reduced their number
of workers because of the law. That is remarkable: nearly one
fifth of the nation's small businesses have reduced employment
because of the Affordable Care Act.
Uncertainty over the impact of this law is building mere
months from full implementation. The nonpartisan Government
Accountability Office told this committee last week that
implementation of the law is behind schedule. Premiums continue
to climb-although this hasn't stopped the law's defenders from
claiming otherwise. Competition has failed to materialize as
well; not only are we hearing stories about insurers sitting
out the Exchanges in places like New Hampshire, North Carolina,
and California, last week we learned that one of the nation's
largest insurers was simply going to exit the California
individual insurance market altogether. Meanwhile, stories
continue to break about cash-strapped local governments cutting
hours of workers because they simply cannot afford the
healthcare law.
Again, I want to thank our witnesses before us today. It
takes courage to come here and talk about the nuts and bolts of
your businesses, and we all greatly appreciate you taking the
time to do so.

#  #  #

Mr. Murphy. With that, I'm going to turn the remainder of
my time over to Dr. Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the chairman. And I also want to join
with thanking the witnesses for being here, taking time away
from your families and out of your productive lives to share
your stories with us. It is important that you do so.
So the President promised when he signed the Affordable
Care Act that it would add hundreds of thousands of new jobs to
the United States economy. But as we get closer and closer, 6
months and 5 days, to full implementation, it becomes apparent
that job loss, not job creation is the actual result.
Look, business owners, I know, because I was one before
coming to Congress, you tend to be goal-directed. The natural
inclination of a business owner is to want to expand and grow.
But instead of facilitating this growth, the healthcare law
incentivizes businesses to decrease their workforce, and even
provides an outlet for employers to drop employees by providing
Federal subsidies in the exchange.
The Affordable Care Act not only burdens many workers with
lower wages, fewer hours, reduced job growth, but it also
increases the possibility of business failure. At a time when
the country is finally beginning to find relief from the severe
recession and high unemployment, it's not the time to
discourage economic growth. Let's remove the hurdles that the
President has placed on economic growth and job creation and
empower our businesses to propel the United States toward full
economic recovery.
I thank the chairman for the recognition. I will yield back
the time.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognizes the ranking member of the committee Ms.
DeGette for her opening prepared statement, 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DEGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I really
appreciate your holding this hearing.
As we have been discussing for a long time, ensuring that
the Affordable Care Act is properly implemented is a top
priority for me and should be for all of us.
I agree with you that there is a great deal of confusion
and even fear about what the Affordable Care Act will mean for
businesses and their employees. Just like everybody else on
this committee, I hear this every week when I go home to Denver
from all sizes of businesses.
I hope the hearing can help clear up some of the confusion
and bring to light some of the very real benefits this law is
already providing to businesses and their employees. I also
hope that it can help key in for us some of the areas that we
need to improve and have further hearings on in this oversight
subcommittee.
I do just want to mention several key pieces of the
Affordable Care Act that are already benefiting small
businesses. The Affordable Care Act contains tax credits that
can reduce the cost of small businesses' health insurance by 35
percent. Four million businesses are eligible for this tax
credit, and nearly 400,000 have already taken advantage of it.
Beginning next year, the value of the tax credit will rise to
50 percent of an eligible small business' health insurance
costs. I hope we can work together to help educate our small
businesses about this important benefit of the health reform
law.
On Friday of last week, I met with a group of small
businesses at one of our small business incubators in Denver,
and I asked these small businesses how many of them really
wanted to offer insurance to their employees. All of them
raised their hand. Every single one of them raised their hand.
And then I said to them, did you know that you will be eligible
for a tax credit of up to 50 percent of your costs? And most of
them were unaware of that. So I think there's a big education
process that we need to undertake to let people know the
benefits they can get.
Something else that the Affordable Care Act will help with
is it contains medical loss ratio provisions to limit overhead
and administrative waste by insurance companies. Now, I heard
from the chairman--and I hear from small businesses all the
time--that premiums increased dramatically the last couple of
years, and that is correct. That is exactly why we passed this
bill, and that's why we put the medical loss ratio provisions
in the bill, because insurance rates have just been going wild
the last number of years.
So the provisions that we put into effect in the bill have
already helped with $1.6 billion in rebates by insurance
companies to consumers, and they have also contributed to $5
billion in premium savings over the past 2 years. But in the
next few months, nearly 6 million business owners and employees
will get over $310 million in rebate checks from their
insurance companies. And these medical loss ratio provisions
are only going to continue to work to bend the curve of the
increase in premiums that our small businesses have been
seeing.
The Affordable Care Act contains a number of long-overdue,
commonsense reforms that are driving down the costs of health
care and pushing waste out of the system. And as these reforms
are have gone into effect, we have seen a persistent slowdown
in the core cost of health care. Medicare cost growth is at
historic lows. PricewaterhouseCoopers found that overall
healthcare cost growth was at its lowest level in 50 years. So
this slowdown, combined with the other provisions of the ACA,
will help small businesses begin to afford healthcare coverage.
But we all know the biggest changes are going to come in
2014. Small businesses will have the opportunity to purchase
health insurance on the State or Federal marketplaces. They
will benefit from increased competition. There will be more of
a choice in healthcare plans with quality benefits, and
businesses are going to be able to compare them side by side.
Businesses will also no longer be in danger of facing
significant cost increases just because one of their employees
becomes ill or has an accident.
Of course, there is also a new responsibility for business
owners. Many will be required for the first time to provide
minimal health insurance for their employees. I can understand
why businesses are nervous about this, but while the benefits
are great, the burden is not likely to be as high as folks
fear. If a business has less than 50 employees, there's no
penalty if they do not over offer coverage. If there are more
than 50 employees, it's likely that the coverage they already
have complies with the law. If they don't offer coverage,
there's going to be new options to give people coverage.
And so I know there is a lot of healthy skepticism. I hear
it from my constituents, too. I look forward to working with
you, Mr. Chairman, and the witnesses here today to help
implement this bill so that it works for everybody and gives
high-quality health insurance for all Americans.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Murphy. The gentlelady yields back.
I now turn to the chairman of the full committee Mr. Upton
for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One of my top priorities as chairman of this committee has
been rigorous oversight of the Affordable Care Act to learn
more about how the law is being implemented and how it is
impacting Americans and the Nation's jobs creators.
Last month, the committee released a report based on actual
data provided by the Nation's leading insurers that chronicled
the looming premium rate shock in store for millions. And just
last week the nonpartisan GAO released a report requested by
this committee about implementation, and the findings raised
additional red flags.
The GAO found that despite having over 3 years to prepare,
this administration is woefully unprepared for implementation,
and the missed deadlines and delays show potential for further
challenges ahead of the October 1st enrollment date.
Today we are here to learn more about how the Affordable
Care Act is affecting business owners and their employees. It's
our job creators who are on the front lines of implementation.
They have a very important story to tell, and I would like to
welcome our witnesses and thank them for taking the time to be
here for this important discussion.
Like many small businesses across the country, the choices
facing the business owners who will testify this morning are
not easy ones. Because of the cost of the law and its
requirements, these businesses will have to make gut-wrenching
decisions whether they can keep the employees that they have,
whether they will have to lay off employees or reduce their
hours, and whether or not they can continue offering health
insurance altogether. These are not hypotheticals issues; these
are real questions businesses are facing today.
And we'll hear today for some businesses the costs of the
law may force them to close their doors, reduce their hours.
Despite the President's promise that the law would lower costs
for businesses and families, the testimony of these witnesses
reveals that the Affordable Care Act is not, in fact,
affordable to a number of them and for many of the small
business owners across the country.
Sadly, job creators large and small across the country are
facing very difficult, similar decisions. In Michigan, a
medical device manufacturer announced that it would lay off
1,000 folks--1,000 employees from across its global workforce
because of the Affordable Care Act.
The healthcare law's threat to job creators and job growth
is real, and I worry about similar announcements that will be
all too common. Our rigorous oversight will continue as we fast
approach the law's full implementation.
And I yield the balance of my time to Mrs. Blackburn from
Tennessee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

One of my top priorities as chairman of this committee has
been rigorous oversight of the Affordable Care Act to learn
more about how the law is being implemented and how it is
impacting Americans and the nation's job creators. Last month,
the committee released a report, based on actual data provided
by the nation's leading insurers, that chronicled the looming
premium rate shock in store for millions. And just last week,
the nonpartisan Government Accountability Office released a
report requested by this committee about implementation, and
the findings raised additional red flags. The GAO found that,
despite having over three years to prepare, the administration
is still woefully unprepared for implementation and the missed
deadlines and delays show potential for further challenges
ahead of the October 1st enrollment.
Today, we are here to learn more about how the Affordable
Care Act is affecting business owners and their employees. It
is our job creators who are on the frontlines of
implementation--they have a very important story to tell, and I
would like to welcome our witnesses and thank them for taking
the time to be here for this important discussion. Like many
small businesses across the country, the choices facing the
business owners who will testify this morning are not easy
ones. Because of the costs of the law and its requirements,
these businesses will have to make gut wrenching decisions--
whether they can keep the employees they have; whether they
will have to let employees go or cut their hours; or whether
they can continue offering health insurance altogether to their
employees. These are not hypothetical issues. These are real
questions businesses are facing right now. As we will hear
today, for some businesses, the costs of this law may force
them to close their doors. Despite the president's promise that
this law would ``lower costs for businesses and families,'' the
testimony of these witnesses reveals that the Affordable Care
Act is not, in fact, ``affordable'' for many of the nation's
small business owners.
Sadly, job creators large and small across the country are
facing similar difficult decisions. In my home state of
Michigan, a medical device manufacturer announced it would lay
off over 1,000 employees from across its global workforce
because of the Affordable Care Act. The health care law's
threat to job creators and job growth is real, and I worry
similar announcements will soon be all too common. Our rigorous
oversight will continue as we fast approach the law's full
implementation.

#  #  #

Mrs. Blackburn. I thank the chairman for yielding.
I welcome all of our witnesses, and I especially want to
welcome a Tennessean, Mr. Hugh Morrow, who is a constituent of
Congressman Fleischmann's, and he is out of the Chattanooga
area and has a wonderful location there. He's president of Ruby
Falls, and Ruby Falls is this Nation's largest and deepest
waterfall that is open to the public.
So welcome, Mr. Morrow. We look forward to your perspective
on how the Affordable Care Act is going to affect you, your
business, seasonal, part-time workers, and how that law's
definition of a full-time employee affects you.
So welcome to all, and I yield the balance of my time to
the gentlelady from North Carolina Mrs. Ellmers.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Madam Vice Chairman, and at this
time I am introducing my witness, Mr. Lozinsky from North
Carolina. It is my honor to do so today.
Mr. Lozinsky and I became friends while discussing many of
the issues that he had concerns about--with health care
lawbeing implemented, or, as we call it, the Affordable Care
Act, Obamacare, the Unaffordable Care Act. And since that time
we've had many discussions, and I have actually witnessed the
changes that have occurred in his business and the concerns
that he has had.
His business was started a number of years ago in 1998 with
1 employee, now having 240 employees. He is a small business
owner. He loves his employees, they are family, and he has
expressed this to me many times. He is very concerned. Thank
you for being here today and the bravery that you're showing
coming forward to discuss this issue.
Mr. Murphy. The gentlelady yields back the balance of her
time.
I now turn to Mr. Waxman, the ranking member of the full
committee, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My hope is that this can be a productive hearing. We need
to educate small businesses about their new benefits and new
responsibilities under the law and make sure that we're on the
right track to have the State and the Federal marketplaces for
small businesses to purchase insurance up and running by
October 1.
But I'm concerned that today's hearing will be just another
exercise in fear mongering and misinformation, a continuation
of the Republican strategy on healthcare reform for more than 3
years now. After all, we've faced 37 times efforts to repeal
the law in part or in its entirety on the House floor. And even
one of our Republican's witnesses today said, I quote, ``little
patience,'' unquote, for this fruitless effort.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I held a series of forums with small
businesses in my district. These business owners wanted to know
what the law requires, the benefit it offers, and where they
can get more information. This is the law after all, and they
needed the basic facts about the law, not the propaganda.
It was helpful for them to know that businesses with fewer
than 50 employees do not face a penalty if they offer no
coverage to their employees. It was helpful for them to know
that the Affordable Care Act does not require employers to
provide coverage to part-time and seasonal workers. They are
gratified to learn that beginning on January 1, 2014, they'll
be able to use the marketplaces to choose from a wide variety
of healthcare plans for their employees, and that they'll
benefit from new transparency and competition in the
marketplaces, that they will not have to worry about their
premiums skyrocketing because one of their employees becomes
ill or has an accident, and that they may be eligible for tax
credits to pay for up to 50 percent of the cost of coverage.
My colleagues who have expressed a great deal of concern
about this issue, or employers that may have to close their
doors should be reminded, 95 percent of employers in this
country with 50 employees or more already have healthcare
coverage for those employees. So when we hear about people
closing their door, well, we hear that for anything the
government hopes to do. Whether it's to protect people in the
workplace from hazards or exposure to chemicals that may harm
them, or to regulate the businesses in which they act, we hear
it all the time, they're going to have to close their doors.
Mr. Chairman, we should be joining together to make sure
the Affordable Care Act is implemented effectively, not wasting
time on dozens of votes to repeal the law. I noticed that one
of our witnesses that the Democrats suggested, Mike Brey, for
example, is a business owner who knows that quality health
coverage is a valuable way to attract quality employees. He has
seen health insurance premiums rise dramatically in the years
before reform. He's starting to see new competition amongst
insurers, and finally he sees an opportunity to get costs under
control.
Members of Congress have an important jobs in the months
ahead. Our constituents are coming to us looking for help in
understanding their new benefits and new responsibilities. We
have an obligation to give them the facts about the law and to
help them understand their options in a fair and
straightforward way. I hope all members of this committee will
join with me in that effort. Our goal should be to educate, not
scare or mislead.
Mr. Waxman. I want to yield a brief period of time to the
gentleman from Maryland Mr. Sarbanes to introduce his witness.
Mr. Sarbanes. I thank the gentleman for yielding. I
appreciate the committee giving me the opportunity to join the
hearing today.
I'm excited to welcome Michael Brey here, who is a
constituent of mine from Annapolis, Maryland.
Michael, as you can see, Members of Congress will walk over
hot coals to welcome their constituents here to these hearings.
It hasn't been that difficult today because the committee has
indulged me.
But we are excited to have Michael here. He is the founder
and president of Brey Corporation, which he started back in
1992. He acquired Hobby Works, which is a unique toy store
offering models, trains, planes, boats, games, in 1993, and
since that time he has increased Hobby Works to five locations
in Maryland and Virginia. The sales have grown 600 percent to
$5 million in 2012.
Michael may be familiar to some of you because he is
someone who is a strong advocate for small businesses. He has
worked with Members on both sides of the aisle over time in
both the House and Senate on how healthcare issues impact small
businesses, and we are very excited to have him here and hear
his discussion of why he thinks the Affordable Care Act offers
real opportunities for relief to his business.
Thank you, Michael, for being with us.
I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman's time has expired.
So now all of our witnesses have been introduced. I will do
it one more time here. Our first witness is Michael Brey. He
owns Hobby Works, a company he started in 1992. It has grown to
five stores in the Virginia and Maryland area.
Our second witness is Jeff Kelly, CEO and owner of Hamill
Manufacturing Company, the family-owned business, precision
machining and fabricating company serving many defense
industry-related needs.
Our third witness, Steve Lozinsky, vice president of
Sparkle and Shine Cleaning, providing construction and
entertainment cleaning along with janitorial services.
And last witness is Hugh Morrow, president of Ruby Falls,
the Nation's largest and deepest waterfall open to the public.
Because of the seasonal nature of his business, Mr. Morrow has
both full-time and part-time employees.
I'm now going to swear in the witnesses. You are all aware
that the committee is holding an investigative hearing and when
doing so has the practice of taking testimony under oath. Do
any of you have any objections to testifying under oath?
All the witnesses answered negative.
Now, the chair then advises you that under the rules of the
House and the rules of the committee, you are entitled to be
advised by counsel. Do any of you desire to be advised by
counsel during your testimony today?
And all of the witnesses say no.
So in that case if you would all please rise, raise your
right hand, and I'll swear you in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Murphy. You are now under oath and subject to the
penalties set forth in Title 18, section 1001 of the United
States Code. You may now each give a 5-minute summary of your
written statement. We will recognize first Mr. Brey for 5
minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL BREY, OWNER, HOBBY WORKS; JEFFREY S.
KELLY, CEO, HAMILL MANUFACTURING COMPANY; STEVE LOZINSKY, VICE
PRESIDENT, SPARKLE AND SHINE CLEANING SERVICES, INC.; AND HUGH
MORROW, PRESIDENT, RUBY FALLS, LLC

TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL BREY

Mr. Brey. Well, thank you, Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member
DeGette and members of the committee for having me. As you
heard, my name is Mike Brey, owner of Hobby Works, a hobby and
toy shop I acquired in 1992, which I've since expanded to five
locations in Maryland and Virginia. I also volunteer my time
and entrepreneurial expertise to help other small business
owners and small business advocacy groups find solutions to
problems that we, small business owners, face every day.
One of the fastest-growing problems is the nonstop rising
cost of health insurance, and that's what I'm here to talk
about today. From the very beginning, I offered health
insurance coverage to keep and retain my good employees, and
one of the first questions people ask me when you're hiring is
if you provide health coverage. And I have taken some pride in
being able to say, yes, and the coverage we're offering you is
the same coverage that the president of the company and his
family are on.
My business has been successful, and we've been able to
grow, but my ability to keep my workers happy and secure by
providing health insurance coverage has eroded. Our health plan
once cost 100 bucks a person, all of which was covered by the
company. Over the years our premium has tripled. My employees
have seen their costs increase fivefold as they pay more of the
premium for worse coverage. My workers are burdened by high
deductibles, and so they put off preventive care for themselves
and their children by avoiding the doctor.
Passage of the Affordable Care Act was the first thing in
years that gave me some hope that this endless spiral of
escalating costs and declining quality of coverage might
finally end. I'm looking forward to full implementation of the
Affordable Care Act next year when our State exchange opens and
more cost-containment provisions go into effect. Perhaps then I
will finally start to have the certainty and stability every
business owner craves.
There are benefits of the ACA for my small business. Long
before anybody ever heard of Obamacare, the high cost of health
insurance was one of my top business concerns. Costs
skyrocketed for many years while quality of coverage decreased.
The status quo was utterly unacceptable. Doing nothing would
have wreaked havoc on mine and other small business owners'
bottom lines and our ability to create jobs.
An MIT economist, Jonathan Gruber, did an analysis of the
consequences of doing nothing. He found that without reform
employers would pay trillions, $2 trillion, in healthcare costs
by 2018, costing several hundred thousand jobs, $800 billion in
small business wages, and $50 billion in profits. Those numbers
show why passage of the Affordable Care Act was so important.
There have been objections from small business owners about
this law, but I believe that that discontent is largely based
on misinformation and myths. One myth I hear all the time is
that small businesses will go out of business because they'll
be required to provide costly health insurance to their
employees. This is simply not true. Ninety-six percent of
businesses in this country have fewer than 50 full-time
employees, which means they're essentially unaffected. Of the 4
percent who do have more than 50 employees, 96 percent of them
already offer insurance. So that leaves less than two-tenths of
1 percent--not 2 percent; two-tenths of 1 percent of small
businesses that have more than 50 full-time employees that
don't offer insurance that will be impacted. That's a pretty
small segment of the community.
I'm one of those employers with fewer than 50 full-time
equivalent employees, and starting next year I'll be able to
use our State SHOP Exchange to purchase coverage. This is huge.
In Maryland we haven't had a lot of choice. This exchange will
allow me to pool together my buying power with other small
business owners when purchasing insurance. Presumably with a
larger--with more competition and a larger pool, the market
will become more competitive, and prices will stabilize, maybe,
maybe even come down as a result. And I crave this kind of
predictability.
Another way the law will help me is to rein in the hidden
costs in the system, like shouldering the burden, the huge
burden, of uninsured receiving medical care. When everybody is
required to have insurance, there won't be the need to pass
those costs on to me.
The Affordable Care Act isn't perfect and won't solve all
of our business problem overnight, but it is the first
meaningful law in decades that meets many small business core
needs in regards to rising healthcare costs. In this fragile
economy, policies that allow me to spend less on health
premiums, and reinvest more of my profits, and create more jobs
is what I need the most.
Implementing and strengthening the Affordable Care Act is
the only logical path forward to lowering the overall cost of
health care, providing more options for coverage for small
business owners like myself, and enabling small businesses to
resume our traditional role as primary job generators.
I would like to thank the committee for having me and
giving me the opportunity to address you today.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Mr. Kelly, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF JEFFREY S. KELLY

Mr. Kelly. Good morning. Chairman Murphy, members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Jeff Kelly, CEO and owner of Hamill
Manufacturing, a veteran-owned family business based in Penn
Township, Pennsylvania. The company was started by my father in
a chicken coop in 1952 in our backyard. Our first contract was
for parts for the U.S.S. Nautilus, the first nuclear-powered
Navy ship. Hamill has produced critical components for every
naval reactor built since, and we plan to continue to do so.
Our company is made up of machinists, welders, inspectors,
engineers, administrators, among others. There are about 125 of
us in the Hamill family, and I cannot stress that point enough
that Hamill, just like thousands of other small businesses, our
employees are our family. I plan to retire in 4 years, at which
point Hamill will be 100 percent ESOP. Currently the employees
own 49 percent of the company.
We pay well. Our average salary is about $50,000, which,
combined with our company size, means we are largely on our own
and will not benefit from most of the subsidies and tax credits
from the Affordable Care Act.
We offer good benefits to help to attract and retain
talent. In southwest Pennsylvania companies like ours compete
against much larger employees who can offer higher wages and
more easily absorb increased healthcare costs. The irony of
this: The cost of our generous plans are increasing so rapidly
that we can no longer provide regular wage increases, which we
need to attract and retain the best talent.
Our healthcare costs for the fiscal year ending March 10--
March 31, 2010, were 795,000. Today with the same number of
employees, they are 1.2 million. And we have--would have been
1.8 million were it not for changes we made to prevent
catastrophic increases difficult for any small business to
absorb.
The future should be bright, but current and future
healthcare costs cloud it. The Affordable Care Act is proving
to be unpredictable and unaffordable. Since the passage of the
law in 2010, our healthcare premiums have increased 46 percent.
It would have been 20 percent higher if we had not taken some
extraordinary means to hold the increase to 20 percent. A
nearly 50 percent increase in healthcare costs is virtually
impossible for small business to absorb, let alone a two-thirds
increase.
To avoid the additional 20 percent, we changed carriers,
doubled our deductible from 2,500 per individual and 5,000 per
family to 5,000 and 10,000. We also instituted an aggressive
wellness program and charged a premium for all employees and
spouses who are tobacco users. The higher deductible was
misleading since we, as the employer, cover 95 percent of the
employees' costs, meaning the company covers 4,500 or 9,000,
while the employee pays a 500 individual and 1,000 family
deductible. That means the amount the company will pay each
year actually depends on how many employees and by how much
they exceed their nominal deductible. In the past fiscal year,
those additional costs were $110,000, money we could have used
to hire two employees or increase wages to retain employees.
So we track two numbers, the premiums we pay and the
company portion of the plan deductible. Currently the company
pays 80 percent of the premium, while the employee pays 20
percent of the balance. In time we will have to ask employees
to share more of the expense towards a 60/40 split. The speed
with which we move to that position will depend on how steep
the future cost curve is. That may in turn cause us to lose
valuable employees. Talk about a no-win situation.
In addition to the actual cost involved with having a
company-sponsored healthcare plan, one cannot overstate how
much management time and resources are spent on administering
the plan. One wonders if running or starting a small business
is really worth the effort.
I want to be clear: This is not just about how much our
company pays for health care. I know many believe the
Affordable Care Act will lower costs for small businesses, but
the opposite has occurred for us. As implementation nears,
insurance companies are pushing down as many increases as they
think employers can absorb.
Unlike the Federal Government, we in small business have to
budget for future costs today. How can I develop a business
strategy for 2014 when I can't estimate future costs?
We will manage next year, but I'm most concerned about when
our company becomes 100 percent employee owned. I doubt they
will like running a healthcare provider, which is what we're
becoming, instead of a manufacturing company that they thought
they were getting.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today
and bring attention to this serious problem.
Mr. Murphy. I thank the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kelly follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Mr. Lozinsky is recognized now for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF STEVE LOZINSKY

Mr. Lozinsky. Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity
to speak.
My wife Kathy and I run a cleaning company in Apex, North
Carolina, with 240 employees. We are very concerned on how this
law will affect our employees. With a $2,000 fine for every
employee after 50, we cannot afford the $380,000 a year that
the law will cost us. It looks like our only option will be to
cut our employees' hours to less than 30 hours a week, but this
will have a devastating effect on our employees' paychecks and
their ability to pay their bills.
Most of our employees are minorities, and we also have
programs to hire felons that cannot find work anywhere else. So
this law that was supposed to help your lower-income workers
will end up hurting my lower-income workers.
We try to be fair and follow the law and pay all of our
employees over minimum wage, but because of some of our
competition pay their employees off the books or as 1099
employees, they already start off with a competitive advantage
against us because they don't pay unemployment insurance,
compensation, Social Security and Medicaid. So with the
implementation of this law, they're not going to follow this
law either, so that just gives them another competitive
advantage bidding against us.
Ninety percent of our jobs are bid, so it's a very, very
small, small margin, and it's a very tight competition. So our
competition who don't play fair, this will give them an extra
competitive advantage against us.
But I'm not here to criticize the law; I'm here to try to
find a solution to our specific problems for our employees and
to try to better their--better them. So any suggestions you
have will be greatly appreciated. Thank you. Sorry, I'm a
little nervous.
Mr. Murphy. You are doing a great job. Thank you, Mr.
Lozinsky.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lozinsky follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Now, Mr. Morrow, you're recognized for 5
minutes. Make sure your mic is on, and pull it close to you.

TESTIMONY OF HUGH MORROW

Mr. Morrow. Good morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of this committee. I'm here today representing the Ruby
Falls and its employees. Ruby Falls is an 84-year-old small
business that employs over 100 strong in the height of our
season, and it's supported by approximately 40 full-time
employees year round.
Ruby Falls is better known as the tallest underground
waterfall open to the public. We've been mentioned in such
lists as the top seven natural wonders in the U.S.A., and
number two waterfall--underground waterfall by World Reviewer
travel site on Earth. A simple way to explain what we are, you
take a 260-foot elevator ride down into the cavern, walk 2,000
feet into a limestone mountain, and when you arrive at the
falls, you're 1,100 feet underground and view a 145-foot
waterfall. People have been doing this for over 80 years.
During 2013, we will host close to 400,000 people. It truly is
a unique experience that has spanned generations.
Since 2008, Ruby Falls has had its challenges, as most
small businesses have in the travel and leisure area.
Disposable incomes have been down, the cost of travel and
energy prices have been up, so, being reliant on the drive-in
market, we have struggled.
Fortunately, Ruby Falls has thrived over the 5 years. Our
workforce is comprised of full-time and part-time workers that
are second to no organization in this country. I could not be
prouder to be representing them today.
This group is a homogeneous mix of Ruby Falls career
employees, retirees, and those working while transitioning to
other jobs, and a mix of students both high school and college
age. Our payroll has increased 27 percent over the past 4
years, and this does not include the contract labor, such as
technicians, plumbers and electricians that we retain.
Many people ask me how do we keep such a great group? The
main reason is that we fit and conform to where they are in
their life situation. One of those options is that we offer
full-time qualifying employees health insurance that is 100
percent employer paid for the individual coverage. How can an
employer manage these costs? We have crafted the plan that
works for both us and our employees that focuses on their
needs, not the needs of every American.
Now, because we have to combine the full-time employees
with part-time employees that choose to work for us part time,
our full-time equivalents will exceed 50 employees. Why is this
important? Because we are in this category, we will not be able
to buy insurance at the benefit levels that work for our
business, and we'll have to move to higher levels that are
mandated by the Affordable Care Act.
And since 2006, we have seen premium increases that have
not exceeded 5 percent, but this past year we saw 21 percent
and are projected to see higher than 30 percent increases for
2014. We are working in a very competitive market, as I
mentioned earlier. Absorbing these costs and passing them on to
our customers is not an option.
We have spent more time analyzing the effects of this law
than creating memories for our visitors. For the first time in
my career, business growth and creating jobs has become a
secondary task.
You know, why invest capital? Significant cost increases we
will see because of the increased mandated benefits will reduce
our ability to grow going forward. As I mentioned, we have
grown our payroll 27 percent, invested over 2 million in
capital and expansion, and invested in the Chattanooga and
surrounding Tennessee community. Ruby Falls is the first U.S.
attraction to be certified by Green Globe, an international
achievement, for our environmental stewardship of our business.
A huge part of that certification was a reduction of power
usage, and we were the first solar-powered cave in the U.S.
Yes, solar power is an important part of our ongoing plan.
Throughout these tough economic times, we have operated on
less resources, reassigned and eliminated nonproductive
positions, reduced inventory, but have still managed to
increase customer satisfaction and revenues. The expenses
created by the Affordable Care Act are not affordable and will
force us to reduce payroll, share in the cost, reduce
investments and growth, or a combination of all three. None of
these solutions create jobs.
I represent our team by saying the coverage we have we
would like to keep, but the coverage we are being mandated to
have is unaffordable. More people have healthcare coverage
available today because we grew our business. We hope to
continue to do that going forward just as we have in the past.
And thank you for your time and attention. I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Morrow follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. I thank the panel.
I was looking at pictures before of the falls. We would
love to have a hearing there sometime. It would be nice.
I will go on with questions, and I will recognize myself
first for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kelly, you testified today that since passage of the
affordable care law, your premiums have continued to climb.
Could you elaborate on the amount of your recent premium
increases, and do you expect more in the future?
Mr. Kelly. We do. As I said, it was a 46 percent. That's
since 2010. There was one big year, which was last year, that
was 23--well, actually was 23 percent. The initial premium
request that came in from Highmark was 42 percent. We were able
to--we had to double our deductible, and we had to basically
tell them we were going to leave them if they don't--we ended
up with a 23 percent increase. That was last year.
This year we moved to from Highmark to HealthAmerica, and
we still had a 15 percent increase, and that was when we
doubled our deductibles again.
Mr. Murphy. Can you give me an idea of what the cash amount
of that percentage is?
Mr. Kelly. Well, I can actually----
Mr. Murphy. If you don't have it handy. I was just
wondering with regard to percentage, but I just wonder how
much. But that's something that comes out of the employees'----
Mr. Kelly. A couple hundred thousands dollars.
Mr. Murphy. I was wondering what that was per employee.
How has it impacted your ability to plan for the future?
Are you able to hire or expand?
Mr. Kelly. We have to figure out what we're going to do to
keep employees. You know, what we're faced with in southwestern
Pennsylvania, our competitors are large OEMs; it's not other
small businesses. And they typically can offer higher wages and
richer healthcare plans. So when I ask my employees to take--
pay more of the premium plus have a higher deductible, even
though we cover 95 percent of the deductible, it still means
less money in their pocket. So I just had a welder walk out the
door the other day because under our new healthcare plan, there
was a certain procedure that was covered under Highmark, wasn't
covered under HealthAmerica. He said his wife needed this
procedure. He left and went to the L8 company. And that's
happening, and I expect it to happen more regularly.
Mr. Murphy. So you're saying--your conclusion is that the
way health care is going is affecting your ability to recruit
or train workers?
Mr. Kelly. Absolutely, Congressman. We're not--we're very,
very careful about hiring somebody today. Where we would--I
need welders, and I need machinists, but frankly I've got to be
very, very careful, because knowing that when you hire
somebody, you're going to pay at least 50,000 in wages, another
$20,000 in benefits, you have to be very cognizant of what
that's going to mean to your bottom line.
Mr. Murphy. So supporters of this law have claimed that
directly costs have gone down, or with tax credits it's going
to lower your costs and allow you to keep the coverage you
currently enjoy. First of all, are you able to take advantage
of these tax credits?
Mr. Kelly. No.
Mr. Murphy. Why is that?
Mr. Kelly. Because we're 125 people. We're too big.
Mr. Murphy. It cuts off at a much lower number.
Mr. Kelly. This gentleman talked about 96 percent of the
small businesses, but the 4 percent of the small businesses
that are well over 50 people--small business think if you have
less than 750 people, you're a small business. If you're a
manufacturer, I think in some of our Federal contracts, if we
have less than 500 people, we're a small business. So what's
the definition of a small business? Maybe under Affordable Care
Act it's 50, but there's a lot of people in that sweet spot.
I was the chairman of the NTMA, the National Tooling and
Machining Association, in 2007, and I traveled the country. I
talked to colleagues all over the country, and many of them are
well over 50 people. And every one of them is going to be
affected by higher premiums and higher costs. And I can hear
right now from my colleagues across the country they're very
careful about hiring people. What we're doing is looking at
automation and productivity using machine tools. I'd rather
invest in a machine tool than a person right now because I
don't have to pay health care for a machine tool.
Mr. Murphy. So robotic things instead of people.
Mr. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Lozinsky, are you able to take advantage of
the tax credits that they're being touted here?
Mr. Lozinsky. No. I mean, even if it pays 50 percent of my
healthcare costs at $450,000 a year, I still couldn't afford
half--I still couldn't afford the 50 percent.
Mr. Murphy. My understanding is the tax credit is only
available if you fewer than, what, 25 employees? I think you're
beyond that?
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes, we're at 240.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Morrow, you're beyond that level, too, so
the tax credits don't apply?
Mr. Morrow. We'll be right at 51 employees.
Mr. Murphy. I see.
Mr. Kelly, again, so if someone operates a business, with
the full implementation of the law coming out, let me ask this:
Do you believe it's easy to even understand what the
expectations are in terms of what this is going to impact in
the future?
Mr. Kelly. I don't believe so. I've talked to my broker at
length, and he's a very close personal friend of mine. In fact,
he just sent me an email the other day to tell me that there
are four fees that are going to go into effect next year
starting January 1: the patient-centered outcome research fee,
the transitional reinsurance fee, the risk adjustment fee, and
the insurer's tax.
Those fees alone next year in the 3 months that are
involved, from January to March, are going to cost me $11,000.
In the full year, from April 1, 2014, to 2015, it's going to
cost Hamill an additional $48,000. That's for no more better
coverage, no change; those are just additional fees that are
coming down the road because of the ACA.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I see my time has expired.
By the way, thank you for your service in the Marine Corps.
Ms. DeGette is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much.
I just want to ask a quick little series of questions to
try to kind of clarify where we need to go to help small
business be able to afford insurance.
Mr. Morrow, you offer insurance to all of your full-time
employees right now, correct?
Mr. Morrow. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. And, Mr. Kelly, you do also, correct?
Mr. Kelly. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. And Mr.--is it Brey?
Mr. Brey. Brey.
Ms. DeGette. Brey. And you offer insurance to all of your
employees, correct?
Mr. Brey. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. And, Mr. Lozinsky, I would assume that you
would like to offer insurance if you could afford to do it from
a cost perspective; is that right?
Mr. Lozinsky. If I could afford to do it, of course.
Ms. DeGette. And I think, Mr. Morrow, the cost of insurance
is not cheap, and it's been going up for some number of years;
is that right?
Mr. Morrow. We've not seen substantial increases until this
past year.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Mr. Kelly, I think you testified that it's
been going up quite a bit in the last few years.
Mr. Kelly. Yes, it has.
Ms. DeGette. And, Mr. Brey, you, too? Have you seen
insurance increases?
Mr. Brey. Oh, yes, for nearly a decade.
Ms. DeGette. I'm wondering if you could, Mr. Brey, talk to
us about why you think it's important to give health insurance
to your employees.
Mr. Brey. Well, when you're one of those guys, young men or
whatever, working for somebody else in a low-wage job, like I
did a long time ago, you always say to yourself things like,
well, you know what? If I ran the company, I would do blank.
And so, working in a front-line retail job as I did, if you
were offered insurance, it was crap insurance or----
Ms. DeGette. And it was unusual that people were offered
insurance in jobs like that; not just young men, but young
women, too.
Mr. Brey. If you were offered it at all, and that's always
bothered me. So it's something I sought to do differently right
from the beginning.
Ms. DeGette. And you have done it from the beginning. And
has it hurt your ability to grow as a company?
Mr. Brey. We've grown 5-, 600 percent over a period of
time. We survived through the recession. We added employees.
Ms. DeGette. OK. And do you think that the fact that you
offer health insurance helps you attract good employees?
Mr. Brey. Yes, absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Mr. Kelly, now, you testified that your
health insurance costs have increased about 50 percent in the
last 3 years; is that right?
Mr. Kelly. Yes. Actually the costs--the premiums were 46
percent; the costs were 42 percent.
Ms. DeGette. It went from 795,000 to 1.2 million, correct?
Mr. Kelly. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. And, Mr. Brey, I think you testified the
health insurance costs for your company have grown the last
number of years, too; is that correct?
Mr. Brey. Yes, that's correct.
Ms. DeGette. And do you know if your health insurance has
cost about the same as your larger competitors', or has it cost
more?
Mr. Brey. For a small group in Maryland, it costs more,
because we're not----
Ms. DeGette. I think that's true in Colorado and probably
every place else.
Mr. Brey. We have from one to three providers at any given
point in time.
Ms. DeGette. And what about shopping for coverage? Was it
easy to compare plans side by side, or did you have to hire
brokers? What did you do?
Mr. Brey. I guess in the sense that in Maryland there is so
little competition, they all offer identical plans at roughly
the same price, it makes it easy to compare pricing, but it
doesn't make it easy to find affordable coverage or a variety
of coverage.
Ms. DeGette. And this has been going on for quite a while;
is that right?
Mr. Brey. Yes, that's correct.
Ms. DeGette. OK. And, Mr. Kelly, your costs have been going
up for quite a while, too; is that right?
Mr. Kelly. Yes, that's correct.
Ms. DeGette. So what we're trying to figure out here with
the Affordable Care Act, we're trying to figure out how to bend
that cost curve, and that's part of what we're--that's part of
what we're trying to figure out, but we're also trying to
figure out how to make it accessible for folks.
Mr. Lozinsky, that's one reason why I think about employers
like you who are employing--you're employing lower-paid
workers, but you still want to be able to get them insurance.
Are your people eligible for Medicaid?
Mr. Lozinsky. I'm assuming, yes, a lot of them are.
Ms. DeGette. So that would be helpful. You could get those
folks enrolled, and you wouldn't have to pay a penalty, did you
know that, under the new bill?
Mr. Lozinsky. No.
Ms. DeGette. Part of what I think we need to do is get this
word out to employers. There's a lot you can do.
Mr. Morrow, I was thinking about what you said. You said
you've got 40 full-time employees, right?
Mr. Morrow. Approximately.
Ms. DeGette. So technically you would be under the 50-
employee limit under the Affordable Care Act, right?
Mr. Morrow. No.
Ms. DeGette. Except for the part-timers that somebody is
telling you that they're--are these part-timers year round, or
just seasonal part-timers?
Mr. Morrow. These part-timers are year round.
Ms. DeGette. OK. So they're going to be put together in a
group, and you believe that's going to take you over 50
employees. So I think that's an area we should look at as well,
because you want to offer your people insurance if it's
appropriate for them, right?
Mr. Morrow. We currently do, yes.
Ms. DeGette. Yes. And you just don't want to have to go
broke doing it.
Mr. Morrow. Correct.
Ms. DeGette. I think that's everybody's goal here.
OK. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Now I turn to the vice chair of the full committee Dr.
Burgess for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Morrow, let me just ask you a question. You do have
seasonal employees, correct?
Mr. Morrow. Correct.
Mr. Burgess. So if I were to go to one of your typical
seasonal employees on January 1st of 2014, the year this thing
is implemented, and I were to asking them to estimate their
earnings for the coming year, would they be able to give me an
answer?
Mr. Morrow. Well, most of our seasonal employees are in the
summer, so January would not be a good time, but in the summer,
yes, they should be able to.
Mr. Burgess. But here is the point: On January 1st of 2014,
they're going to be asked--as they apply for this Affordable
Care Act insurance, they're going to be asked what their
earnings are for this year coming up. And many people, myself
included when I ran a medical practice, would have difficulty
coming up with that figure.
So if they're wrong when they estimate that number, and
they underestimate their earnings, they will receive a subsidy
to buy health care in the exchange if you don't provide the
insurance for them. And then they could be required to pay that
back if their actual earnings, as reported to the IRS--so that
information will be available to the government, so they could
be required to pay that money back.
Is your experience that your typical seasonal employee
would hold money in an account in case they had to pay it back
to the government at the end of the year?
Mr. Morrow. No, sir, they do not do that.
Mr. Burgess. Yes. I wouldn't think so, because I wouldn't
do it either. And we've had other people on other panels, and
you deal with that issue of how are you going to estimate your
earnings when you're a lawyer in solo practice, when you're a
doctor in a group practice; how are you going to estimate your
earnings over the coming year when it's entirely contingent
upon factors that are completely beyond your control, such as
the economy and other things that may be affected?
Now, I think we're all getting a clear understanding as the
law comes toward completion, or at least the 2014 completion,
and I have a copy here if anybody wishes to reference it, but
it's pretty difficult to know what the road ahead is. And it's
difficult for us to be able to advise you of the road ahead.
And I daresay, although it's difficult to get answers out of
the agency, have any of you contacted the Department of Health
and Human Services or the Office of Personnel Management--if
your State doesn't do an exchange, the Federal Government is
going to do it for you--have any of you contacted them for
information about what the next year looks like?
And I daresay they wouldn't be able to tell you, so I don't
blame you for not making that contact, but that has
historically has been a difficulty.
Now, Mr. Lozinsky and, I think, Mr. Morrow, you both
reference the fact that you deal with competitive environments.
You deal with the fact that there are other people out there
competing for the same space, and the same entertainment dollar
in Mr. Morrow's case, and the same cleaning dollar in Mr.
Lozinsky's case. Tell me--and both of your businesses have over
50 employees; is that correct? Mr. Lozinsky, are you over 50?
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes. Oh, yes.
Mr. Burgess. And, Mr. Morrow, you're over 50?
Mr. Morrow. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. So what is the fine that people talk about
that you might face? Do you have a clear understanding of what
that fine is? Say you have an employee you're providing
insurance, but they go and say, I want the subsidy in the
exchange. I don't want your insurance, Mr. Morrow, I want the
subsidy. Do either of--and either of you feel free to answer--
do you have an idea of what that fine is and why it's there?
Mr. Lozinsky. I don't. I just know that if you can't afford
to pay for insurance for your employees, the government is
going to fine you I think it's $2,000 the first year and then
$3,000 the second year.
Mr. Burgess. And I appreciate you may not know the
specifics. I daresay people on this panel don't know the
specifics. But are you aware, as confusing as this law is,
we're not done with you yet? The Senate is working today, this
very day, on S. 744, a major immigration overhaul for this
country. As a consequence of that law, there will be a group of
individuals who are called registered provisional immigrants
who will not be--will not have the Affordable Care Act
available to them. The President told us this 2 or 3 years ago
when he came to Congress. So they will be outside.
So, Mr. Lozinsky, can you imagine a competitor who would
staff their rolls with people who are RPIs and therefore
outside the requirements of the Affordable Care Act? Can you
imagine having to compete with that as a business?
Mr. Lozinsky. No. That's part of the problem, because most
of our competition, like I said, they're either below 50
employees, or they pay their employees off the books, or they
make them 1099 employees.
Mr. Burgess. And yet you offer employment to a group of
individuals--we got 22 million unemployed in this country, and
you offer employment to some of the hardest people to employ;
is that correct?
Mr. Lozinsky. That is correct.
Mr. Burgess. How does it make you feel that your government
is to going to set up your competition to make your business
model essentially extinct?
Mr. Lozinsky. I mean, I'm very concerned about it.
Mr. Burgess. Of course you are, and I understand it. I
appreciate you all being here. I share your concern, too, sir.
Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Now I recognize the gentleman from Texas Mr.
Green for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And like a lot of us, these hearings--and I know there's
issues with this law, and there's issues with any law that
Congress passes. And a lot of us on our side of the aisle have
tried to sit down and say, OK, what can we do to make it better
for the witnesses that are here today? And that's our issue.
Instead of talking about how bad it is, the law is going to
be the law. The Supreme Court upheld it. We passed 33 times
last Congress in the House and 1 time this Congress. It's not
going to change, so maybe we ought to quit saying how bad it is
and say, OK, let's get a list of things to fix it. And we're
not seeing that in this House of Representatives. All we're
seeing is let's paint it bad.
Well, I have information that says, for example, in
California they're going to set up their own State exchange.
The premiums are going down, and also they announced that
there's going to be at least five different insurance carriers.
In an earlier life I managed a small business with 13
employees. Part of our employees were union bargaining unit. We
had the option to go into the union plan, or have a plan that
met that for all our employees, including our front office. And
my job was to negotiate benefits with those carriers, and like
some of you, I couldn't get anyone to negotiate. We couldn't
get the top-tier companies particularly. So we would battle
every year. And we were seeing the same percentage increases as
you have seen in your time, but we're also seeing that some of
those percentage increases are going down. And maybe we ought
to hear from that. I'd like to hear from Secretary Sebelius and
some of the Members who--the information that we've gotten come
to that.
So, I'm glad you all are here, but we really need to find
out what can we do to fix it, because the law is not going to
go away, and we have to deal with it. But in this House of
Representatives, we're not dealing with it. All we're doing is
saying, the dam is going to break, and we're going to get
flooded. Well, wouldn't it be nice to say, OK, let's deal with
it and see how we can come up with some better things?
But as we know on October 1st, the State exchanges--or the
national exchange. I'm from Texas, and we're not to going to
have any State participation in our State exchange, so we will
have a national exchange. And I'm looking forward to having at
least five plans, whether they're from the Blue Cross, Aetna,
you name it, because when I was in business, we couldn't get
five companies to give us a price. In fact, my experience was
we signed a 3-year contract, but it was always premium reopened
the first year, and so ended up having to negotiate premiums
every year on a 3-year plan. And I know that's the experience
you all are having, because we didn't go through the--we didn't
decide to only cover five of our employees under our bargaining
unit and then try and find for the other seven or eight
employees we had.
Small business have the right to be nervous about health
reform, but a lot of us who voted for that made sure there were
things in there to help small business. You know, the 50
employees, that's the same thing for minimum wage. That's not
new law. If you're over 50 employees, you have to pay minimum
wage. And so now you're going to have to cover your employees
with some type of health care. And each of you have particular
issues, and I wish Congress would take those issues and say,
let's put together legislation to do it.
Instead of, as some of my colleagues said, talk about how
bad it is, let's see how we can fix it. When I managed a
business, that's what we did. If I lost a customer, I'd say,
wait a minute, what did we do wrong that that customer left us?
We're not seeing that in this House of Representatives, and
that's what's frustrating.
I have a district, though, in Texas that's 44 percent of my
constituents who work did not have insurance through their
employer; only 32 percent did. It's a very urban area. I have
some of the biggest companies in the country; refineries, big
chemical plants, service companies for the oil and gas
industry. But, again, 44 percent of my constituents who worked
didn't have any insurance through their employer. So that's why
there was a lot of support for this, because those employers
were not providing health care, and they were showing up in our
emergency rooms. And those of us who had insurance were
continuing to see those premiums increase because somebody was
paying that bill for those folks showing up in the emergency
rooms.
Mr. Brey, is it fair to say that the health insurance
market for your small business has been problematic for quite a
while?
Mr. Brey. Yes. You have anywhere from one provider choice
to three provider choices.
Mr. Green. There was a reason why Congress passed the
Affordable Care Act with the health insurance market for
individuals in small businesses were dysfunctional.
I also served in the State legislature. We tried to create
plans, but the problem is that if you have a high-risk plan,
and all you have are people with high risk, nobody can afford
it, including employers.
And I went through the experience some of you had. Since I
negotiated it, our insurance carrier came in and said, this
lady in your plan had a double mastectomy. If you separate her
and get an individual plan for her, we can save you money. And
I explained to them, I said, I'll be glad to share that with
the owners, because that happened to be the owner's wife. And
so, and I'm glad that company did not do that. And they
wouldn't do it for the owner's wife, and they didn't do it for
any of the 12 employees that we had.
But the Affordable Care Act hopefully will solve some of
these problems as of January the 1st, and the SHOP marketplaces
will allow more competition, more transparency. That was the
other reason. When I would see those premiums increase every
year----
Mr. Murphy. Gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Green [continuing]. I never understood why, why they
did.
But, anyway, I appreciate you all being here and explaining
your problem. Now, if we would do our jobs and try and fix some
of these problems----
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Gentleman's time has expired.
Appreciate that. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Olson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair. And welcome to our witnesses.
I go home to Texas 22 every weekend, and I get out and go
to small businesses to hear how they're impacted by Obamacare.
I've been to property management companies, oil, and gas
service companies, even block-walked an area of Spanish-
language businesses in historic Rosenberg, Texas. In broken
English in Rosenberg, these three words which were said over
and over and over, sum up Obamacare's impact on every family
business in Texas: Bad. Hurts. Stop.
There are many job-killing, growth-stunting parts of
Obamacare. My questions will focus on a small part of the law
which is hurting the very people the law is supposed help,
Americans working minimum-wage and low-skilled jobs. They're
being locked into a future of stagnant wages and few
opportunities for personal prosperity.
I'm talking about that small section which defines a full-
time employee as someone who works 30 hours per week. My staff
has done some research. There are over 100 regulations with
different definitions of a full-time employee. Obamacare is the
first to define it so clearly and so broadly, 30 hours per
week.
A new name has emerged in American business: 29ers, people
only being employed for 29 hours because of Obamacare. And I
will follow up my questions from my colleague from Texas, Mr.
Burgess. Mr. Lozinsky. Sparkle and Shine, your testimony says,
has 240 employees, 85 percent of which are minority employees
or people trying to get a new start from being incarcerated.
Mr. Lozinsky. Correct.
Mr. Olson. In light of your testimony, you have three
options: going forward with Obamacare, reduce everybody's hours
to something below 30, make them 29ers; can fire 140 employees,
60 percent of your company, fire them, lose their jobs; or
close up shop. In ancient Greece those choices are hemlock,
cyanide, or poison mushrooms.
Can you describe how you came to realize these were your
only three options, and have you talked to your employees about
what their future is going to look like?
Mr. Lozinsky. No, we have not talked to our employees yet.
We've been trying to research what our opportunities are. We
have talked to our management staff already and asked them to
get--to start getting a list of the 50 people, because the
first 50 are exempt. So all of our project managers are getting
their main, key people, a list to us so that we can have our 50
that can still be full-time, and then we'll have to make tough
decisions on the other 190, on what kind of hours we can give
them. But we have not discussed it with our rank-and-file help
yet.
Mr. Olson. Do you think anyone will say, great, I want to
work for 30 hours instead of 40 or more?
Mr. Lozinsky. No, I don't think so. Like I said in my
letter, we have husband and wives that work for us. Like I
said, we have a husband and wife that works for us. They have
three kids. They work 45 hours a week. So they get paid 40
regular time and 5 overtime. And it's--and it's tough for them
to survive on that amount of money. So cutting them back to 29
hours would be devastating for their family and their kids.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
This next question to you, Mr. Morrow. You have the largest
and deepest waterfall in America, and you must be careful
saying that in this committee because we have some Texans here,
and bigger is better in Texas. That sounds like a challenge to
me in many ways. But your business is seasonal, as came out
with your discussion with my colleague Mr. Burgess. And you've
got 40 full-time employees now, 100 seasonal employees. If you
cross these guys and the one-season ones, do most of your
season employees work for at least 40 hours per week, more than
30?
Mr. Morrow. Yes, they will work full time during--mainly
between Memorial Day and Labor Day.
Mr. Olson. And so they will be full-time employees. You'll
cross 50. So you have to yield to Obamacare. You have to
provide healthcare to these employees, all these new ones, or
somehow modify your business; is that correct?
Mr. Morrow. Correct.
Mr. Olson. Can you talk to me about how the employees
suffer because of these changes?
Mr. Morrow. The employees are going to suffer through
increased cost. We have paid their premiums 100 percent since
I've been with the company 7 years ago, and it's been part of
our family of support for them. We are going to have to pass on
part of that expense when we see 30, 40 percent increases in
our premium. They will have to share in that cost going
forward, which will reduce their incomes.
Mr. Murphy. Gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Olson. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Now turn to the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Tonko for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Our Secretary of HHS Sebelius has been quoted as saying
many were priced out, locked out, or dropped out of healthcare
insurance coverage in the years ensuing before--the pre-
Affordable Care Act days. The question is, did U.S. companies
or did you know counterparts that were unable to get insurance
written for their companies at all? Any of you, to any of the
gentlemen of the panel.
Mr. Kelly. I can say that in southwestern Pennsylvania I've
had fellow manufacturing companies tell me that it's
increasingly difficult to find somebody that would insure them
without some huge premium increase.
If you wouldn't mind, Mr. Congressman, I'd like to make a
comment to what Mr. Green said. He said you guys were
complaining about the fact that--that you're looking for
solutions, you're tired of the--the hits that Obamacare is
taking. I'm going to give you a perspective of a businessman,
if I might. I don't know whether I have that leeway, but I
would happy to do that.
You know, in my view, the Affordable Care Act was designed
to get 30 million Americans that weren't insured insured. The
one thing it doesn't do and hasn't done at all is to address
the real problem. That's cost. In southwestern Pennsylvania you
have basically one juggernaut, UPMC, University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center. They own 60 percent of the doctors and about 80
percent of the hospitals. There's no competition.
You haven't even addressed cost. One of the great drivers
of cost is malpractice insurance. Not one word was written in
the Affordable Care Act about tort reform.
Mr. Brey. This is not true. In Maryland in April they--
Maryland announced--we had six people announced to participate
on the SHOP exchange. I've never had anywhere close to six
options.
Mr. Kelly. I know that people tell me all the time that the
reason that doctors practice so much defensive medicine is
because of malpractice insurance. I know, I talk to doctors all
the time about that fact. My cardiologist tells me that. He
said that's the real reality.
Mr. Brey. I serve on the board of directors, the finance
committee of a $100 million health insurance----
Mr. Johnson. This is not a debate.
Mr. Kelly. So I'm just saying from a perspective of a
business person, I believe that if you want to get past the
fact that the Affordable Healthcare Act really is about putting
more people in--insuring those people, fine, you've made that
step, but you haven't done anything to really address the major
driver of costs. And if you can get costs under control, then
things probably would work better. But they're not going to
happen until costs can be driven down. You have to start
addressing what are the causes of costs to be so high.
You know, and Congressman Murphy knows this, in
southwestern Pennsylvania you basically have an oligopoly of
providers. You have one big, big provider, and he basically can
charge whatever he wants. There's no competition really. It's a
real problem. And it's one problem that, because of so many
special interests, you people really won't have the courage to
face that problem.
So that's what my--as a business person, I'm going to
challenge you folks to come up with a way to really take on
some things that are really difficult.
Mr. Tonko. Right.
Mr. Kelly, I think my question to you, all of you as a
panel, was the affordability and accessibility of health care
pre the Affordable Care Act. I was hoping to glean some
information on that.
And in terms of the bending of the cost curve, that is
indeed part of the effort here with the Affordable Care Act by
making certain we go forward and rewarding the quality of care
rather than just the number of tests or procedures performed.
And, Mr. Brey, I would ask if you had something to offer
that--to the previous statement made, I would like to hear that
now, and then we can move forward.
Mr. Brey. Well, listen, there was--I've seen a lot of cost
increases long before I ever heard the term ``Affordable Care
Act'' or ``Obamacare.'' I served on the board of directors of a
finance committee of a hospital system, and our crushing cost
was the burden of the uninsured. And I guess it's interesting
to me that back then everybody--I was the evil conservative
businessman because I thought everybody should pay their fair
share. It wasn't fair to me--to me to be paying for those
people. And now here I am, I'm testifying for the liberal side.
My views haven't changed.
So, I have seen--I've gone for 18 years in small group
never having real choice, and now six insurance--five insurance
companies have definitely said that they're going to
participate in Maryland SHOP exchange, and there's one on the
fence. So that may be six. So I may be doubling my pool of
choices. We'll see if it actually happens.
Mr. Murphy. Gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Tonko. I'm sorry. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Now turn to Mr. Long for 5 minutes.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here today.
Mr. Brey, how are your sales this year, year to date, over
last year's sales? Do you find your business has improved,
stayed the same, declined in sales?
Mr. Brey. Our business has declined for the first half of
this year.
Mr. Long. It's declined?
Mr. Brey. Yes, sir. 2011 and 2012, coming out of the
recession, were exceptionally strong years for us. And because
we're in this Maryland-Virginia area, I think that there's been
a little bit of uncertainty that has made the first half of the
year less than optimal. But May, May finished very strong, June
is going great, and so far the summer looks really good.
Mr. Long. So your thoughts about the Bush tax cuts
expiring. Whenever you said that by letting the Bush tax cuts
expire, allowing the tax rates to go back to where they were
will help bolster the economy and with it your customer base,
the middle class. So that didn't work out like you thought it
would.
Mr. Brey. Say that again.
Mr. Long. Your comments about letting the Bush tax cuts
expire, letting the Bush tax cuts expire on people over
250,000.
Mr. Brey. Well, we did----
Mr. Long. The vast majority--let me finish. The vast
majority of small business owners simply won't be affected.
Allowing the tax rates to go back to where they were will help
bolster the economy and with it your customer base, the middle
class.
Mr. Brey. But instead what you did is you let payroll taxes
go up on people making $40,000 a year, and in exchange for
going from 250,000 to $400,000 on that tax break. I mean,
that's what happened in January. My guys making 40 grand a year
managed--you know, 40- to $50,000 a year managing one of my
stores saw their payroll taxes increase. So what we did is we
took the money right out of the pockets.
Mr. Long. We're talking apples and oranges. The Bush tax
cuts were above 250,000 people is what you were talking about,
which those did go back up on January 1 or January 2, if I
remember right. So----
Mr. Brey. I think it was over 400,000, though.
Mr. Long. But how does letting taxes go up on people above
250- bolster the middle class? I mean, that's money that's paid
to the government, to us, Congressmen and Senators and people
here in Washington that are----
Mr. Brey. My objection at the time was it appeared--
Congress appeared to be making a trade-off, the trade-off being
allowing payroll taxes to go up on middle-class workers in
exchange for keeping tax rates low on high-income--on high-
income earners.
Mr. Long. Say that again.
Mr. Brey. I said, my perception at the time, which was in
January, I think is when you're talking about--my perception at
the time was that Congress appeared to be making a trade
amongst the Members, letting payroll tax--the payroll tax cuts
expire on middle-class workers, and in exchange Democrats would
hold down--would--would let tax rates--would--we would make the
cut from--go from 250---instead of the cutoff being 250-, would
go to 400-. At the time that was the debate that appeared to be
taking place, and that's when those comments were made.
Mr. Long. This was back in October, not January.
Mr. Brey. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. October.
Mr. Long. OK. But I'm just trying to get--I mean, you're of
the opinion that the Affordable Care Act is indeed affordable,
and we need to work things out here in Washington. We need to
work for the American people. We need to make health care more
affordable for everyone, we all agree to that. Health care
needs to be reformed, granted.
I sit here representing the Seventh District of Missouri,
southwest corner of Missouri, Springfield, Joplin, Branson down
in the southwest corner. And there's a company at home that
started out with one store back in the '60s, and now they have
53,000 employees. And when they--when the CEO comes to me and
says, I'm going to you; I'm going to Roy Blunt, U.S. Senator;
I'm going to Claire McCaskill, U.S. Senator, one Republican,
one Democrat, to explain to you all how devastating this
Obamacare actually is, and I said, OK, I'm here to listen. He
said, we provided great health care for our employees for
years. They loved it. It was affordable, it was doable. Their
estimate--Mr. Kelly, who found his rates going up by 46
percent, I'm sure they'll want to talk to you because the way
they calculated it, theirs are going to go up by 120 percent.
They've already told all their part-time employees--I don't
know how many are part time out of this 53,000--that they will
no longer cover their health insurance next year. And they--so
120--I forget what the dollar figure is here, wasn't actually
for this panel, but I was just curious when I--trying to hear
all the good things you say and all the good things that Mr.
Green--looks like he's gone, but that Mr. Green has to say
about this----
Mr. Brey. But that is a tragedy, but that was going on,
like I said, before I ever heard of the Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Long. Well, not according to these folks who have
53,000 employees.
But anyway, I appreciate it. I don't have any time, but if
I did, I'd yield it back.
Mr. Murphy. Gentleman's time expired.
Now go to Mr. Butterfield for 5 minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank the four of you for your testimony today.
I think I'm going to begin my part by asking each of you a
yes or no question. That seems to work very well with Mr.
Dingell when he does it. Starting with you, Mr. Brey, do you
accept the goal of the Affordable Care Act to make affordable
insurance available to every single American? That's a goal of
the Affordable Care Act. Do you embrace that goal?
Mr. Brey. I do.
Mr. Butterfield. Yes.
You, Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. Mr. Lozinsky?
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. And Mr. Morrow?
Mr. Morrow. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. Do you believe that an employee
is happier and therefore more productive when they can cover
their healthcare costs?
Mr. Brey. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes.
Mr. Morrow. Ours at Ruby Falls are.
Mr. Butterfield. All right.
Finally, do you agree or disagree that a good corporate
citizen would look for responsible ways to comply with the law?
Mr. Brey. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes, sir.
Mr. Morrow. Yes, sir.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you. And that's what I anticipated
your testimony would be.
Let me go to you, Mr. Lozinsky. You are--you have a
business that is a skip and a jump from my congressional
district. I'm over in Durham and surrounding area. And so thank
you very much for coming today----
Mr. Lozinsky. We have----
Mr. Butterfield [continuing]. And thank you for what you
do.
And I particularly took interest in the spirit of your
testimony. You said that you came here today looking for
solutions, and I like that. And that's the way a good
businessman or -woman should conduct themselves. And I also
want to thank you for offering jobs to low-income people in the
Wake County area. That is commendable.
Mr. Lozinsky. We have quite a few people that actually live
in Durham also. Probably about 25 percent of our employees are
from Durham.
Mr. Butterfield. And you also said that some of your
workforce are convicted felons.
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes.
Mr. Butterfield. And that's a big deal in my world, because
we have so many young men who rehabilitated their lives, they
are looking for an opportunity, and you seem to be giving out a
better opportunity.
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes----
Mr. Butterfield. When this committee wrote the bill some
years ago, and I've been on this committee now for some years,
as many of my colleagues, a different group was in the
leadership of this committee at the time. But when we wrote the
bill, we anticipated that poor people would need insurance, and
so we created what we call Medicaid expansion, which would
cover employees or individuals from zero percent of the Federal
poverty level to 133 percent. Many of those are working for
you.
Mr. Lozinsky. Right.
Mr. Butterfield. And so it seems--Ms. DeGette mentioned
this in her question--it seems that some of your employees
would qualify for the Medicaid expansion if it existed in North
Carolina. The problem is that your legislature and my
legislature and your Governor and my Governor have chosen to
decline to expand the Medicaid program in our State, and so the
option that would normally be available to your low-income
workers doesn't exist. And so if you have any influence with
our State legislature and Governor, if you would join some of
us in trying to convince them to try to rethink this whole
thing. We need full participation.
Let me now ask you, are your employees currently covered
with insurance?
Mr. Lozinsky. My employees?
Mr. Butterfield. Yes. Health insurance.
Mr. Lozinsky. No, the majority of them are not. Once our
employees get to be at the supervisor and the project manager
level, yes, then we offer them health care. So we have--we pay
insurance on about--I think it's around 22 people right now.
Mr. Butterfield. But your minimum-wage earners do not have
insurance----
Mr. Lozinsky. Correct.
Mr. Butterfield [continuing]. Because you simply can't
afford it----
Mr. Lozinsky. I can't afford----
Mr. Butterfield [continuing]. At this point. Yes.
Mr. Lozinsky. My margins are very small, and yes.
Mr. Butterfield. We anticipated that. And we had hoped
under this act that those people that you speak of, that you
care about and I care about, would be able to go across the
street and qualify for the Medicaid expansion, and it's not
happening. And that's very disappointing.
Let me use my final minute with you, Mr. Kelly. And you
mentioned a minute ago that you clearly understand that this is
the law of the land. I would hope that you would find some way
in Pennsylvania to try make this thing work. You haven't gotten
where you are today in business without being smart, and
shrewd, and strategic and visionary in your approach. I wish
that you could find some way to find--to make this thing work.
Forty-six percent of your premiums have gone up 46 percent
since 2010. I understand the pain. I understand the problem
that that poses to your company. And I would certainly hope
that you would find some way to really make this thing work.
You say that the average wage--and correct me if I'm wrong--I
think you said the average wage was somewhere around $50,000
for your employees?
Mr. Kelly. Average wages for our employees.
Mr. Butterfield. Commendable. Wonderful. But that's for a
single individual. And I would hope that that individual's
spouse would also be gainfully employed at some other location
in Pennsylvania, and he or she would be making 40- or 50- or
$60,000. That's a $100,000 family. And I would hope that that
family would be able to find some way, some way to afford
health insurance because they need it, you know they need it, I
know they need it, and I hope that you could get creative and
help your employees get insured.
Thank you for listening. I've run out of time. I yield
back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Gentleman's time has expired.
Now I turn to Ms. Ellmers of North Carolina for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lozinsky, we've had numerous conversations on this
issue. And I again commend you for coming forward, especially
in the spirit that you're doing so, which is looking for
solutions. But as we all know, many times in order to find the
solutions, you also have to identify what the problems are, and
you have to be willing to make changes that are necessary to do
so.
With that, I would like to say I know that you have looked
at this issue. I know this is something that's very important
to you because you care very much about your employees, again
pointing out that many of these individuals are low income;
many of these individuals, 85 percent, are minority; and you
employ those who have formerly been in prison; and now you're
giving them--you and Kathy have offered them a second chance.
Some of the discussion here today has focused around the
idea that many of your employees, because they are low income,
would therefore be able to qualify for Medicaid. Are some of
them already on Medicaid, to the best of your knowledge?
Mr. Lozinsky. To the best of my knowledge, I think, yes,
quite a few of them are.
Mrs. Ellmers. And I guess my question to you is--and
looking at this, and the testimony that you've submitted,
you've pointed out that, basically what you'll have to do is
cut back employees to under 30 hours, or what we're now calling
the 29ers, because essentially at 29 hours you're not
obligated.
Mr. Lozinsky. Correct.
Mrs. Ellmers. The point being, do your employees want to be
cut back?
Mr. Lozinsky. No, definitely not.
Mrs. Ellmers. Do your employees want to work more than 40
hours?
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes. Most of our employees do work--our
business is not like 9:00 to 5:00.
Mrs. Ellmers. Right.
Mr. Lozinsky. They go do certain amount of jobs during the
day. And, believe me, when we have Saturday work, they line up
for the overtime. And the majority of our employees, at least
in our construction division, work more than 40. And they are
always begging to work Saturday so they can pick up that extra
time-and-a-half money.
Mrs. Ellmers. Absolutely. So the point here is that these
are individuals who want to better their lives. These are
individuals who want to work, earn an income. You are an
employer that wants to offer these jobs. You want to grow as a
business; do you not?
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes, I do. Yes.
Mrs. Ellmers. In the present situation, facing the
implementation of the Affordable Care Act, do you see your
business growing?
Mr. Lozinsky. No. Well, this is the first year since we've
started that we haven't grown, and that was pretty much our
decision because we don't know what the effects of this law is.
We don't want to hire more people and have to lay them off, or
hire more people and have to get them over--over 30. So what
we've been trying to do is just bid on jobs for our present
customers who haven't been--we haven't been trying to expand
our customer base this year because last year we were pretty
much getting close to 300 employees, and in--because of what
the effect this law was going to be on that, we haven't--we
haven't tried to grow this year until we--and hopefully we come
up with a solution for us, and then we will hopefully continue
to grow.
Mrs. Ellmers. Let me ask a question about the employees
that you have which have former prison records that you and
Kathy have employed. In the event that you do have to layoff
employees, and I'm assuming that some of them would--would be
those individuals who are getting a second chance at bettering
their lives, how easy is it going to be for them to get a job
out there? Especially in this economy?
Mr. Lozinsky. I don't know what the job market is around
us. I'm sure it's not going to be easy. There's been a lot of
them that have come to us and said, you know, nobody else would
give them a chance. And they really appreciated what we did.
Like I said in my letter, I had one former inmate that's
just celebrated his 10-year anniversary with us. He actually
worked for 7 months out of a work release program from Raleigh,
the central prison. And he works at a work release program.
Then he came to work for us, and he started as a laborer. And,
like I said, last week he celebrated his 10-year anniversary.
He's now moved up to a project manager, and he makes over
$50,000 a year.
Mrs. Ellmers. That is wonderful.
I have about 30 seconds left, so I would like to ask each
and every panel member here, are you aware that the CBO has
actually come forward and said that even after implementation
in 10 years of the Affordable Care Act, there would still be 30
million people left uninsured? Are you aware of that, yes or
no?
Mr. Brey. I'm aware of that.
Mrs. Ellmers. You are aware.
Mr. Kelly. Yes.
Mrs. Ellmers. Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. Morrow. I was not aware of that.
Mrs. Ellmers. Yes, 30 million will still be left uninsured,
and that is, again, by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget
Office.
So thank you, gentlemen. I yield back the remainder of my
time.
Mr. Murphy. Gentlelady yields back.
Now turn to Ms. Schakowsky for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Mr. Kelly, I heard you talking about the
bending the cost curve. We have to do something about the cost
of health care. The fact of the matter is that the increases
that have been overall--I realize averages don't apply to
everyone--but are at about a 50-year low right now in
healthcare costs over the last year or so. And this has to do
with--just heard this today from Secretary Sebelius, but it's
also CMS and Pricewaterhouse that would document that. Because
you're exactly right, and the Affordable Care Act took steps to
address the core problem of rapidly increasing healthcare
costs, requires insurance companies to operate more
efficiently. It subjects premiums to independent review. Some
States actually have the right, their insurance commissioner,
to modify rates and bring them down. And it requires that at
least 80 percent, every--80 cents on every dollar--go to health
care now; can't go to CEO salaries or to marketing costs. And
many enrollees in insurance policies have gotten rebates around
the country equaling billions of dollars. We're beginning to
now reward the quality of care rather than just the number of
tests and the procedures performed. That gets at the issue,
too, of, we were talking about the doctors that are doing
defensive medicine.
So while it's still early to say for certain, there is
increasing evidence that the reforms in the ACA are on their
way, overall and over time, to drive down costs while improving
healthcare quality and health outcomes. And if you've received
a 46 percent increase over the last little while, this is not
untypical. This is not about the Affordable Care Act, which
hasn't gone into effect yet. And this is typical of what has
been happening over the years.
You have seen--I mean, sometimes I listen to these
arguments, and I think, well, gee, it must have been great in
the insurance market before the Affordable Care Act came along.
And, of course, we know that that is absolutely not the case.
I don't know if you wanted to comment at all.
Mr. Kelly. Well, I don't know--I must be in a different
universe, Congresswoman, because we have not experienced a
reduction of any kind. Yes, costs have been going up long
before the Affordable Care Act. They seem to have accelerated,
unfortunately. Maybe it's because insurance companies are
starting to pack--they're taking advantage of the opportunity,
the window that's available, to just jack the prices up because
they know, after the so-called reforms that are going to go
into effect, that maybe the game will be up.
However, for example, I mentioned to Congressman Murphy
that there are four fees that go into effect next year because
of the Affordable Care Act. That's going to add $40,000--
$48,000 to my costs without any change in coverage or anything
else. That's just $48,000 in additional fees. Now, I don't know
how that's bending the cost curve down. If the Affordable Care
Act is going to mandate that fees be levied on insured people,
insured--in the companies that provide the insurance, I don't
see that. I'm sorry, I don't see that.
So you're going to have to show me where in the law that
there are prescriptions that are going to drive costs down. I
don't see it. In our market it's just not going to happen. When
you have two basic providers of healthcare in southwestern
Pennsylvania, UPMC and Highmark, they own all the doctors and
the hospitals, there's no incentive for them to cut their
costs. I don't see it happening. I'm sorry.
Ms. Schakowsky. Well, we're all going to have to, as
Members of Congress, work with our constituents and with our
healthcare providers to make this thing work.
But getting back to sort of the theme that Mr. Green was
raising before, what we're finding in this House of
Representatives is rather than a willingness to sit down and
talk about what are the snags in this legislation, this
Affordable Care Act, this Obamacare, and figure out how to do
it, it's just a continuous drumbeat of repeal, repeal, stop,
get over it. We--as the United States of America, we are
capable, as most other industrialized countries are, of
constructing a system that is going to work for our people and
for our businesses to provide healthcare. We could do this.
Mr. Kelly. Haven't you reaped what you've sown? By that I
mean this----
Mr. Murphy. Gentlelady's time has expired. I need to move
on. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Thank you, Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Griffith of Virginia is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much.
Mr. Kelly, reap what you sew. Tell me what you were going
to say.
Mr. Kelly. What I was going to say was if you look at the
history of this law----
Ms. Schakowsky. I really resent that.
Mr. Kelly. Well, I'm sorry you resent that.
But the reality is that the law was passed without any
support on the Republican side. So here you are, you force
something down the throats of--and it's--I feel this way as a
business person--you're forcing this down my throat. I've got
no say in the process. You had no say in the process. And now
because it's not going very well, because the implementation is
difficult, all of a sudden it's--you folks are--are the
problem, and I find that really reprehensible that that is
said.
I think if you would have--I think if it had been really a
spirit of comity and bipartisanship 4 years ago, perhaps what
we would have would be something that would be implementable
and affordable, but it hasn't turned out that way. I'm sorry.
Ms. DeGette. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Griffith. I will not at this time. I only have 4
minutes left.
Mr. Kelly, would you agree with me that there's more than
just snags in this bill? There's more than just a few snags?
Mr. Kelly. Absolutely. Absolutely.
Mr. Griffith. And I would have to say that among the things
that my constituents tell me are snags, and what I've heard
testimony here today, is we've got the long-term care insurance
part didn't work out, so they abandoned it; the catastrophic
coverage that was to be the interim step cost a lot more than
was originally projected to cost; the insurance rates didn't
react the way they thought they were going to do, we haven't
seen any real savings there; the Secretary is--is having to go
out and look for more money to try to get folks to enroll in
the programs and to do the things that they want to do; we've
got the 29ers that we've referred to several times today, which
both--even if we were to change it tomorrow, the Commonwealth
of Virginia has a law coming in July 1 that says that they
can't have part-time workers that work longer than that because
they don't want to have to pick up that cost; the Medicaid,
forcing the States to do the Medicaid expansion--forcing the
States to do the Medicaid expansion was ruled unconstitutional
by the Supreme Court.
You know, you've got problem after problem after problem.
And I kind of think this is--is similar to Blacksburg High
School in my district. The roof of the gym caved in, and the
debate began do we just build a new gym, or what about the rest
of the building? And it caved in because of structural defects.
And the ultimate decision was they condemned the rest of the
building, and they are going to build a new Blacksburg High
School.
Sometimes when the construction, the initial part of
putting something together, putting a building together, is so
poor, you have to just say, OK, let's start over. Let's go back
and see what we can do to build something that does work for
the American people, that does lower costs, that does expand
coverage in the ways that we want to, and doesn't cost people
the hours at work or jobs. Would you not agree with that, Mr.
Kelly?
Mr. Kelly. Absolutely.
Mr. Griffith. And Mr. Lozinsky?
Mr. Lozinsky. Sure.
Mr. Griffith. And, Mr. Morrow, as a businessman, if
something is structurally flawed, don't you sometimes have to
just say, OK, we're going to scrap that, bulldoze it, and start
over?
Mr. Morrow. In our business, sometimes we do that, yes.
Mr. Griffith. I mean, I think everybody who's been in
business very long has run into that position where they have
to do that, or they have to go back and say, that didn't work.
And I would submit to you all and to this committee that that's
where we are on this particular plan. It was built poorly; it's
not going to work as currently designed. I don't know how many
patches we could put on it. I don't think we could put enough
patches on it to fix it; I think we have to tear down the
building and start rebuilding.
And so I would ask you all, have any of you all run into
the 29-hour problem in your particular business where you have
had to stay to employees, we're only going to give you 29
hours?
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Lozinsky, I think you mentioned that
earlier.
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes, I have.
Mr. Griffith. And I will tell you, I'm going to ask you
this. I have a business in my district. See if you all have had
this problem or if you know folks who do. This business has
been in existence more than 30 years. It now has 59 employees.
They have three shifts. One of the shifts they just started a
few years ago. So the businessman came to me and he said, I
just left my folks--this was a couple months ago, now, and I
don't know what decision he ultimately made. He says, here are
my decisions: I can layoff the third shift, marginally
profitable. I, you know, worked for years to get it off the
ground, but I can lay off the third shift and get below the 50
employees so I'm in the same position that Mr. Brey--he didn't
use Mr. Brey's name, obviously--but I can be in a position
where I'm not covered by this bill. I can pay $40,000 in the
fines, or I can pay 60-some thousand dollars and cover
everybody. And I've been covering--kind of like you, Mr.
Lozinsky. He's got a lot of folks that don't last in the
business. He's in a business where some come in and stay for a
couple of months, and then they move on, but some stay for a
while. And when they stay for a while, they get a supervisory
position.
Mr. Lozinsky. Correct.
Mr. Griffith. And he's been covering all those folks for
years. So he said, my choices are for the first time in over 30
years don't grow my business anymore, cut back, and lay folks
off, pay a fine, or pay $40,000 fine or $60,000 increase. And
he doesn't know what he's going to do, and he's wringing his
hands over it. Have you all found that to be true as well?
Mr. Lozinsky. I have, yes.
Mr. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Gentleman yields back.
Now turn to the gentleman from Louisiana Mr. Scalise for 5
minutes.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate you having
this hearing.
I appreciate all of our panelists for coming and taking
time away from your businesses, because I think as you, Mr.
Kelly, pointed out at the beginning of this, it seems like the
voice of the small-employing business owner was left out of
this debate back when this bill came through.
In fact, this committee, it was here in this committee room
that we had those hearings for hours and hours and combed
through--I remember reading through the bill when it was this
high, and it got higher. And there were so many bad provisions
that we saw that could devastate small businesses, could
devastate families who have good health care that they like.
But there were all those lofty promises, too, you know, the
President's promise, if you like what you have, you can keep
it. That promise has been broken to so many Americans already
when the law hasn't even taken effect yet, just businesses that
are looking at this saying there's no way that they can comply,
that provide good health care to their employees today. We
remember the Speaker at the time, Nancy Pelosi, her famous
quote: We have to pass the bill so that you can find out what's
in it. Well, now you know what's in it and, as all of have
testified, the different impacts it's having.
But when I go home every weekend and talk to small business
owners in southeast Louisiana, I'm hearing the same things. You
know what, Mr. Lozinsky, what you talk about with your small
business, you know, you're competing against people that are
also going to be handling this bill differently, and all of a
sudden it makes changes to the way you're going to have to do
business.
You know, my colleague from Texas, Pete Olson, talked about
the 29ers, and we've heard about them from so many of our
businesses. There are restaurants in Louisiana that everybody
in this room has heard of, famous New Orleans restaurants, that
have the same problem, because the law--there's so many
perverse incentives in this law that literally force you to
contemplate reducing the number of your workers. You're
rewarded in Obamacare if you lower the number of workers you
have. You're rewarded in Obamacare if you reduce the hours to
your employees. That's what you all are facing. What kind of
perverse incentive is that where the Federal Government is
encouraging you to reduce your workforce? And yet that's what's
going on in this law, and we're seeing it all around the
country.
And so, when those of us who say you need to rip up the
foundation and actually go and fix the problems-- Mr. Kelly,
you talked about costs, and we ought to be focused on fixing
the cost. This bill actually raises the cost of health care.
We've seen that from so many different reports and, in fact,
States that are grappling with it. In Louisiana, the estimates
are over 54 percent increase in healthcare costs due to the
impacts of the law.
Since passage of this law in 2010, what have you seen in
terms of increases in your healthcare costs?
Mr. Kelly. Well, the cost--premiums are 46 percent. The
actual costs, because we pay some of the deductible, is 46
percent.
Mr. Scalise. Forty-six percent higher?
Mr. Kelly. Higher.
Mr. Scalise. But, wait, you were promised that they would
be lower. How could that be?
Mr. Kelly. Well, I never thought that that was----
Mr. Scalise. I think a lot of us didn't either.
Unfortunately, you're seeing that in the real world. And that
takes into account the changes you made, right? You doubled
the--you doubled the deductibles, you even changed carriers,
and even with those changes you still saw increases; is that
right?
Mr. Kelly. Yes. Congressman, the thing that's so
frustrating as a business owner is that it's the amount of time
now that we spend looking at not the strategic path of where
the company is going to go in terms of market share, in terms
of who your customers are going to be and what opportunities
you're going to have. We're spending an inordinate amount of
time on how are we going to manage this leviathan that's out
there. This healthcare costs that are already greatly increased
and appear to be on a path--there's a hockey stick. And it's
not on global warming. The hockey stick in--this is my view,
it's a personal opinion, it's on the healthcare costs.
Mr. Scalise. You don't have to take our word for it, but
one of the lead authors of the bill in the Senate, one of the
architects of the law in the Senate, Senator Baucus, called it
a train wreck coming down. That was his words. He called this a
train wreck. And, of course, you all are the ones sitting at
the end of the track where it's coming.
I want to ask you, Mr. Lozinsky, because you're considering
those kind of options of how many employees do you lay off; is
that correct?
Mr. Lozinsky. Well, I don't know. I think best bet would be
the 29 option.
Mr. Scalise. So you're going to have to lower the number
of----
Mr. Lozinsky. We will lose a lot of employees because they
won't be able to survive on 29 hours.
Mr. Scalise. What a shame.
Mr. Lozinsky. So it will be very hectic. And the sad part
about it is, our best employees are the ones that are--want to
work the most and want to work the most hours, and those are
the ones that we will lose.
Mr. Scalise. What a shame.
I'm almost out of time. I want to ask Mr. Morrow one
question.
The supporters of the healthcare law promised that the law
would lower costs for your business. Is that true for your
company?
Mr. Morrow. No. We've seen a lot more increases and heavier
increases this past year.
Mr. Scalise. Thank all of you for your time and your
testimony. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Murphy. Gentleman yields back.
Now recognize the gentleman from Ohio Mr. Johnson for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I, too, want to
thank our witnesses for being here today.
You know, I think oftentimes the complexities of the law
and the discussions that we get into, we tend to overlook the
cultural changes that's going to result long term. I came from
a background as a kid where I looked for an opportunity to get
a job and to go to work, whether it was on the farm, later in
restaurants and seasonal-type work. You folks come from
industries that provide that opportunity.
Today we have millions of college students that are working
their way through school, working hard, going to class in an
effort to keep from becoming indebted to the Federal Government
with huge student loans.
So, you know, I just want to comment before I begin asking
questions that this is going to have far-reaching implications,
far beyond just the benign discussion of health care. It's
going to have societal and cultural changes as industries like
yours have to pare back and pull back, and are unable to grow
and hire, and laying off workers. It's not going to be good.
Mr. Morrow, you testified that--that--let me go back. My
colleague pointed out just a minute ago one of the big promises
of the healthcare law was to--if you like your current health
insurance, you can keep it. Do you believe that your employees
like and enjoy the healthcare coverage that you've provided to
them up until now?
Mr. Morrow. Yes, I do. They helped us architect that plan.
For instance, prescription drug coverage was extremely
important to them, so we spent more money in that area for
them, and we also spent a lot of money on well health care for
preventative healthcare. We have health fairs. In fact, we had
an employee that we found prostate cancer in its early stages
through a simple health fair. Saved his life. He's on Medicare;
he doesn't go to the doctors, he said. And I caught this. So,
yes, we constructed it with their input for the best coverages
possible.
Mr. Johnson. Do you think you're going to be able to
sustain that? Are you going to be able to provide that same
level of health care that was promised to all Americans by the
President? Do you think you're going to be able to do that?
Mr. Morrow. I don't think we are, because the costs are
going to become prohibitive for us to do it through our family
at Ruby Falls as private healthcare coverage.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Lozinsky, Mr. Kelly, either of you have a
comment on that? Are you going to be able to provide the same
healthcare coverage in the future that you've provided in the
past?
Mr. Kelly. Based on where we're headed, I don't know how we
can. We really value--I mean, we're becoming an ESOP. My
employees already own 49 percent of my company. They're going
to own 100 percent. Nobody can value their employees more than
somebody who says, I'm going to actually give you the company.
They're not paying for that; under the ESOP rules, they are
going to have ownership of the company.
My concern for them is when they have to sit down and
manage the company and have to decide those really tough
questions--by the way, we have a health committee that looks at
these increases that we get every year. They decide what
they're going to do to keep us competitive. It's not me. And
so, honestly, I don't know what they're going to be able to
look at in 4 years and say, what are the choices that we have?
Mr. Johnson. Sure.
Mr. Kelly. Do they get rid of their fellow employees?
Mr. Johnson. Let me move on quickly. We just saw a report a
couple weeks ago, the State of Ohio, for example, the Ohio
Department of Insurance says we're going to see an 88 percent
increase in premiums, a staggering increase for college
students. And a lot of that is because we've seen a change in
the risk pool composition. The younger are going to be paying
higher premiums, who are healthy, to subsidize the more senior
folks, who may be unhealthy.
In your situations with your employees, do you think young
people are going to pay these higher insurance premiums, or are
most of them going to opt for the penalty? Any of you. Mr.
Morrow.
Mr. Morrow. I would going to say they're going to opt for
the penalty.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Kelly?
Mr. Kelly. I believe that's what they'll do.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Lozinsky.
Mr. Lozinsky. Yes, I would think so.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I've exceeded my time, and I
yield back.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Now recognize the gentleman from Georgia Mr. Gingrey for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
I want to first go to Mr. Lozinsky, because, Mr. Lozinsky,
as I heard your testimony and response to some of the other
questions, and you mentioned that there are a lot of former
felons that you've been good enough to hire in your business in
North Carolina, and you were talking with Mr. Butterfield
earlier about that, there was a discussion about the Medicaid
program and Medicaid expansion. But just a few minutes ago, you
said that if you have to cut to 29 hours a week to avoid the
expense of health care, that a lot of these people won't be
able to make it; they'll have to find another job----
Mr. Lozinsky. Correct.
Mr. Gingrey [continuing]. Just to make do. I couldn't help
but think, in your unique situation, some of these people that
you talked about, you would be forcing them back into the only
other skill set that they know so as to support themselves and
their families. And wouldn't that be a tragedy, when you've
gone to all of the tremendous Good Samaritan work to give them
the opportunity to set their lives straight.
Mr. Lozinsky. Well, I sure hope not. The employees are
really good.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, I hope not, too.
But let me go back to that issue of Medicaid, because I
think this needs to be clarified for everybody, and they need
to understand.
Why do you think in drafting this bill that they wanted
to--the Democratic majority wanted to expand Medicaid coverage
to 33 percent above the poverty level? We say 133 percent, but
the poverty level is 100 percent. They expand it to 33 percent,
because quite simply if you had all of those people in that
window between 33 percent--between a hundred--zero and 400
percent of the Federal poverty level, you think about the cost
of the subsidies that the Federal Government--that this Federal
Government would be paying, especially those who were at 33
percent above the Federal poverty level, they would probably be
paying something like 75, 80 percent of the premiums.
So to put it on the backs of the States where there's this
matching program, this FMAP, granted there's a couple of years
where the Federal Government pays for all of it, then there's
another year or two where the Federal Government pays for 90
percent of it, but it's a loss leader, just like a used car lot
or a grocery store; come on in, get something, and first thing
you know, it's not there anymore. And I'll guarantee you in 4
or 5 years--and that's what these Governors are looking at.
They know that once that expansion occurs in 4 or 5 years, that
FMAP is going to go back to 50-50, 60-40, 55-45. And they're
going to have no money for anything but Medicaid; no money for
public safety, no money for public schools. An absolute train
wreck, as Chairman Baucus said.
So that is a scheme to keep those people out of the
exchange where it would be just Federal dollars supplementing
their health insurance premium. So just wanted to bring that
out.
Real quickly, I'd like to thank all of the witnesses. It's
sobering to hear the trouble and uncertainty that your
businesses face. I have, unfortunately, heard much of the same
from small businesses back in my home State of Georgia, if you
can't tell by the accent. I have heard from the overbearing
compliance burden that businesses must endure to ensure they
are not breaking the law. Instead of investing money in their
workforce or expansion, they are forced to hire consultants and
law experts. This is no way to create new jobs and incubate
small business growth.
I spoke to another constituent, an owner of a welding
company, that pays high wages and benefits to its employees,
who has decided to hire subcontractors or automated equipment
instead of hiring new workers due to the fact that he is just
under the 50-employee threshold.
Based on a U.S. Chamber of Commerce poll, 72 percent, 72
percent of small business executives would have a harder time
hiring. Mr. Chairman, it's clear the President's healthcare law
is placing an undue burden on our small businesses.
And quickly, in these last few seconds, to all of the
witnesses, three of you operate businesses where in the future
you'll be faced with a choice of providing coverage or paying a
penalty. Have any of you looked at the feasibility of this and
which is cheaper? Can we start with Mr. Brey and just go right
down real quickly?
Mr. Brey. As we expand, I intend to continue attempting to
provide coverage. I have not looked into which would be
cheaper.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Doesn't really apply to me because we're----
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Lozinsky?
Mr. Lozinsky. From what I understand as of now, the fine is
cheaper. I did read a couple days ago where there might be a--
just a basic preventive plan that kind of skirts the law, but
will satisfy the law, and that comes in at around $50 a month
per an employee. So that's something that I just found out
about a couple days ago that I'll look more into. But I didn't
look into it before.
Mr. Gingrey. Mr. Morrow?
Mr. Morrow. It would be cheaper for us to pay the penalty,
but it's not part of our culture with our family.
Mr. Gingrey. Well, I understand that.
I'm beyond my time. I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I thank the gentleman.
I also thank this panel. It's very helpful to have the
information from all of you. We deeply appreciate it. We're
trying to get our hands and minds around this issue, and the
testimony provided today has been very helpful to us. So thank
you so much.
This first panel is dismissed, and while the second panel
is taking their seats, I will introduce them all so we can be
moving forward here.
So let me describe our second panel here. Our first witness
is going to be Mr. Daley. Bill Daley is the legislative and
policy director for the Main Street Alliance. The Main Street
Alliance is a national network of State and locally-based small
business coalitions.
Our second witness is Katie Mahoney. She is the executive
director of health policy at the United States Chamber of
Commerce. She has more than 13 years of healthcare experience
in hospital and health plan operations as well as healthcare
policy.
She is responsible for the healthcare regulation portion of
the healthcare policy portfolio.
And our third witness is Michelle Neblett. She is the
director of labor and workforce policy for the National
Restaurant Association. She is responsible for labor and
workforce issues, including health care.
Our fourth witness is Neil Trautwein. He is the vice
president and employee benefits policy counselor for the
National Retail Federation. In this role he serves as NRF's
lead advocate and strategist on healthcare policy and
legislation, and manages NRF's exclusive health and employee
benefits committee.
I thank all the members for being here.
I'm now swearing the witnesses. So, as you're aware, the
committee is holding an investigative hearing; when doing so
has a practice of taking testimony under oath. Do you have any
objection to taking testimony under oath?
All of the witnesses say they have no objections.
The chair then advises you that under the rules of the
House and the rules of the committee, you are entitled to be
advised by counsel. Do any of you desire to be advised by
counsel during your testimony today?
And all of the witnesses decline.
In that case, if you will all please rise and raise your
right hand, I'll swear you in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Murphy. All of the witnesses responded that they do.
Well, you are now under oath and subject to the penalties
set forth in Title 18, section 1001 of United States Code.
You may now each give a 5-minute summary of your written
statement. We'll start with Mr. Daley. You are recognized for 5
minutes.

TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM DALEY, LEGISLATIVE AND POLICY DIRECTOR,
MAIN STREET ALLIANCE; KATIE MAHONEY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, HEALTH
POLICY, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE; MICHELLE R. NEBLETT, DIRECTOR
OF LABOR AND WORKFORCE POLICY, NATIONAL RESTAURANT ASSOCIATION;
AND NEIL TRAUTWEIN, VICE PRESIDENT AND EMPLOYEE BENEFITS POLICY
COUNSEL, NATIONAL RETAIL FEDERATION

TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM DALEY

Mr. Daley. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for the
opportunity, and thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
DeGette.
I am Bill Daley. I work for the Main Street Alliance. We
represent about 12,000 small business owners with organizations
in a dozen States and at-large members throughout the country.
Our members are very supportive of the passage of the
Affordable Care Act because of the market that they've
confronted over the last decade at least for small businesses.
It's been a disaster. You've already heard testimony about the
price that they've had to pay. The biggest challenge we face is
affordability, and I must say that at least in some surveys
now, we're beginning to see some hope.
The actual filings that are being made under the Affordable
Care Act that have been surveyed, there are nine States where
there are actual filings of rates, are coming in under CBO
estimates. And as you heard others state earlier today, there
is evidence that the healthcare cost trend is slowing, so we
can be hopeful.
There are reasons for us to be hopeful about the market,
too, because it simplifies paperwork. It gets rid of a lot of
the problems we've encountered trying to get quality care and
benefits. Many of our businesses have not purchased health care
because they didn't think it was worth it, given the
exclusions, the rescissions, the pre-exes, and the low benefits
that were available. So our members are hopeful that they will
benefit from the Affordable Care Act and look forward to its
implementation.
On the matter of the question of employer mandates, again,
let's make it clear: Under 50 employees, those mandates do not
apply, and over 50, some 94 percent of the companies are
already qualified. So you're talking about a very narrow sector
of the economy when you talk about this issue.
On the matter of the 30 hours, I must also point out that
only approximately 1 percent of the entire workforce in the
United States falls into the category that's being discussed.
So as you look at these problems, please try to keep them in
perspective.
I also want to just mention the question of paperwork and
simplicity. One of the issues our members raise constantly
confronting bureaucracies is that they have the daunting task
filling out the forms. They look forward to the simplicity of
qualifying for insurance through exchanges and the new
simplified online processes. They also have found, and our
members have come here to testify, that qualification for the
credits under the Affordable Care Act, which many of them are
getting, took very little time and was greatly beneficial to
them.
And you've all heard a lot of these other issues already
today. I just want to mention one other thing, and it's the
functionality of the markets at the State level. You heard
testimony about Medicaid. In those States where Medicaid is not
being implemented, indirect costs will continue to fall back
into the market, and risk will continue to fall back into the
market, creating affordability difficulties.
In a number of States that are implementing their own
exchanges, there are still some questions about competition and
how well it will actually function, and we do hope that you
will continue to monitor that. But overall we think the act is
poised to be a success for small businesses, we look forward to
its implementation, and we appreciate the opportunity to come
and present our remarks to that effect.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Daley.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Daley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Ms. Mahoney, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF KATIE MAHONEY

Ms. Mahoney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member and
other members of the subcommittee, for the opportunity to
participate in today's hearing. We appreciate the focus on the
challenges facing America's business under the health reform
law and believe we must all do what we can to help employers
and their employees deal with the challenges of implementation.
I'm Katie Mahoney, executive director of health policy at
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. With our diverse membership we're
particularly cognizant of the problems facing small businesses
as well as large corporations. While the Chamber opposed the
health reform law during the legislative debate, we are moving
forward to help our member companies understand and comply with
the law. To that end, we continue to work with the regulators
to mitigate the burdens and challenges of implementation and
with Members of Congress to provide relief to business.
Our vision of reform continues to be one where Americans
can access affordable healthcare coverage, receive innovative
and high-quality care, and realize better health.
Tomorrow the Chamber will release a report with
recommendations to improve access to affordable coverage and
drive greater healthcare value. While the report outlines ways
to improve the system, today's hearing focuses on the system
created by the health reform law, and that is where I will
focus my comments.
As the first panel outlined, despite the goal of the
employer mandate, the health reform law is eroding the
employer-sponsored system and forcing employers to consider
significantly changing their workforce not because these
changes make sense for their customers or their employees, but
because they are necessary to keep their doors open. In many
cases, employers are not hiring new employees; they're
canceling expansion plans, reducing employee hours, and
dropping the affordable healthcare coverage that they had
previously provided for their employees.
Beyond the statistics, the real-life conversations we have
with businesses are perhaps the most remarkable. What is most
shocking during these opportunities is the complete confusion
as to what the law will require. While we're eager to explain
recent regulatory developments, we find ourselves still
outlining the basics of the law, such as what constitutes an
applicable large employer and the difference between a full-
time equivalent and a full-time employee.
So what are we to do? We're working hard to educate our
members, regulators, Members of Congress and the public. First,
for our members, we've created a new Web site, Health Reform
Law 101, which has a variety of interactive resources including
a coverage or penalty chart, an employer mandate penalty
calculator, an interactive timeline, and an FAQ page. We are
getting great feedback on these resources.
Secondly, we've been working with the regulators,
submitting comments and meeting with the administration to
highlight problems with the regulations promulgated to
implement the law. We filed 62 comments to date to mitigate
implementation burdens at every opportunity.
For example, one key point that we're focused on now is
encouraging the Treasury to use its discretion to not tax the
tax, but to exclude the portion of the premiums collected to
pay for the health insurance providers fee from gross income
for reporting purposes. This important and feasible regulatory
approach would save small businesses unnecessary premium
increases of between 45- and $70 billion over 10 years.
Third, we've been educating Members of the House and Senate
and pushing for relief with regard to several critical
provisions. First and foremost, our focus is on the employer
mandate and how it will hurt employees as well as employers.
Unfortunately, and perhaps ironically, because of the mandate
not only are employees not receiving healthcare coverage,
they're now losing full-time wages. To rectify this we continue
to push for changes and believe that restoring the definition
of full-time employment to the traditional 40 hours per week is
a critical step in the right direction.
Fourth, our efforts to educate the public will be even more
important in the coming months as the administration begins its
PR campaign. We need to have an honest discussion about what
the law does and does not do. Selling the law to the public
instead of educating the public about the law is going to lead
to further confusion and frustration.
Beyond the employer mandate, the list of problematic
provisions is long, and several constantly rank as the most
dire for business. the health insurance tax, the essential
health benefit package requirements, the limits on out-of-
pocket maximums and deductibles will all increase premiums and
reduce flexibility, continuing to contribute to the one-size-
fits-all vision of health care under the PPACA. It's like
forcing all car manufacturers to make only cars with leather
seats, DVD players, GPS systems, sunroof, and seat warmers,
where many people could only afford a more modest car at a
lower price.
In conclusion, regardless of our opinions of the law, it is
being implemented. It is critical that everyone, businesses,
regulators, Members of Congress and the public, do what we can
to mitigate the harm on Americans, our economy and innovation.
We must engage in an honest discussion, not a sales pitch, to
inform individuals about the law and to take every opportunity
to ease burdens, administrative burdens, preserve flexibility,
and reduce premium increases.
Finally, we urge business to continue to innovate and work
within the confines of the law to develop and offer coverage
options that employees value. We urge the regulators to adopt a
compliance assistance approach as opposed to strict
enforcement. We urge our elected representatives to pass
legislation that would restore common business standards for
the definition of ``full-time employee,'' and we urge the
public to be inquisitive and cautious as they assess the
information available to understand the law.
Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Ms. Mahoney.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Mahoney follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Ms. Neblett, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MICHELLE R. NEBLETT

Ms. Neblett. Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member DeGette,
members of the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations of
the House Energy and Commerce Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today regarding the
challenges restaurant and food service operators are facing in
implementing the 2010 healthcare law.
My name is Michelle Neblett. I'm the director of labor and
workforce policy for the National Restaurant Association. We
are the leading trade association for the restaurant and food
service industry, which is comprised of 980,000 restaurant and
food service outlets employing 13.1 million people, who serve
130 million guests daily. Our industry employs about 10 percent
of the U.S. workforce, and restaurants are employers of choice
for many looking for flexible work schedules. As a result, we
employ a high proportion of part-time and seasonal workers.
Much of our workforce could also be considered young
invincibles, as 43 percent of the employees are under age 26.
The National Restaurant Association is active in helping
our operators understand the requirements of the healthcare
law. We have conducted numerous Webinars and countless
educational sessions in partnership with our State restaurant
associations and as part of our annual trade shows. We have
detailed, written materials, and through our Health Care
Knowledge Center Web site, we are trying to provide a one-stop
place where an operator can go to understand the law's
requirements.
In my role I have traveled around the country conducting
these educational sessions and answering operators' questions
as they work through how to comply with the law. What I have
learned is that this is one of the most challenging
requirements placed on the restaurant and food service industry
that any can recall, and it is clear that the law cannot stand
as it is today.
While the restaurant association has worked since enactment
to constructively shape the regulations, legislative action is
needed as there are limits to what can be done through the
regulatory process.
With a little more than 3 months until open enrollment
begins October 1st in the exchanges, an employee notification
about those exchanges by employers must go out as well. The
time for restaurant and food service operators to comply is
now. The overarching challenge our members face with this law
is to first understand its complexity and interwoven
requirements.
By far the definition of ``full-time employee'' under the
law possess the greatest challenge for my industry. The statute
defines ``full time'' as an average of 30 hours a week in any
given month. This is not based on existing law or traditional
business practices. Certainly restaurant and food service
operators, like many businesses, have traditionally used a 40-
hour workweek.
One of the attractive benefits of working in our industry
is the flexibility to adjust one's hours to suit their own
needs. However, for the first time, under the law, the Federal
Government has drawn a bright line as to who is part-time and
who is full-time. As a result, employers with variable-hour
workforces and flexible scheduling must be deliberate about
scheduling hours, because there is now a greater financial
impact with potential liability for employer penalties if
employees who do work full-time hours are not offered coverage.
If the definition is not changed to align better with workforce
patterns, there is concern that the flexibility so many
employees value in our industry will no longer be widely
available, and structural changes to our labor markets could
occur.
The applicable large employer determination is also too
complex and stifles small employers' ability to manage their
workforces, plan to expand their businesses, and prepare to
offer coverage. The automatic enrollment provision is a concern
that could cause financial hardship for some employees and
greater confusion as well, without increasing access to
coverage.
Finally, these challenges clearly demonstrate a need for
broader transition relief without threat of penalty or subsidy
recapture for good-faith compliance by both employers and
employees. We believe it is appropriate to provide time for
employers to make plan and system changes and for employees to
understand their options under the law.
In conclusion, thank you again for the opportunity to
testify before you today regarding the challenges restaurant
and food service operators face as they implement the law. The
National Restaurant Association is dedicated to providing
restaurant and food service operators with the information they
need to face these challenges and to make the best possible
decisions they can for their employees and their businesses.
Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Neblett follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. Mr. Trautwein, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

TESTIMONY OF E. NEIL TRAUTWEIN

Mr. Trautwein. Thank you, Chairman Murphy, Ranking Member
DeGette and honored members of the committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the
challenges of ACA implementation and how we in the business
community, particularly retailers, are reacting to those
challenges.
My name is Neil Trautwein, and I'm a vice president with
the National Retail Federation. NRF is the voice of the retail
industry worldwide, everybody from the very largest to the very
smallest, and everybody in between. Our membership also
includes chain restaurants and online retailers.
We figure our members support everybody from stores to
supply chain, one in four jobs in the American economy today.
So it's particularly important that the transition moves
smoothly.
We continue to have concerns about the ACA, but we're also
working very hard to help educate our members on what's coming,
when, where and how. We've worked hard and productively with
the administration to help address and smooth wherever possible
particular provisions in ACA implementation. Yet we still
remain worried by fast-approaching deadlines for
implementation. Our Nation can't afford to have the ACA stumble
out of the gates as it makes its debut.
We've been closely engaged in the regulatory process ever
since the ACA was signed into law, probably after the--before
the ink dried on it. We've met numerous times with the
regulators, and we've submitted numerous written comments.
For retails, our part-time and variable-hour employees are
a particular challenge for us. Some may become full-time and
move on to long-term careers in retail. Others value the great
flexibility that part-time work provides. Many of the most
useful regulatory approaches that have been developed to deal
with these problems, such as the look-back/stability period, in
turn breed additional complexity and are a challenge to
implement.
One very significant challenge is the 30-hour rule for
full-time coverage. As my colleagues have said, most of us have
long assumed that 40 hours, consistent with Federal overtime
rules, is a normal full-time workweek. A 30-hour definition
forces retail employers to manage to a new standard. The
requirement to provide an equal period of stable coverage to
the look-back adds to the stakes, complexity and anxiety
employers have over this provision, who will be forced to fine-
tune our workforce and adjust the balance between full-time and
part-time in order to meet the new realities.
This is time, effort and money spent on compliance rather
than on retail or chain restaurant sales.
For variable-hour employees who don't reach that standard,
as my colleagues have said, it means less money in their
pockets.
We strongly support the efforts that have been commented on
to redefine full-time work at 40 hours as is traditional. We
respectfully ask that this and other steps to address the
shortcomings of the ACA be addressed before it becomes fully
effective. Later on may be too late to really make a difference
in the amount of change coming.
We respectfully don't agree with those who either argue
full implementation or full repeal are the only options. We
think we need to move ahead on specific changes. We have
responsibilities in the here and now, and our members have
responsibilities to their employees, their stores, shareholders
and communities. We'll bend every effort we can to mitigate the
impact of the ACA on the retail and chain restaurant
industries.
We also urge Congress to consider an outright delay in the
provisions in order to allow businesses to spool up and create
the systems they will need to manage these requirements.
Alternatively, Congress could consider a soft rollout and more
compliance-oriented in order to help them move through this.
Again, I greatly appreciate the opportunity to appear
before you today. We urge you to be wary of the pace of ACA
implementation. This could have the effect of freezing
employers and forcing them away from providing coverage. At a
minimum it's going to pressure our ability to continue to
provide coverage. We hope to work with you to mitigate those
harmful effects.
Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Trautwein follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Murphy. I thank all the panelists. I'll start off by
asking questions for 5 minutes.
Just for the record, Mr. Daley, I appreciate your
testimony. You made reference to an article that actually a
number of Members have been talking about, and that is
something from Health Affairs, I think May of this year, which
was doing some analysis of healthcare costs and them declining
and flattening out. I call attention to a couple of the
articles.
Kaiser Family Foundation did a study, and it said that that
some of the leveling off of health care costs actually began in
2002. The New England Journal of Medicine article from last
summer said that the leveling off has been going on since 2005.
And the Health Affairs article made references to a couple of
parts. One is the job loss and economy. That's a fraction of
the leveling off; am I correct? That's a fraction, but not the
whole explanation for leveling off of healthcare costs and some
declines?
Mr. Daley. Actually--I'm uncertain I can be heard, but
actually the article pointed to the recession as a considerable
contributor to leveling off. However, not only that article,
but another, both found that there were structural changes in
the healthcare system itself long term, and that would, in
fact, reduce the growth of costs.
Mr. Murphy. Yes. I just want to go on the record as saying
those--what they refer to in that--articles in Health Affairs
was the out-of-pocket costs for employees have gone up, and
then it says it has shifted from the employers to the
employees. And that's been a significant part of the impact as
well, as well as I think the article also referenced a
reduction of rate of new technology.
I just wanted to make sure we had that fact on the record
for Members to note that these articles are not referencing the
Affordable Care Act as making this more affordable. They're
saying the structural things you said. No, we don't have big
technologies introduced, the economy has been down, and
employers are basically shifting costs to employees. Some
employees are seeking the health care less.
But let me go on to a couple other things for Ms. Mahoney,
Ms. Neblett and Mr. Trautwein. What do you hear from business
owners about the burden of complying with the healthcare law in
terms of the time requirements and their costs of just
compliance?
Ms. Mahoney, what do you hear there?
Ms. Mahoney. I think some are savvy, and they say, wow, I'm
really overwhelmed with what all I'm going to have to do to
comply. I'm talking to my broker, I'm looking at what the
reporting limits are going to be, it's a lot. Others are, I
think, just really shell-shocked.
I mean, it's really remarkable when we travel the country,
I know my colleagues do as well, to speak with small businesses
that really have no understanding of the kind of basic function
of the law and what all it will require, and sort of their
brilliant ideas about how to circumvent it, whether it's
letting their spouse or their child take a bigger portion of
ownership. And we all appreciate that there are laws of common
control and aggregation that are going to be very confusing to
kind of navigate with regard to those possible solutions.
So I think it depends on what segment of the employer
community you're talking about, what segment of the country,
not only just size, but industry.
Mr. Murphy. Let me move on.
Ms. Neblett, what are you hearing?
Ms. Neblett. Yes. I think our operators are small
businesses, midsized businesses, large businesses, and so we
have a range of operators that we're talking to. And some have
H.R. departments, and have the benefit of benefit consultants
and attorneys and others to help them.
We're talking to a lot of those smaller operators, those
right on the bubble of 50 FTEs, when we go out and speak a lot,
those just over that threshold, and the complexity is, one, to
get over and then dive into the details, because the details
really do matter in this.
Mr. Murphy. Mr. Trautwein, I only have a minute left.
Mr. Trautwein. I share the same experience. I've been very
surprised by the--by how much of an all-hands effort it is for
larger companies, everybody from H.R., who you would expect,
but also finance, legal, information technology and on down the
line. But when you go down that chain, it gets to be a lot more
frustration, and these are the same people we're trying to help
educate.
Mr. Murphy. Let me ask this: My assumption is you're going
around the country trying to explain the healthcare bill, and
none of you are undermining the healthcare bill and saying,
here is how you get away from it; am I correct?
All the panelists say yes.
So you're out actually teaching the people how to comply
with the bill; is that correct?
Ms. Neblett. That's correct.
Ms. Mahoney. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. Now, given that, do they have enough
information on how to comply, and is it working? Quickly.
Ms. Mahoney. No. And I think my biggest concern is that the
effort to educate will turn more into a campaign style of
selling. I know this is a very controversial issue, but--or
law, but to sell, for example, preventive services as free
care, I think, is----
Mr. Murphy. So it's an issue that it just has to do with
how this is sold or how this is pitched, or fundamental in the
law itself there are flaws that are difficult for them to
comply with? Real quick.
Mr. Trautwein. I think the Achilles heel of the law is its
complexity, and we heard differences on applicable size and
number of hours on the first panel. It's a tough law to
understand.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Ms. Neblett. I think it's complex, but there are also some
very specific challenges, especially from my industry and
industries like mine, that it makes it particularly difficult.
Mr. Murphy. We appreciate getting the details from you
then.
I yield now to Ms. DeGette for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to start out by thanking the three people over here,
Ms. Mahoney, Ms. Neblett and Mr. Trautwein, because even though
all three of your organizations oppose this legislation, you
are all working assiduously to try to implement it in an
appropriate way for your members, and I really appreciate that.
The other thing I would wish is that my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle, I've been saying this for a long time,
let's put bygones be bygones. This bill is here now. We've had
37 votes to repeal it, and it's not going away. So what I think
we should do, and I know the chairman agrees with me on this, I
think we should be really working on ways to make it work
better for small businesses and for everybody, because the
ultimate goal is to give high-quality health insurance to all
Americans.
And we heard this last panel of small business people. Some
of them I know don't agree with me. They all said they want to
offer insurance to their employees, and I would think that
would be true of all of your members, that they all want to be
able to do that.
Mr. Daley, is that correct? Yes or no.
Mr. Daley. Ours, absolutely.
Ms. DeGette. Ms. Mahoney?
Ms. Mahoney. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. Ms. Neblett?
Ms. Neblett. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And Mr. Trautwein?
Mr. Trautwein. Yes.
Ms. DeGette. And all of you are bringing suggestions to the
table that I think we need to look at, because I don't--we're
still trying to revise Medicare, and it was passed in 1964. So
definitely we should be working on that. And like your 40-hour
suggestion that you're making and other suggestions, I think we
should sit down and talk about that instead of sitting here and
quoting things that were said when the bill was passed on both
sides of the aisle.
And, Ms. Mahoney, you're nodding your head, so I assume you
would agree with that.
Ms. Mahoney. I would agree. I think one point I would make
is the need for flexibility.
Ms. DeGette. Yes. And this kind of goes to the other point
you made, which I like, which is--and this goes on both sides
of the coin, too--is we should be educating people, not trying
to sell this. And that's true. You know, we shouldn't be having
commercials saying, this is great for everybody, and it's free.
And we shouldn't be having commercials saying, this is
terrible, and don't do it. And I agree with that.
And the other thing I agree with that all four of you said
is as I go in my district and around Colorado, there is a lot
of confusion about what the Affordable Care Act is. So I
welcome your--I got the names of your Web sites, and I welcome
your participation and your partnership in trying to explain to
people, small businesses in particular, what this does. And
there is so much misinformation out there.
I do want to ask a couple of questions.
Mr. Daley, I think I already asked this, but your sense
would be that small businesses really do want to offer their
employees insurance; is that correct?
Mr. Daley. I think that's a surveyed and universal almost,
they want to.
Ms. DeGette. They want to, but yet over the last number of
years, small businesses have been really the hardest hit by
great increases in insurance prices and also less ability to
get affordable plans for their employees; is that right?
Mr. Daley. Absolutely. The markets have been adversely
selected, there is tremendous cost, and it's very difficult----
Ms. DeGette. And part of what happened for small employers,
this was in your testimony, they had to pay 18 percent more
than large insurers for complete coverage; is that right?
Mr. Daley. That is correct.
Ms. DeGette. And a lot of those plans, people were thrown
out if they had preexisting conditions, or if they hit the
caps, or issues like that; isn't that correct?
Mr. Daley. That's why many of them don't buy, because the
quality of the insurance isn't very good.
Ms. DeGette. You know, I had mentioned before I did this
this little town hall meeting with some small businesses in
Denver last Friday, and there was a small company, and the
woman said, my husband and I own this company, and we have a
child with severe handicaps. She said, it doesn't pay for my
employees to go into my insurance plan because it would cost so
much for them.
I'm sure that happens a lot with small business; is that
right?
Mr. Daley. We just had a personnel person had a stroke, and
everybody's premium went up $1,000.
Ms. DeGette. Everybody's premium went up.
Now, one last thing, and I hope all of you know this,
several people mentioned we don't want a one-size-fits-all, and
I agree with that. But under the Affordable Care Act, just
within the exchanges we have several different levels of plans,
and we also have catastrophic plans for younger workers that
would help with Ms. Neblett's employees. So, in fact, we have a
variety of options, it's not that everybody has to have one
plan; is that right?
Mr. Daley. That's correct.
Ms. DeGette. But what we do is we make it so there's a
minimum level of coverage so if somebody gets sick, they
actually have insurance that they can use; is that right?
Mr. Daley. I think you need to be clear that there are
standards pegged to employer responsibility, that there are
certain levels of offering that need to be made. There are
different offerings in the exchanges that are available.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much. And thanks again to all
of you for coming. I look forward to working with you as we
sort this all out.
Mr. Murphy. I now recognize the gentleman from Texas Mr.
Olson 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the chair.
And welcome to the second panel. A special thanks to you,
Ms. Mahoney, for the help the local Chambers have done back
home in Texas 22. They've given me access to your member
organizations, and I go there and listen to them. I appreciate
that. And I get the challenges they're facing in Texas 22.
And many of these businesses are restaurants. So I need to
thank you, Ms. Neblett, for all the hard work you've done at
the National Restaurant Association.
As you know, Texans love to eat out. And when I want to get
a pulse on an issue, I go get some barbecue, some Tex-Mex, go
to a burger joint, a steakhouse, Chinese food place, Indian
food place and get a full belly and a full mind. So thank you,
thank you, thank you.
My questions will focus on Obamacare's prosperity-
threatening definition of 30 hours of work as a full-time
workweek.
Almost a year ago, I toured a steakhouse in Pearland,
Texas. It was heartbreaking. Owners painfully telling their
employees in the future they'd be limited to 30 hours--less
than 30 hours, 29 hours, the 29ers, per week. Many of these
kids--and they were kids working part time, full time, 40 hours
a week and going to school. They were single moms raising a son
or a daughter, who did not have the flexibility to find another
job. They need to have the job they had for 40 or more hours.
And my questions are for all four of you; first with you,
Ms. Neblett. Since this train wreck is coming, it sounds like
you really have no information to advise your membership. If
you do have information, please tell me what you're advising.
If not, what do we need to give you so your members can make
informed decisions about the future?
Ms. Neblett. Thank you.
We help explain and lay out the law's requirements for our
members, explain the regulations. And, as Neil mentioned, the
look-back/stability period is very helpful, although still
complex to implement for those variable-hour and seasonal
employees when a large employer is offering coverage.
But I think we need a one-stop place for information about
the law. I think that would be very helpful from the Federal
Government's perspective. And I think we really need to take a
close look at this definition, because it is having potential
impacts on the employees in terms of hours and wages.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Trautwein?
Mr. Trautwein. We're engaging in similar efforts talking
about different options. If you look at the law, there's a neon
sign saying that it's cheaper to pay a penalty than to provide
coverage if you're in that applicable large-employer size. But
there are other options, and the last panel talked about some
of the newer things, and strategies of satisfying the A
penalty, but not the B penalty, and all this is contrary and
foreign to the process of running a retail or chain restaurant
store. And that's part of the problem and part of the
frustration in the employer community.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Daley.
Mr. Daley. I need to point out that the Towers Watson,
which is a huge H.R. firm across the river in Virginia, did a
survey of employers about the 30 hours and found that almost
none of them plan to change the way they treat their employees.
There are reasons for that. It's difficult administratively to
mess around with more employees in order to bring your
workforce down under that 30-hour lid. It offends your
employees if you make them 29 rather than when they were 35.
And again, keep in mind, as I said in my testimony, the
category that this affects is around 1 percent of the entire
U.S. workforce.
Mr. Olson. Yes, sir. One further comment. I have a little
bit of time here. Some of my colleagues on the other side of
the aisle have been saying we're just after this because it's
politics. It's not politics. This 30-hour provision needs to be
fixed. It's a big problem in your businesses, and we're trying
to fix it, and that's why we're having this hearing.
And one other thing we talked about, Mr. Trautwein. You
brought up talking about so-called large businesses. Every
business I've talked to back home has more than 50 employees,
every single one that provides health care now likes that, they
get better employees, they keep them longer, and they want to
give them health care. But they have to compete, and one of the
competitors drops out and goes in the exchanges, they will do
it. Everyone has told me that. So they won't be able to keep
their health care. That was a false promise.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
Mr. Long is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
panel taking your time to be here today. I know our first panel
ran over a little longer than what we all anticipated, but
thank you all for being patient and being here.
And as we have heard here today, the impact of this
legislation known as the Affordable Care Act will have a major
and often harmful impact on businesses small and large across
our Nation.
One particular company based out of my district, which is a
Fortune 500 company--this is a Fortune 500 company that started
with one little store, one dream in a guy's mind that he could
start a business back in the 1960s. So he opened his first
store. Fortune 500 company. Now they employ 56,000 employees in
retail stores across the United States.
And they have a desire to continue offering affordable
healthcare plans like they've been offering for all these years
to their employees, to their workforce. Unfortunately, after
making the calculations, the total impact of the law on its
benefit package, the company estimates that full implementation
of the Affordable Care Act will ultimately increase their
annual net cost 120 percent, or $100 million. And what the CEO
has told me from his lips to my ears is that it's going to be
worse coverage, not as good a coverage as what they have now,
and it's going to cost 120 percent more.
In order to address these dramatic new costs, the company
has already announced to its part-time employees they will no
longer be offered the coverage that they currently receive.
Additionally, they're exploring ways to reduce their number of
full-time employees by moving them to part-time work, the 29ers
as we call them today.
Mr. Trautwein, I have a question for you that I would like
to direct you. Are your member businesses similar to this
company experiencing the same difficult decisions?
Mr. Trautwein. The short answer is they vary greatly in
terms of their approach, but it's at least part of the
decisionmaking process and the balance, and fine tuning that
balance between full time and part time. And, again, they would
much rather be making sales or doing other business-related
activities, and they don't want to be thinking about these
things.
Mr. Long. Do you find it pretty widespread across the
country----
Mr. Trautwein. I think it is.
Mr. Long [continuing]. With the companies?
And I just want to say for the record--is the ranking
member gone?
Mr. Murphy. She is here in absentia.
Mr. Long. OK. I was hoping we had at least one person on
the other side to hear this, but there's this constant--and my
friend Jan Schakowsky often says she hears this constant
drumbeat from our side of the aisle about repeal and replace
Obamacare.
There are good things about Obamacare. When I ran the first
time for Congress, it had just passed. It was all out there in
the media. Everyone knew health care needed to be tackled,
needed to be handled, needed to be changed. And there are good
things about Obamacare. I'm willing to admit that. There's the
allowing kids to stay on their parents' plan until they're 26,
preexisting conditions. Insurance providers used to be risk
takers, and over the years they kind of became risk averters.
So there are good things, and I'm willing to admit that.
I would hope that the other side of the aisle, when we're
trying to work through these things to help companies, help
individuals to get good, affordable health care and keep the
insurance that they have, would come across and admit there are
some bad things about the Affordable Care Act so we can all get
together, instead of we get in these meeting after meeting,
hearing after hearing where they sing the praises that
everything is coming up roses on Obamacare. And it's simply not
true.
Now, not everything is disastrous about Obamacare. That's
not true either. There are some good parts of it. But I would
wish that we could work together, and I wish I had someone to
talk to on the other side of the aisle, but apparently they
have other things to do, bigger fish to fry, I guess I could
say.
But anyway that is just kind of my statement going forward
trying to resolve these problems, because there are good and
bad things about it, and we need to come to that realization
instead of just coming in on one side saying everything's
coming up roses, and the other side saying that everything's
going to heck in a handbasket.
So, again, I just want to thank you all for being here
today, and I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman yields back.
I now go to Mr. Griffith from Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you all very much for being here today.
And I saw most of you were here listening to the testimony of
the previous panel, and I do appreciate that.
Ms. Neblett, one of the concerns that I have and have had
with Obamacare is that a number of the restaurants in my area,
particularly the fast-food restaurants, indicated when I was
first elected--and I was elected the same time Mr. Long was, 2
years and a piece ago now--they indicated that if there weren't
some relief from this act, that their marginal stores would
have to close down. And I have noticed over the course of the
last 2-and-a-piece years that some of these restaurants have,
in fact, closed down in my district.
Now, the economy not being good, and the fact that
apparently our position in this country in my district, which
is a coal district, which is adverse to coal, at least
according to the President, that has not helped matters any.
But have you all seen a trend where some of the more marginal
stores are closing down because they don't want to have to deal
with Obamacare in the first place?
Ms. Neblett. I think it's very hard to pinpoint exactly
why, as you said, the economy has been slow, and businesses
that are on the margin have--will always tend to go out of
business. But there's no doubt that this is a complex law. It
does add a lot of time in terms of trying to figure out what
you need to do, and costs in terms of either the penalties or
offering coverage is a big factor, and these are all things
that operators are trying to figure out and deal with.
Mr. Griffith. And here is--one of the concerns that I have
is that I believe this bill is all built with pieces
interconnecting. And so one of the difficulties I think we have
in trying to work out some interesting compromises--and we've
talked about the 29ers, and a lot of folks are saying, well,
let's just move it back up to where it was at 40 hours a week.
The problem is I believe that--and I wasn't here when it was
passed, but I believe that the reason that they lowered it down
to the 29 was they felt they'd get more people actually buying
in. They had the Medicaid expansion component. Then they had
the component of we're going to lower that, you have to cover
folks down if they're working the 30 hours, because they needed
to pick up those employees between 30 and 40 hours to make the
numbers work on how many people were going to be pulled in the
system, how many people were going to be insured, and, of
course, the bigger the pool, the less expensive the insurance.
So my fear is we raised that number up to 40, we solved
that problem, but then we've made the overall cost of Obamacare
greater because we have not--we don't have that group invested
in doing--that 29-to-30 group invested in being a part of the
program.
So I have some real concerns there, and I'm wondering if
any of your members and, Ms. Mahoney and Ms. Neblett
particularly, if any of your members have expressed those
concerns as well.
Ms. Mahoney. Our members haven't expressed that concern. I
think for them their focus is on how their businesses are run--
--
Mr. Griffith. They're drowning, and they're looking for
anything they can grab onto.
Ms. Mahoney. Well, how their businesses have run
historically, how they can continue to keep their businesses
going in a way that's best for their employees, and this is a
big wrench in that piece. I don't think they're aware of kind
of the economic matrix that may have gone on to the funding of
it and who gets in and who gets out. I think they're just
working----
Mr. Griffith. And I think that's where it's a problem for
us to come in and try to tweak it here or tweak it there, and
everybody keeps saying, well, why don't you all just try to fix
it? I believe that the way it was constructed is such that if
you pull out any major piece, the whole house of cards
collapses. And it may have already happened with the fact that
there's not the forced Medicaid expansion, which was a part of
the program to make sure that everybody, you know, was going to
be brought into the system one way or the other.
And so I have some real concerns with trying to do
piecemeal fixes when you pull a piece here, and it unravels
something else over here. And I think if we try to fix it,
we're going to spend years trying to repair what I believe is a
structurally flawed from the very beginning concept that will
not work. And I do appreciate that you all are just looking for
solutions because you have lots of businesses that are in
trouble and that are going to have to lay off people.
And I would make this one last point. I've got about 30
seconds left. While the people who were only working 29 hours
may only be 1 percent of the workforce now, I suspect that it's
going to be a lot larger come this time next year, because when
you have the entire Commonwealth of Virginia saying we're not--
the State of Virginia says we're not going to have part-time
workers at any more than 29 hours, when you look at the
counties in my district that are looking at the same kind of
policy, when you look at the grocery stores and the fast-food
places and the other businesses across the country that are
looking at sending people down to 29 because of the huge cost
savings if they only work 29 hours, I think you're going to see
that that's a lot more than 1 percent, Mr. Daley.
And I yield back.
Mr. Long. Will the gentleman yield just a second?
Mr. Griffith. Well, I'm out of time. I don't have a second
to yield, but by unanimous consent I'd be happy to----
Ms. DeGette. No. I object.
Mr. Murphy. We're out of time at this point.
Ms. DeGette. Oh, if you want to apologize that's OK. That's
fine.
Mr. Murphy. Do you want to say something. Mr. Long?
Mr. Long. Pardon?
Mr. Murphy. Did you have a quick comment to make, Mr. Long?
Mr. Long. Yes, if I could.
When I prepared my line of questioning, the ranking member
was in the room, and I'm sure if you watch the video, you will
see I turned around to speak to her, and she was not there. And
might I offer her my apology if my comments came off as being
smart alec or whatever. They did not intend to be. I did not
intend to turn and see until I turned around, and I was
surprised you weren't there.
And I really think that we need to work together as
Republicans and Democrats. And like I said in my comments, and
I understand you were with your art student, which I'm going to
meet mine after a while, which is a great program, and I
apologize to you. I don't know if you'll accept it or not, but
it's a harsh call----
Ms. DeGette. I'm always happy to accept an apology. I
appreciate it. And what I'm trying to do here is the same thing
you're trying to do, which is to solve a problem. And we can't
do it if we're going to, A, demagogue this issue, or, B,
attacking each other.
Mr. Long. Right. And that was my whole point not for it to
end like it did when I was trying to be helpful, and I
apologize.
Ms. DeGette. And I'm happy that you recognize that, and I
accept your apology.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I appreciate you all for tuning into
Dr. Murphy's group therapy session. Stay tuned tomorrow for
more good comments on how we can work together.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, I just have one final comment,
which is very brief and aside from the fact that we do hope we
can work together on all of these issues.
Ms. Neblett said that small businesses need one resource to
go to to figure out answers to the questions and to bust some
of these myths. I would suggest that you put on your Web site
healthcare.gov. That is the central Web site that the HHS has
put up. And then we'll continue to work with you on trying to
get this message out better all around the country.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you.
I thank all the panelists here today. I thank the Members.
And I ask unanimous consent that the written opening statements
of other Members be introduced in the record. So without
objection, the documents will be entered in the record.
And, again, I want to thank all of the panelists from both
panels here and all the Members who participated in today's
hearing. I remind Members they have 10 business days to submit
questions for the record, and I ask that all the witnesses also
agree to respond promptly to any of the questions.
And with that, I adjourn this hearing. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


