- KEEPING THE PROMISE: SITE-OF-SERVICE MEDICARE PAYMENT REFORMS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

KEEPING THE PROMISE: SITE-OF-SERVICE
MEDICARE PAYMENT REFORMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 21, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-148

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

91-549 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  GENE GREEN, Texas
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                      JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            Islands
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PAUL TONKO, New York
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                  Islands
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Mike Rogers, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................    30
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................    30
Hon. Michael C. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, opening statement..............................    32
Hon. David B. McKinley, a Representative in Congress from the
State of West Virginia, opening statement......................    32
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................   198
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, prepared statement..............................   200

Witnesses

Mark E. Miller, Executive Director, Medicare Payment Advisory
Commission.....................................................    66
Prepared statement...........................................    68
Answers to submitted questions...............................   201
Barbara Gage, Fellow, Engelberg Center for Health Care Reform,
the Brookings Institution......................................   115
Prepared statement...........................................   118
Answers to submitted questions...............................   216
Barry D. Brooks, Chairman, Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee,
the U.S. Oncology Network......................................   131
Prepared statement...........................................   133
Answers to submitted questions...............................   224
Reginald W. Coopwood, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Regional One Health, on Behalf of the American Hospital
Association....................................................   146
Prepared statement...........................................   148
Answers to submitted questions...............................   231
Steven Landers, President and Chief Executive Officer, Visiting
Nurse Association Health Group.................................   162
Prepared statement...........................................   164
Answers to submitted questions...............................   237
Peter W. Thomas, Principal, Powers, Pyles, Sutter & Verville,
P.C., on Behalf of the Coaltion to Preserve Rehabilitation.....   173
Prepared statement...........................................   175
Answers to submitted questions...............................   240

Submitted Material

H.R. 2869, the Medicare Patient Access to Cancer Treatment Act of
2013, submitted by Mr. Pitts...................................     4
H.R. 4673, the Bundling and Coordinating Post-Acute Care Act of
2014, submitted by Mr. Pitts...................................     9
Letter of May 19, 2014, from Dan Weber, President and Founder,
Association of Mature American Citizens, to Mr. Pitts and Mr.
Pallone, submitted by Mr. Pitts................................    34
Statement of the American Academy of Family Physicians, dated May
21, 2014, submitted by Mr. Pitts...............................    35
Statement of the American Orthotic and Prosthetic Association,
dated May 21, 2014, submitted by Mr. Pitts.....................    38
Statement of the National Association for Home Care & Hospice,
dated May 21, 2014, submitted by Mr. Pitts.....................    48
Statement of the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, et al.,
``Site Neutrality: A Race to the Bottom for Patients with Heart
Disease,'' submitted by Mr. Pitts..............................    55
Statement of the Premier healthcare alliance, dated May 21, 2014,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................    60
Study Highlights, ``Assessment of Patient Outcomes of
Rehabilitative Care Provided in Inpatient Rehabilitation
Facilities and After Discharge,'' by Joan E. DaVanzo, et al.,
submitted by Mr. Pallone.......................................    64
Statement of Bruce M. Gans, Chair, American Medical
Rehabilitation Providers Association, dated May 21, 2014,
submitted by Mr. Green.........................................    98

KEEPING THE PROMISE: SITE-OF-SERVICE MEDICARE PAYMENT REFORMS

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 21, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:16 a.m., in
Room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Shimkus,
Rogers, Murphy, Lance, Cassidy, Guthrie, Bilirakis, Ellmers,
Pallone, Schakowsky, Green, and Barrow.
Also attending: Representative McKinley.
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Chief Counsel, Health; Gary
Andres, Staff Director; Mike Bloomquist, General Counsel; Matt
Bravo, Professional Staff Member; Leighton Brown, Press
Assistant; Noelle Clemente, Press Secretary; Brad Grantz,
Policy Coordinator, Oversight and Investigations; Sydne
Harwick, Legislative Clerk; Sean Hayes, Deputy Chief Counsel,
Oversight and Investigations; Robert Horne, Professional Staff
Member, Health; Chris Pope, Fellow, Health; Heidi Stirrup,
Policy Coordinator, Health; Josh Trent, Professional Staff
Member, Health; Tom Wilbur, Digital Media Advisor; Ziky
Ababiya, Democratic Staff Assistant; Eddie Garcia, Democratic
Professional Staff Member; Kaycee Glavich, Democratic
Government Accountability Office Detailee; and Amy Hall,
Democratic Senior Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The Chair
will recognize himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Today's hearing is designed to educate members on a topic
that has come up repeatedly in recent years: site-neutral
payments. In two recent reports, MedPAC has addressed the
differences in Medicare payment rates across sites of care.
MedPAC's March 2012 report recommended that payment rates for
certain evaluation and management services be equal, whether
these services are provided in a hospital outpatient department
or in a freestanding physician office.
Currently, hospitals are reimbursed for these services
under the Hospital Outpatient Prospective Payment System
(HOPPS), and physicians' offices are reimbursed under the less
generous Physician Fee Schedule.
In its June 2013 report, MedPAC discussed equalizing
payment rates for certain services in a hospital outpatient
setting to those of ambulatory surgery centers (ASCs) and
reducing the gap in payment between other services. However,
the Commission did not make a recommendation on payment
changes. These discussions bring up a number of important
issues as it relates to the role that Medicare plays in our
health care system. MedPAC has estimated that seniors could
save hundreds of millions of dollars a year if a site-neutral
payment system were instituted.
In addition, MedPAC cites an urgent need to address these
issues because services have been migrating from physicians'
offices to the usually higher-paid outpatient department
setting as hospital employment of physicians has increased.
While stating the benefits of site-neutral payments and
post-acute care (PAC) reform, MedPAC has also expressed some
concern that these policy changes could cut access to physician
services for low-income patients, noting that a stop-loss
policy could protect such patients by limiting hospitals'
losses of Medicare revenue. These policies have arisen as
potential pay-fors for SGR reform and other health care
reforms. As the subcommittee with the largest health
jurisdiction of any committee in the House, we are charged with
safeguarding the Medicare program and preserving it for future
generations.
As such, I and Ranking Member Pallone felt it important for
the members of this subcommittee to hear the pros and cons of
potential policies in this space. Two pieces of legislation are
also before us for consideration today. Representatives Mike
Rogers and Doris Matsui introduced H.R. 2869, a proposal that
would require Medicare to pay for cancer services at the same
rate regardless of the site of service. In addition,
Representative McKinley has authored H.R. 4673, a bill that
would combine the various post-acute care payments into one
reimbursement payment or bundle.
I would like to thank all of our witnesses for being here
today to educate Members on both sides of the issue.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

Today's hearing is designed to educate Members on a topic
that has come up repeatedly in recent years, site-neutral
payments.
In two recent reports, MedPAC has addressed the differences
in Medicare payment rates across sites of care.
MedPAC's March 2012 report recommended that payment rates
for certain evaluation and management (E&M) services be equal,
whether these services are provided in a hospital outpatient
department or in a free-standing physician office.
Currently, hospitals are reimbursed for these services
under the Hospital Outpatient Prospective Payment System
(HOPPS), and physicians' offices are reimbursed under the less
generous Physician Fee Schedule.
In its June 2013 report, MedPAC discussed equalizing
payment rates for certain services in a hospital outpatient
setting to those of ambulatory surgery centers (ASCs) and
reducing the gap in payment between other services. However,
the Commission did not make a recommendation on payment
changes.
These discussions bring up a number of important issues as
it relates to the role that Medicare plays in our health care
system.
MedPAC has estimated that seniors could save hundreds of
millions of dollars a year if a site neutral payment system
were instituted.
In addition, MedPAC cites an urgent need to address these
issues because services have been ``migrating from physicians'
offices to the usually higher-paid outpatient department
setting, as hospital employment of physicians has increased.''
While stating the benefits of site neutral payments and
Post-Acute Care (PAC) reform, MedPAC has also expressed some
concern that these policy changes could cut access to physician
services for low-income patients, noting that a ``stop-loss
policy'' could protect such patients by limiting hospitals'
losses of Medicare revenue.
These policies have arisen as potential payfors for SGR
reform and other health care reforms. As the subcommittee with
the largest health jurisdiction of any committee in the House,
we are charged with safeguarding the Medicare program and
preserving it for future generations.
As such, I and Ranking Member Pallone felt it important for
the members of this subcommittee to hear the pros and cons of
potential policies in this space.
Two pieces of legislation are also before us for
consideration today. Reps. Mike Rogers and Doris Matsui
introduced H.R. 2869, a proposal that would require Medicare to
pay for cancer services at the same rate regardless of the site
of service. In addition, Rep. McKinley has authored H.R. 4673,
a bill that would combine the various Post-Acute Care payments
into one reimbursement payment or bundle.
I would like to thank all of our witnesses for being here
today to educate Members on both sides of the issue.

[H.R. 2869 and the H.R. 4673 draft follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. I will yield the remainder of my time to the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Rogers.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing on H.R. 2869, the Medicare Cancer Patient
Protection Act.
The United States is home to the most effective and
successful cancer care in the world, creating an environment
that has resulted in the best cancer survival rates across the
globe. However, in the last 5 years, a troubling change in the
delivery of cancer care has begun to emerge, a change that has
been directly affecting not just the continuing rise in the
cost of Medicare but also the ability for cancer patients to
access treatment.
Since 2008, community oncology clinics have seen the shift
from physician office setting to the hospital outpatient
department as a result of the flawed Medicare payment policies
that reimburse hospitals at higher rates than oncology clinics
for the exact same service.
Due to the significant changes in Medicare payment
policies, physician practices are suffering from serious
financial difficulties and struggling to keep their doors open.
These changes have serious implications on patient access,
especially in rural areas, where radiation therapy is not
always available through local hospitals. Patients may be
forced to travel long distances to receive care, posing a
considerable barrier to care for beneficiaries who require
radiation treatment therapy daily for months at a time, and by
the way, we have examples of those very scenarios.
Moreover, this shift in setting for cancer treatment poses
a threat to the solvency of Medicare as hospital consolidation
of physician practices is driving up costs for the Medicare
program, and more importantly, driving up cost for cancer
patients themselves. Reimbursement should be equal for the same
service provided to a cancer patient regardless of whether the
service is delivered in the hospital outpatient department or a
physician's office.
I look forward to working with my colleagues to ensure the
future of community cancer care is preserved, and Mr. Chairman,
I thank you, and I thank you again for taking up and having
this discussion on this very important issue, and I would yield
back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now recognize
the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Pallone, 5 minutes
for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, and I am glad to
see the committee taking interest in issues of post-acute care
reform.
For many years, there has been a lot of discussion about
how we move our health care system into one of quality and
efficiency. In fact, if we are going to ensure that Medicare is
strong for our Nation's seniors well into the future, we must
diligently evaluate how we pay doctors and how we incentivize
care.
MedPAC has been reminding Congress of these issues and the
need for action in this area for some time. Their work and
recommendations should be a useful guide for our efforts, and I
thank Mr. Miller for being here today to review MedPAC's
perspectives on such reforms.
I also welcome the witnesses on the second panel, who have
important perspectives to offer to these topics, and thank you
all for being here today.
As you know, the Affordable Care Act recognized the need
for reform in the post-acute care (PAC) setting and put in
motion a number of initiatives that will build towards PAC
reform. Medicare is testing a number of payment system reforms
such as bundled payments, value-based purchasing and
accountable care organizations that will inform and help to
improve care and outcomes in this area.
We know there is a lot of variation in the quality outcomes
and costs of PAC around the country. Medicare pays
indiscriminately for care in the PAC setting. We don't know if
one side of care is better than another for a patient with a
particular condition. We don't know what combination of
services produces better outcomes or even what level of
services is optimal for a given condition.
Medicare spends $62 billion on post-acute care in the fee-
for-service setting in 2012. That is a big price tag, so it is
critical we get a handle on these issues quickly. We can't
improve the accuracy and efficiency of care if we don't know
what we are buying, and efforts to decrease waste in the system
will fall short of our dual goals of care delivery and payment
reforms.
Before we can envision a wholesale redesign of the payment
system, however, we need more data. We do not have any common
and comparable data across providers like skilled nursing
facilities, home health agencies and others to determine which
patients fare best in which settings or even what appropriate
levels of care are for patients of varying acuity.
So Mr. Chairman, I commend the House Ways and Means and the
Senate Finance Committees for putting out bipartisan draft
legislation on that issue to get the discussion started, and I
hope to engage with these colleagues as policy proposals are
further considered and refined, and in fact, I think you would
agree, the House Energy and Commerce Committee should play a
part in that conversation as we move forward.
We also know there are efficiencies and improvements to
payment accuracy that must be done and can be done now such as
ensuring the current payment system is providing the right
incentives for quality care rather than encouraging care
delivery that maximizes profits. Our committee clearly has a
role to play in advancing positive beneficiary-focused reforms
related to post-acute care for Medicare beneficiaries, and I
hope that we can continue the bipartisan tone in this area and
work to develop solutions in the near future.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, and thanks, everyone, for
joining us today, and I look forward to continuing to
strengthen Medicare for the future.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the vice chairman of the committee, Dr. Burgess, 5
minutes for opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL C. BURGESS, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
recognition, and special acknowledgement to a physician from
Texas, Dr. Barry Brooks, who has joined us in the committee
before. It is at this point in the hearing where I usually
offer the observation that one day it is my hope that we will
have arrayed on the witness table five physicians, who will
tell us how much economists ought to be paid, but until that
day, we will go with what we have got. We do have doctors on
the second panel, and for that, I an extremely grateful.
So we are coming up on the 50th anniversary of the
enactment of Medicare, in fact, 49 years ago this summer. The
practice of medicine has changed a lot since 1965. I used to
tease my dad back then that they had only had two drugs back
then, penicillin and cortisone, and they were interchangeable.
He didn't think that was very funny either.
But the practice of medicine has changed, and so has the
Medicare benefit, and that is a good thing. Now we are asking
themselves if the payment structures must also be modernized so
that the dollars are spent the way they are intended, that is,
efficiently and effectively. Payments to doctors' offices and
hospitals are sometimes misaligned with the true cost of care.
Sometimes the same services are provided to patients at
significantly different rates, depending upon location, with no
real difference in the quality or the outcome. Payments for
patient care in inappropriate or less optimal settings, of
course, can lead to higher long-term costs.
I think that one of the things on this committee we must be
careful about is that we do not create a race to the bottom. It
is not a question of deciding what is the LD-50 of what doctors
can survive on. The lethal dose 50 is 50 percent of what
doctors could live on. We are not trying to ascertain the
figure. The lowest payment is not always the most appropriate
payment, and we should not shy away from paying for better
outcomes.
I would agree with the ranking member of the subcommittee
that it is important that this committee had an important role
to play and the jurisdiction of this committee is the
appropriate place for having these discussions. I know I have
done significant work on the cost drivers of dual eligibles. It
is important for us to guard this population by ensuring we are
exercising the jurisdiction of this committee to improve care
in all settings.
I thank the chairman for the recognition, and I will yield
time to the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. McKinley.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID B. MCKINLEY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA

Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Dr. Burgess, for
holding this hearing on H.R. 4673.
Alarmists scare seniors by suggesting that cuts to Medicare
are coming. We hear it all the time, all during the campaigns,
all through sessions. I am here to say they don't have to be.
For the past 2 years, our staff has been working with
various stakeholders to create a program that would make
Medicare more efficient and improve health care for seniors
without making cuts to provider payments.
The bill before us would do just that. This bill develops a
model for post-acute care services, which will increase
efficiency, encourage more choice and personalize care for
patients, and offer significant savings to the program in the
process. Estimates by independent experts have determined that
this bill could save as much as 85 to 100 billion dollars. We
are not cutting funding for Medicare. We are encouraging
efficiency in services and programs that are more patient-
centered.
Similar models have already been developed for primary care
that has saved 24 percent using efficiency models. By improving
our efficiency, we will strengthen the Medicare program without
cuts.
Some here today have already suggested that we need to
study this issue further. We have had plenty of studies. In my
4 years in Congress this issue has been hanging for 4 years,
and we keep talking about studying it. It is time we do
something about it. It is time to paint or get off the ladder.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity, and I
yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman, and that
concludes the opening statements. All members' opening
statements will be made part of the record.
We have two panels. Before we do that, I would ask for
unanimous consent to include the following statements for
today's hearing record from the AMAC, that's the Association of
Mature American Citizens; from the AAFP, the American Academy
of Family Physicians; the AOPA, the American Orthotics and
Prosthetics Association; from NAHC, the National Association
for Home Care and Hospice; and a collective cardiology letter
on behalf of the ASES, the American Society of
Echocardiography; the ASNC, the American Society of Nuclear
Cardiology; and the CAA, the Cardiology Advocacy Alliance; and
the Premier Health Care Alliance. Without objection, so
ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Did you have a UC request?
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent to
include this A. Dobson/DaVanzo study titled ``Assessment of
Patient Outcomes.''
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Dr. Burgess, do you have a UC request?
Mr. Burgess. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent
that joint testimony of the American Society for
Echocardiology, the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology and
the Cardiology Advocacy Alliance be submitted for the record.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
We have two panels before us today. On our first panel, we
have Mr. Mark Miller, Executive Director of the Medicare
Payment Advisory Commission. Welcome. Thank you for coming.
Your written testimony will be made part of the record, and you
will be recognized for 5 minutes to summarize. So at this
point, the Chair recognizes Mr. Miller for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK E. MILLER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, MEDICARE
PAYMENT ADVISORY COMMISSION

Mr. Miller. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone,
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for asking
the Commission to testify today.
As you know, Congress created MedPAC to advise it on
Medicare issues, and today I have been asked to comment on
site-neutral and other payment reforms for post-acute care in
ambulatory settings.
The Commission's work in all instances is guided by three
principles: to assure that beneficiaries have access to high-
quality, coordinated care; to protect the taxpayers' dollars
and to pay providers and plans in a way to accomplish these
goals.
First, some of the problems that we face. Fee-for-service
encourages fragmented care because we pay on the basis of
location or provider rather than the beneficiary's episodes of
needs. Fee-for-service also encourages high volume of service.
We know that Medicare payment rates send signals, and if they
are set too high or constructed inconsistently across setting,
they can result in patient selection or care patterns that
focus on revenue rather than patient needs.
Post-acute care has an additional issue. The clinical
guidelines regarding when a service is needed are often poorly
defined and it is hard to know when an episode should begin and
when an episode should end.
With respect to ambulatory care, the last few years of data
shows that hospitals are aggressively purchasing physician
practices, and the Commission is concerned that part of the
motivation is that they can bill for the same service at a
higher hospital payment rate resulting in more trust fund
expenditures and higher out-of-pocket for the beneficiary but
no change in the service provided.
So what has the Commission's guidance been? In the short
run, in focusing in some instances or in a lot of instances on
fee-for-service, the Commission would set all fee-for-service
payment rates to reflect the cost of the efficient provider.
This protects the taxpayer and also protects beneficiaries'
premiums that support the program. Of particularly urgent
attention are the very high rates in home health and skilled
nursing facility settings that have been set high for over a
decade. The Commission would set fee-for-service payment rates
to be the same or similar for similar patients and similar
services. This protects the taxpayer, and again, if there is
cost-sharing, it protects the beneficiaries' out-of-pocket.
As part of a broader recommendation on hospitals that
included an update, the Commission recommended setting payment
rates for selected patients the same for long-term-care
hospitals and acute-care hospitals and also recommended that
payment rates for a selected set of outpatient services be set
equal to or near the physician fee schedule.
In order to protect the hospital's core mission, these
services were chosen because they are frequently done in a
physician's office, they are not part of the hospital's
emergency standby services, and they are used by patients with
comparable risk profiles.
Just focusing on three services. If continued migration
that we see in the data now, or if migration continues as we
see in the data now, by 2021, the program will be paying $2
billion more on an annual basis for just these three services,
of which $500 million would be paid by the beneficiary.
The Commission is also exploring policies to normalize
payment rates between skilled nursing facilities and inpatient
rehab facilities. That work as developmental and will be
published in the June report, but I am happy to take questions
on it.
We have also been concerned that the payment systems are
set to encourage patient selection. We have longstanding
recommendations in skilled nursing facilities and home health
settings to take down the incentives to see physical-rehab
patient and avoid complex medical patients. We think this
protects the beneficiary against patient selection and it
protects providers that take the more complex patients.
The Commission would also create policies to encourage
coordination. We have recommended penalties for hospitals,
skilled nursing facilities and home health agencies that have
excessive readmission rates. This protects the beneficiary by
encouraging care coordination and of course the taxpayer from
paying for unnecessary care.
In the longer run, the Commission has called on CMS to
create pilot projects to develop various bundling payment
strategies for acute and post-acute care and has called for the
development and implementation of a common assessment for post-
acute care. This would allow us to consistently assess patient
needs, to track their change in functional status and quality,
and to move towards a unified payment system on the post-acute
care side. Beyond fee-for-service, a well-functioning managed
care program and initiatives like the accountable care
organizations can also create incentives to avoid unnecessary
volume and coordinate services for providers. The Commission
has a broad range of guidance on each of these, and we are
willing to take questions on that as well.
In closing, the Commission has consistently tried to make
policy recommendations that assure beneficiary access to
coordinated care at a price that the taxpayer can afford.
I appreciate your attention and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I will begin the
questioning, and recognize myself for 5 minutes for that
purpose.
Mr. Miller, some have proposed that post-acute care
bundling reforms are premature and should not even be
considered by Congress until such time as a standardized
assessment tool is created and data collection is complete.
Others have pointed to the fact that such perfecting of data
collection could take a decade or more, and even then, such an
assessment will need to be refined. Do you agree with the
notion that Congressional consideration of bundling should only
occur after an assessment tool has been created and sufficient
data collected, or can both be done concurrently?
Mr. Miller. OK. I think the Commission's view on this works
as follows. I think there is a very strong consensus and a
recommendation that we need a common assessment instrument. We
think that that is a lynchpin to improving both our measurement
and payment and organization and coordination over the long
haul. So there is no question that should happen. We have made
recommendations. We have given a timeline. We have talked about
an instrument. And just for the record, we have been pushing
for this for over a decade, so I have got to make sure that I
say that.
On bundling, I think the Commission believes that bundling
is a viable option and is one that should be pursued, but there
is a large set of technical issues that the Commission went
back and forth on, and I can take you through some of that but
we will see where you want to go here, and I think their view
is that there should be experimentation, which is occurring
now, and to see which of the models tend to jell and work best
for both the beneficiary and the program. So I guess what I am
saying to you is, we should be pursuing both.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Medicare payments are a huge
influence on the health care industry, often serving as a
baseline for negotiations between hospitals and private
insurance. Do private payers mimic Medicare site-of-service
reimbursement disparities?
Mr. Miller. OK. A couple things here. It is correct that
you find the same phenomenon in the private sector as you find
in Medicare where if you pay for a similar, or if you see a
similar system or service in the hospital setting, it is
usually paid higher by private insurance. I think there is more
than--there is more to that than just the notion that Medicare
does it, so too does the private sector.
Over the last several years, the private sector and
hospital systems have become much more consolidated and they
are able to extract higher prices in their negotiations with
insurers, and that certainly contributes to the higher prices
that you see in the hospital setting versus other settings. So
I don't think it is just simply mimicking Medicare but the same
phenomenon is observed in the private sector.
Mr. Pitts. Do private insurers obtain similar discounts for
care that is provided through physician offices and ambulatory
surgery centers?
Mr. Miller. I am just going to use a slightly different
word. I think what you will see in the private sector is that
the payment rates in ambulatory centers and physician offices
tend to be lower than the hospital. Whether those are extracted
discounts is just sort of a terminology point. I think it is
true that they have lower rates in ambulatory surgery centers
and the physician's office for the same service relative to the
hospital.
Mr. Pitts. Have any private insurers adopted site-neutral
payment policies similar to the recommendations that MedPAC has
made to Congress?
Mr. Miller. I don't have data, and, you know, really
rigorous information on this point. What I can point you to,
and I have certainly talked to the committee staffs about this,
there is widespread newspaper reports where privately insured
folks are showing up at the physician's office after a
physician has transferred to a hospital ownership and seeing
their cost-sharing go up, you know, significantly, and this has
been reported on a widespread basis, and what we have heard in
discussion, but there is not a lot of science behind this, is
there have been some private insurers have refused to pay the
additional facility fee for regular office visits in the
hospital setting. So I don't want to overplay that but that is
more anecdotal and what we are reading and hearing in
discussion.
Mr. Pitts. The respected journal, Health Affairs, this week
released a study finding that hospital ownership of physician
practices is associated with higher prices and spending. Can
you comment on how Medicare's payment differentials might have
spillover effects to the private sector and health system?
Mr. Miller. Again there, I think part of what is going on,
and I did look at that when it came along but I am sure I can
dredge it right back up, but I think part of the explanation
there is some of the consolidation and the ability of hospital
systems on the private side to extract higher prices. I think
what you are seeing both in the private and in the Medicare
payments is this ability to arbitrage, to say if I can move a
practice into the billing stream for the hospital side, both
for private insurance and for Medicare, the hospital will get
more revenue. So that certainly seems to be going on, and what
we are concerned about is, while it is not the only reason that
a hospital would purchase a physician practice, because there
are other motivations for doing that, the fact that Medicare's
payments are so much higher on the hospital side certainly
encourages the migration, and we are seeing a fair amount of
it.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Miller, I am amazed by how much variation exists in the
care provided in the post-acute setting. There is no uniform
assessment of where a patient should go following a hospital
stay. Does a patient with a hip replacement fare better in a
skilled nursing facility or home health agency? We don't really
know. And how much post-acute care does a typical hip
replacement patient need? We don't really know. So given that
the Medicare program spent $62 billion on post-acute care in
2012, I am amazed we don't have better information about
patient outcomes, service use or quality of care.
So my question is, does MedPAC view this as a problem, and
what do we do about that and how can we quickly move to a place
where we have info to know what kind of care is being provided?
Mr. Miller. OK. You are right. There is significant
geographic variation, or significant variation, not even just
geographic, even with the same marketplace and the amount of
post-acute care. I think there is a couple issues there, the
one that you referred to, which I will come right back, and the
notion that it is hard to define in many instances, you know,
the amount of post-acute care that a patient should get, when
do you stop rehab, you know, for some----
Mr. Pallone. I agree.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. And where----
Mr. Pallone. I am going to answer the question myself.
Mr. Miller. So the Commission, as I said, a little bit in
my opening comments, many years ago said we need a common
assessment instrument. It took a long time, but the Congress
then called on CMS to develop an instrument and to test it,
which they did through the care demonstration, and that
instrument now exists. We believe, and we have made a
recommendation along these lines, you can take the elements
from that instrument--doesn't have to be the whole, giant
thing--put them into each of the current collection instruments
that exist for SNF, home health, require one for long-term-care
hospitals and then you will be able to sweep up that
information across the settings and be able to start making
judgments about does a patient have a better outcome in one
setting versus another, what is the average resources, the very
things you are saying, for hip replacement as the case may be.
We laid out a 3-year process to get that information integrated
into the collection instruments and then have a product. So
yes, that is what we should be doing.
Mr. Pallone. And, you know, I do think that is important to
have but, I mean, it is always going to be individual case too,
though, obviously.
There have been a number of proposals to bundle payments
for post-acute care, and the President's budget proposed to
bundle 50 percent of PAC spending by 2019. Mr. McKinley is
working on a bill that would bundle payments for care and pay a
reduced rate. But how can we develop a bundled payment rate or
develop the items that go into a bundle or develop appropriate
risk adjustment? I mean, it is obvious if we don't have basic
data, that is going to be difficult, so that is obviously why
you think the data is important.
Mr. Miller. And in some ways, this is this question that
came up, is it an either-other type of thing, and I think the
urgency in some of what you have laid out at the beginning
really requires that we proceed on both tracks. So let us just
say that there is a bundle--there is a lot of complexity in
assembling a bundle but just for half a second let us pretend
that we have some sense of what that is. One way that you can
kind of mitigate against the fact that you don't have ideal
information is, you could continue to use a fee-for-service
model underneath a set platform, so you don't have a stinting
incentive. In order to get paid, the person has to provide the
services. You put a small portion of the payment, let us just
for discussion call it 5 percent, and then you do have
measures, and the Commission had worked with these and there
are others out there on things like avoiding the emergency
room, avoiding the hospital and community discharge and say OK,
those are the three outcomes we are looking for, here is the
block of dollars and then get providers who are willing to take
that risk and manage the patient through that episode, and that
is imperfect information but we are assuming that the provider
will have tools to have more accurate information on the ground
while the program is developing through this unified assessment
instrument.
Mr. Pallone. I know we are almost out of time, but could
you just quickly----
Mr. Miller. Sorry about that.
Mr. Pallone [continuing]. Talk about the stinting or
potential dangers in the bundled payment or capitated payment
design?
Mr. Miller. It is always an issue when you--I mean, you
know, fee-for-service has the issues that I have raised,
fragmentation and generation of volume. Any time you go to an
episode, capitated, you know, whatever the case may be, you
have the reverse problem where you create the incentive to
under-provide. You have to either have a mechanism that
encourages that like paying on a service basis underneath a cap
or you have to have quality--and you have to have quality
measures that say to the provider, you are not going to get
paid or not get your withhold back or whatever the case may be
unless these quality metrics are met. But it is decidedly an
issue. It is not something to be brushed past.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thanks a lot.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Dr. Burgess,
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Miller, thank
you for being here this morning.
In the report from June of 2013, you discussed the increase
hospital consolidation, particularly in the cardiology space.
Has MedPAC seen this trend in other specialties?
Mr. Miller. I am not sure I can break it down for you by
specialty, but yes, we have seen it in other services, not just
simply cardiology services. But yes, we have seen it in other
services.
Mr. Burgess. And those other services, examples of those
would be?
Mr. Miller. You know, certainly the E&M, you know, basic
evaluation and management visits are shifting. I guess some of
the ones that immediately come to mind are cardiology,
echocardiograms. There are probably some other examples I can't
dredge up at the moment.
Mr. Burgess. What about clinical oncology?
Mr. Miller. OK. So in that, you know, obviously
understanding that there was going to be a hearing, we looked
at it a little bit, and just before I answer, yes, there are a
few oncology--when we went through our recommendations that
were in the March 2014 report, and we have the set of services
that we are saying should be set to the physician fee schedule
rate, there are a few services in there, two, three services,
that seem to be related to oncology but we didn't approach it
as a specialty or a service line approach. We had a set of
criteria and said if services meet this criteria--I won't drag
you through it unless you want to hear it--then the service was
put into the policy, but we didn't approach it as oncology,
cardiology.
Mr. Burgess. Could you perhaps that in writing? I will ask
the question for a written response.
Mr. Miller. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. I actually would be interested in the thought
process in going through that, but we don't need to go into
that now.
Have you looked at what happens to patient access and costs
with hospital acquisitions around different specialties?
Mr. Miller. Well, what we look at every year, both in the
hospital setting and in the physician setting and in every
other setting that we look at, we look at access and
utilization. Now, if your point is--and it may be--well, what
happens to access if we get this migration into the hospital
for oncology services, we haven't looked at that recently. We
looked at it several years ago. We haven't looked at that
specific phenomenon. But we broadly look at access year and
report to the Congress.
Mr. Burgess. When you say several years ago, like how many
years ago?
Mr. Miller. Longer than I would report the results.
Mr. Burgess. So----
Mr. Miller. Eight.
Mr. Burgess. So prior to the passage of the Affordable Care
Act?
Mr. Miller. One more time?
Mr. Burgess. Prior to the passage of the Affordable Care
Act?
Mr. Miller. Yes.
Mr. Burgess. So have done any kind of estimate on the
return on investment to this trend? What are the costs/benefits
as far as patients and their access to care, the cost-benefit
analysis for this consolidation?
Mr. Miller. So the migration from the physicians' offices
to the hospital?
Mr. Burgess. Correct.
Mr. Miller. At least for the services that we looked at and
met our criteria, which I realize we haven't had that
conversation, for about 66 of them that met our criteria, and
if you look at that, it is about a billion dollars of program
spend and about let us call it $200 million in beneficiary out-
of-pocket that is being incurred because these are being
migrated. We have not seen access issues but again, we haven't
gone in by service line or specialty to see that, but we have
not seen access issues.
Mr. Burgess. But there is a dollar impact?
Mr. Miller. Oh, yes, and I tried to point that out in my 5
minutes.
Mr. Burgess. And one of the reasons I am concerned about
this, and I don't have the article in front of me but I think
it was in August of 2011 in the Annals of Internal Medicine, if
I recall correctly, Ezekiel Emmanuel wrote an article about the
fact that doctors really shouldn't fight the concept of being
employed by an entity, presumably a hospital or insurance
company or even a governmental entity, that this would be a
better way to deliver care. It frees the doctors from having to
worry about the vagaries of running a business, but because of
the Affordable Care Act, there is this pressure for
consolidation, and I ask myself all the time, just from a
professional standpoint, is this a good thing or a bad thing. I
come from a long line of a medical family, and our contract was
always with the patient. Our advocacy was always supposed to be
for the patient. If I work for the hospital, then suddenly that
dynamic changes and I am not certain--and I can't put a
dollars-and-cents figure on that. I don't sense that that
necessarily is an improvement in the practice of medicine.
Obviously, a philosophical article but I am concerned about the
effect of consolidation cost being used as a driver.
I have got several other questions I would like to ask you,
and I will submit those in writing, and the chairman will
delineate how we get those responses.
Mr. Miller. I see 37 seconds, so----
Mr. Burgess. That means I am over, but proceed. That is a
surrogate endpoint.
Mr. Miller. OK. I mean, one thing I would say is, I don't
think the Commission is--I am sure the Commission is not making
a statement about better or worse ways to organize practice.
What the Commission is saying is, it shouldn't be driven by
distorted prices. Those decisions should be made by a physician
saying I want to practice this way or I want to practice that
way or what the best episode and arrangement is for the
beneficiary, and it shouldn't be just this price-driven
phenomenon.
Mr. Burgess. And I agree with you completely.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, 5
minutes for questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to talk to you about observation status and then
what it means for post-acute care. This has been a huge issue
for constituents in my district who when they get to the
hospital and they are put into a room think I am admitted to
the hospital, and my understanding is that it is open-ended how
long observation status can actually occur, and then if they
end up going to a skilled nursing facility, then they find out
that Medicare doesn't pay anything. They thought they were
admitted to the hospital, for good reason. We find frail,
elderly people sometimes with certain mental deficiencies, and
if they are in the hospital and they are in the hospital a few
days to assume that they are admitted to the hospital seems
logical.
So we have had large numbers and dealt with CMS a lot on
this question of observation status. So I wonder if you could
just clarify this for me and how it impacts then the post-acute
care status in terms of payment?
Mr. Miller. OK. I am not as deep for this hearing as maybe
on some other things.
So I think the issue that you are getting at--you tell me
to redirect if we are not on the same wavelength--is that if
somebody enters the hospital and ends up, let us just say for
the sake of discussion, in three days of observation care,
although lots of observation stays last much less than that,
then while they by all appearances to the beneficiary and their
family, they have been in the hospital, they won't have
qualified for the 3 days of hospitalization needed to qualify
for skilled nursing care.
Ms. Schakowsky. That is correct.
Mr. Miller. I think that is the point that you are driving
at.
Ms. Schakowsky. That is correct.
Mr. Miller. And I think, you know, the dilemma for the
Congress is that, you know, when a beneficiary feels, and for
almost all intends and purposes has been in the hospital, the
concern is that they should qualify. Of course, the issue that
has to be dealt with--and them I am going to get you to a
happier place in just a second--the issue that has to be dealt
with is, if you simply remove that 3-day requirement, the
estimators, the Congressional Budget Office and folks like
that, believe that the skilled nursing facilities will start to
get community admits and then the costs will go up
significantly. So there is an issue that gets kind of enjoined
there.
But the happier place perhaps----
Ms. Schakowsky. I don't understand what you just said, that
they will get community admissions.
Mr. Miller. So if you say to--if you were today--and this
is something you should check--this is what I understand, and I
am a little bit off base, but this is what I understand. If you
said today there is no 3-day requirement to stay in the
hospital to go into----
Ms. Schakowsky. No, no, I am not saying that.
Mr. Miller. Well, I am just saying if you did, you would
run into a cost.
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes, OK.
Mr. Miller. So there are other avenues to potentially
explore here. One is--and the two discussions that--and I have
some work going in the background although I haven't brought it
forward yet because it is not far enough along, is looking at
the inpatient hospital payment system and creating a short-stay
payment so that they don't have to have this choice between
observation care and short-stay inpatient stay, and then the
person would come in in the inpatient and it would be
classified as an inpatient stay. So there is both an
observation versus inpatient issue there and it has bearing on
your skilled nursing facility question.
Ms. Schakowsky. Correct.
Mr. Miller. We are not far enough to have a nice, concrete
conversation about the specifics but we are working on that.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. I think it is really important. I can't
tell you how many elderly individuals and couples have just
been astonished at being--they are not really admitted to the
hospital. It just doesn't make sense.
Mr. Miller. I hope you are hearing that we are taking this
seriously because nothing I have said should have given you
anything other than that.
Ms. Schakowsky. And is there any timeline built into this?
Mr. Miller. You know, we are working with data, we are
talking to hospitals. These are kind of messy issues. There is
a RAC auditor issue kind of mixed in there as well. We are
working on it, is the best I can tell you at this point.
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me just submit for the record, there is
a question I want submitted that deals with post-acute
providers' high profit margins that I want to get to you as
well. Thank you.
Mr. Miller. I would be happy to talk about that.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Rogers, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Director, for being here. Over the last 5 years,
47 community practices have started referring all of their
patients elsewhere for treatment. Two hundred and forty-one
oncology office locations have closed and 392 oncology groups
have entered into an employment or professional services
agreement with a hospital. That is a fairly staggering shift in
5 years. What would you attribute that significant shift toward
a hospital setting?
Mr. Miller. You know, with respect to oncology, I am a
little bit of a deficit here to give you the specifics related
to that. The broader trend that we are seeing we think are the
trends that I have been speaking to up to this point. There is
a lot of consolidation out there. I think the hospital's
motivations come in a couple of varieties. There is this notion
of building systems and coordinating care, which may be a good
motivation. There is capturing referrals, and, to the extent to
that the Medicare and the private sector pays more when you
make that jump, then there is that motivation.
On the physician side, and this goes to some of what Mr.
Burgess is saying, I hear both kinds of conversations, ones
that are ``I am very upset by this trend and I don't want it to
happen,'' and other physicians who say this actually frees me
up to kind of focus on care, and I am not saying that is the
oncology argument but I have heard that from other practices. I
think this is kind of a complex set of currents running in both
directions.
Mr. Rogers. Although in a market economy, if the hospitals
pay more for exactly the same services, it is pretty hard to
argue that that isn't a significant factor.
Mr. Miller. And you do hear us saying that is what we----
Mr. Rogers. I just wanted to clarify that number because I
was staggered by it. A $1 billion increase, if I heard you
correctly, from that migration to the hospital setting of which
$200 million is borne by the hospital--or excuse me--by the
patient. Did I understand that correctly?
Mr. Miller. Yes, and just to clarify, for the 66 services
that we have identified which may or may not encumber the ones
that you are referring to, we think on an annual basis we are
talking about a billion dollars, and just for round numbers,
let us say the beneficiary carrying 200.
Mr. Rogers. That is a significant cost increase for the
patient, is it not?
Mr. Miller. Yes, and----
Mr. Rogers. It is a 20 percent increase.
Mr. Miller. Yes. There are examples of these differences.
For example, for cataract surgery, if you get it in a
physician's office, the copayment is $195. If you go into the
hospital, it is $490. That is the beneficiary's----
Mr. Rogers. And 20 percent of that increase, according to
your numbers, would be borne by the patient?
Mr. Miller. No, that is the beneficiary's increase.
Mr. Rogers. That is just the beneficiary's increase?
Mr. Miller. The program increase goes from about $1,000 to
about $1,800 on the program side.
Mr. Rogers. That is a significant out-of-pocket increase
for those patients, is it not? So if you look at something
like--let us talk about some kind of radiation treatment,
somewhere between 6 and 8 weeks. So we have had this major
displacement of at least places that are convenient for
treatment, a daily transportation for the 6 to 8 weeks for
these treatments and a roughly 20 percent increase. Someone has
to tell me why that is good for the patient.
Mr. Miller. Again, I can't speak to your very specific
oncology examples. Our concern is motivated both by the program
dollar and beneficiaries out-of-pocket.
Mr. Rogers. And I would hope that you would consider travel
times. When you are getting radiation treatment, obviously I am
specific to oncology here, but you are already tested to the
limit, and increased commute times and pay more money doesn't
seem like a good idea for care to me.
I mean, have you done anything that shows a benefit to the
patient from moving to hospitals? Is there any white paper I
can look at? Is there anything that tells me that this is a
good idea for people like cancer patients, or in your case,
cataract patients?
Mr. Miller. I want to answer this carefully. We have not
done anything, which doesn't mean it doesn't exist. It is just
that we haven't done anything. So I am unable to point you to
something but it is not because I know that is the answer. It
is just because we haven't done anything.
Mr. Rogers. I thank you, and my time is running out, but
Mr. Chairman, thanks for having this hearing. I think just the
fact that we pointed out the significant cost to patients,
number one, not only in just dollars but the anxiety that comes
with getting in that car and driving a greater distance just to
have access to care means that we ought to do something about
this yesterday. We already have lost 392 plus the 241 just
oncology, just oncology centers are gone, and wrapped up in
this system. Two hundred and forty-one just closed completely.
The longer this goes, the more we will lose, the more patients
that will be impacted by out-of-pocket costs, and again, all of
the anxiety and trouble that is caused by greater distances is
very, very troubling.
I appreciate you having this hearing. I think this has
highlighted a very important issue that needs immediate
attention. I yield back my time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Dr. Murphy from Pennsylvania 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to follow up on
some of the issues presented by my friend Mr. Rogers of
Michigan.
So when we are looking at the out-of-pocket costs a
Medicare patient may pay, they will pay a copay for some
chemotherapy and other treatments, and is that a percentage
basis or is it a flat dollar?
Mr. Miller. It is usually 20 percent just because nothing
is simple. It varies a bit in the outpatient department on a
percentage basis due to some very old historical issues that
are being changed over time. But for purposes of conversation,
think 20 percent.
Mr. Murphy. OK. And rather than look at the aggregate
amounts totally, so if somebody was getting some treatment at a
clinic--well, those clinics that haven't closed yet--versus at
a hospital, any sense of what the comparative price would be
for individual treatments in one place for another?
Mr. Miller. For a clinic?
Mr. Murphy. A clinic or a physician's office or a hospital.
You know, we are talking about the differences in disparity
here.
Mr. Miller. If I understand your question, some of the data
that we have put out suggests that evaluation and management
issue or a visit is paid about 80 percent more in the hospital
setting. An echocardiogram is paid about 130 percent more in
the hospital setting.
Mr. Murphy. So if they are paying 130 percent more in the
hospital setting, that means the patient is paying more in the
hospital setting too if they are paying 20 percent, but do you
have any idea what that dollar value might be. I know it
probably varies by region.
Mr. Miller. Well, you know, there is some adjustment for
wage index and things like that but I think this is correct if
you don't--I have some scribbled notes that I was writing down
last night. I think, for example, on the echocardiogram, the
beneficiary's copayment goes from about $40 to $90. The program
payment goes from about $150 to $360.
Mr. Murphy. Which is pretty significant, especially if
someone is on fixed income.
Mr. Miller. I am sorry?
Mr. Murphy. If someone is on a fixed income, well, under
any circumstances, and of course, if a person is chronically
ill and receiving a lot of medical care, that can amount to
thousands of dollars in a year.
And so let me ask you another issue too. Now, some centers
have a 340B program and so they are able to obtain drugs as
long as, I understand, if they are a nonprofit patient they can
quality to purchase drugs on a 340B program. Am I correct?
Mr. Miller. There may be some more requirements than that
but I will stay with you for the moment.
Mr. Murphy. Well, let us say a private physician's office
or a for-profit clinic or something would not be able to
purchase drugs on those discounts. Am I correct?
Mr. Miller. I am pretty sure that is correct.
Mr. Murphy. One of the concerns that I frequently hear
about the 340B program, first of all, it is a great program. I
support it strongly in many instances. But we also hear that
some are claiming that there are some abuses of that program
where some centers will purchase drugs at discount but then
they will sell them at the markup again and get this money.
Now, is that something that some of these other private clinics
or physicians' offices, are they able to purchase drugs from
the 340B program?
Mr. Miller. Again, I am not deep on this, given the subject
of the hearing. I didn't study down on this one. But my sense
is no, that is not available to them.
Mr. Murphy. So this adds another issue here. I mean, what I
hear frequently across the board, hospitals and physicians
saying that the reimbursement rates for mc doesn't really cover
their costs sufficiently. They complain about the low
reimbursement rates. But what you are telling me is that if we
focus also on--if some of them also are making money on the
340B program, and maybe this is out of your wheelhouse, but
that is another area of disparity if there are differences
between people who generally qualify versus those who may not
qualify but the hospital is still getting some 340B money out
of this.
Mr. Miller. To the extent that the fact set that you and I
are talking about here without me doing the homework on it,
yes, that would be true, and I would say to you similar to what
I said to the Congresswoman over here, this is an issue that we
have not come forward on because there is still a fair amount
of staff work to be done, but we have started to try and look
at it.
Mr. Murphy. We hope that is information you will provide
this committee.
Let me ask one last thing then. So we have heard concerns
before of people with non-insurance or Medicaid versus private
insurance. The survival rates are very different for people
with cancer. But that is also according to the Cancer Medicine
Journal, it is due to a complex set of demographic and clinical
factors of which insurance status I just a part.
But let me look at this in terms of Medicare in terms of
where a person actually gets their care, a hospital base versus
a physician's office. Are there differences there in survival
rates that you are aware of?
Mr. Miller. I have not looked at that, which doesn't mean--
I don't know the answer to that question.
Mr. Murphy. That would be something that would be valuable
for us to get to.
I thank you very much, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to ask
unanimous consent to place in the record a written statement by
Dr. Bruce Ganz, Chair of the American Medical Rehabilitation
Providers Association, regarding the post-acute care reforms
being discussed today.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Green. Thank you and the ranking member for holding
this hearing. I want to thank Dr. Miller for your testimony.
Our district in Houston is home to world-class hospitals
and community oncology centers. We know that Medicare payment
rates often vary for the same service provided to similar
patients in different settings such as physicians' offices,
hospital outpatient departments or for specific services across
any of the post-acute care settings. While at the first glance
it seems unclear why Medicare would pay different rates for the
same service, we have heard justifications from both sides of
the debate on whether to maintain these differential payments
or to move to site-neutral payments. For example,
Representative Rogers has a bill that would equalize
reimbursements for oncology services received by patients in a
hospital outpatient department with those by patients in
freestanding oncology clinics. The hospital outpatient
departments tell us that their higher rates are necessary
because their additional payments help pay for the hospital
standby capacity, access to care for low-income patients,
efforts to improve care coordination and community outreach.
The freestanding clinics have said the payment system is
inadequate, causing them to close their doors, limiting access
to care for critically ill patients and increasing total costs
as hospitals are buying them up.
Mr. Miller, as you represented a nonpartisan research-
driven policy body, I am interested to hear your perspective on
the matter. I understand that MedPAC has given a considerable
amount of thought to the subject of site neutrality and
establish criteria for when it is appropriate to equalize
payments across settings including considering beneficiary
access and cost-sharing. Could you further describe the
Commission's thinking on the topic?
Mr. Miller. Yes, and I actually appreciate the question,
and this is in some ways what Mr. Burgess and I were almost up
to.
So the way the Commission has approached this in the
ambulatory setting, the principal is, assuming and assuring
actually that the beneficiary has access and quality, Medicare
should seek the most efficient setting, and so that is the
motivation, and the other motivation is, we have seen a
tremendous amount of data that suggests that it is heading out
of the lower payment setting.
But by the same token, and while there are people in the
hospital industry who probably are suspect, we want to be sure
that the hospital's core mission, particularly for emergency
room and standby services, are not undercut, and so the
criteria that we worked through was, is the service provided in
a physician's office frequently so it is safe to do outside of
the hospital, is the risk profile of the patients the same, is
the unit of payment the same, and is it not associated with
emergency services, and so then using that criteria, we said
what services fit this criteria. So we are not just sort of
sweeping through and saying pay it all, you know, the same, we
are saying you need to be careful to protect the core mission
of the hospital but also undercut this incentive that is
pulling things out of the physician setting and approaches the
practice. So that kind of high level, that was the criteria
that we were using.
And again, you know, I have gotten some other questions of
what about oncology, what about cardiology. We didn't approach
it as a specialty or service line. We stepped back and said
what meets these criteria and then let things hit the criteria
and said OK, these are the ones that qualify.
Mr. Green. Has MedPAC given thought to aligning payment
rates between hospital outpatient departments and physicians'
offices for other types of ambulatory management, cardiac
surgery? I think you answered that.
What further analysis or information would you need before
being able to comment on the appropriateness of equalizing
these payment rates between OPDs and the physician offices for
oncology services? Are there any concerns you can share with us
now?
Mr. Miller. I mean, what I do want to point out before I
switch right back to your question is, we looked at this also
for equalizing rates between ambulatory surgery centers and
hospital rates for a set of surgeries that also met these
criteria that I went through. On the oncology side, I am
willing, as a matter of questions for the record, to try to
give you a more detailed answer of what oncology services came
in under our criteria and the kinds of things one might want to
think about if they were to look further into it, but I am not
really tooled up to do that right this second.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. And
I guess you almost got to one of the things I was thinking. You
have to make sure the same person walking into an outpatient
isn't the same person walking into a hospital because if you
are going to do the same procedure----
Mr. Miller. Absolutely.
Mr. Guthrie. What if the person is diabetic? Therefore,
they say we need to do this in the hospital so you do have
paying for capacity for some availability there, so that is
just something that I was thinking that you kind of addressed
that before.
Mr. Miller. And the Commission does take that seriously,
and there was statistical work done by a couple of people
behind me who said do these patient profiles look statistically
different than each other, and if they did, they weren't
included in the basket of services that we would focus on.
Mr. Guthrie. And do you think some of it could be cost
shifting such as an outpatient clinic wouldn't have--they
obviously don't have emergency room, and I hear, I think
somebody mentioned it earlier that people come in with Medicaid
and Medicare particularly don't pay the cost of--it may pay the
cost of service for a cardiogram more than if you got it
outpatient but it is also keeping the emergency room open. I am
not saying that is the right way to do it.
Mr. Miller. I think I understand your question, and if not,
immediately redirect because I want to use your time carefully.
We also took that into consideration. We said if a service is
provided in an emergency room setting on, you know, any
significant basis, then again, it was out of the mix, and our
point was, we don't want to undermine the core mission of the
hospital to have emergency standby services. The Medicare
payment rates, since those services are very--or those costs
are very direct--staff, equipment, that type of thing--those
are built into higher rates that go to the hospitals for those
services. We share that concern. We tried very hard to work
around that and make sure we weren't undercutting that.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thanks. And a couple of questions I wanted
to ask about the--going from a lot of people in private
practice settings into hospital settings. There was a Merritt
Hawkins survey that asked the students in the final year of
medical school. In 2001, 3 percent said they would rather work
for a hospital than private practice. Now it is 32 percent. I
know there are other factors but what extent do you think the
Medicare practice expense payment disparities are responsible
for the decline in attractiveness?
Mr. Miller. OK. I think this question is much more complex,
but before I blow past it, I do want to say, and I think there
were some other comments along these lines, it is very hard to
ignore that if a hospital is approaching a practice and saying
I have, you know, revenue that I can buy out your practice and
make it very lucrative to you, that is going to be important.
But to the extent that we have talked to physicians, talked to
hospitals, talked to folks like that, we hear a very, you know,
kind of mixed story on the part of the physicians. There does
seem to be a generation of physicians who are saying care has
become very complex, and I don't mean that in a negative way.
It means, you know, we all have to think about the patient much
further and broader than my own sets of services that I am
providing. It takes more coordination, it takes more
understanding of the patient's medical record, and some
physicians will say a larger organization that will take that
overhead off of my hands and allow me just to focus on the care
is where I want to be, and by the way, I would like some
predictable hours and that type of thing. And then you run into
physicians who are saying this is the wrong direction to go, I
want to run my own practice. So I think these currents are more
complex than any one factor, but I don't think we should
dismiss the notion that either in the private sector or
Medicare if the revenues are there, then it is going to be hard
to say no to them.
Mr. Guthrie. That is a good question, it leads into my next
one, because you said whether Medicare or private sector. Does
the private sector, private payers mimic the Medicare site-of-
service disparity of payments?
Mr. Miller. I wouldn't use the word ``mimic'' but the
outcome is the same. It is generally true that the private
sector pays more in those settings than in the physician
setting.
Mr. Guthrie. So they get similar discounts between
hospitals and ambulatory areas?
Mr. Miller. There are similar price differences between
physician office and hospital settings--lower, higher.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, I appreciate that, and I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina, Mrs. Ellmers, 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Ellmers. Hi, Mr. Miller. Thank you for being with us
today.
I know some of my colleagues have asked about the 340B
program, and I believe you said that at this point it is being
looked at. Is that correct, that you are not ready to kind of
weigh in on it?
Mr. Miller. I haven't even taken the Commission through it
because the research is really still very much at the formative
and staff level.
Mrs. Ellmers. OK.
Mr. Miller. But we are not oblivious to the issue. That is
the point I would like the committee to know.
Mrs. Ellmers. Great. Well, I will tell you, it is a concern
of mine because I do believe that there is--just as you are
looking into the issue, I think there is a lot of gray area
there, and I think that this is one of those issues where we
are looking at health care savings and dollars that are being
saved, and of course, first and foremost, patient access to
care, especially those who are in an economic disadvantaged
situation. These programs are very worthwhile and we need to
make sure that they are sustainable. Unfortunately, I am not at
this point sure that we really know where those dollars are
going, and I think that is something that we need to get to the
bottom of and, with that, I will just follow up by saying that
about a year ago, last year, Commander Pedley, the head of
HRSA, had stated that she was not sure where the dollar
savings, where the money was going, and I think that that is a
significant statement because if the Government doesn't know--I
mean, shouldn't the Government know where these dollars are
going and how they are being utilized?
Mr. Miller. I think so.
Mrs. Ellmers. And there again, I will just get back to the
issue of----
Mr. Miller. But I want to assure you that we wouldn't look
at that issue strictly as a savings issue. We would look at it
as a program integrity issue, assurance for beneficiary access,
assurance that we are paying fairly and then, you know, if that
turns out that we are letting dollars go out the door that
shouldn't go out the door, then that will be the outcome.
Mrs. Ellmers. I think, you know, from my perspective, it is
an issue of, are those dollars going to the care that those
patients who require charity care. You know, if the hospital is
a 340B hospital, are those dollars truly going where they are
supposed to go, and certainly not ever thinking that a hospital
would be playing games, but I think if there is a wide and a
very gray area there, I think that the hospital would utilize
them as they need to, and I think that might be something that
we need to work on into the future.
And I will go back too to the cancer care in the hospital
setting versus the outpatient or ambulatory care setting. This
is something that I am very, very concerned about. I am very
concerned about the cost issue with chemotherapy drugs,
especially since the sequester went into effect. We have seen a
number of cancer clinics that are in our communities basically
closing their doors or being bought out by hospitals and many
of them will cite that it has to do with the Affordable Care
Act, which is an issue, but then on top of it, the sequester
has created a very difficult situation for them to continue in
private practice, and in fact, I will add to that by saying
that just in my hometown of Dunn, North Carolina, oncology
practice was just purchased by a hospital, and now hospital
care will be given at that clinic. The good news is, they will
be there in Dunn. The bad news is, now the care is going to be
much more costly.
So there again, it gets back to the issue of how do we
justify that if that the patient receives the care in the
hospital, which is wonderful care, great care being provided by
health care professionals, but then if they go to a more
convenient area that they have come to appreciate and know and
feel comfortable receiving their treatment, now that cost is
going to go up simply because the hospital now owns that
practice.
Mr. Miller. You have defined the problem extremely well.
This is the way the Commission is thinking about it, and the
only other thing I will say with respect to your comments is,
the Commission has been on record as saying that, you know, the
sequester is not a good policy and what we try to offer the
committees of jurisdiction on a daily basis in every one of our
reports are more thoughtful policies to get you where you need
to be without having to do the across-the-board type of stuff.
Mrs. Ellmers. Well, thank you, Mr. Miller. I truly
appreciate it, and thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
All right. We will begin a second round. Dr. Burgess, do
you have questions?
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So Mr. Miller, we
have been talking today about payment disparities across
different sites of service, the inpatient hospital, outpatient
department, ambulatory surgery centers and physician offices.
Outpatient departments and ambulatory surgery centers have
similar requirements to participate in the Medicare program and
to be licensed at the State level, and both arguably provide
high-quality care. Can you discuss the cost benefit of
increasing payment rates in certain outpatient settings?
Mr. Miller. I am really sorry. There was some distraction
over there, and I apologize.
Mr. Burgess. That is all right. Let us wait until it calms
down.
All right. So we have various settings where can be
administered. Ambulatory surgery centers, physician offices,
outpatient departments, they all have similar requirements to
participate in the Medicare program and to be licensed at the
State level. All provide high-quality care. Can you discuss the
cost and benefit of increasing payment rates in certain
outpatient settings?
Mr. Miller. Increasing payment rates in certain outpatient
settings?
Mr. Burgess. Hospital outpatient department versus an
ambulatory surgery center.
Mr. Miller. And the question is, should there be
differences in the rate or----
Mr. Burgess. No. Are there differences in the rate, and
then, what is the benefit that occurs because of the
differences in the rate?
Mr. Miller. OK. I am sorry. There are differences in the
rate. I think a figure to carry around in your head is, there
is about an 80 percent difference between the rate in an OPD
and an ASC, just to focus on that for a second, and I think
what the Commission explored, we made recommendations with
respect to some services between a physician office and the OPD
but over here on the ASC side, we also did some research where
again we used some criteria, which I will take you through, but
I understand your time is limited, where we tried to identify
similar patients, you know, services that could safely be done
in both settings and then said that there is the opportunity to
lower the payment rate on the OPD side to the ASC rate. There
were 12 services and in total it is in the neighborhood of $500
to $600 million annually.
Mr. Burgess. And in this movement from a hospital to an
outpatient setting, does that potentially free up the hospital
time and space for use for other patients who have a greater
degree of acuity who wouldn't be satisfactory to be serviced at
an ambulatory surgery center?
Mr. Miller. Yes, I think that is our--in constructing the
criteria, that is what we are trying to assure.
Mr. Burgess. Let me ask you this. In January of this year,
the committee voted on recommendations around site neutrality
for 66 ambulatory payment classifications. Is the Commission
looking at other classifications or codes?
Mr. Miller. At least for the near term, the blocks that we
have looked at are evaluation and management codes. The 66 APCs
that you just mentioned, we have done analysis on that, and we
have done analysis on 12 APC/OPD codes, and that is the
exchange we just had one second or so ago. At the moment, this
is kind of where we are. I am not 100 percent sure how much
more we will do but the Commission sort of has to figure out
what its cycle is going to be for the upcoming cycle. And so at
the moment, this is what we have and this is where we are. It
would be hard for me to point to specific things that we are
going to do beyond this.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the consideration.
I will yield back to you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair recognizes Mr. Green, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Green. Mr. Miller, I am concerned when we are
discussing payment that we make sure to appropriately account
for complexities and differences among patients. I believe if
we move forward to reform the post-acute care setting, we
should also be looking to make sure that we are appropriately
adjusting provider payments to reflect those beneficiary risk
scores. Can you discuss the issue: Do you believe risk
adjustment is an appropriate issue to focus on?
Mr. Miller. Yes, and in all of our work, when we talk about
bundling and we talk about differences, you know, creating
either bundled payments or when we talk about moving towards a
more unified post-acute care payment system or if we talk about
assuming risk at more of population level, say an accountable
care organization, we spend a lot of time talking about the
need to measure differences in risk, and I will say something a
little more specific about that, and then also to make sure
that we construct quality measures so you sort of backstop the
patient in a couple of ways. You make sure that the payments
that go out the door are adjusted in a way that they reflect
the relative risk of I took this patient, you took that
patient, and then we have quality metrics to sort of make sure
that the patient is getting the kind of care that they need.
I think in the post-acute care setting, there are lots of
discussions beyond things like diagnosis and the kinds of
comorbidities, things like functional status, cognitive status,
physical status, that thing of thing, which probably need to
come into the mix in order to make the measurement more
accurate, and we have got some discussion and focus on that in
our work.
Mr. Green. You may have already answered that a little bit
just now, but what steps do you take, for example, in
developing a bundled payment would appropriately account for
the differences? I think you just answered that one.
Mr. Miller. And again, I think it is this two-prong thing:
try and get the risk adjustment as best as you can get it and
then have a set of quality metrics to stand by the beneficiary
to make sure that they are getting the necessary care that they
need.
Mr. Green. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Cassidy, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Cassidy. Hi, Mr. Miller. I am sorry for running in and
out.
Mr. Miller. No problem.
Mr. Cassidy. So reading your testimony and listening to it,
how much is--obviously is we are building through a hospital-
based practice, I assume that is all Part A.
Mr. Miller. And we are talking about outpatient here, and
so this is B.
Mr. Cassidy. So the facility fee would be Part A, wouldn't
it, and the procedures oriented, so if they order an EKG and it
is a hospital, it is still Part A, correct?
Mr. Miller. No, it is still B. I am sorry.
Mr. Cassidy. Oh, really?
Mr. Miller. Yes.
Mr. Cassidy. OK. Well, that helps me.
Now, it also seems, though, in some of the testimony from
others suggest that as we migrate towards these hospital-based
practices, we are increasing costs for both Medicare and for
the beneficiary.
Mr. Miller. That is right.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, if you have an accountable care
organization, it obviously would increase the cost basis of
their care if you have hospital-based services. Fair statement?
Mr. Miller. That is correct.
Mr. Cassidy. It almost seems that this is driving up the
cost of health care, frankly. I mean, so if you will, it almost
seems as if the more we emphasize or induce hospital-based
accountable care organizations to acquire practices, i.e., it
increases their profitability and increases their cost basis,
we are inducing increase and expense both to beneficiaries and
to the Medicare program.
Mr. Miller. That is correct.
Mr. Cassidy. So we actually have a set of policies which
are working in the exact wrong direction if our goal is to
decrease cost to beneficiaries and to Medicare.
Mr. Miller. Yes, that is correct, and the only modification
or addendum that I would say to that is, to the extent that you
have prices for the same service on the outpatient side that
look like this relative to the physician's office, you are
creating an economic incentive to move in that direction. End
of sentence. Next sentence. But of course, there are core
hospital services----
Mr. Cassidy. Core, yes, I get that totally.
Mr. Miller. OK.
Mr. Cassidy. I am a physician by the way.
Mr. Miller. We are saying the same thing.
Mr. Cassidy. Yes, absolutely, but that is, I think, lost in
this debate, that we have created a law which is going to drive
up cost. Just the behavioral economics of it is such that we
are going to create these.
Let me ask you something else.
Mr. Miller. Yes, we are trying to make sure that it is not
lost in the debate.
Mr. Cassidy. And I appreciate that. Thank you.
Now, also I am very interested in the 340B program, and you
may decide that you may or may not wish to comment on this, but
to what degree--I will read this, because it was prepared for
me but I asked it to be. In the last few weeks, a report by the
IMS on global oncology trends as well as other things shows
that there is a different cost for Herceptin in different sites
of service, that if you have a 340B hospital oncology-based
program, that the delta between what they are, you know,
charging and paying is such that it creates a competitive
advantage relative to community oncologic services. Any comment
upon this?
Mr. Miller. And I really apologize. I am not deep on that.
There were a couple other questions on this. The only thing I
can offer you is the Commission is aware of this issue and I
have some work going on but it is very developmental at this
stage. I haven't even taken it out in front of the Commission.
So the only comfort I can give you is, we are not tone deaf. We
understand that that is going on. We will start looking. We are
looking at it.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, let me ask you then, with my minute and
30 left, if I go to the behavioral economics, there is a sense
in which if you put something at two-sided risk, you may
mitigate the incentives to increase cost but let me ask, if you
put somebody at two-sided risk, they get the upside but also
swallow the downside, and they start off with a higher cost
basis because they have acquired physicians' practices,
particularly, say, orthopedics and hearts. I don't know this. I
am asking. Going forward, if they begin to discharge those
practices, those procedures to the outpatient setting, do they
continue to get the profitability? Did you follow that?
Mr. Miller. I think I followed it. So I think you probably
have a couple of questions in there, and just for purposes of
discussion, let us frame it in the context of an accountable
care organization. So if an accountable care organization is
hospital-based and they have engaged in a lot of this, then
arguably--and they get attributed patients in a way for
purposes of this conversation occurs, then yes, arguably, they
would have a higher base. And so that raises questions which
are bigger than a minute 30 but the Commission has been talking
about over time how the Medicare program should be looking at
that phenomenon.
Mr. Cassidy. But going forward, if they then take this
hospital-based practice and they sell it and it now becomes an
outpatient and they begin to now that which was originally
conceived at a higher cost basis they are now putting at a
lower cost, do they consider--do they continue to get that
delta or will the payments ratchet down?
Mr. Miller. It is theoretically possible that by moving
people back, as you used in your example, to a lower cost
setting, they could show a better performance. In other words--
--
Mr. Cassidy. So that would be an artificially conceived
better performance? It would be merely arbitraging the
regulations and the site of service?
Mr. Miller. That is right, but remember, we are talking
about a very hypothetical situation.
Mr. Cassidy. Oh, man, it is not going to be hypothetical,
Mr. Miller. I can promise you that.
Mr. Miller. And I didn't mean to imply that. There is two
different, you know, ASC ACO programs, and exactly how the
baselines are set get a little bit technical. But what I do
want to leave you with is, the Commission is thinking about
these phenomena and how to think about setting those basements
over time so these kinds of phenomena don't get away from the
program. Theoretically, what you have set up there, yes, I see
your point.
Mr. Cassidy. I yield back, and I thank you very much.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. That concludes
the second round. Members will have follow-up questions. We
will submit those to you in writing. We would ask you to please
respond promptly.
Mr. Miller. OK.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you very much, Mr. Miller. That includes
the first panel. We will take a 2-minute break as the staff
sets up for the second panel.
[Recess.]
Mr. Pitts. We will reconvene. Everyone can take their
seats. Our second panel, I will introduce in the order which
they will speak. First, we have Ms. Barbara Gage, Managing
Director and Economics Study Fellow, Engelberg Center for
Health Care Reform, the Brookings Institute. We have Dr. Barry
Brooks, Partner, Texas Oncology, and Chairman, Pharmacy and
Therapeutics Committee, the U.S. Oncology Network. We have work
Dr. Reginald Coopwood, President and CEO of Regional Medical
Center at Memphis; Dr. Steven Landers, President and CEO of
Visiting Nurse Association Health Group; and finally, Mr. Peter
Thomas, Coordinator, Coalition to Preserve Rehabilitation, and
Principal at Powers, Pyles, Sutter and Verville.
Thank you all for coming. You will each have 5 minutes to
summarize. Your written testimony will be made part of the
record.
Ms. Gage, we will start with you. You are recognized for 5
minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF BARBARA GAGE, FELLOW, ENGELBERG CENTER FOR HEALTH
CARE REFORM, THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION; BARRY D. BROOKS,
CHAIRMAN, PHARMACY AND THERAPEUTICS COMMITTEE, THE U.S.
ONCOLOGY NETWORK; REGINALD W. COOPWOOD, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, REGIONAL ONE HEALTH, ON BEHALF OF THE
AMERICAN HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION; STEVEN LANDERS, PRESIDENT AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, VISITING NURSE ASSOCIATION HEALTH
GROUP; AND PETER W. THOMAS, PRINCIPAL, POWERS, PYLES, SUTTER &
VERVILLE, P.C., ON BEHALF OF THE COALITION TO PRESERVE
REHABILITATION,

STATEMENT OF BARBARA GAGE

Ms. Gage. Thank you, Chairman Pitts and distinguished
members of the committee. I appreciate the opportunity to
testify today on payment reforms for Medicare post-acute care.
I have been studying these issues for a very long time and have
led much of the research that underlies this work.
Post-acute care is a very important issue for the Medicare
program. Almost 40 percent of all hospital discharges go on to
post-acute care, so that is a key point that I want to drive
home. We heard a bit about the expenses associated with it.
Second, the patients who are in the acute care hospital for
similar conditions we know are often discharged to different
settings, and the information that we have leaves us a little
unclear as to whether they are actually different in terms of
their medical complexity or their functional complexity or
cognitive, although some of our results suggest that is the
case.
Third, the standardized assessments developed as part of
the post-acute care payment reform demonstration showed that
these patients could be measured consistently and reliably
across post-acute and acute care settings, and once done, that
would allow us to answer several questions, many of which came
up today, with the same type of hospital patient discharged to
alternative settings. We know that some of that varies by
geographic area and the availability of beds but some of it may
also vary by medical functional and cognitive status. Secondly,
did the patient outcomes differ depending upon the site of
care.
So why should patients be measured in a standard way? That
is a basic issue to answering these questions. As noted in your
figures, you can see that almost one in five beneficiaries who
are admitted to the hospital each year and about 40 percent are
discharged from there into the post-acute care setting. Figure
1 is a little messy but it shows what a Medicare patient--their
trajectory of care, and it underscores how these answers are
not simple. People have different issues and attend different
sites. So the sites include long-term care hospitals, inpatient
rehab hospitals, skilled nursing facilities and home health
agencies, all of which provide nursing and therapy services in
their sites. Among the 37 percent of the PAC users who are
discharged from the hospital to home health, 39 percent of them
continued on to additional services, so an episode of care is
not just one discharge, it is a continuation. The SNF
admissions also tended to use multiple PAC services. Of the 42
percent who were discharged first to a NSF, 77 percent
continued on to additional services, and about 23 percent of
these cases return to the hospital while another 32 percent
were discharged from the SNF to home health for additional
services.
The probability and the type of post-acute care service
used at hospital discharge can be partially explained by the
reason for hospitalization, but as shown in figure 2, the types
of cases that were most likely to use post-acute care were
patients who had had joint replacements among the top five
reasons for an admission to the hospital in Medicare, or stroke
populations. However, the factors distinguishing what type of
PAC setting would be used were less clear, and as you see on
figure 2, the shares of these patients who were discharged to a
SNF, 37 percent were home health with 36 percent with another
19 percent discharged to inpatient rehab, so it is not that
there is a little bit of variation going on. Conversely,
medical cases such as pneumonia and congestive heart failure
were less likely to continue to post-acute care. Only about 33
percent of these cases go from the hospital to post-acute care,
but when they went, they were most likely to go to SNF or home
health, which have very different costs.
The probability of being readmitted to the hospital also
varies by the reason for hospitalization, and as shown in
figure 3, joint replacements may have a very small share who
are re-hospitalized in that 30-day window because we know
technically they are healthier if they were strong enough for
that surgery. But over 30 percent of the stroke, the pneumonia
and the heart failure cases are readmitted during that window,
and again, claims provide very little information to explain
these differences. Additional information about health status
is available from patient assessment data. In the Medicare
program, assessment data is submitted in the inpatient rehab
hospitals, through the MVS and the SNFs, through Oasis and the
home health, and more recently, through the LTEC care in the
long-term care hospital, and each of these assessment tools
contain the same types of information including measures of
their medical status, their functional status and their
cognitive status as well as social support information
collected by discharge planners. The same type of information
is collected in the hospital as patients are admitted and
managed through the stay. Despite these similarities in
practices, few of the tools use the same items to measure the
patient complexity. All are measuring primary and comorbid
conditions, pressure ulcer staging, cognitive impairment,
mobility and self-care limitations, many of the things we have
been talking about this morning, as well as documenting whether
the patient will need assistance at discharge, whether they
live alone, and the types of medications they are on but
without using a common language to measure these
characteristics, a patient's progression cannot be measured
across the episode of care.
So findings from the post-acute care payment reform
demonstration, this came up this morning, this was a major
initiative mandated by Congress in the Deficit Reduction Act of
2005, which required CMS to develop standardized assessment
items for use at hospital discharge and at admission and
discharge to the post-acute care settings. The standardized
assessment items were critical to allowing comparisons of the
patient acuity, the differences in the complexity across
settings, and more importantly, to answer these questions about
whether outcomes differ across the setting. First you need to
be able to know that you are looking at the same patient in
terms of complexity.
Mr. Pitts. Could you begin to wrap up, please?
Ms. Gage. Yes. The care items were based on the science.
They had the input of over 25 associations and each of the
clinical communities working with the post-acute care
populations and were highly reliable in each of the different
settings.
But what do these results tell us about payment policy?
That one set of uniform assessment items can be used across
acute and post-acute care settings. They were reliable in all
the settings. They allowed the differences in patient severity
to be documented.
A question about whether a standardized payment system can
go into effect now based on the post-acute care payment reform
data. We collected assessments on over 25,000 cases over 55,000
assessments in the data set, and while they were adequate for
identifying key differences, key drivers of patients associated
with one setting or another, there are small numbers of certain
types of populations. So collecting the standardized data
nationally for 2 years prior to actually finalizing payment
systems will increase that sample size and allow you to have
stronger numbers.
Why use standardized items across the acute and post-acute
settings? Condition severity is independent of setting. Using
standard language to measure it in each of the three areas of
health status will improve communication and allow data
exchange across different IT systems. There is work underway
right now by CMS and ONC working with the health IT communities
to develop interoperable standards for the care assessment
items, which will allow exchangeability even if one system is
using a Mac and another an IBM product. CMS also provides the
item specifications and the e-specifications, the training, the
training materials to all providers who are required to submit
assessment data, and the e-specifications are downloaded.
So why should the standardized assessments be collected at
the hospitals? The hospitals already collect this type of
information but they use different items to do so. A recent
review by the American Hospital Association showed that the
hospitals under the bundled payments and under the accountable
care organizations were trying to predict readmissions but you
couldn't compare differences across hospitals because they were
all using their own systems. If you standardized the assessment
items and include them, you can actually compare outcomes.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gage follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Thank you. The gentlelady's time is expired.
For the witnesses, we have a little series of lights on the
table. It will start green. You will have 5 minutes. When it
gets to red, that is 5 minutes, so if you can just keep that in
mind and begin to wrap up at the red light.
Dr. Brooks, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BARRY D. BROOKS

Mr. Brooks. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone, thank
you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of U.S. Oncology
and Community Oncology regarding site-of-payment reforms.
I am Barry Brooks, and for 32 years I have had the
privilege of taking care of cancer patients in the community
setting. Being an oncology is challenging but deeply rewarding,
and I love it.
Americans enjoy the best cancer survival rates in the
world. One reason we have the best cancer care is because the
network of community clinics that provides state-of-the-art
cancer care close to home. Yet in recent years, we have had a
sharp decline in community-based cancer care, leaving patients
with fewer options and more expensive medical bills. Thanks for
recognizing one of the main drivers in the shift of care.
To be blunt, cancer care costs more in hospital outpatient
departments and hospital-based care is growing by leaps and
bounds. Congressional action is needed to stem the shift of
care and the resulting costs incurred to Medicare, taxpayers
and patients.
I was pleased to hear Mark Miller's testimony today, and I
am glad that MedPAC is weighing in on this important issue.
Hospitals play a critical role in cancer care delivery, and I
am not going to try to diminish that today, but instead
highlight access and cost consequences of an environment that
favors hospital-based outpatient care. This unlevel playing
field should be fixed by any support of patient choice and
access to affordable, quality cancer care.
In the current environment, hospital-based care enjoys
numerous advantages over community clinics including up to 50
percent discounts on drugs for the 340B program, tax
exemptions, Medicare reimbursement for uncollectable patient
responsibilities, Government payments for uncompensated care,
tax-deductible private contributions, and the focus of today,
higher payments for the same services.
In less than a decade, a third of outpatient cancer care
has moved from the community to the hospital. Hundreds and
hundreds of clinics have closed and hospitals are aggressively
buying up private practice oncology. Many times when this
happens, patients see the same physicians, nurses and
caregivers in the same offices. The only thing that changes,
like mentioned by Representative Ellmers, is the name on the
door and the amount charged to Medicare and the patients. In
other cases, outlying clinics are consolidated to be closer to
the main hospital campus, as mentioned by Representative
Rogers. This results in increased travel and hassle for
patients undergoing cancer treatment. Either way, patients
fighting cancer are burdened by new barriers to access, either
financial alone or both financial and geographic. A Milliman
study finds that this costs Medicare $6,500 more per
beneficiary each year, $623 million total each year, $650 more
out of pocket for each senior cancer patient.
Why should we accept a system that requires the Nation's
most vulnerable to pay more for the exact same service in a
less convenient setting? Not only do hospitals charge more for
the same services, their utilization and overall spending are
higher too. An analysis of Medicare data by the Rand Company
indicates hospitals spend 25 to 47 percent more on chemotherapy
and 42 to 68 patient more on chemotherapy administration. The
latest CMS payment rules worsen our problem. The 2014 payment
rate for the most common chemotherapy infusion is now 125
percent higher in the hospital than in the community. A recent
IMS study calculated prices for 10 common chemotherapy
treatments and found hospital charges for those treatments 189
percent more on average than an independent doctor's office.
Sadly, they also show that patients who experience these higher
out-of-pocket costs are more likely to discontinue treatment
altogether.
We know the committee has supported policies to equalize
E&M payments across care settings. We strongly support the
efforts of Representatives Rogers and Matsui to take an urgent
approach for oncology services. There is no reason for
different payments for the same outpatient services to depend
on whose name is on the door. As proven over the last decade,
Government-imposed market advantages will predictably lead to
expansion and higher cost centers and corresponding reductions
in patient access and increases in patient costs. Members of
this committee have introduced and supported legislation that
enhances cancer patient access like H.R. 2869 that we are
discussing today from Rogers and Matsui, H.R. 800, Whitfield,
Representative Green and DeGette, and H.R. 1416 from
Representative Ellmers and others. Over 30 members of this
committee, 124 in all, have signed a letter to CMS questioning
how the administration handled sequestration cuts on our
Medicare Part B drugs administered in our office. Given the
current reality facing our community oncology offices, if these
solutions are not enacted, by this time next year there will be
fewer community oncology clinics and more patients will have to
travel farther and pay more for the same services.
The world's best cancer care delivery system is struggling.
We need your help.
Thank you for letting me testify today. I would be happy to
answer questions when it is appropriate.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brooks follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Dr. Coopwood, 5 minutes for opening statement.

STATEMENT OF REGINALD W. COOPWOOD

Mr. Coopwood. Good morning, Chairman Pitts, Mr. Green,
and----
Mr. Pitts. Can you poke the little button on there? Yes.
Thank you.
Mr. Coopwood. Good morning. Chairman Pitts, Mr. Green, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, I am Dr. Reginald
Coopwood, President and CEO of Regional One Health in Memphis,
Tennessee. I am here today on behalf of the American Hospital
Association's 5,000 member hospitals, and I appreciate this
opportunity to share with you and your colleagues the hospital
field's perspective on site-neutral payment proposals.
Regional One Health, which serves a three-State area,
includes a nationally acclaimed level I trauma center, a level
III neonatal intensive care unit, the only American Burn
Center-certified burn center in our region, and a high-risk
obstetrical referral center. Annually, there are more than
100,000 outpatient visits to our health system. We have four
community primary care sites and more than 32 subspecialty
services are provided in our outpatient facilities. Nearly one
in four people in Memphis live in poverty, and the city has a
very low health ranking.
Americans rely heavily on hospitals to provide 24/7 access
to emergency care for all patients and to respond to every
conceivable type of disaster. These roles are not specifically
funded. Instead, they are built into a hospital's overall cost
structure and supported by revenues received from providing
direct patient care across various settings including hospital
outpatient departments. Even though this is the case, some
policymakers have endorsed proposals that would make payments
for service provided in a hospital the same as when a service
is provided in a physician's office or ambulatory surgery
center. These proposals have a number of problems and would
have devastating consequences for Medicare patients in the
communities you represent.
First, it is important to know that hospitals are already
losing money providing outpatient services to Medicare
beneficiaries. The Medicare Payment Advisory Commission data
says that hospitals' outpatient Medicare margins are a negative
11.2 percent. To make matters worse, if site-neutral payment
proposals under consideration by some policymakers were
enacted, it would result in outpatient payment department
Medicare margins of nearly negative 20 percent. This could
force hospitals to curtail these vital outpatient services and
threaten seniors' access to care.
Second, hospitals have additional financial burdens as
compared to a physician's office. As was previously mentioned,
this is due to the need to provide the community with 24/7
emergency capacity. Hospitals are also subject to more
comprehensive licensing, accreditation and regulatory
requirements. For example, hospitals must comply with EMTALA, a
State hospital licensure requirement, the voluminous Medicare
conditions of participation and Medicare cost reporting
requirements, among others.
Finally, when compared to patients treated in physicians'
offices, hospitals serve more medically complex patients as
well as higher percentages of patients who are eligible for
both Medicare and the Medicaid program and a higher percentage
of disabled patients.
At Regional Medical Center, our hospital-based outpatient
departments play an integral role in the health system's
ability to fulfill our mission: to improve the health and well-
being of the people we serve and to ensure that vulnerable
patients have access to effective health care services which
provide patients access to acute care services, a retail
pharmacy that offers a sliding fee scale, medical
interpretation services, surgical facilities, nutrition and
diabetic care, as well as rehabilitation services. Providing
these services has helped us reduce costly emergency department
utilization, reduce hospital readmissions and improve care
continuity for vulnerable patients and their health outcomes.
The AHA has estimated that the proposed changes to hospital
outpatient payments would reduce Medicare payments to my
hospital, Regional One Health, by approximately $8 million over
the next 10 years. Our ability to continue to improve the
health status of our communities by ensuring that individuals
have access to the right level of care at the right time in the
right setting would diminish if those cuts were made. We also
would have to evaluate our existing services as well as any
plans to expand our service capacity. This would
disproportionately impact the most vulnerable and elderly
patients that we serve.
Again, I appreciate your invitation to share the hospital's
perspective on site-neutral payment policies with the
committee. I urge you to exercise caution and not to propose
any recommendations to Congress that would dramatically reduce
payments to hospitals until a complete analysis and debate has
occurred. Ensuring adequate payment for all services will allow
hospitals to continue to provide access to care for all
patients. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Coopwood follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Dr. Landers, 5 minutes for opening statement.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN LANDERS

Mr. Landers. Chairman Pitts, Mr. Green, thank you so much
for inviting me to testify today. My name is Steve Landers. I
am a family doctor and geriatrician. My background is in home
visitation for frail elders and people with disabilities and
also in home health agency medical direction. I did my medical
training at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio,
and my geriatric training at Cleveland Clinic. I later went on
to run Cleveland Clinic's home care and post-acute care
programs, but the true honor, really the greatest honor of my
career has been 2 years ago being able to leave my post at
Cleveland Clinic and become a visiting nurse, and I am now the
President and CEO of the Visiting Nurse Association Health
Group in New Jersey. It is the Nation's second largest
independent nonprofit home health organization in the country
and the largest in New Jersey. We have been serving our
communities for over 100 years.
I have, through my role as a physician, as a medical
director, as an administrator, come to admire, frankly, if not
revere the work done by home and community health
professionals, particularly nurses, aides, therapists, social
workers. These individuals help people at the most desperate
times in their lives. We know that those receiving Medicare
home health services are sicker, older, more likely to be
impoverished, more disabled, have higher disease burden than
the general Medicare population. Home health services support
these patients and families when they are really struggling,
living in the shadows with things like Alzheimer's disease,
multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease. They bring help to
help people transition home from the hospital after a stroke,
help patients learn to walk again, learn to eat again, support
family caregivers in their often taxing job, sometimes 24/7
job, of helping their loved ones at home.
Home health care, it is essential to these families and
these individuals, but as importantly, it is also essential for
the future of our country. We have 70 million aging baby
boomers that want to remain independent at home. This is our
country's Sputnik moment for home care and elder care. We need
to develop and improve our home care delivery system in order
to help these individuals meet their needs and also so that the
programs, the Medicare program, Medicaid programs, don't suffer
unnecessary financial burdens. Helping people stay home in a
win-win where both the patients and families benefit and also
the program sees savings.
The current Medicare home care program, it could be so much
more. We can do so much more. The current model is limited by
overly complex paperwork requirements. We have nurses and
physicians spending an inordinate amount of time checking off
boxes and filling out forms. The program has struggled with
some integrity issues and fraud issues, particularly in
aberrant geographies, and that needs to be fixed. There is
confusing and unnecessarily limiting homebound requirements
that make it difficult for certain people to get home care
services. It doesn't make much clinical sense to me as a
physician, and also there are opportunities around technology
and care coordination that we are just not achieving yet.
And so that is why I am here to just share my enthusiasm
and support for the work being done by Mr. McKinley and your
committee on the bundling and coordinating post-acute care
initiative because this is a true innovation in how we look at
post-acute care, and the flexibility and the removal of
barriers to home care and the respect of patient choice that
has been engendered in this proposal I think are worthy of
commendation, and I am thankful to have the chance to be here
to testify in relation to that initiative.
My former boss at Cleveland Clinic says that the future
belongs to those who seize the opportunities created by
innovation, and I believe that today that we are talking about
a proposal that is an innovation in the Medicare program that
can help us help more older Americans stay healthy at home in a
sustainable way.
Thank you so much for the chance to come today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Landers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes Mr. Thomas, 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PETER W. THOMAS

Mr. Thomas. Thank you, Chairman Pitts, Congressman Green,
and members of the subcommittee. Today I speak on behalf of the
consumer-led coalition called the Coalition to Preserve
Rehabilitation, or the CPR Coalition. It is about 30
rehabilitation and disability organizations, and it is run by a
steering committee of the Center for Medicare Advocacy, the
Brain Injury Association of America, the United Spinal
Association, the National Multiple Sclerosis Association and
the Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation.
My testimony today focuses on post-acute care and the
importance of preserving access to rehabilitation, timely,
intensive and coordinated rehabilitation care, in the context
of site-neutral payment proposals and bundling proposals.
First, I am worried about the importance of rehabilitation.
The Coalition believes that rehabilitation is truly the
lynchpin to improving health, function and independence of
Medicare beneficiaries after an illness or an injury, a
disability or a chronic condition. But these settings are not
all the same, and in fact, the outcomes in these different
settings are quite different, and I am happy to say that we are
beginning to get new data that actually demonstrates this
rather than just the intuitive sense that that is the case.
Just a quick personal word. Like many Americans, I have
personal experience with rehabilitation. When I was 10 years
old, I spent about 2 \1/2\ months in a rehabilitation hospital,
Craig Rehab Hospital in Denver, Colorado, following a car
accident where I lost my legs below the knees, and proceeded to
have a goal of walking into my fifth-grade class, which I did,
and since then have used 13 different sets of artificial limbs
over the past 40 years and have had a real front-row seat in
what a good rehabilitation program and what good prosthetic
care really means. All Medicare beneficiaries should have the
same access that I did to that care.
Under Medicare PAC reform proposals, both site neutrality
and bundling, all Medicare patients should have access to the
right level of intensity coordination of rehabilitation in the
right setting and at the right time and on a timely basis, and
of course, that is easier said than done. We believe that any
legislative changes to the post-acute care environment on these
issues should not have the effect of restricting access to
rehabilitation care and should avoid proposals that will lead
to a reduction in Medicare rehab benefits or that erect policy
barriers that will affect beneficiaries by essentially
channeling them into settings of care that are less than what
they need in terms of their individual or medical rehab
benefits.
In terms of the SNF/INF site-neutral payment proposal that
has been proposed in the last few budgets from the President as
well as MedPAC, the Coalition opposes this proposal. We believe
this is little more than an outright financial disincentive for
inpatient rehab hospitals and unit to accept certain
beneficiaries based solely on the patient's diagnosis and not
based on their individual needs and rehabilitation and
functional requirements.
And so while that is the case, we do not necessarily oppose
bundling. In fact, recognize the different silos of care that
often lead to inefficient care in the post-acute care
environment and we favor well-developed bundling proposals that
are based on sound evidence and are linked to quality measures
and to risk-adjusted payments so that those savings are not
achieved by essentially stinting on patient care. And with due
respect to some of the things that I have heard this morning,
we do believe that further study is needed in this area. This
is a very complex area and it impacts very vulnerable Medicare
beneficiaries.
In terms of the Bundling and Coordination Post-Acute Care
Act of 2014, we believe that this is a model--bundling is a
model again that we do not oppose--but we think that especially
to protect vulnerable beneficiaries, there needs to be some
improvements, and we will just quickly tick off a few of those.
Number one, we have great concerns about the bundle being held
by an acute care hospital or an insurance company. We believe
that PAC providers, people that are in the post-acute setting
who understand rehabilitation and know what the patients' needs
and what they will need in terms of services should be the
bundle holder in those instances. There is a concept known as
the continuing care hospital pilot, which is mandated by law
that CMS implemented and inexplicably CMS has not yet moved
forward with that pilot. We encourage them to do so. A
rehabilitation physician should be directing the care in a
bundled payment system.
Device exemptions should apply. You should not have
prosthetics or orthotics, durable medical equipment that are of
a customized nature included in the bundle because we have got
evidence based on the SNF PPS many years ago that those kinds
of devices are simply not provided to beneficiaries under a
bundled payment system. They are either delayed or they are
denied completely. And there are certain vulnerable patient
populations such as traumatic brain injury, spinal cord injury
and other conditions that we do not recommend bundling, at
least in the initial phases of implementation.
Risk adjustment and quality measures are obviously the most
important to make sure that people are not underserved under
bundled systems, and the rest of the detail on that is in my
testimony. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thomas follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. Thanks to all
the witnesses for their opening statements. I will begin
questioning and recognize myself 5 minutes for that purpose.
Dr. Coopwood, in your written testimony, you suggest that
the facility fees disparity between physician offices and
hospital outpatient settings for cancer treatment is justified
by the need to maintain ``standby capacity that allow hospitals
to respond to emergencies ranging from multivehicle car chases
to hurricanes and terrorist attacks.'' I would respectfully ask
how this is relevant to the way Medicare pays for chemotherapy.
Mr. Coopwood. Thank you. The way the hospital system's cost
structure is built into the payment, we have to--there are many
things that we have to do that private physician offices do not
have to do. I am a former surgeon and ran a three-member group,
and we had a very lean office in order to be able to
economically make that system work, but in operating a hospital
and a hospital system, the costs associated with 24-hour
emergency care, the costs associated with the accreditation
bodies, just to have a hospital-based clinic in order to
qualify for Medicare patients, we have to be certified by Joint
Commission. That puts a significant amount of burden and cost
into the system that a private physician does not have to have.
So all of those things that you mentioned built into the
actual cost to operate a hospital-based clinic, they are not
directly tied to the chemotherapeutic administration but it is
part of the infrastructure costs that this facility must bear
in order to deliver that high level of care.
Mr. Pitts. Well, would you respond to this question? Is it
fair that cancer patients face higher out-of-pocket costs for
the same care when physician offices are bought by hospitals?
Mr. Coopwood. And I guess ``fair'' is the key word in your
question. When hospitals acquire physician practices, and there
are many drivers as to why that happens--it is not just to get
a higher payment--there are physicians in oncology practices
that are coming to hospitals to acquire them because of the
economics of trying to run private practice, the economics of
trying to get an electric medical record, the difficulties in
having continuity of care and wanting to be part of a system.
So there are many drivers as to why these practices are coming
into the hospital under the hospital's continuum. Because of
that transition from a less expensive-run entity into a more
expensive or higher-cost entity, there is where the increase in
reimbursement comes in to help pay for that higher
infrastructure.
Mr. Pitts. Well, are there any payment reforms or site-of-
service reforms that you would support that might reduce
payments to hospitals?
Mr. Coopwood. I think there are--in my testimony, we, we
being American Hospital Association, want to be a part of the
conversation as we look at these payment proposals. I think
that we don't want to do in such a way that it jeopardizes the
hospitals and puts hospitals at risk because if we do drastic
measures in a way, it will put risk to those emergency services
and all that because, as I described in my testimony, just
changing it from a facility-based payment to a private office
payment adds $8 million to my hospital on a $300 million cost.
I mean, that is significant.
Mr. Pitts. Dr. Landers, in your written testimony you
observe that care is much cheaper to deliver in home-based than
institutional settings. In long-term care, some worry that a
shift to home-based care ends up being more expensive due to
more claimants coming out of the woodwork. Is this also the
case for post-acute care?
Mr. Landers. Thanks for your question, Chairman. As you
correctly point out, care at home tends to be less expensive
than facility-based care. For example, a month of post-acute
care at home for a Medicare beneficiary is costing the program
roughly $1,200 to $1,500 for that month versus in a subacute
facility $12,000 to $15,000 for that same month of care, and we
know from the variation that has been referenced earlier in
this committee and from some of the research that has been
submitted that there are many instances when the home is a
clinically appropriate setting and we can get people home as an
alternative to institutional care. So one of the opportunities
in the bundled payment initiatives is to appropriately use home
care, which is lower cost, often desired more as a substitute
for unnecessary facility care, and not just clinically
unnecessary. Patients and families don't want to be
unnecessarily pushed into facility-based care, so I see this as
an opportunity to save money, not to spend more.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. My time is
expired. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Brooks, for the past few Congresses, I have teamed up
with our Kentucky colleague, Congressman Ed Whitfield, in
introducing legislation to fix a flaw in the Medicare
reimbursement formula without impacting providers. This
legislation is called the Prompt Pay Bill, H.R. 800, as you
mentioned in your testimony, and would ensure that CMS no
longer includes the prompt pay discount when reimbursing
providers.
Dr. Brooks, as we talked today about factors that are
causing patients to be shifted out of the community settings to
more expensive settings, what impact do you think passage of
this bill would have on helping prevent this shift in care?
Mr. Brooks. Well, the prompt pay--thank you,
Representative. I appreciate your bringing it up. It would help
us a great deal. It would true up the legislative intent of the
original legislation and right now we are not given that almost
2 percent on the Medicare service fee for managing chemotherapy
drugs, and it would, in my opinion, metaphorically say take a
lot of community practices off of life support, and if we were
to pair it with the Rogers-Matsui bill and the Ellmers bill, we
could restore vitality to community oncology, but prompt pay
would go a long way standing on its own.
Mr. Green. Do you think addressing that formula flaw would
benefit both patients and ultimately the taxpayers on the
amount that is being reimbursed?
Mr. Brooks. Absolutely. As I mentioned in my testimony, the
most recent data suggests that the costs in the hospital
outpatient department are almost triple what they are in our
facilities, 189 percent in the IMS study. Certainly patients
would benefit, because the copays would be so much less in that
setting, and our practices tend to be located closer to a
patient's home so that the travel is less and the patient's
out-of-pocket costs are much less. Medicare gets no value from
hospital-based outpatient cancer care. The patients get no
value from hospital-based outpatient care.
Mr. Green. And have there been studies that show
differences between hospital-based and outpatient facilities on
the quality of the care or the results?
Mr. Brooks. The care was assessed primarily for equality of
the type of patient. There are no quality measures within those
studies but there is no reason to think that the type of
patients between the two facilities is any different
whatsoever, and it is mostly just a cost and reimbursement
setting issue. It benefits the patients to be in our clinics.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Ms. Gage, under the current Medicare payment system,
hospitals are not provided any financial incentives to refer
patients to the most efficient or effective setting so that
patients receive the most optimal care at the lowest cost.
Whether a patient goes to a home health agency or skilled
nursing facility, for example, depends more on the availability
of the post-acute care setting in the local market, patient and
family preferences or financial relationships between
providers.
Ms. Gage, since patients access post-acute care after a
stay in the hospital, how can we best encourage hospitals to
help ensure patients receive care at the right setting after a
hospital stay?
Ms. Gage. Thank you for the question. Many of the--one way
to address it is to keep the hospitals accountable for the
post-discharge time period as is currently done with the
readmissions policy in the fee-for-service program. Giving the
hospitals accountability for the continuing care and the
coordination with the subsequent providers is critical to
forming the team that is needed to address the patient needs.
Mr. Green. I know we are doing some of that now because of
the Affordable Care Act, so do you see any recent evidence that
that is occurring?
Ms. Gage. I do, as another hat that I wear is evaluating
the bundled payment initiatives, and there is much more
discussion in the hospitals that are participating in bundles
to be communicating with the post-acute care setting and
following the patient through that 90-day period and actually
giving information around the entire caregiving team. It has
led to reduced readmissions but there are two types of
patients. There are the medical patients and the rehab
patients, and in the rehab patients, you have fewer measures of
outcomes than you have with the medical community except for
functional change for those who have acute needs.
Mr. Green. That brings up my next question.
Mr. Thomas, there is resounding consensus that as part of
any payment reform, robust, meaningful quality measures must be
available. What challenges are there in measuring these quality
outcomes of Medicare beneficiaries who receive these post-acute
care services again in various settings?
Mr. Thomas. Thank you very much for the question. Well, I
would say first that the quality metrics across the different
settings, the primary areas of post-acute care are not uniform
and so it is very difficult to measure quality across different
settings with different systems. I think that there is a lack
of functional measures but in particular quality-of-life
measures, and it is very important that after a post-acute care
stay, it is not necessarily the range of motion that a person
is able to achieve in their rehabilitation through their
rehabilitation stay, it is whether that person can dress
themselves again or whether they can play golf or whether they
can go back to work if that is appropriate. It is returning to
life roles, and that is--those kinds of measures, there are
data sets that measure those kinds of things but that is where
the consumer groups or disability groups would like to see much
more emphasis on measuring those kinds of things of returning
back to community life and living as independently as possible,
and if you can't do that as a result of a particular post-acute
care stay because you weren't set to the proper or the more
intense setting of care with that set of services that you
really need to meet your individual and unique needs, then you
are really not getting all you can out of the Medicare program,
and that would be a real shame.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and we will probably
have some other follow-up questions of the panel. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman and now
recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Ellmers, 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
panel for being here today. These are issues that are very,
very important to me, having been a nurse for over 20 years
prior to coming to Congress, and again, also, my husband being
a general surgeon and actually having had his own solo practice
and now has joined a practice owned by a hospital, and I would
say to that point, there are significant economic factors that
play into that, especially now with the Affordable Care Act,
and many of the costs that our physicians in private practice
are faced with, and we understand the hospitals are also faced
with many of those same situations, and I think it is important
to point out and recognize that individual patient offices,
small businesses are faced with many, many issues of overhead,
Dr. Coopwood, you mentioned electronic medical records being
one of them, great cost to individuals and practitioners, and
those are definitely hurdles.
But on that, I do want to talk--Dr. Brooks, you had
mentioned, and I would like to talk a little bit about my bill,
H.R. 1416, addressing the sequester cuts to Medicare Part B
drugs as a result, as we know, of the sequester cut.
Unfortunately, now, it has been over a year since I introduced
that bill, and we do have a number of cosponsors. However, it
is one of those things where information has to be gathered as
we move along, and unfortunately, the results are playing out.
There are many community cancer settings that are closing their
doors or are being bought up by hospital practices. In fact, I
had mentioned this in the previous panel with Mr. Miller, that
a practice in my hometown that has been a 30-year oncology
practice, private practice, has now been purchased by one of
the hospitals. Now those same patients, although they will be
able to receive the care in that same clinic, will be paying
more money, and I do think that this is significant and
something that we must draw attention to.
So I guess my question to you very simply and very plainly
is, if we were to pass H.R. 1416--and again, when I talk about
Medicare Part B drugs, it is not just chemotherapy drugs. We
are talking about other drugs that any physician would have to
be responsible for administering in the outpatient setting.
Would there be a cost savings to that patient and would there
be a cost savings to Medicare overall?
Mr. Brooks. If we were to pass 1416, and right now, for
those of you who are not familiar with the perverse
interpretation of CMS on our Part B payments, they decreased
our service fee for managing chemotherapy and oncology offices
not by 2 percent as we anticipated but by 28 percent when one
does all the calculations because they included the entire cost
of the drug. And so our service fee was decreased by 28
percent. This has caused great hardship in the oncology
communities, and even with my own U.S. Oncology Network, we
have practices now in peril, and prior to sequestration, really
those practices were fine. So this additional blow on top of
the lack of prompt pay relief and the lack of site neutrality
payments--I mean, CMS decreased our reimbursement for
chemotherapy infusion again this year--those triple burdens are
causing practices even in our very robust, efficient network to
be financially imperiled, and if we got 1416 passed, we got
relief from that, that would put us back just like
Representative Green's question, it would take us off of life
support. Right now, we are impoverished and barely paying the
light bills.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Dr. Brooks.
And Dr. Landers, I do have a question for you. I am a huge
proponent of home care services. I think we are helping our
patients, especially our Medicare patients, our most
vulnerable, to stay out of the hospital setting where they can
be at home receiving care. One of the other issues, as we know,
and I am sure you are aware as well, and I just want to get
your verification on this. We are talking about a patient
population of Medicare patients who are largely women and we
are also talking about an employee population that is by and
large women as well. You know, we are faced with this question
here in Washington all the time: how can we empower women and
what is the true war on women. How do you feel about that
situation?
Mr. Landers. Congresswoman, thank you for the question. In
my experience, one of the best things about my work has been
with many nurses and patients and family caregivers, quite
frankly in home care most of them have been women, and if you
look at the Affordable Care Act re-basing cuts that are sort of
just across-the-board, non-risk adjusted, non-outcomes-based
cuts, they are hurting women disproportionately because that is
where--that is who is involved with home care by and large, our
employees, our nurses, our therapists, our social workers, our
aides are disproportionately women. The patients tend to be
women and also we can't forget family caregivers. Although some
of us men chip in every once in a while, the women nationally
are bearing the brunt of the family caregiving responsibilities
and home care is their support and their lifeline. So I am glad
that you brought that up, and I think it is important that we
are focused on payment reform and innovation based on value
rather than these across-the-board disproportionate cuts on
things that hurt a lot of people including a lot of women.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Dr. Landers, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for indulging me and letting me go over a little bit.
Mr. Pitts. That is all right. Thank you. The Chair thanks
the gentlelady.
We are voting. We have got 12 minutes left in the vote. We
will go to Mr. Rogers, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Brooks, can you tell me in your experience as a
community oncologist what this shift that we talked about
earlier of the closure of so many, 241, I think, practices
around the country, what impact does that have on a patient
that is in one of those 241 closed facilities?
Mr. Brooks. Thank you for the question. I have had the
opportunity to talk to some of my friends who have been
acquired by the hospital, and I have been curious about some of
the hospital assertions that licensing requirements and other
things are more onerous under that situation. I have not been
able to discern any additional licensing requirements that were
required for these offices that were taken over, but one of my
friends in another State, I talked to him recently, and when he
transitioned his patients who were on chemotherapy from his
bills to the hospital bills, he had several patients come in
with their bills and say what is this, because the bills were
over 100 percent more than what he had charged them from his
own thing, and the door had changed names but the nurse was the
same, the doctor was the same, the office was the same, and the
patients were confronting him and he had substantial angst, but
in his defense, their practice was in peril financially. They
were not doing well, and they could have hung on a while longer
but they were on an intolerable course based on, in his case,
mostly sequestration.
So there have been serious displacements among my
colleagues and they are not happy to go to the hospital. They
would prefer to be independent but in many cases want to
continue to take care of their cancer patients and that was
their only option.
Mr. Rogers. And what about those that have been closed? I
mean, we talked a lot of numbers. I could talk to you all day
long about the cost disparities or not, the payment disparities
or not, but a patient is in that mix and in that number
somewhere. So my center closes. What happens? If you are an
average patient there, you are in the middle of some radiation
treatment that is not an easy process to go through, talk about
the patient, Doctor, if you would.
Mr. Brooks. Oh, the patients are at the center of our
concern here, and if our centers in rural Texas close, we are
the only providers. Hospitals are always talking about being
the only provider but we are the only provider for cancer care
in most of rural Texas, and if our center, say, in Paris,
Texas, where we are 70 percent Government pay, if that center
were to be deemed by our organization to be no longer
financially viable and we had to close that, those patients
would have to drive more than 100 miles each way for a
radiation center.
Mr. Rogers. And what does that mean? If I am a patient
undergoing treatment, what does that 100 miles mean to me?
Mr. Brooks. Well, Representative Rogers, if you are frail
enough, you can't do it. You can't continue 100-mile commute
every day for five weeks, and it is an issue that comes up for
us all the time. Frail, elderly patients cannot make long
commutes. They are not able to. And they choose to discontinue
treatment and not get adequate care.
Mr. Rogers. And I have heard examples and I am sure you
have heard examples of people who are choosing not to continue
care or treatment because of the distance to travel.
Mr. Brooks. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rogers. Well, that is one way to save money, I guess.
Mr. Brooks. Yes, sir, it is a perverse way to save money,
but it is true that patients discontinue therapy because of
travel burdens, particularly in States that are spread out like
Texas.
Mr. Rogers. My frustration with this is exactly what you
said, so one day the shade goes down and it is whatever the
rate is, the next day it opens up under this new contract
because a hospital-affiliated center now and the price goes up,
and I think the number we heard was roughly 20 percent on
average across all of the specialties. What is the difference
in care that that person gets from the day that the shade goes
down until the day the shade goes up? What is the difference in
care?
Mr. Brooks. There is no measurable added value for those
patients, and there is no measurable added benefit to Medicare
for transferring the care.
Mr. Rogers. Are there more regulations they have to follow?
Mr. Brooks. I have actually--the hospitals assert that. I
have looked into that, and I have asked my friends who have
been acquired by the hospital and have not been able to find
any additional licensure requirements or other regulatory
burdens that they had to bear after hospital acquisition. I
sought that information and was not able to find any.
Mr. Rogers. Again, Mr. Chairman, I think we would all be
remiss in our duties if we stand by and allow one more cancer
patient not to be able to make travel, select not to get
treatment or their costs go up so prohibitively they can't
continue treatment. Shame on all of us if we can't pull this
together pretty soon so that we don't lose any more of these
centers. I think it is awful important we deal with this issue
soon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. There is 6
minutes left to vote on the floor. Dr. Burgess, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again, I want to
thank our panel. I appreciate you being with us today and your
forbearance through what has been a long morning.
Dr. Brooks, as you were answering Mr. Rogers' question, I
think he asked specifically about someone who was receiving
radiation therapy, but a chemotherapy patient then has that
100-, 120-mile drive home, I can't quite do the calculation on
how many sublingual Zofran may have to be consumed on that
drive but you are adding a significant burden to the clinical
course of that patient, are you not?
Mr. Brooks. Yes. Travel is a burden when you are ill. I
mean, any of us who have just had the flu and tried to drive to
your local doctor's office understand how crummy you feel in a
reasonable commute. But in very long commutes for people that
are chronically and acutely ill, it is intolerable, and people
do select to discontinue care for that reason.
Mr. Burgess. I am old enough to remember when your partners
came to our community hospital, and we were grateful for that,
to have the services for our patients, but I also remember not
being able to electively hospitalize a patient on a Tuesday
because that is the day your partners filled the hospital up
with their chemotherapy patients, so it was also a great day
when they opened their own center and now the chemotherapy was
administered as an outpatient. So are we in fact driving back
the other way? Is hospital bed availability going to become an
issue because of the occupancy of those beds with chemotherapy
patients?
Mr. Brooks. Well, it is a little different these days. We
don't actually put people in inpatient beds like we did--I
actually didn't know you were that old. But in my youth as an
oncologist, we did in fact hospitalize patients, put them in
hospital beds. Nowadays, most hospitals have outpatient
treatment departments that look quite similar to our physician
offices, and they do not occupy inpatient beds in most cases.
So that is not a concern per se.
But the migration, like Mark Miller said earlier, from the
lower cost, more efficient to the higher cost, less efficient
because of the economic incentive, and that is what we are
looking at here.
Mr. Burgess. Yes, and I actually tried to encourage him to
be a little bit more vocal about that, and I wasn't able to
draw it out of him, so I appreciate your articulating that
concept because I think it is important.
I used to be a student of medical irony but now I have kind
of branched out. I just cannot tell you the frustration of
dealing with the Centers for Medicare and Medicare Services
trying to get them to calculate a correct arithmetic equation
of the 2 percent reduction in the sequester of ASP Plus 6, and
this was the subject of a letter. We had a lot of people that
signed on. To their credit, they wrote me back but they wrote
me back to me indicating that they didn't understand how to do
simple arithmetic. ASP Plus 6, for people who don't understand
what that is, that means you take the average sales price of,
in this case, a drug, and you add 6 percent, which arguably
should cover the cost of storage, administration, your staff's
time, the IV tubing, all of the things that are connected with
administering that drug. I recognize that the plus 6 doesn't
really cover that, but still, in theory, the plus 6 should
cover that.
But it makes no sense if you are going to apply an across-
the-board reduction with the sequester of 2 percent. You would
never begin with the ASP part of that equation. The ASP part of
that equation is a fixed cost. That is a direct cost. That is
like saying well, we are going to reduce--someone is going to
come in and reduce your light bill by 2 percent because
Medicare is cutting you 2 percent. They are not going to do
that. Your electricity charge for keeping the drug
refrigerated, your carrying charge is all the same. It has not
been impacted. No one has cut you a break because Medicare is
reducing your reimbursement.
So I continue to be frustrated with that. I continue to try
to educate our good friends over at the agency. So far, I have
not been successful, but like you, I fear that the consequence
of this error in calculation is going to be a big driver.
Again, you so well articulated what the actual reduction means
to your clinic and your office and how hard it will be to keep
your doors open.
Let me just ask one last thing before we finish up and I
have to go vote. The issue of EMTALA came up, and Dr. Coopwood,
I think you referenced that, that this is of course something
that the hospital bears, but doctors bear it too. I mean,
EMTALA applies to both providers that are both physicians and
hospitals. So the question on the EMTALA mandate actually
affects both physicians and hospitals. Is that not correct?
Mr. Coopwood. I am really just aware of the responsibility
of a hospital's role in EMTALA. Someone shows up on their
perimeter property, they have a responsibility to treat them
and at the minimum stabilize them. I am not sure if that
extension goes into the physician's office practice because
they are not obligated to see everyone who presents to them as
a hospital is obligated to see everyone in emergency
situations.
Mr. Burgess. Let me elaborate on that just a little bit,
because as a member of the hospital staff of your hospital, if
your emergency room doctor calls me because of a woman in
labor, for example, I got to show up. I have got to show up
within 30 minutes or a $50,000 fine comes my way. So I would
just argue that it does affect the doctors as well as the
hospitals. It might not affect the bottom line in our office
practice, but as far as the taking of our professional
services, it still occurs under EMTALA as it does for you.
Mr. Coopwood. Absolutely.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Chairman, I know we have a vote on.
I want to thank our panel again. It has been very
informative. I have got some questions I am going to submit for
the record. Thank you for being here, and I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
There is no time left on the clock for voting, so I urge
members to get over to vote. We still have some 250 people who
haven't voted.
Thank you for your responses, for the questions. Some
additional questions we will send to you in writing. We ask
that you please respond promptly. I remind members that they
have 10 business days to submit questions for the record, and I
ask the witnesses to please respond promptly. Members should
submit their questions by the close of business on Wednesday,
June 4th.
A very good hearing. Thank you so much for sharing your
expertise with us. Without objection, the subcommittee hearing
is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:48 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
