- OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS
COMMISSION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 20, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-146

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
91-268                       WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey                Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               PETER WELCH, Vermont
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PAUL TONKO, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology

GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                ANNA G. ESHOO, California
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  DORIS O. MATSUI, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JIM MATHESON, Utah
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California, ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio
FRED UPTON, Michigan, ex officio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, opening statement......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................    10
Hon. Lee Terry, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Nebraska, prepared statement...................................    59

Witnesses

Tom Wheeler, Chairman, Federal Communications Commission.........    11
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Answers to submitted questions...............................    70

Submitted Material

Letter of May 7, 2014, from 100+ venture capitalists to the
Federal Communications Commission, submitted by Ms. Eshoo......    60
Letter of May 8, 2014, from 100+ Internet Companies to the
Federal Communications Commission, submitted by Ms. Eshoo......    63

OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

----------

TUESDAY, MAY 20, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in
room 2123 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Greg
Walden (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Walden, Latta, Shimkus,
Terry, Rogers, Blackburn, Scalise, Lance, Guthrie, Gardner,
Pompeo, Kinzinger, Long, Ellmers, Barton, Upton (ex officio)
Eshoo, Matsui, Braley, Welch, Lujan, Dingell, DeGette,
Matheson, Butterfield, and Waxman (ex officio).
Also present: Representative Yarmuth.
Staff present: Gary Andres, Staff Director; Ray Baum,
Senior Policy Advisor/Director of Coalitions; Matt Bravo,
Professional Staff Member; Leighton Brown, Press Assistant;
Andy Duberstein, Deputy Press Secretary; Gene Fullano,
Detailee, Telecom; Kelsey Guyselman, Counsel, Telecom; Sean
Hayes, Deputy Chief Counsel, Oversight & Investigations; Grace
Koh, Counsel, Telecom; David Redl, Counsel, Telecom; Charlotte
Savercool, Legislative Coordinator; Macey Sevcik, Press
Assistant; Tom Wilbur, Digital Media Advisor; Phil Barnett,
Democratic Staff Director; Shawn Chang, Democratic Chief
Counsel for Communications and Technology Subcommittee;
Margaret McCarthy, Democratic Professional Staff Member; Ryan
Skukowski, Democratic Staff Assistant; and Patrick Donovan,
Democratic FCC Detailee.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GREG WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. We will call to order the subcommittee on
Communications and Technology, and I certainly want to welcome
our Members and our witness, the Chairman of the Federal
Communications Commission. Mr. Wheeler, we are delighted that
you would make time to come and spend with us on this important
day with so much going on in the telecommunications world.
Six months ago, this subcommittee met for the very first
time with the current complement of FCC Commissioners and
welcomed Mr. Wheeler as the new chairman. Today--and let me
welcome Mr. Wheeler back--we meet to review the record of
action and selective inaction that the Commission has taken
under the first 6 months of your leadership. Unfortunately,
given some of the most recent actions out of the Commission, I
fear that we may be heading into rough waters.
When we last met I offered two pieces of advice to Chairman
Wheeler and his colleagues. First, I urged them to heed the
words of Congress where it has spoken and reject calls to act
in ways contrary to Congressional intent. Second, I urged them
to bear in mind that even seemingly small changes in the
Federal Communications Commission's rules can have significant
impact on the marketplace. I called upon all the members of the
Commission to discharge their duties with transparency,
accountability, and a long view of the technological landscape.
In sum, my advice was that they must approach their duties with
humility and restraint.
Unfortunately, recent actions have hinted that my advice
was ignored. In December we had yet to know that the D.C.
Circuit Court of Appeals would once again reject the
Commission's attempt to regulate the Internet and could only
speculate as to whether the Commission under Chairman Wheeler's
lead would mount a third attempt. Sadly, we now know the
answer. Not only is Chairman Wheeler leading us down this path
again, the item the Commission adopted last week tees up the
long-dead idea that the Internet is a common carrier. This
reinvigorated willingness to consider regulating the Internet
under Title II of the Communications Act, rules that find their
roots in 19th Century railroad regulation and were designed to
regulate the world of a telephone monopoly, harken back to a
world in which a twisted copper was the only portal for
consumers to the communications network and voice, the only
service.
The modern communications landscape bears no resemblance to
the world Title II was meant to regulate, and application of
Title II to the Internet is, at best, a poor fit. Worse still,
the practical consequences of reclassification are to give the
bureaucrats at the FCC the authority to second-guess business
decisions and to regulate every possible aspect of the
Internet. We should all pause and consider the prospect of the
FCC as a rate-setting authority over Internet access and what
that meant for innovation in the telephone network of
yesteryear. We should also be aware that this path opens the
door for states to regulate the Internet.
Contrary to any intended effect, the reclassification of
broadband service under Title II will harm consumers, halt job
creation, curtail innovation and stifle investment. In sum, at
a time when the Commission, at Congress's direction, is taking
steps toward even greater growth and innovation across Internet
access platforms, the Commission is simultaneously
contemplating rules that undermine those very efforts and
compromise the fundamental approaches of both the Clinton and
Bush administrations that laid the foundation for the Internet
we know today.
As troubling as some of the actions taken under Chairman
Wheeler's watch, the selective inaction of the FCC is equally
troubling. Although required under the Telecommunications Act,
the Federal Communications Commission has failed to complete
its quadrennial review of the limitations on ownership of
broadcast properties. It has been 6 years--6 years--since the
Commission last fulfilled this statutory mandate. Rather than
focus on ensuring that the rules reflect reality, however, the
chairman has now announced that the Commission would
essentially scrap the 2010 quadrennial review, and begin in
earnest its 2014 quadrennial review.
Notwithstanding this stale record, the FCC also moved
forward to make major changes to the regulations that govern
media ownership anyway, the adopted changes to its attribution
rules that determine how to count stations toward the local
television ownership rule. The FCC also stated that it would
begin counting certain shared service arrangements toward the
local ownership cap. In order to comply with local ownership
rules, these pronouncements will likely force broadcasters to
divest stations and unwind shared service agreements that are
beneficial to ensuring local content in the smaller markets.
These changes do not bring benefits to the communities served
by these broadcasters drawing into question how this change
could serve the public interest.
Finally, FCC process reform has been an ongoing priority of
our Subcommittee. It is an issue my colleagues and I are deeply
invested in as demonstrated by the unanimous passage in the
House of the bipartisan Federal Communications Commission
Process Reform Act on March 11 of this year. Unfortunately,
after the events of the past few months, I am sad to say I
continue to be troubled by the FCC's seemingly flawed
processes.
In March, the FCC chose to restrict license transfers
involving certain shared service agreements, which had long
been implicitly blessed by the Commission. This action was not
debated by the commissioners, nor is it subject to any kind of
vote. Rather, it was announced by the Chief of the Media Bureau
as a fait accompli.
Recent press reports also allege that the chairman's office
withheld presentation of revisions to the Open Internet Notice
of Proposed Rulemaking from Republicans for as long as 24 hours
after having provided the material to the Democratic
commissioners and to the press during the run up to the May
15th FCC Open Meeting. The concern raised by these reports is
only compounded by revelations that a substantially revised
draft of another item scheduled for vote at the Open Meeting
was not presented to other offices until the closing minutes of
the evening before. According to Commissioner Pai's dissent
from the commission's Mobile Spectrum Holdings item, his office
received the revised item fewer than 12 hours before the Open
Meeting, and the item contained more than 3,000 revisions.
So I find myself channeling Commissioner Rosenworcel who
said of the Open Internet NPRM that the ``process that got us
to this rulemaking today is flawed.'' The committee has opined
in the past that withholding of a revised draft item from other
members of the commission until the eleventh hour precludes the
scrutiny and analysis necessary for reasoned decision-making.
It is my hope that these occurrences were anomalies. Perhaps
Chairman Wheeler will want to commit today to providing his
fellow commissioners with adequate and equal time to review
proposed orders and rules.
The transformative impact of the evolution of technology
from analog to digital, from narrowband to broadband, has
forever altered our lives. The evolution continues and the
Commission has before it the issues I just mentioned and many
more, all significant in their impacts on our lives and the
economy. You stated in your written testimony that you are
eager to build on the progress of the last 6 months going
forward. And I hope working together we can move forward in a
direction that protects the success this critical sector of the
economy has enjoyed and facilitates its continued growth and
job creation unencumbered by regulatory overreach.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden

Six month ago, this subcommittee met for the first time
with the current complement of FCC Commissioners and welcomed
Mr. Wheeler as the new chairman. Today--and let me welcome
Chairman Wheeler back--we meet to review the record of action
and selective inaction that the commission has taken under the
first six months of his leadership. Unfortunately, given some
of the most recent actions out of the commission, I fear that
we may be heading into rough waters.
When we last met I offered two pieces of advice to Chairman
Wheeler and his colleagues. First, I urged them to heed the
words of Congress where it has spoken and reject calls to act
in ways contrary to Congressional intent. Second, I urged them
to bear in mind that even seemingly small changes in the FCC's
rules can have significant impact on the market. I called upon
all the members of the commission to discharge their duties
with transparency, accountability, and a long view of the
technological landscape. In sum, my advice was that they must
approach their duties with humility and restraint.
Unfortunately, recent actions have hinted that my advice
was ignored. In December we had yet to know that the D.C.
Circuit Court of Appeals would once again reject the
commission's attempt to regulate the Internet; and could only
speculate as to whether the commission under Chairman Wheeler's
lead would mount a third attempt. Sadly, we now know the
answer. Not only is Chairman Wheeler leading us down this path
again, the item the commission adopted last week tees up the
long dead idea that the Internet is a common carrier. This
reinvigorated willingness to consider regulating the Internet
under Title II of the Communications Act--rules that find their
roots in 19th century railroad regulation and were designed to
regulate the world of a telephone monopoly--harken back to a
world in which a twisted copper was the only portal for
consumers to the communications network and voice was the only
service.
The modern communications landscape bears no resemblance to
the world Title II was meant to regulate and application of
Title II to the Internet is, at best, a poor fit. Worse still,
the practical consequences of reclassification are to give the
bureaucrats at the FCC the authority to second-guess business
decisions and to regulate every possible aspect of the
Internet. We should all pause and consider the prospect of the
FCC as a rate-setting authority over Internet access and what
that meant for innovation in the telephone network of
yesteryear. We should also be aware that this path opens the
door for states to regulate the Internet.
Contrary to any intended effect, the reclassification of
broadband service under Title II will harm consumers, halt job
creation, curtail innovation, and stifle investment. In sum, at
a time when the commission--at Congress's direction--is taking
steps toward even greater growth and innovation across Internet
access platforms, the commission is simultaneously
contemplating rules that undermine those very efforts and
compromise the fundamental approaches of both the Clinton and
Bush administration that laid the foundation for the Internet
we know today.
As troubling as some of the actions taken under Chairman
Wheeler's watch, the selective inaction of the FCC is equally
troubling. Although required under the Telecommunications Act,
the FCC has failed to complete its quadrennial review of the
limitations on ownership of broadcast properties. It has been 6
years since the commission last fulfilled this statutory
mandate. Rather than focus on ensuring that the rules reflect
reality, however, Chairman Wheeler announced that the
commission would essentially scrap the 2010 quadrennial review,
and ``begin in earnest'' its 2014 quadrennial review.
Notwithstanding this stale record, the FCC also moved forward
to make major changes to the regulations that govern media
ownership anyway. The adopted changes to its ``attribution
rules'' that determine how to count stations toward the local
television ownership rule. The FCC also stated that it would
begin counting certain shared service arrangements toward the
local ownership cap. In order to comply with local ownership
rules, these pronouncements will likely force broadcasters to
divest stations and unwind shared service agreements that are
beneficial to ensuring local content in smaller markets. These
changes do not bring benefits to the communities served by
these broadcasters drawing into question how this change could
serve the public interest.
Finally, FCC process reform has been an ongoing priority of
the subcommittee. It is an issue that my colleagues and I are
deeply invested in as demonstrated by the unanimous passage in
the House of the bipartisan Federal Communications Commission
Process Reform Act on March 11th of this year. Unfortunately,
after the events of the past few months, I am sad to say I
continue to be troubled by the FCC's seemingly flawed
processes.
In March, the FCC chose to restrict license transfers
involving certain shared service agreements, which had long
been blessed implicitly by the commission. This action was not
debated by the commissioners, nor was it subject to a vote of
any kind. Rather, it was announced by the Chief of the Media
Bureau as a fait accompli.
Recent press reports also allege that the Chairman's Office
withheld presentation of revisions to the Open Internet Notice
of Proposed Rulemaking from Republicans for as long as 24 hours
after providing the material to the Democratic commissioners
and to the press during the run up to the May 15th FCC Open
Meeting. The concern raised by these reports is only compounded
by revelations that a substantially revised draft of another
item scheduled for vote at the Open Meeting was not presented
to other offices until the closing minutes of the evening
before. According to Commissioner Pai's dissent from the
commission's Mobile Spectrum Holdings item, his office received
the revised item fewer than 12 hours before the Open Meeting
and the item contained more than 3,000 revisions.
I find myself channeling commissioner Rosenworcel who said
of the Open Internet NPRM that ``the process that got us to
this rulemaking today is flawed.'' The committee has opined in
the past that withholding of a revised draft item from other
members of the commission until the eleventh hour precludes the
scrutiny and analysis necessary for reasoned decision-making.
It is my hope that these occurrences were anomalies. Perhaps
Chairman Wheeler will commit today to providing his fellow
commissioners with adequate and equal time to review proposed
orders and rules.
The transformative impact of the evolution of technology
from analog to digital, from narrowband to broadband has
forever altered our lives. That evolution continues and the
commission has before it the issues I just mentioned and many
more, all significant in their impacts on our lives and the
economy. You stated in your written testimony that you are
eager to build on the progress of the last 6 months going
forward. I hope, working together, we can move forward in a
direction that protects the success this critical sector of the
economy has enjoyed and facilitates its continued growth and
job creation unencumbered by regulatory overreach.

#  #  #

Mr. Walden. With that I yield back, and I recognize my
friend and colleague from California, Ms. Eshoo, the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee, for her opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning to all
of my colleagues, and welcome back to the committee, Chairman
Wheeler.
Before we do a deep dive into the specifics of the
chairman's proposal as well as so many other major issues that
are before the FCC, I think that it would be well for us to
step back and appreciate what I believe is one of the most
consequential inventions in human history. This was dreamed of
and built by disruptors. It is an American story. It is a
product of American genius--the Internet, one word but it
really takes one's breath away in terms of the arc of history.
It is not only an invention, it has reshaped lives,
economies here and around the world, and our thinking and our
debate today really should be viewed, I think, through the
prism of a critical step that we are taking now in the 21st
Century. The Internet is a continuum of change. It is
accessible, it is open and its innovations continue. They
empower individuals, entire fields of learning, growing not
only our economy but economies around the world and serving
humanity in countless ways.
All of this has taken place, and here we are in the second
decade of the 21st Century. So this is huge. This is huge. This
is not what is behind door number one, door number two, door
number three, where the price is right. This is not some
guessing game. This is huge. This is something--these decisions
are going to affect every single American going forward just as
it has in the past, and it will continue to.
So all of us--regulators, innovators, consumers,
legislators--we have to get this right. The stakes are very
high, and America cannot lose. It has been our leadership that
has advanced the digital age, and now is not the time, and
actually I don't think there should be ever a time, to unravel
the values that have really been the hallmarks and the bulwarks
of the Internet.
So the question is, how do we seize the future? At least in
my view, that is what the question is. I know what I want to
see continue, openness, free, accessible. These are also the
hallmarks of our democracy, and that is why this has been such
an extraordinary export of our country.
I know what I don't want. I don't want this to become an
auction, selling off the best in bits and pieces where some pay
for faster lanes, others can't pay. They get stuck in a slow
lane--some giant company blocking content and others
discriminating so that they can sell their stuff to keep the
other guy's stuff stymied. That is not a very pretty
description, but it is a street description of what can be at
hand.
I want every day to be essentially the 4th of July for
American innovation so that it just keeps bursting, it just
keeps bursting. And I see it every day in my Congressional
district. Looking forward 10 years, 25 years, 50 years, I want
this to continue, and we should all be thinking on a grand
scale because this growth and this economic driver should be
for everyone. We need smart, savvy regulations, regulatory
decisions. We need a Congress that is engaged in this and a
Congress that is vigilant, and I plan to be.
So what should the FCC do? I think in all the articles you
read, there is a debate. Should it be 706 or should it be Title
II? I think that we have to have a clear understanding of what
has made the Internet what it is today and what basic values
need to be protected and preserved and then what that is going
to look like.
And there is more on top of all of this. Can anyone here
today piece together the effects of a Comcast/Time Warner
merger and an AT&T/DirecTV merger on consumers and a free and
open Internet? These are massive decisions and massive pieces
that are moving forward. And what is going to happen to
innovation?
Mr. Chairman, Chairman Walden, I urge you to convene a
hearing to examine these issues here. I think they deserve to
be examined and to be debated and questions asked. So as I said
earlier, every person in the country will be affected by the
outcome of these decisions that are before the Commission and
before us. And so I look forward to questioning Chairman
Wheeler today. I also ask for unanimous consent to two letters,
two very important letters, be entered into the record, one
signed by more than 100 venture capitalists and angel investors
who support simple, strong, enforceable rules against online
discrimination and access fees, and the other signed by more
than 100 Internet companies, small and large, mostly small,
that support a free and open Internet.
Mr. Walden. Without objection.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Ms. Eshoo. And I don't know if I have any time remaining.
No, I think I have gone over. With that, I will yield back what
I don't have.
Mr. Walden. Thank the gentlelady for her opening statement
and the letters. I will now turn to the Full Committee
Chairman, Mr. Fred Upton from Michigan, for opening comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Oversight is a
critical part of this committee's work to foster a smaller,
more nimble government for the innovation age. We have held
lots of hearings with all of the FCC's commissioners to address
issues of national importance, to keep a close eye on the
budget, and to ensure that Commission process focuses on
promoting jobs and innovation, and today's oversight hearing
with Chairman Wheeler will continue that discussion to ensure
that the FCC works in a way that benefits consumers, industry,
and certainly the economy, and I thank you for coming today.
There is a lot to discuss. In the 6 months since Mr.
Wheeler was confirmed as chair, he has addressed a number of
items including media ownership, the IP transition, universal
service, and just this past week, of course, the incentive
auctions and net neutrality. While I appreciate the chairman's
leadership on some of these, I have serious concerns with some
others.
As an initial matter, Chairman Wheeler started off his
chairmanship with the review of FCC procedure, an issue that
this Subcommittee has spent lots of time working to reform in a
bipartisan manner. But I was disappointed to see some of the
process failures that occurred last week. Media reports of open
meeting items being circulated to commissioners as late as
midnight the evening before the vote on one item and what seems
to be partisan sharing of items with Democrats as much as 24
hours before sharing them with Republicans on another is
particularly concerning. Regardless of political affiliation,
commissioners must be given adequate and equal time to consider
the items on which they are going to vote. Let us all hope that
such incidents of favoritism and selective sharing are isolated
and not emblematic of the Chairman's new operating procedure.
Additionally, I continue to be concerned with the
Commission's ongoing defiance of its statutory obligations to
complete the 2010 quadrennial review of media ownership rules.
Despite the commission's woefully outdated record on this
issue, it has nonetheless moved forward with changes that
effectively bar joint sales agreements and change Commission
treatment of shared service agreements under its media
attribution rules. These actions, in the absence of the
statutorily required media ownership review, do raise
significant questions about the Commission's commitment to
making decisions informed by facts and utilizing sound process.
And lastly, I am troubled by the chairman's insistence on
attempting to regulate the Internet under rules that were
informed by 19th century railroad regulations and adopted to
regulate the monopoly telephone network of the past. The
Internet has indeed flourished under the current light-touch
regulatory scheme, and subjecting it to burdensome regulations
is a leap in the wrong direction. Title II is inappropriate for
the Internet, and attempting to reclassify it would be harmful
to consumers, businesses, and the future of the Internet as we
know it. Nobody wants telephone service to look like it did in
1984, and we certainly shouldn't wish for our Internet access
to return to that rotary phone era, either.
The communications sector is vital to our national economy,
and Commission action on even small items can have broad
impact. I thank Chairman Wheeler for being here today and look
forward to working together toward a bipartisan, measured,
transparent, and responsible actions that do benefit consumers,
job creation and our economy.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

Oversight is a critical part of this committee's work to
foster a smaller, more nimble government for the innovation
age. We have held multiple hearings with all of the FCC's
commissioners to address issues of national importance, to keep
a close eye on its budget, and to ensure that commission
process focuses on promoting jobs and innovation. Today's
oversight hearing with Chairman Tom Wheeler will continue this
discussion to ensure that the FCC works in a way that benefits
consumers, industry, and the American economy. I thank Chairman
Wheeler for joining us today.
There is much to discuss. In the 6 months since Mr. Wheeler
was confirmed as chairman, he has addressed a number of items--
including media ownership, the IP transition, universal
service, and just this past week, the incentive auctions and
net neutrality. While I appreciate the Chairman's leadership on
some of these items, I have serious concerns with others.
As an initial matter, Chairman Wheeler started off his
chairmanship with a review of FCC procedure--an issue this
subcommittee has spent considerable time working to reform in a
bipartisan manner. But I was especially disappointed to see
some of the process failures that occurred last week. Media
reports of open meeting items being circulated to commissioners
as late as midnight the evening before the vote on one item and
what seems to be partisan sharing of items with Democrats as
much as 24 hours before sharing them with Republicans on
another is particular concerning. Regardless of political
affiliation, commissioners must be given adequate and equal
time to consider items on which they will vote. Let us all hope
that such incidents of favoritism and selective sharing are
isolated and not emblematic of the chairman's new operating
procedure.
Additionally, I continue to be concerned with the
commission's ongoing defiance of its statutory obligation to
complete the 2010 quadrennial review of media ownership rules.
Despite the commission's woefully outdated record on this
issue, it has nonetheless moved forward with changes that
effectively bar joint sales agreements and change commission
treatment of shared service agreements under its media
attribution rules. These actions, in the absence of the
statutorily required media ownership review, raise significant
questions about the commission's commitment to making decisions
informed by facts and utilizing sound process.
Lastly, I am troubled by the chairman's insistence on
attempting to regulate the Internet under rules that were
informed by 19th century railroad regulations and adopted to
regulate the monopoly telephone network of the past. The
Internet has flourished under the current light-touch
regulatory scheme, and subjecting it to burdensome regulations
is a leap in the wrong direction. Title II is inappropriate for
the Internet and attempting to reclassify it would be harmful
to consumers, businesses, and the future of the Internet as we
know it. Nobody wants telephone service to look like it did in
1984, and we certainly shouldn't wish for our Internet access
to return to that rotary phone era, either.
The communications sector is vital to our national economy
and commission action on even small items can have broad
impact. I thank Chairman Wheeler for being here today and look
forward to working together toward bipartisan, measured,
transparent, and responsible actions that benefit consumers,
job creation, and our economy.

#  #  #

Mr. Upton. And I yield the balance of my time be split
between Mr. Latta and Mr. Barton.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you, Chairman, for yielding, and
Chairman Walden, I appreciate you holding this hearing today,
and welcome Chairman Wheeler. Thanks for being here.
The communications and technology industry is hailed as a
vibrant, dynamic, and productive sector of our economy. This is
not by accident. As networks and services transition to IP-
based platforms, they have had the flexibility to grow, advance
and evolve in large part because they have not been subjected
to the stifling hand of legacy government regulations.
We have pursued a light-touch regulatory approach to the
Internet ecosystem because we have seen time and again that it
serves as a catalyst for increased investment, innovation, job
creation, and competition. As we look forward to develop
policies that would further this growth, we would be remiss to
overlook the significance of how regulatory restraint has been
a fundamental component of the industry's success. That is why
I am concerned with some of the proposals emerging from the
FCC, particularly in consideration of reclassifying broadband
Internet access services, as a telecommunications service,
under Title II of the Communications Act. This policy would be
an extreme exercise of government overreach and likely result
in failed Web sites, downgraded and poor customer service, less
choice and flexibility for consumers, businesses and the
stifling of innovation through regulation. Unwarranted attempts
to manufacture and shape markets' outcome, propose solutions in
search of problems and impose antiquated regulations will
frustrate future progress and innovation.
I intend to introduce legislation that prevents the FCC
from following through on this misguided regulatory proposal.
Mr. Walden. Mr. Chairman, with that I yield back the
balance of my time, and I yield to Mr. Barton.
Mr. Barton. We just welcome Chairman Wheeler, and the
question before the committee today is are we soon going to be
calling him Mr. Wheeler Dealer? And with that, I will put my
statement in the record and in the interest of time yield back
to the chairman.
Mr. Walden. I thank the chairman. The gentleman yields
back. I now turn the gentleman from California, Mr. Waxman, for
opening comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to welcome
back Chairman Wheeler. Federal Communications Commission had an
historic week last week. You are tackling some of the most
complex and pressing issues in the communications sector today.
In 2012, Congress gave the FCC a big job, create the world's
first incentive auction to ensure that each front low-band
spectrum is put to its highest economic value, and you
established the ground rules for this crucial auction last
week. You had a hard job because you needed to balance four
potentially conflicting objectives: one, maximizing the amount
of spectrum made available for auction; two, promote
competition; three, create bands of unlicensed spectrum to spur
innovation; and four, raise money. It appears you hit this one
out of the ballpark.
I particularly want to commend you for your work to advance
unlicensed spectrum. Your plan will create three channels of
each front unlicensed spectrum throughout the Nation. The
vision of new super Wi-Fi can now become a reality. I also want
to commend you for promoting competition by reserving spectrum
for competitive carriers. It would be an enormous setback for
innovation and consumers if the incentive auction turns the
wireless market into a duopoly, dominated by Verizon and AT&T.
This auction is the best and possibly the last chance the FCC
has to invigorate competition.
I would have preferred if you reserved even more spectrum
for competitive carriers, but I recognize the pressures you are
under and your need to secure three votes.
By the way, you may hear arguments today from Republicans
on this committee that you lack the authority to promote
competition. These claims are nonsense and contradict the
express language of the statute.
Last week you also launched the FCC's third attempt in 8
years to protect the open Internet. You didn't hit this one out
of the park, but you didn't need to, either. You made a wise
decision to solicit comment on a wide range of options. As I
wrote you, the time has come to end the legal gymnastics and
stop the lobbying games being paid by the big broadband
providers. In 2010, Verizon, AT&T, and Comcast pled with the
FCC not to use its undisputed authority under Title II of the
Communications Act, and then after FCC did what they wanted,
Verizon sued the agency for lacking authority when the FCC
agreed with the company. This time, you need a different
approach. You should use your Title II authority as a backstop
authority to protect the open Internet. If you want to proceed
under Section 706 as your main legal theory, that is fine, but
you shouldn't water down the open Internet rules to fit Section
706. Instead, you should get the substance right and invoke
Title II as an independent basis of authority.
The FCC has already lost two rulings in court over the open
Internet. You don't have to choose between weak rules and a
weak legal case. You can issue strong rules and have a strong
legal case if you use a belt-and-suspenders approach to the
next rule-making.
I look forward to exploring this issue with you further in
the question period.
In the meantime, I would yield the balance of my time to my
friend and colleague, Congresswoman Matsui.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Ranking Member Waxman, for
yielding me time, and welcome, Chairman Wheeler. The FCC
certainly has a lot on its plate. The Commission is considering
net neutrality rules, rules on the broadcast incentive auction,
the AWS-3 auction, USF and E-Rate reforms and two very
significant mergers. I am confident the FCC will be able to
demonstrate that it can walk and chew gum at the same time.
This Subcommittee should also do its part. For one, I join
in calling for the chairman to hold oversight hearings on the
two proposed mergers between Comcast and Time Warner and on
AT&T and DirecTV. Those are some of the largest mergers in our
Nation's telecommunications history.
Americans, including many in my district of Sacramento are
seeing the trends toward consolidation, content impairing deals
and how they hear phrases like paid prioritization and
wondering what is going on. What does all this mean for them,
for competition and for the economy? It has been encouraging
that so many Americans are speaking up in support of protecting
an open Internet. I was one who thought the FCC should have
taken more time to deliberate on what net neutrality rules the
Commission should propose. But we are where we are. The
proposal has certainly proved over the last few weeks it is
still far from perfect. I support a ban on paid prioritization
deals. We can't afford a two-tiered Internet system.
I look forward to hearing from you today, and I yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back the balance of her
time, and with that, you have heard from us or at least a few
of us up here, Mr. Chairman. And now we are delighted to have
you here, and we look forward to your opening statement and
comments. And thank you again for the work you are doing. Go
ahead.

STATEMENT OF HON. TOM WHEELER, CHAIRMAN, FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS
COMMISSION

Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
committee. As you have pointed out, it has been about 6 months
since we last sat down, and what I wanted to do was to
highlight some of the things we have done in that period and
then engage in a dialogue with you with whatever topics that
you would like to address.
As has been evidenced by a lot of these comments up here,
one of the principal responsibilities of the Commission is
dealing with the spectrum crunch, and we have taken a
significant step forward in terms of getting more spectrum out
to the market. We had the H-Block auction which raised $1.5
billion for 10 megahertz spectrum. We have opened a new, 100
megahertz swath in the 5 gigahertz band which is already being
referred to as ``gigabit-Wi-Fi'' because of the incredible
through-put that it enables. We have begun a proceeding on
spectrum sharing at 3.5 gigahertz, and we announced yesterday
that in accord with the mandate of this Committee and Congress
to auction off AWS-3 spectrum, that we will begin the auction
on November 13, and we will finish as per your mandate
February--we will license by February 22, 2015.
We have also, as some of the Committee had noted,
established a new set of mobile spectrum holding rules which
have been praised by everybody from public interest groups to
small operators to large operators, as was commented on by Mr.
Waxman, ``Hitting the ball out of the park.'' And we have begun
the incentive auction process. You mandated us, as you have
said, with a non-trivial task, and we have taken the first
important steps to that.
On the question of Universal Service and what is going on
there, we have fulfilled the pledge that I made to this
Committee last time we were together to eliminate the infamous
Quantile Regression Analysis, and we are seeking comments on
what its replacement should be.
We have funded the Connect America Fund to provide
connectivity to 5 million more Americans who do not have access
to broadband today. That is about \1/3\ of the total, and a
significant bite out of that. And we are seeking input on
multiple additional issues, a through-put standard. Should we--
as technology increases and bandwidth increases, do we need to
think about higher bandwidth that is supported by the Connect
America Fund? How do we best deal with the mobile component of
broadband delivery in Connect America and how best to support
broadband for rate-of-return carriers? Those are all
proceedings that we have under way.
We have made some significant strides also in the area of
public safety. We took a good chunk out of the FirstNet $7.5
billion with the H-band auction. I expect, obviously, that the
AWS-3 auction will do more, and I wouldn't be surprised if we
show up at the incentive auction having met the requirement, or
at least taken a huge bite out of the requirement, for funding
FirstNet.
We had rule-making on text-to-911. You know, phones aren't
used just for talking anymore but also texting. And so, if you
want to text to an emergency service provider, we had a rule-
making on that. The major carriers stepped up and literally in
the last couple of days, they all met their goals for the
implementation on that, which is a terrific step forward. And
we have also issued a Further Notice on location accuracy,
because as wireless usage increases, and particularly, as it
replaces wire line connections inside and as GPS usage has
increased, there has been a fascinating reality that location
accuracy has actually declined. And we have got a Notice going
on, how do we address that, because that is literally a matter
of life and death.
As you mentioned, we began the 2014 Quadrennial Review on
media issues with an expedited delivery date. We closed a
loophole that was being exploited to get around the ownership
rules using Joint Services Agreements, and we brought
competition back to the retransmission consent negotiations.
We have also continued to press on the reform issues that
so many of you and I share in common as being important. Last
time we were together I told you we stood up a task force to
deal with this. That task force came back with 154
recommendations. About \3/4\ of those are now well along their
way to being in process. They kind of break into two parts:
there are procedural issues that you might associate with the
Administrative Procedure Act and things like this, and there is
also just how you make the agency more efficient.
And last week, as many have discussed, we opened a Notice
of Proposed Rulemaking on preserving and protecting the open
Internet. It is important to recognize that there are no
protections for an open Internet in place today. The January
court decision affirmed the Commission's authority under
Section 706 to deal with the open Internet and identified what
I call a ``roadmap'' for how to achieve that. And what I
proposed is a method that follows that roadmap.
I understand that there is a great debate on this issue. I
heard the debate here this morning between those who say there
is no need and those who say it ought to be a regulated
utility. What we have tried to do is to follow the court's
direction, the roadmap, the blueprint, and to come up with a
proposal that stops blocking, that prohibits anything that
degrades a consumer's access, including prioritization, that
asks a broader question about prioritization as to whether it
should be banned outright, and if so, how, and then engages in
the discussion that we have heard already this morning about
Title II versus 706 and collecting a broad scope of learned
information on that.
I have consistently said that there is only one Internet.
There is not a fast Internet and a slow Internet. There is not
a special services Internet. There is one Internet, and when
the consumer buys access to the Internet, they are buying
access to the full Internet. And that is what our rules attempt
to protect.
This has become a debate about legal approaches. It is a
healthy debate. It is a debate that our Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking furthers with multiple requests for input. But my
position has been similar to that of the Consumer Federation of
America and that is that we ought to explore the powers that
are granted in the '96 Act, specifically Section 706, keep
asking how Title II fits in, but develop a regulatory policy
that looks forward, not backward, because what we need is a
regulatory plan for the 21st Century. And I look forward to
discussing that with you, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
Committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wheeler follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Walden. Mr. Wheeler, Chairman, thank you for being
here. We appreciate your work and your willingness to come and
spend some time with us and respond to our questions.
I want to pick up on the Middle Class Tax Relief Act which,
as you know, was designed to create a forum where broadcasters
could volunteer their spectrum up for auction for mobile
broadband use. It has never been done quite like proposed, and
we all knew that going in. But it seemed like a good balance.
The critical term in all of this was that the broadcasters
would volunteer to put their spectrum up. They wouldn't be
forced into it. That was the agreement. Yet many of the actions
that we have seen coming out of the Commission would lead some
to believe that the FCC might be bullying broadcasters into
giving up spectrum without providing hard data and clear models
so that the broadcasters can thoroughly and thoughtfully
deliberate and choose to participate or not in this first-of-a-
kind auction.
Let me tell you what I am thinking here--for example, the
joint sales agreements that are now outlawed. These agreements
essentially offer broadcasters a viable business model in small
markets that would otherwise suffer from lack of service. You
are considering increasing the attribution value of UHF
stations such that more broadcasters could end up in violation
of the national cap under the Broadcast Ownership Rule. And the
FCC has failed to process broadcasters' petitions for
allocation changes from VHF to UHF even though the petitions
were filed prior to the Middle Class Tax Relief Act.
And finally, you are seeking to use the modified version of
OET-69. I am hearing about this to repack broadcasters. This
will likely result in reduced coverage for broadcasters that
choose to stay in the business, making the business itself less
viable. So the very people you are trying to incentive--to put
spectrum up so that it would be available for auction, I think
are concerned about where the Commission is headed in a number
of areas.
Can you explain to me how these actions will actually
encourage broadcasters to participate in this auction?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, I think the
goal here that we have been trying to follow is not to
discourage or to encourage but to follow through with our
responsibilities, and that means enforcing and updating our
rule----
Mr. Walden. Do you think any of the things I have just
cited encourage broadcasters to participate more? If you don't
have broadcasters showing up with spectrum----
Mr. Wheeler. So as I said, Mr. Chairman, I don't think
that--we have an important, as you said, an important and
historic role. This is an incentive auction.
Mr. Walden. I am aware of that, yes.
Mr. Wheeler. What we have tried to do in the Mobile
Spectrum Holdings Rule, for instance, is to encourage
broadcasters--encourage, I am sorry, wireless carriers to buy
which creates the incentive. The interesting thing, there was a
report by one of the Wall Street analysts last week who said we
expect the greatest risk to this auction, broadcasters not
showing up, just dropped. Because the fact that AT&T suggested
that they are ready to bid between $9 and $18----
Mr. Walden. Right.
Mr. Wheeler [continuing]. Billion for 20 to 40 megahertz,
this analyst said should send positive signals to broadcasters.
So our----
Mr. Walden. All right but----
Mr. Wheeler [continuing]. Goal is to create this
marketplace, and we are not trying to take regulatory action--
--
Mr. Walden. All right. Well----
Mr. Wheeler [continuing]. In unrelated areas that would----
Mr. Walden. But you are taking lots of regulatory actions,
and it does have an effect on the marketplace. I mean those two
are fact, the quadrennial review not complete, new decisions
being made on ownership. Without these things are out there. If
we don't have these broadcasters coming to the table
voluntarily, there won't be spectrum available.
So I want to steal a line from the distinguished gentleman
from Michigan, and this one I refer to as Mr. Dingell, to see
if I can get to sort of some yes or noes here. Will you commit
that the FCC will not score television stations based on their
enterprise value?
Mr. Wheeler. On their enterprise value? That is not our
intention, sir.
Mr. Walden. So that is a no. Or that is a yes, actually,
that you will commit that you will not score. Is that correct?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes.
Mr. Walden. Yes. You will commit the FCC will ensure that
broadcasters' costs to reallocate are covered by the $1.75
billion relocation fund?
Mr. Wheeler. We believe that that fund will be adequate.
Mr. Walden. OK.
Mr. Wheeler. That is what Congress told us to spend,
period.
Mr. Walden. And will you commit to completing frequency
coordination with Canada and Mexico before the auction?
Mr. Wheeler. I think the issue there is what is the term
``complete?'' As you know, on the DTV transition, it never came
down to actual signing on paper, but we understood where each
other was. And I am very confident that we will be at that kind
of a point.
Mr. Walden. Because that is critical. And will you commit
to revoking only those low-powered TV and translator licenses
that are necessary to complete the auction?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you. And I think I am out of time. So
with that, I will now yield to the gentlelady, my friend from
California, Ms. Eshoo.
Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A lot of things to
discuss, but I want to bore down or bore into some of the
particulars on your recent proposal relative to the Internet on
net neutrality.
I have argued, many advocates for net neutrality have
argued, that paid prioritization represents a fundamental
departure from the Internet as we know it, just kind of
restating what is obvious. But I think that when you have
hundreds of thousands of people communicating from across the
country to you on it, that it is important to raise.
Now, as a policy, not as a legal question, do you think
that paid prioritization should be blocked outright?
Mr. Wheeler. So I have said, Congresswoman, that I don't
believe there ought to be haves and have-nots----
Ms. Eshoo. No, no, just answer my question.
Mr. Wheeler [continuing]. That----
Ms. Eshoo. Just tell me. Do you think that it should be
blocked outright?
Mr. Wheeler. We have asked that question in the rulemaking,
and what I have said is that I believe that under Section 706,
anything that is anti-competitive or anti-consumer is
competitively unreasonable and therefore can, and should be,
blocked. And that becomes the trigger with how you deal with
paid prioritization.
Ms. Eshoo. Yes. Now, what happens----
Mr. Wheeler. And on the question, per se, that you have
asked, we specifically asked, how and whether.
Ms. Eshoo. Now, what happens if the FCC determines if there
is no way to create an outright ban on these paid agreements
under 706? Where does that leave you? Where does that leave the
country?
Mr. Wheeler. So when the court gave us our instructions,
they talked about what they called a ``virtuous cycle,'' and
that is that that content drives the need for conduit which
then creates the opportunity for content and that this cycle is
what is our responsibility to protect. And that's what 706
authorizes us to protect.
And so what my proposal is is that we take them up on that
and we say if there is something that interferes with that
virtuous cycle, which I believe paid prioritization does, then
we can move against it.
Ms. Eshoo. All right. But now let us move over to Title II.
Title II is described--it depends on who is describing it. It
is either a scourge--it has been compared to the early railroad
regulations in our country--to being the flip side, the savior
title. I talked about in my opening statement about one of the
imprimaturs of the Internet has been consistent innovation, and
while there are those that--and I understand why people would
move to Title II because they want the Internet protected and
these values, they are worth protecting. But I also believe
that there is room in Title II for heavy-handed regulation. And
I don't think that--well, let me put it this way. I think that
we need a light but strengthful legal touch in this because the
values are so essential, and people across the country and in
the world--I mean, I am hearing from people from different
parts of the world as well--are calling for these protections.
How would you envision, how would you handle constraint
under Title II----
Mr. Wheeler. Well----
Ms. Eshoo [continuing]. In terms of being the chief
regulator?
Mr. Wheeler. So as you know----
Ms. Eshoo. Have you give thought to this?
Mr. Wheeler. Pardon me?
Ms. Eshoo. Have you given thought to this?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Eshoo. OK. Go ahead.
Mr. Wheeler. And as you know----
Ms. Eshoo. As some people say, share it with me.
Mr. Wheeler. As you know, Title II--there is nothing in
Title II that prohibits paid prioritization. As a matter of
fact, we have all kinds of paid prioritization----
Ms. Eshoo. You are worrying me by bringing that up first.
But anyway, go ahead.
Mr. Wheeler. So the question, because it goes to your--I
think the root question of yours, which is, ``How do you
forebear from that,'' OK? And so it is possible to go through
and say, ``Yes, we will not do this, we will not do this, we
will not do this.'' In the wireless context, interestingly
enough, Congress created wireless as a common carrier, but then
specifically said, ``But this doesn't apply, and this doesn't
apply, and this doesn't apply, and this doesn't apply.'' We can
do that as a Commission as well. It has been proposed that that
is an approach to take.
There are also those who throw up their hands in great
concern over that because they say, ``OK, well, this Commission
may do this but what about the next Commission?'' And you can't
bind a future of Commission by making those kinds of
determinations.
So what we have done in this NPRM is to ask the specific
question about ``Here is Section 706, here is Title II, let us
compare them and contrast them with each other and tell us what
the pluses and minuses and the best ways to get through this
are.'' And I think that leads us to the kind of answer that you
are asking for today.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady's time is expired. We will go
now to the gentlelady from Tennessee, Ms. Blackburn, the Vice
Chair of the Full Committee, for her questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Wheeler,
we thank you for taking the time to come and be with us.
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you.
Mrs. Blackburn. You have got a feisty term going over there
at the FCC, and in Tennessee we would say you are kicking up a
little dust, and it is causing concern. Many of our content
creators have a tremendous amount of concern about your
approach, and many of our healthcare innovators who are looking
at apps and telemedicine concepts and things of that nature are
also expressing concern. And I think that probably your actions
have inserted a good bit of uncertainty into the innovation
sector that is looking at how we best utilize all things
Internet for quality of life and access for economic
development, for healthcare, for innovation.
And I have got just a couple of simple questions for you.
First of all, on cost-benefit analysis--and I thank you that
last night your team sent a letter over to us on that question.
But what concerned me was that in the letter you say that this
is just a tool. Cost-benefit analysis is just one of many tools
that would go into your decision, and your NPRM does not
include an initial cost-benefit analysis. And your predecessor,
Mr. Genachowski, in this committee, came before us and assured
us he was going to use this, and I am actually going to read
you his statement that he gave to us. He said, ``During my
tenure, I brought particular focus to this process including by
directing the early involvement of our chief economist in the
analytical process of rule-making and by having FCC staff
consult with the staff of the Office of Information and
Regulatory Affairs on best practices in conducting cost-benefit
analysis.''
And I think that it is an incredibly important component of
this to look at what the cost of net neutrality rules would be
to the consumer and also to industry. So I want to know from
you, are you going to give us a commitment right now that you
will conduct a thorough and extensive cost-benefit analysis of
the actual cost to the consumer and to industry on these rules?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, Ms. Blackburn. I agree that cost-
benefit analyses are crucial to decisionmaking, and in this
rule-making, we specifically ask what are the costs of one
approach or another and what are the benefits, one or another,
so that we can collect that information and have that kind of
analysis. I agree with the importance of cost-benefit analysis.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Let me ask you this also. You know, the
Commission's funding really comes from those that are regulated
by the FCC, but we have some that are not--they are impacted by
this but they are not regulated in paying those fees.
So in the net neutrality context, for example, companies
like Google and Netflix want the FCC to act on their behalf and
petition or visit the agency, if you will, in support of those
efforts, but they free-ride because they are not paying the
fees and bearing that part of the regulatory burden. So since
they seem so ready and willing to rely on regulation to help
them with their business models, how would you recommend that
those entities share in the cost, pay their part of the cost of
funding the agency?
Mr. Wheeler. With all respect, that is above my pay grade.
That is a decision that this Committee and the Congress can
make and setting those rules as to----
Mrs. Blackburn. I am asking what your----
Mr. Wheeler [continuing]. Who we can collect from.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. Recommendation would be. They
come and they lobby you, and they are pushing the net
neutrality rules. And while they may like what you are saying
because they want you to step in, we have a lot of people out
there who are paying the fees that are not in favor of what you
are doing, and we have a lot of innovators who are not in favor
of what you are doing. And your door has the name chairman on
it. So I am asking, what is your perspective?
Mr. Wheeler. So our effort in all of this is to represent
the American people, not Company A or Company B. We have been
told by the Congress from whom we can collect regulatory fees,
and we do. If there is a decision that we should collect
regulatory fees from somebody else, that is something we
obviously will take. If there is a decision that we should
expand regulatory authority over other entities, that is
obviously something we should do. But that is a decision that
is out of our hands.
Mrs. Blackburn. I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentlelady yields back. The chairman
recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms. Matsui, for her
questions.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I would
like to understand, given the success of the Internet in the
absence of prioritization, precisely what types of paid
prioritization you believe would speed the deployment and
adoption of broadband Internet access services? Given that paid
prioritization agreements would be used as a barrier of entry
to start-ups and small business, what prioritization
arrangements specifically would be better for the Internet than
the no prioritization norm we have today?
Mr. Wheeler. What we are trying to do in this item is to
say that anything that affects that virtuous cycle that the
court talked about and I talked about before, is not
appropriate, is unlawful, and that would include paid
prioritization. Now, the court told us to look at this on a
case-by-case basis. We have asked the question in the rule-
making as to whether we should look at it generically and say
it is all out, and we are soliciting comments on that.
But you know, the concept of paid prioritization, when I
buy Internet access, I am buying the full pipe. I am buying
access to everything that is out there. And if somebody comes
along and says, ``oh, no, you can't get this unless you pay
more,'' that is unreasonable, and should be banned. If somebody
comes along and says to a content provider, ``You can't get on
unless you pay more,'' that is unreasonable, and that would not
be permitted.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Well, as for my part, other than public
safety, I believe paid prioritization should be banned.
I also think another concern here is a last-mile equivalent
we are seeing appearing. The fact that there is so much
uncertainty with paid prioritization is troublesome. If this
concept moves forward, we could inadvertently block the next
Google or Amazon from the market without even knowing it. I am
concerned that your hands may be tied here. Even if the
Commission wanted to ban anti-competitive paid prioritization
deals, you may not have the authority or the tools to do so.
Chairman Wheeler, if you were to explain to my constituents
what is occurring in the market right now with the two mergers,
content peering agreements and now paid prioritization could be
legitimized under a commercially reasonable standard, what
would you tell them, not just what it means for them but also
for competition and for economy as a whole?
Mr. Wheeler. I would tell them that I felt that paid
prioritization was commercially unreasonable and therefore
could be dealt with. And on the question of peering, that that
is a separate issue that the Commission needs to look at and
will be looking at. But I would emphasize that I am a strong
supporter of the open Internet, and I would also tell them a
story that when I was an entrepreneur, I was shut out of cable
systems because they were closed networks. And I would come
with a new product and couldn't get on. And then when I was a
venture capitalist before taking this job, that the companies
that I was backing, had to have access to the Internet, could
only succeed if they had access to the Internet.
So I would say to them that I believe in an open Internet.
I have experienced closed networks and the harm they cause to
innovation and that I want to protect and preserve an open
Internet.
Ms. Matsui. You know, I think this is a very critical time.
When I have ordinary people practically off the street coming
to me and asking me about all these things they have heard
because people today really depend on the Internet, ordinary
citizens, the entrepreneurs who are concerned about this and
who else we might not know out there. So it is very concerning
to all of us that there is a potential that we may have a
situation where we won't have an open Internet.
And I would also like you to consider some of these
mergers. I mean, we feel like we are kind of in the Wild West
of the digital economy now, and now with mergers coming
forward--but can you commit to us these large mergers that are
before us, they may be different from each other, but can you
commit to us here that the FCC will carefully scrutinize these
deals with a focus toward public interest?
Mr. Wheeler. Without hesitation and with complete
affirmation.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Thank you. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Walden. The chair now recognizes the former chairman of
the Full Committee, Mr. Barton, for his questions.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to echo the
last question you lasted, Chairman Wheeler, about low-power
television. You and I are working on a bill hopefully to give
them some protection. We understand under current law they
don't have standing when they repackage, but we hope to give
them some at least priority or help if and when we do do these
repackaging of the spectrums. So I want to commend you for that
last question.
I have listened, Chairman Wheeler, to my friends on the
Democratic side repeatedly talk about the open Internet and
whether you should try to regulate it under Section 706 or
Title II. I think you are asking a false question. The Internet
is open. The question is what does the FCC do in terms of
monitoring to make sure that it stays open?
And the analogy I am going to use is not perfect, but I
think it is instructive and educational. The airways that we
fly back and forth from Washington to our districts are open,
but they are regulated and monitored for a number of reasons by
the FAA. If I call up American Airlines and I say I want to go
from Washington Reagan to DFW and they quote me a price, let us
say it is $350 one way. Well, when I show up with my ticket, I
get one seat on that plane. I don't get to take 100 of my
friends and put them on the plane with me because I happened to
buy the ticket first and show up first.
So it is obvious that it would be great for $350 if I could
fill the plane. But we allow the airlines to price by volume.
You want one ticket? It is $350. You want two tickets? It is
$700. Maybe if you want to buy the whole plane, they do give
you a discount. It is only $250. But we don't let the first
person to buy the ticket use the whole plane for $350.
And for all the bold talk about open access, what people
are really trying to do is, you know, I want to pay a minimum
price and get all this broadband and I want to download
everything from Netflix and I don't want to pay if I download
every movie they rent or vice versa. Netflix pays a basic
price, and they can service 10 million people instead of
whatever it would be.
So you know, the broadband providers who have spent
billions and billions of dollars and have networked this
country and provided access through the competitive market
principles are not going to somehow all of a sudden decide as
long as the FCC under your chairmanship make sure that it stays
a competitive model. They are going to continue to provide an
open Internet, but they may want to provide based on volume of
use some sort of a pricing system that allocates if it is in a
limited spectrum.
I see no reason to try to shoehorn some sort of a
regulatory approach into either Title II or Section 706. You
know, explain to me why my approach which is what we have been
doing which works is the wrong approach?
Mr. Wheeler. Let me see if I can respond to both parts of
your question. First, , as I said to the Chairman, we did not
want to move those whoon LPTV don't have to be moved as a part
of it. We also believe that there are opportunities to go to
digital and the new efficiencies that that brings, just like it
did in the Class A stations. And thirdly, we are opening a new
rule-making to specifically deal with that because we agree
with the importance of low power and translators.
To the second part of your question, let me take the
Chairman's hat off and put my consumer hat on for a second
because two weekends ago I called my ISP and increased my
capacity because I wanted faster through-put. And they said for
another $10 a month, we will give you another, what turned out
to be like, 20 Meg. That is a marketplace transaction. That is
something that is accepted now. That is not something that is
part of the open Internet rules.
What the open Internet rules are trying to say is that when
I buy that capacity, I have bought that ride to every place on
the Internet, that somebody can't turn around and say, ``Oh,
but you can't say that,'' or somebody can't turn around and
say, ``Well, you can deliver that, Tom, but you have got to pay
me an extra fee.''
And so the concept of the open Internet is that I have
bought this broad pathway, and I have the right to use it
unfettered on an open basis and that is what we are trying to
deliver in this rule-making.
Mr. Barton. I am not trying--my time is expired. I am not
trying to oppose that, but if you want--you are looking at it
from the consumers' standpoint, and I accept that, that
everybody should have access. But if you are a provider of
content, you should be willing to pay more based on the number
of items you are going to put at any given time on the open
Internet so that everybody has access to it. Because if you
have a constrained pipeline, somebody has to make a decision
how you put things into the pipeline, whether it is the
airplane, whether it is the airwaves or the Internet.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the former chairman on the Democratic side, Mr.
Waxman, for his questions.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Wheeler, I
commended your leadership earlier in my opening statement about
the spectrum auction, so I want to ask questions about a
different subject and that is net neutrality.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Waxman. I commend you for tackling this issue and for
seeking comment on a broad range of issues. But I have serious
concerns about some proposals that have been discussed.
You have said that there would be presumption against
broadband providers like Verizon, AT&T and Comcast, entering
into arrangements that give exclusive advantages to their
affiliates. Is that right?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Waxman. OK. What I don't understand is why this
presumption against exclusive arrangements would be limited to
affiliates. Suppose Netflix entered into an exclusive
arrangement with AT&T or Comcast for faster speeds for its
videos that block competitors like Amazon Prime from getting
similar services. I think that would be a serious threat to
competition and an open Internet, yet your proposal does not
create a presumption against these exclusive arrangements.
Why would you allow any exclusive arrangement that
guarantees some content providers faster speeds than
competitors can access?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, Mr. Waxman. This goes back to this
virtuous cycle that the court talked about. You know, it was
interesting. Yesterday in the Wall Street Journal there was an
article that interviewed a bunch of infrastructure
manufacturers about the impact of net neutrality, and they
flat-out said that if you offer fast lanes for some, you are
going to degrade service for others. I think that is at the
heart of what we are talking about here. That would be
commercially unreasonable under our proposal.
Mr. Waxman. OK. The problem with exclusive arrangements is
that they would let some companies block their competition from
similar advantages. In markets where there is no or only
limited choices of broadband providers, that would stifle
openness in competition. I just want to say to you that I am
opposed to any form of paid prioritization. Paid prioritization
divides the Internet into the haves and the have-nots, and it
will entrench the big companies at the expense of start-ups. My
understanding is that you have asked comment on a multi-
factored test for determining when paid prioritization is
permissible and when it would be prohibited. My concern is that
this will create a lot of ambiguity and a lot of litigation. I
believe right lines would be much better for the market and for
innovation.
So I am going to ask you to consider a presumption against
all paid prioritization as you develop final rules. Will you
agree to consider this option?
Mr. Wheeler. Absolutely, and we have asked in the NPRM
specifically whether and if so, how do you accomplish it. So
that is a ripe debate that is in the NPRM right now, sir.
Mr. Waxman. My understanding is that the reason you have
proposed a complicated, multi-factored test is concern about
the court ruling, and I agree that if you are limited to acting
under Section 706, your options could be limited. But if you
are not limited to Section 706, you could establish a
presumption against paid prioritization under Title II. And
that is why it is so important for you to use your Title II
authority as backstop authority. You don't have to settle for
weak open Internet rules if you exercise your full powers, and
I am glad you are looking at that possibility.
Let me close by thanking you for seeking comment on the
backstop proposal in the proposal adopted last week. I am
committed to working with you to ensure the Commission adopts
strong and open Internet protections for consumers and
innovators while encouraging continued investment in the online
content and services we all rely on and enjoy today. I think it
is important that we get the substance right. We have tried
three times, we meaning you at the FCC, because of the concern
that the consumer have full access to what is on the Internet
and full access to be able to use the Internet to its greatest
maximum potential. And I would hate to see that net neutrality
in any way be diminished if we have an opportunity under the
law as we look at it to make sure that we get the substance
right.
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back his time. I now turn
to the distinguished gentleman from Ohio, the vice chair of the
Subcommittee, Mr. Latta.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
again, Chairman Wheeler, thanks very much again for being here.
There has been some discussion on Title II, and I would like to
follow up on some of that questioning.
The central premise of Title II regulation has always been
that the regulation was a substitute for competition. And two
parts for the question then. What types of findings has the
Commission made to justify entertaining the idea of Title II
regulation of the Internet? And then do you believe the FCC
should have to make a specific showing that of a market failure
before imposing rate regulation or reporting requirements that
are the precursor to rate regulation?
Mr. Wheeler. So again, these are the kinds of questions
that we have tried assiduously not to decide on but to ask
about in this rule-making. We are going to have to make a
decision on exactly those questions at some point in time, but
what we want to achieve is a record that gives everybody the
opportunity to opine on that so that we can be appropriately
informed.
Mr. Latta. Well, let me ask, what is your timeline on that
then?
Mr. Wheeler. So we have got 60 days for comments and then
45 days for reply comments.
Mr. Latta. OK. So are you saying then that you are not
ruling out rate regulation?
Mr. Wheeler. I am saying we have asked the question about
Title II and the full panoply of Title II, yes, sir.
Mr. Latta. OK. Well, let me ask you this. What have you
been hearing from the communities thus far, especially when you
are saying that you are going to be asking those questions?
What have you been hearing out there?
Mr. Wheeler. Well, we have heard very little on the record
thus far. There has been a great outpouring of people speaking
to us through the press, people speaking to us through letters
and this sort of thing. And as I indicated at the outset, there
are two diametrically opposed positions. One is that you should
not do anything and the other is that it should go all the way
to being regulated like a public utility. And our job is to
find that which is best for consumers and best for encouraging
investment in the Internet which itself is best for consumers.
Mr. Latta. Let me go on with this question. While you have
resolved some of the issues in the 5 gigahertz rule-making,
there are a number of issues outstanding that have the
potential to open up another 195 megahertz of spectrum for
unlicensed use. What is the FCC's and your plan for tackling
that open issue?
Mr. Wheeler. In 5 gig?
Mr. Latta. Right.
Mr. Wheeler. So there is--you actually think about 5 gig in
3 bits. The first bit we have dealt with, that is the lower end
of 5 gigahertz. In the middle component of 5 gigahertz, there
are lots of national defense kinds of activities, radar and
this sort of thing. And the question is, how can you work out
sharing arrangements there, and we are working with those
parties.
On the upper end is where you have spectrum that has been
identified for intelligent traffic, ITFS, kinds of activities,
and that is based around the 802.11 standard. There are strong
feelings about the need to protect that. I believe that it is
possible to work together to meet both sets of needs since it
is based around a common 802.11 standard.
Mr. Latta. And in my remaining time, I want to ask this
last question. The FCC's 2011 Universal Service Transformation
Order requires phone companies to set minimum prices that they
can charge the consumers if the provider wants to continue
receiving the same amount of funds from the USF program to
support the high cost of its business. So as a result, many
rural consumers, a lot that I represent out there, will see the
rate floor go from $14 to about $20.46. And while the
Communications Act requires rural rates to be reasonably
comparable to rates in urban areas as affordable, reasonable
comparable does not necessarily mean that the rural rate should
be exactly the same as the urban rate when the rural customer
might be able to call only a few thousand people locally while
an urban customer can call many times more than that.
Should the rate be the same in the rural areas where the
average income is significantly lower, then it might in fact
not be as affordable. The rate floor continues to be a concern
for many of our telecommunications providers in my district and
others servicing rural America. While I understand that the FCC
has agreed to phase-in the increase at $2 per year and postpone
that start date until after 2015, can you explain why the FCC
interpreted the reasonably comparable rates to mean exactly the
same rates between urban and rural areas considering the
smaller population of rural calling areas and the fact that
what is affordable in the largest urban areas is not what is
also affordable to consumers in the rural?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you. I am glad you asked that question.
It is an important question. So as you stated, we are supposed
to make sure that things are reasonably comparable. The reason
for that is to make sure that the subsidies that some Americans
are paying to deliver service to other Americans don't end up
being subsidies that some Americans are paying to reduce the
bills of other Americans but to overcome the high cost of
getting to them.
In some instances, it has been, unfortunately, the former.
In 16 states there are situations where some consumers are
paying $5 a month for telephone service because they are being
subsidized by people in your district and other districts. We
need to get our arms around that. So what we have done is to
say, OK, step one goes into effect January 15. Then what we are
going to do is--and that can't be more than $2 by the way. And
then what we are going to do is go back out with another survey
that hits the kind of granularity you were talking about in
terms of service and including long distance and all these
kinds of things so that we have a better understanding of
exactly what comparable means, and then look at that issue
again.
Mr. Latta. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, my time is expired, and
I yield back.
Mr. Walden. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the chairman emeritus of the committee, the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Dingell.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy. I
commend you for holding this hearing. I would like to welcome
our old friend, Mr. Wheeler, back; fine public servant, and we
are looking forward to good things from him.
Mr. Chairman, at last week's open meeting, the Commission
adopted a number of big-ticket items including a new net
neutrality NPRM and draft rules for the upcoming incentive
auction of broadcaster spectrum. Concerning the former, I
commend you for your efforts to keep the Internet open and will
be watching the matter closely as it goes forward. It is my
hope the Commission will work with this committee to ensure
that any final action it takes to conform to its statutory
authority, especially concerning Title II, reclassification.
Now, with respect to the incentive auction, I am interested
in what the Commission intends to do about treating
broadcasters fairly. My questions will require a simple yes or
no answer.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I would like to begin with a
parochial matter. Section 6403(b)(1) of the Middle Class Tax
Relief and Job Creation Act specifies that the Commission may,
subject to international coordinates along the border with
Mexico and Canada, reassign and relocate and reallocate
broadcast frequencies. Is that correct?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Now Chairman Wheeler, in the Commission's July
2013 response to my letter of inquiry about the reverse
auction, Gary Epstein, head of the Commission's Incentive
Auction Task Force stated the following. The language used in
Section 6403(b)(1) of the Act is ``identical to that used by
the Commission in describing its handling of the earlier DTV
transition in which the Commission adopted our proposed
allotments for these stations subject to our continuing
negotiations with Canada, notwithstanding the broadcasters'
requests to the contrary.'' One here could reasonably assume
based on the statement that the Commission may reassign and
reallocate broadcast frequencies pursuant to the Act while in
negotiations with Canada and Mexico are still ongoing. Is that
correct?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. I am going to ask you to submit for the record
how you are going to assure protection to the broadcasters and
the viewers in that process.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Mr. Wheeler, does the Commission believe
that concluding negotiations with Canada and Mexico prior to
commencing the reverse auction will give broadcasters,
particularly in border regions, greater certainties and likely
to increase their willingness to participate in such auction?
Yes or no.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Mr. Wheeler, does the Commission expect
to conclude negotiations with Canada and Mexico prior to
commencing the reverse action next year? Yes or no.
Mr. Wheeler. The expectation is it is the goal.
Mr. Dingell. You may not make it is what you are saying.
Mr. Wheeler. It is the goal, and I answered you in your
previous question----
Mr. Dingell. Will you notify this committee as soon as that
becomes likely or dangerous?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Now, in this matter, Mr. Chairman, I would
like to state for the record that it is my understanding based
on exchange with counsel at the Energy & Commerce Subcommittee
on Communications and Technology, December 1, 2011, markup of
the act that border negotiations are to be completed before the
Commission reassigns broadcast channels. I hope that Chairman
Wheeler will honor that understanding. I hope, Mr. Chairman,
you understand I have great apprehensions about that because of
the impacts it could have on the broadcasters and also on my
constituents.
Mr. Wheeler. Mr. Chairman, this is--I share your deep
concern about this, not only because of the very legitimate
concern you have about your constituents and other Americans
getting service along the border but also that the
cantilevering effect, if you will, as spectrum allocation then
goes into the middle of the country.
I can assure you this is an incredibly high priority. I can
also assure you that our Canadian colleagues have been very
forthcoming and very helpful.
Mr. Dingell. I would like to have this submitted for the
record in response to correspondence. Now, Mr. Chairman, I note
that the Commission proposes to use a method called ``scoring''
to set individual prices for each broadcast station
participating in the reverse auction. Is that correct? Yes or--
--
Mr. Wheeler. It is one of the things we are considering. We
have not made the final decision yet.
Mr. Dingell. There are others?
Mr. Wheeler. We are looking at others. Scoring----
Mr. Dingell. I am going to ask that you submit in response
to correspondence a proper answer on that particular point.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Chairman Wheeler, is the Commission
concerned that scoring as opposed to competitive bidding will
decrease broadcasters' willingness to participate in the
reverse auction? Yes or no.
Mr. Wheeler. No.
Mr. Dingell. Chairman Wheeler, in general, do you intend to
work in good faith with broadcasters as the Commission refines
the rules for reverse auction in order to see to it that their
needs are met as the act specifies to the best of your
abilities? Yes or no.
Mr. Wheeler. Absolutely.
Mr. Dingell. I want to quote Admiral Rickover, who once
observed, ``The devil is in the details but so is salvation.''
I am hoping that you are going to see that the salvation is
there and not just that we are going to find ourselves amidst
trouble because of carelessness, not by you, but by some of
your overenthusiastic and less-than-competent predecessors.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Latta [presiding]. The gentleman's time is expired and
has yielded back. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Chairman Wheeler,
welcome. I am going to try to get this through three pretty
quick points if I can. As you know, there is a lot of concern
on this side of the dais on this Title II debate.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. And the basic premise is, for me, how do you
build out? We want more, not less. Does a regulated monopoly
incentivize more build-out, more pipelines? Or does a
competitive, capital-intensive incentivize market-driven
process? I believe the second. We have gone from copper to
cable, coaxial cable, satellite, cellular, fiber, a lot of
different ways for data to now flow, and we want to encourage
that. And I think only--I kind of like the idea of
incentivizing people who want to use more, making them pay
more, to incentivize those who carry so someone may want to
build out more. So that is where I kind of where I come from.
My position is more pipes, not less. More pipes, not regulated
pipe. Competitive markets versus controlled markets.
Because here is an example of a recent--on May 16, a
Wireline Competition Bureau released a public notice seeking
comment on state regulation of dial-up Internet traffic. Dial-
up? I mean, this is a dinosaur. It is hardly used.
You want to talk about uncertainty for the state and for
the providers when we are still in this process more than 15
years after the FCC first discussed the treatment of dial-up,
we are now to this process? That is just kind of a statement.
That doesn't create certainty. Would you agree?
Mr. Wheeler. Well, what we are trying to do, Mr. Shimkus,
is to create an environment that assures consumers and those
who rely on the Internet that there is openness, while at the
same point in time encouraging investment and----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, let us just go back. I get that. But
this is dial-up.
Mr. Wheeler. So if we are dealing with the dial-up issue, I
mean, that is really--that is a different topic----
Mr. Shimkus. Well, it is but it is not because it is the
whole debate about certainty, and we actually have a dinosaur
application that--why are we even----
Mr. Wheeler. So we still have 40 percent of our consumers
on dial-up telephone lines. One of the challenges that we have
is, how do we evolve that into an all-IP environment which
would be an Internet-like environment? And one of the things
that I have said to this Committee is that we believe that this
IP transition is a crucial part in helping to make sure----
Mr. Shimkus. OK. I get it. I am going to try to move----
Mr. Wheeler. OK. Sorry, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. And one deals in both of our sweet spot is
kind of the public service, 911----
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. The Spectrum Act called for the
creation of the Do Not Call Registry and the automatic dialing
issue. The Commission keeps saying there is not enough money to
do this. I would ask you to check into that. I think there is a
lot of money in the FCC because obviously, this automatic
dialing freezes up lines and it is a public safety concern, and
I would hope that we would work together to try to--you would
take this----
Mr. Wheeler. I would look forward to that, sir.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. Under consideration.
Mr. Wheeler. Let me get back, and I will come----
Mr. Shimkus. And you know, myself and the ranking member
have been better involved in these issues----
Mr. Wheeler. Right.
Mr. Shimkus [continuing]. As you have in the early days
also. The last thing I want to, from rural America, is kind of
there seems to be a de facto freeze on this shared service
agreements, and this is in the broadcast sector, as you know,
the local. When you represent \1/3\ of the State of Illinois as
I do now, 33 counties, these shared agreements are now helping
to provide--and we have got real-world cases--better local
service to the local folks than less. And I guess the basic
question in my last minute is, what is your plan to ensuring
that the FCC action on television transfer application is
predictable, consistent, fair and timely?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, Mr. Shimkus. What we have done is
to put out a Public Notice on how we look at transfers, and I
consider this to be a procedural reform because the way it used
to be was broadcasters would come together in some kind of a
merger situation, and they would come to the Commission which
was a black box that was constantly changing--``Well, we will
look at it this way, we will look at it that way.'' And what I
wanted to do was to say, ``OK, what are the things that we will
look at?'' So that everybody has notice, everybody understands,
and it is not a black box. And that is the process that we have
now established to be able to make those kinds of decisions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you. I know my time has expired. I
appreciate it if you would keep me in mind as these things move
forward. It would be helpful.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Latta. The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Colorado, Ms. DeGette, for 5 minutes.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to follow up,
Chairman Wheeler, on this discussion about the open Internet
NPRM. Leading up to the Commission's vote last week, there was
a robust public exchange among ISPs and edge providers and
others about the impact of paid prioritization on their
business models, and as Ms. Matsui said, we have been hearing
from a lot of our constituents about this as well. Now, you
talked very briefly a few minutes ago about what the FCC is
doing in its review process to look at the effect of paid
prioritization on consumers' broadband bills. I was wondering
if you can comment about what you think the proposed open
Internet rules will have on access to new and innovative
content on line? Because that is one reason why we are
concerned about these proposed rules.
Mr. Wheeler. They each should be encouraging of new and
innovative programming because of the fact that it assures that
they will be able to reach the consumer unfettered and without
having to pay special fees.
Ms. DeGette. And what impact do you think that the rules
will have on average broadband speeds, network investments and
overall quality of service?
Mr. Wheeler. That is a terrific question.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
Mr. Wheeler. I am glad you asked it. You know, one of the
fascinating things is that in 2010, when the open Internet
rules were first proposed, since then there has been hundreds
of millions of dollars of broadband investment made. So the
rules don't seem to have a chilling effect. And speeds have
been doing this, going up. And this is what the court was
talking about when they talk about this virtuous cycle because
everything--in the Internet ecosystem, everything adds to
everything else.
Ms. DeGette. So what do you think that the new rules, what
effect will they have on these issues?
Mr. Wheeler. I believe----
Ms. DeGette. You just talked about what has been happening.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, we are----
Ms. DeGette. What about your rules?
Mr. Wheeler. We believe that the rules that we have
designed will continue to encourage investment in broadband,
continue to encourage increases in through-put, and as a result
continue to encourage innovation from edge providers.
Ms. DeGette. And so are you saying also then average
broadband speeds will increase?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. DeGette. And overall quality of service will increase?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, ma'am. They need to.
Ms. DeGette. All right. OK. One last thing no one has
raised yet is the issue of industry consolidation, and this
year we have seen two major merger proposals in the telecom
industry. Now, clearly the industry is going through a period
of significant technological and economic change, and some
folks think that consolidation is the best approach to this.
So all things being equal, do you think industry
consolidation is good or bad for the consumers?
Mr. Wheeler. So I read the other day that this is
probably--in the last decade the biggest year for telecom
mergers. And what we are doing is opening a record on each of
them, and we will make that decision based on the record that
is developed for each----
Ms. DeGette. So you don't have an opinion at this point?
Mr. Wheeler. I would not want to prejudge the record.
Ms. DeGette. OK. And as you know, Congress has recognized
the importance and unique character of the telecommunications
marketplace by giving the FCC the authority to review mergers
under the public interest standard. Do you think the conditions
the FCC placed on the Comcast/NBC U merger were effective at
promoting the public interest?
Mr. Wheeler. Oh, wow. That is something that, a decision
that my predecessor made. I know that it had an impact. My goal
is to look at the record that is presented before me and my
colleagues and make a decision based on that.
Ms. DeGette. Do you think it promoted the public interest?
Yes or no.
Mr. Wheeler. I think that there were multiple things in it
that promoted the public interest.
Ms. DeGette. And what other lessons do you take away from
the Commission's previous attempts to promote the public
interest by placing conditions on mergers as you go forward?
Mr. Wheeler. That it is an important role that the
Commission has. You know, there is a lot of discussion as to
why should there be any authority at the FCC to look at public
interest obligations. I strongly believe that there is a big
difference between the kind of statutory rigidity that the
Justice Department is required to look at mergers with and the
kind of broader public interest issues that you have raised
that the statute asks the FCC to look at.
Ms. DeGette. Mr. Chairman, I would just ask if you could
supplement your testimony with some specific takeaways that
this has given you.
Mr. Wheeler. Great.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latta. The gentlelady yields back. The chair now
recognizes----
Mr. Walden. Would you yield a second?
Mr. Latta. The chair recognizes the chairman.
Mr. Walden. I just wanted to clarify one thing, make sure I
heard it right.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Walden. Did you say 40 percent of Americans are still
using dial-up for Internet access?
Mr. Wheeler. No, I am talking about dial-up phone service
at large.
Mr. Walden. All right, because I was thinking it is more
like 3 percent.
Mr. Wheeler. No, dial-up phone service at large.
Mr. Walden. Thank you much.
Mr. Latta. Thank you for clarifying that, sir. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Nebraska for 5 minutes, Mr.
Terry.
Mr. Terry. Well, it is good to know that my 82-year-old is
in those 3 percent. That makes him very elite. I am trying to
talk him out of that, but that is a work in progress.
Mr. Wheeler. We all remember those days when we were
thrilled to get 56 KB, right?
Mr. Terry. So switching gears just a little bit, I want to
ask about quantile regression analysis progress, and I do think
that you have probably captured its deficiencies better than
anyone else has, and I appreciate that work. I was glad to see
the Commission's follow-up by repealing the QRA formula.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Terry. So congratulations. I appreciate that. I am
curious on your thoughts of how it should be replaced, and if
you could walk me through what factors are going to be used in
any decision-making and timetables and process.
Mr. Wheeler. I respect the question, but I can't really
answer it right now because we are in the process of--there are
several proposals. We are in the process of looking at what the
best components of each are, and I don't want to hip shoot
here, but we do have proceedings under way to say, ``OK. What
is it we replace QRA with?''
Mr. Terry. Where are we within the process of those?
Mr. Wheeler. I think that we are probably heading into
something that you would see before fall.
Mr. Terry. Before fall?
Mr. Wheeler. Early fall.
Mr. Terry. OK.
Mr. Wheeler. Football season.
Mr. Terry. Well, I don't want to get distracted.
Mr. Wheeler. Well, if you joined the Big 10----
Mr. Terry. Do that when we play McNeese State, and I would
appreciate it.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Terry. For the rest of you, that was humor. Now, let me
go to a broadcast question since we succinctly dealt with one I
thought would take all of 5 minutes. The spectrum bill that was
authorized and incentive auction and passed through the
committee was a bipartisan bill. Unfortunately, the order that
recently removed the FCC was not bipartisan, and some
Commissioners, particularly Republicans, stated that the order
treats TV broadcasters that choose not to participate in the
auction unfairly, and that has me concerned. Congress set aside
the 1.75 to reimburse broadcasters forced to move. Part of the
incentive auctions are aimed to fully recover their expenses.
Why did the FCC not adopt the number as its repacking budget
and ensure that broadcasters would not have to go out of pocket
when forced to the FCC to move?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you. Congress said $1.75 billion is the
max that can be spent on repacking. We think that will be
sufficient. There have been broadcasters who have expressed a
concern that it might not be sufficient. So we have said, ``OK,
we don't think that's going to happen, but we will put in place
a process that will have a structure in place if and when that
should happen.'' Sir, I don't expect that we are going to get
there.
Mr. Terry. All right. I will yield back my time.
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Latta. The gentleman yields back, and the chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Utah, Mr. Matheson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Matheson. Thanks, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Wheeler, thanks
for your testimony. I appreciator your candor and your
articulate way you answer questions.
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Matheson. I just want to commend you on your efforts to
open up more spectrum for unlicensed uses. The FCC took an
important step last month by opening up the 100 megahertz
spectrum for unlicensed uses in the 5 gigahertz band, and I am
pleased to see in your testimony that the FCC is actively
participating in ongoing efforts to free up additional
unlicensed spectrum in the 5 gigahertz band. Can you provide an
update on where things currently stand with resolving the
technical issues in the ITS band currently used for vehicle-to-
vehicle communications and the parts of the band used by the
DOD for military radar?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes. So as we talked earlier, there are three
slices to 5 gigahertz. There is the lower slice that we took
care of. The middle, as you suggest, is DOD. We are having
ongoing discussions with them. I have been personally involved
in those discussions about a wide range of spectrum issues
including this. There are strongly held beliefs on both sides,
sir. I continue to believe, however, that people of good faith
can find answers if you sit at the table long enough, and that
is the goal.
Insofar as the high band in 5 gig, yes, that is intelligent
transportation, which offers such great opportunities. We have
seen the Google smart car and all this sort of thing. The thing
that is really encouraging is that that is an 802 type of
standard. It is not a dissimilar reality, however, where we
need to make sure that people are sitting around the table
looking for commonalities rather than looking for differences.
Mr. Matheson. Something we ought to do around Congress a
little more.
Mr. Wheeler. But you have a little experience. You have a
little experience.
Mr. Matheson. It's an editorial--on my part, yes.
Mr. Wheeler. But that's the goal of what we are trying to
do here.
Mr. Matheson. Do you have a timeframe for when this
additional spectrum could be freed up?
Mr. Wheeler. I wish I did. I would be misleading you, sir,
if I gave you a date right now.
Mr. Matheson. I understand. Another issue I wanted to
mention, the administration's Connect Ed Program----
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Matheson [continuing]. The goal to bring 100 megabit
broadband to every school in the United States. To the extent
that this initiative is implemented through the E-Rate program,
what can the Commission do to maximize efficiency and get the
most bang for the buck?
Mr. Wheeler. Wow. Thank you. Great question. There were
multiple challenges in that. One is that we need to spend our
money, the people's money, on 21st Century high-speed broadband
solutions, not 20th Century solutions like dial-up telephone
service and long distance. Right now about half of the $2
billion, $2.4 billion that is being spent is spent for old
stuff.
Mr. Matheson. Not today?
Mr. Wheeler. Today. Today. Second part is that we have to
design a system that helps schools and library administrators
find their way through the maze that is telecom. We put them in
those jobs to educate students, not to be telecom wizzes. So we
are trying to develop a process that says, here is what you
ought to be paying. Here is what somebody next door is paying.
Here is like situated--so that they can go in and understand
where their bargaining position is. We are going to be talking
about being able to have longer contracts because buying it on
a monthly basis as we all know is the worst way to buy. So let
us talk about several years. We are going to be encouraging
consortia so that you can buy in bulk and get better prices,
and I just think that there are a myriad of things that we can
do to get more efficiency out of the existing bucks, and we
intend to do that.
Mr. Matheson. That is great. Does the FCC plan on using the
national broadband map to identify fiber that is already in
place in a given community so it could be leveraged toward
these Connect Ed goals?
Mr. Wheeler. Absolutely, and we have now taken over
ownership of the broadband map, so yes, sir.
Mr. Matheson. OK. I appreciate that. I will yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back the balance of his time, and the chair now recognizes the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, and good afternoon to you.
I believe that some of my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle would prefer a Title II reclassification, and if the
Commission were to decide to proceed in that direction, I am
concerned that it might trigger a lot of ill-fitting
regulations that might not make sense in the context of these
services.
In your opinion, Chairman, would the process of going
through forbearance to separate the wheat from the chaff, could
it be a messy exercise and might it lead to more years of
litigation and uncertainty is my real concern, sir?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, Congressman. That is one of the
things that gets teed up in the NPRM when we ask about Title II
versus Section 706. And I presume that that will be
exhaustively discussed in the responses. And that is exactly
the kinds of questions that we are asking.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. One concern has been raised about the
proposed net neutrality rule, making the protections that would
be afforded companies who use a carrier who is providing the
same service as another carrier. For example, the large
carriers are beginning to bundle services that go well beyond
phone service, the Internet and television, to include smart
home services such as temperature control, home health
monitoring, which of course is important to another
subcommittee of this committee, as well as alarm services such
as monitoring of home intrusions and fires, video surveillance
or personal emergency response systems. What protections will
the FCC provide to ensure that a carrier does not give its
service provider a preference over a company using them as a
broad-based carrier?
Mr. Wheeler. I am not sure I exactly understand what--your
concern is will there be preferences----
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Mr. Wheeler [continuing]. Among providers of those
services?
Mr. Lance. Yes, Chairman.
Mr. Wheeler. That is contrary to the concept of an open
Internet.
Mr. Lance. Can you assure us and through us, the American
people, that that will not be the case as these other services
are provided moving forward?
Mr. Wheeler. Let me give you an example personally.
Mr. Lance. Yes, sir.
Mr. Wheeler. I just switched out ADT in my home security
system for another company, and I was able to access both of
them over the Internet and both of them over my mobile device.
And there should be no interference with my ability to move
from ADT to the other provider.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. And that is the goal of the
Commission and you will assure us that that is how we will
proceed moving forward?
Mr. Wheeler. It is open. There needs to be open access for
all providers.
Mr. Lance. Well, thank you. I look forward to working with
you. I understand you are a proud graduate of Ohio State.
Mr. Wheeler. You bet. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lance. Please be gentle with Rutgers now that Rutgers
has entered the Big whatever-it-is, the Big 16 or whatever it
is.
Mr. Wheeler. It is the Big 10 that can't count.
Mr. Lance. The Big 10 that can't count. I defer back to the
chairman the balance of my time, a proud representative from
Ohio.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much for the gentleman
yielding back the balance of his time. The chair now recognizes
the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Butterfield, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you very much the gentleman for
yielding time, and thank you, Chairman Wheeler, for your
service and thank you for your testimony today.
Mr. Wheeler. You are welcome.
Mr. Butterfield. I especially thank you for your clarity. I
told you that the first time that I met you, and whenever I
hear you speak, it is unambiguous, at least until the subject
of your home security system comes up. And then you are a
little ambiguous on who the new provider is. But thank you so
very much.
Mr. Chairman, in the Communications Act, Congress mandated
that the Commission ensure diverse participation in media and
telecom, and that includes participation of minority and women-
owned businesses. The quote from the statute basically says
that the mandate is ``to promote economic opportunity and
competition by disseminating licenses among a wide variety of
applicants including small businesses, rural telecoms and
businesses owned by members of minority groups and women.''
It seems to me that the response of the Commission to
judicial criticism of the FCC's inaction in this area and the
lack of meaningful study in progress as well as the low level
of minority and women-owned participation in media and telecom
licensing, that the Commission it seems to me is not committed
to these diversity goals. And if I am wrong about this, I would
ask that you correct me.
On May the 14th, members of the Congressional Black Caucus
including Congressman Rush and myself, addressed these
diversity concerns in a letter to you. I suppose the letter may
not have made its way to your desk yet, but I ask that you look
at it very carefully when you do.
Question, what precisely do you need beyond the
congressional directives and judicial criticism to get the
Commission to make progress in creating opportunities for
diverse communities?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, Congressman, and I got the letter
this morning, so thank you.
Mr. Butterfield. OK.
Mr. Wheeler. First of all, I agree that we have a mandate
to have a broad swath of opportunity for all Americans to
participate in all aspects of telecommunications. I can assure
you that that is a goal of mine. Now, let us talk about some
specifics. Number one, I think what we did on the JSAs in the
broadcast space actually opens up opportunities for minority
and small operators. That is why it was supported by more than
a dozen representative minority groups.
Secondly is we are going to move on the AWS-3 auction to
make sure that there are appropriate steps taken to assure that
minorities can participate through waivers and other kinds of
processes in that auction.
Thirdly, we are going to have, and I should pause in all of
these to call out Commissioner Clyburn who has been the
constant pusher on all of these issues. There will be rules for
the incentive auction that will create bidding credits for
appropriate designated entities. And I very much take to heart,
both as an institutional responsibility and as a personal
responsibility, the language that you read.
Mr. Butterfield. And so when the spectrum is auctioned, you
are making a commitment that diversity will be an overriding
concern of the Commission?
Mr. Wheeler. So what we want to do is make sure that there
are opportunities for designated entities to get bidding
credits so that, for instance, they can bid with 75-cent
dollars against AT&T and Verizon's 100-cent dollars.
Mr. Butterfield. All right. Let me get this last one in if
I can, Mr. Chairman. In light of the demographic changes
occurring in our country and the growing number of mergers in
the communications industry, how is the Commission encouraging
companies to partner with diverse businesses in the secondary
market?
Mr. Wheeler. We have been doing that, both formally and
informally, there are great opportunities when there are
transactions for minority companies. Green Telecom, for
instance, comes to mind which is now operating spectrum, I
believe, for both AT&T and Verizon, which they purchased as a
part of some settlements with the Commission. And those kinds
of opportunities are important and worthwhile.
I also believe that there can be new opportunities in the
broadcast space, particularly after the auction in terms of
being able to share spectrum and offer other kinds of services.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lance [presiding]. Thank you very much. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for coming
today. I know you had a busy week, so your time is appreciated.
My colleague from California, Ms. Matsui, and I have spent a
lot of time on spectrum, spectrum issues, and we founded
Congressional Spectrum Caucus----
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. With the goal of looking with
different ideas of how we can move forward on spectrum. And I
appreciate the efforts that you have done to move the incentive
auction forward, and I have a couple of questions about the
guard bands in the 680 megahertz band.
It appears to me that the band plan for spectrum cleared in
the broadcast incentive auction carefully considered the
importance of maximizing license spectrum and adhered to the
technically reasonable standard set by Congress for creating a
duplex gap, and I applaud the Commission for its work in this
regard.
Two questions. One, how do you foresee going forward with
unlicensed spectrum in the duplex gap? As you know, it will be
important for those who have been on adjacent license spectrum
to have assurance there will not be interference. And are you
confident the FCC will have technical guidelines to provide
assurance to those who bid for license spectrum, there will be
no interference in the duplex gap from----
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir. I think you just--the answer to
both-- identified technical standards. And so for instance, we
are going to have a technical standards proceeding for wireless
mics and others who would be using the unlicensed spectrum, so
yes, sir.
Mr. Guthrie. OK. Thank you. And we have been using social
media to reach out to interested Americans, and we said we are
here representing the American people. And one came from Kelly
on Facebook, and Kelly asked this question. Well, Kelly
submitted through Facebook, user name Kelly, who would like to
ask you the question about your plans for future spectrum
policy. And can you give Kelly a brief answer to her question
about future spectrum policy overall?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, Kelly. The answer is that, they are
not making it no more. And so what we have to do--I believe
that we are today on the cusp of the new horizon on spectrum
policy with two things that we are doing. One is the incentive
auction that you all created because when you boil everything
down, it ultimately comes to economics. And if you can address
the other person's economics, you can probably go a long way to
solving your economics issue. And that's what the auction does.
The other component is spectrum sharing, and the days of
``Here, this is all yours, you can use it,'' are over. And
fortunately, digital allows that kind of sharing. Think about
going into a Starbucks and everybody is sharing that Wi-Fi
spectrum. You put those two together, and that is I think the
answer to Kelly's question as to where is spectrum policy
going. And we are in the middle of making both of those work
right now, which is why what we are doing is so terribly
important.
Mr. Guthrie. Yes, to use a metaphor, it is a very simple
metaphor compared to a complex physics in this, but we don't
have special highways for ambulances or fire trucks. We get out
of the way when they need to go down the highway. So sharing
that, that is kind of a simple way to look at the metaphor.
There is something in one of your statements--and I am
putting on my hat as a former state legislator, I was the state
Senator in Kentucky before here, and there are some convincing
concerns of places like Utah and Oregon where there has been
municipal broadband deployed----
Mr. Wheeler. Right.
Mr. Guthrie [continuing]. In the projects that failed in
areas where there were competitive providers. And these
projects have resulted in putting millions of dollars of
taxpayer funds in municipal bonds, proper tax and sale and
franchise taxes at risk. And I believe the iProvo was sold to
Google for a dollar and leaving city taxpayers on the hook for
repayment of tens of millions of dollars.
My understanding isfive states or so have passed laws
saying that cities can't do this because the states usually----
Mr. Wheeler. About 20 states.
Mr. Guthrie. Like in our area, if something happens to a
city, the state is on the hook for it as well. And I believe in
your prepared, written testimony, you have said that you
believe the FCC can do prevention in this area over the state
law? I wanted you to clarify that.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Guthrie. And why you think Washington could have a
better view of this than Frankfort, for example, in Kentucky?
Mr. Wheeler. So there about 20 states that have put some
kind of restrictions in place. And I can see it through just
exactly the opposite end of the telescope, with all due
respect, that if the citizens of a community want to organize
through their local government to say, to bring competition in
broadband provision, they should not be inhibited.
Mr. Guthrie. Not be inhibited by their elected----
Mr. Wheeler. They should not be inhibited by the fact that
the incumbents have been urging the adoption of legislation
that would ban it. And if we believe in competition, we ought
to let competition flourish. So what I have said is that I am
following again Judge Silverman's comments in his dissent,
nonetheless, in the open Internet case in which he said if
there is ever an example where 706 would apply, it is in the
ability to say to states, you cannot get in the middle of this
``virtuous cycle'' and prohibit consumers from being able to
have access to a competitive service.
Mr. Guthrie. So your protection is the governments are
doing that because of incumbents or because they don't want to
be on the hook for an iProvo type situation?
Mr. Wheeler. So the--again, I go back to first principles,
that is, this is a decision that ought to be made by the people
of the community and that--but if they want to take the risk,
if they own it themselves--but you don't have to own it
yourself. It is also--the gentleman from Utah has left, but for
instance, in Utah, there is a group of cities that have banded
together to solicit bids for somebody else to own that they
would have a participation in, that kind of structure. If the
people say, ``That is what we want, we want this kind of
competition,'' then I think they ought to be encouraged to get
it. And competition has clearly been shown to be the best tool.
Mr. Guthrie. Well, I don't disagree with you on that, but
my time actually is expired. I know the chairman is ready to
gavel me down, so I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much. The chairman would never do
that to the gentleman from Kentucky. The chair recognizes the
gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Wheeler,
I have five questions. We have 5 minutes, so we can go lickety-
split.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Welch. The first thing, Bob Latta and I started the
Rural Caucus. We so appreciated you coming in. Enormous concern
in rural America that we get access to the Internet. It is
essential for our future. Net neutrality is a big deal. That is
the big topic. You have been getting comments. There is an
enormous amount of concern that if we make the wrong decision,
the big guys are going to get the fast lane, the little guys,
many in rural America, are going to get the breakdown lane.
Can you give us some reassurance that at the end of this
process we are going to have access on equal terms for folks in
rural America to the Internet?
Mr. Wheeler. You want a quick answer?
Mr. Welch. Yes.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes.
Mr. Welch. And that is the sentence. You can give a full
sentence to reassure all of us, especially rural America----
Mr. Wheeler. I should.
Mr. Welch [continuing]. That we are going to be driving in
the fast.
Mr. Wheeler. There is one Internet. There is not a fast
Internet, there is not a slow Internet. There is not an urban
Internet, there is not a rural Internet. There is one Internet.
Everybody ought to have open, equal access to the capacity
delivered by the Internet.
Mr. Welch. OK. Thank you. Now, getting the Internet, rural
America is spread out, and the investors want to put their
money where they can make their money. We all understand that.
That was true for electricity, but we have got to get that
Internet out into rural America so we can be part of the modern
economy. And we have a Universal Service Fund with the Mobility
Fund. We need to have that, and I am wondering if you could
comment on the status of that and what we need to do to make
sure that the funds are there to build out that broadband.
Mr. Wheeler. Specifically on mobility? Here is the
interesting question that gets raised by mobility. Broadband
wireless is LTE. It is being built out across America. Recently
just one of the major carriers announced a new initiative in
rural America with LTE. The question becomes that we are
wrestling with is should we subsidize something if it is
already happening and that prudent fiscal responsibility
suggests probably not?
Mr. Welch. Well, I got three more questions----
Mr. Wheeler. OK.
Mr. Welch. So we want to work with you on that to make it
rational and not have us investing in things that aren't
working but invest in things that are going to help rural
America get----
Mr. Wheeler. Yes. That is where we are trying to get to.
Mr. Welch. All right. Third, we have got to work with you
and your entire commission, the Republicans and the Democrats,
and when you came into our Rural Working Group, you explained a
couple of problems you had, ancient IT and also procedures
where I guess it is easier to hire a lawyer than an engineer.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes.
Mr. Welch. I am a lawyer, so maybe I would like that. But I
wouldn't be very much use to you. What are the things that this
committee can advocate to help your entire Commission, Rs and
Ds who want to do the job, so you have the tools you need to do
it?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you for asking. Our IT infrastructure is
worthy of the Smithsonian. I came from a business background.
The things that you cannot do that are common sense in the
business world, the fact that we are still using computers that
have known cyber risk associated with them, the fact that we
can't organize a consumer complaint process on line for
American consumers because our IT system isn't up to it is
ridiculous. So we have serious problems there.
And the issue of lawyers versus engineers, far be it from
me to take a side on that, but we do need more engineers, sir.
Mr. Welch. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Wheeler. And economists.
Mr. Welch. Right.
Mr. Wheeler. And economists.
Mr. Welch. OK, well, I would like our committee to work
with you on that.
Next, Section 706, there is a lot of concern about whether
you have the sufficient authority under that section in order
to give you the rule-making power to guarantee the outcome
being net neutrality. Can you comment on that? Do you still
feel that that is sufficient and the court gave you a roadmap
forward?
Mr. Wheeler. I think that we do have sufficient authority,
and when the court talked about this virtuous cycle and they
said anything that interferes with that virtuous cycle is a
violation of 706, that is a very broad grant of authority.
Mr. Welch. OK. My last question in 26 seconds, retrans
consent and blocking online content. We have seen that in the
broadcast area where there is a dispute and people can't get
access to the signal. Now that is starting to migrate into the
online content. Is this the beginning of the cablization of the
Internet?
Mr. Wheeler. Sir, I think it is the right question. Our
authority goes to retransmission consent, good faith
negotiations, and program access. I think there is reason to be
concerned when because I happen to subscribe to an ISP who is
in a dispute with a program provider, that the program provider
blocks all access from IP addresses coming from that ISP, I
think that is something that is of concern and that we all
should worry about.
Mr. Welch. OK. I yield back. Thank you very much, Mr.
Wheeler.
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much. The chair recognizes the
gentleman from Kansas, Mr. Pompeo.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here today. I don't want to spend a lot of time on net
neutrality. We have different views. I view it as nothing more
than a price control. I think we have seen how that works in
creating supply, and I think it is a very dangerous path that
you are headed down.
I do want to ask a couple of process questions related to
that. Have you spoken to anyone at the White House or OMB in
the last month regarding net neutrality?
Mr. Wheeler. Only to keep them appraised. They have been
assiduous in their recognition that we are an independent
agency.
Mr. Pompeo. And did you call them or did they call you?
Mr. Wheeler. I called them.
Mr. Pompeo. And has anyone else on your staff spoken to
folks at the White House or OMB in the last month in addition--
--
Mr. Wheeler. Well, the answer is I am not sure. On this
issue, I don't know, but I can assure you from my discussions
with everybody, from the President on down, the recognition of
the independence of our agency, and I will go further and
assure you that never have I or to my knowledge anyone on my
staff felt any pressure to decide any issue.
Mr. Pompeo. I appreciate that. Thank you. I want to follow
up on something Representative Guthrie was saying. You believe
the FCC has the power to preempt state laws to ban competition
from community broadband?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pompeo. Under Section 706?
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pompeo. Do you believe that states have the same
authority?
Mr. Wheeler. The issue that I believe is do we have the
authority to preempt? That raises the question of what is the
authority of the state, and I think we have preemptory
authority. I think we will probably end up having this answered
in court.
Mr. Pompeo. I just read the statute. The states have the
same authority that the FCC does. The language is identical. It
says whatever authority it is, you have and they have.
Mr. Wheeler. Well, in state Commissions.
Mr. Pompeo. Right.
Mr. Wheeler. Well, yes.
Mr. Pompeo. The states----
Mr. Wheeler. It says that we have preemptory authority over
state Commissions.
Mr. Pompeo. So state commissions have the same authority
that you do? You would agree with that?
Mr. Wheeler. No----
Mr. Pompeo. It is a simple statute. I mean, it just says
the same thing.
Mr. Wheeler. No, I think that it says that both of us have
authority but that we have preemptory authority on this issue,
and I think that is what Judge Silverman was saying in his
dissent in that Verizon case.
Mr. Pompeo. Right, in that law, dissent. Well, the FCC's
media bureau recently issued new and they call them processing
guidelines for broadcast transactions, and these broadcast--it
talks not only about future broadcast transactions but also
pending applications. I have three questions with respect to
that. First, how many applications have been singled out for
close scrutiny since the new guidelines have been issued? How
many have been approved in those 2 months? And when might those
broadcasters see the resolution of their applications?
Mr. Wheeler. I don't know the answer to any of those three
off the top of my head, but I will be happy to get it for you
for the record.
Mr. Pompeo. OK. You can understand these are pending
applications submitted under a set of rules. You have now moved
the goal posts on them.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir, I understand your point. What we are
trying to do is not move the goal posts but to open up the
process so that everybody knows what the rules are.
Mr. Pompeo. But that is what you did. That is what you did.
You changed the rules with respect to applications already
submitted under a preexisting set of standards. But I don't
know how you could describe that as anything but moving the
goal post.
Mr. Wheeler. With all respect, sir, we had a series of
transactions that were in place, and in the decisions on those
transactions, we said, ``Note, going forward there will be a
new look at what financial structures are in transactions, not
in these transactions that we are approving.'' Then we put out
a Public Notice that said here is how we are going to open up
this black box, and here is what is going to be going on. And
it is that standard. So there was notice as a part of a
decision that was not affected. Then there was notice through a
Public Notice. And now those that the Bureau is reviewing are
subject to both of those.
Mr. Pompeo. And my last 20 seconds, with net neutrality
there are also cyber security issues. Do you plan to explicitly
give network providers liability protections in their efforts
to protect their network from cyber security as part of your
rule-making for net neutrality?
Mr. Wheeler. It was not considered as a part of the rule-
making to have that.
Mr. Pompeo. Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much. The chair recognizes the
gentleman from New Mexico, Mr. Lujan.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Chairman
Wheeler, thank you so much----
Mr. Wheeler. Mr. Lujan.
Mr. Lujan [continuing]. For being here as well. Chairman
Wheeler, 2 weeks ago this committee added my amendment calling
on the FCC to conduct a study on reforming the designated
market area system to the STELA reauthorization bill. As you
know, DMAs are currently defined by a map drawn by Nielsen, a
for-profit marketing research company based upon the reach of
television broadcast antennas. This network of antennas is
based upon technology deployed back in the '40s and '50s.
Americans could have a multitude of viewing options via
technology such as cable, broadband and wireless Internet, but
current DMA rules prevent the viewership of much of that
content.
I believe that a system embraced by these technologies
could revitalize television broadcasting with new affiliates
reaching viewers who have more in common than their placement
on Nielsen's old map. It is my hope that the Commission takes
this study seriously and brings the policy into the 21st
Century, Mr. Chairman, so I hope that we might be able to
work----
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you for your leadership on this, Mr.
Lujan, and I assure you that we will take it seriously.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Mr. Chairman, it
wasn't too long ago that a company would not allow access to
another company's apps. There was a question a few years ago
with AT&T and Facetime in an Apple product.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lujan. As I talk about fixed versus mobile, they
defended it by saying it was allowed under the FCC's net
neutrality rules. Granted, this was under 3G. Section 62 of the
proposal suggests the no blocking rule was applied in different
standard to mobile broadband Internet access, and mobile
Internet access service was excluded from the unreasonable
discrimination rules. We are seeing mobile getting faster now
and with the new spectrum options, even faster than fixed. I
appreciate and I agree with you that we are talking about one
Internet with open and equal access. With my colleagues in
rural areas, I have shared with you before if there is a
conversation about taking phone calls with bandwidth
capabilities as well as streaming of content on airplanes, in
rural America we should be able to get the same treatment. I
don't understand why we are not there yet. But nonetheless, it
is coming.
So I am hopeful that as we have this conversation, that we
are able to have equitable treatment. I know that as I read in
the proposal that there are elements of asking for a look into
this----
Mr. Wheeler. Right.
Mr. Lujan [continuing]. In the rule, but I am certainly
hopeful that this will be treated with the same scrutiny and
level of attention and again, as I talked about an old,
antiquated rule within the '40s and '50s, we talked about dial-
up, that this is another area that we are going to have
equitable treatment as well, especially with new gigabit access
as well.
Mr. Chairman, in another area I know that there is a number
of my colleagues who join me in their concern for recent
reports of interconnection deals, particularly the one between
Comcast and Netflix. You stated that peering is not a net
neutrality issue, that there is a matter of the open Internet
and there is a matter of the Internet connection among the
various disparate pathways that become the Internet. And while
I understand that net neutrality refers only to the behavior of
Internet service providers blocking or throttling the speeds of
certain Web sites, my question is how is interconnection an
agreement that essentially throttles content substantially
different?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, sir. That is a very good question.
You can think of the Internet in three parts, actually four
parts. There is somebody like Netflix getting on the Internet
and then riding so-called middle-mile providers to a ``peering
point,'' which is just a fancy word for interconnection, where
they then have access to Comcast, Verizon, whoever the case may
be.
The consumer buys from their computer up to the peering
point. Traditionally, peering has been an ``I will take mine,
you take yours,'' back and forth kind of a thing. And for free.
That has begun to change over time.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, if I may, I apologize. My time is
going to elapse, and maybe what I will do is--if we could get
that into the record. All that I would add is once upon a time
peering agreements didn't have an exchange of money. People
found a way to work with each other----
Mr. Wheeler. Exactly right.
Mr. Lujan [continuing]. And I am hoping that we can get
some certainty with the treatment of fixed versus mobile, in
that area. And lastly I would like for the record, if there is
any way that you might be able to provide us more specifics and
details with what has been talked about as commercially
reasonable----
Mr. Wheeler. Good.
Mr. Lujan [continuing]. As well as we talked about not
putting smaller companies at a disadvantage. I apologize to cut
you off, Mr. Chairman. I could always sit and visit with you.
And the last thing that I would say is President Obama is in
support of an open Internet, and I would encourage you to speak
with him. So thank you very much for that as well.
Mr. Wheeler. Let me just--Congressman, so am I.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much. The chair recognizes the
gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Scalise.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having the
hearing, and thank you Chairman Wheeler for being here today
and answering our questions. I know as we look at the potential
changes that have been proposed, a lot of us that want to
continue to maintain a free and open Internet want to make sure
that we are going about it the right way. I know I have got
some concerns with the fact that the FCC would even consider
going the Title II route in terms of reclassifying broadband. A
lot of us had reached out to our constituents to have them also
give us suggestions on things that they would like to ask you
as well. And a lot of the comments that we got, I know that I
got in my district, were just concerns about maintaining that
open Internet and keeping the government out of regulating it
and trying to make sure that the government doesn't impede the
ability for the innovations that we have seen, which have been
so dramatic and revolutionized not only the country but
revolutionized the entire world. And it is a lot of innovation
that is made in America, and we want to continue to see that
innovation thrive.
When you look at going into the reclassification, and it is
a proposal that is out there, I know, like I said, I have got
concerns about that. But in your written statement you assert
that the private sector must play the leading role in extending
broadband networks to every American. If it were to be
reclassified under Title II, who would pay for extending those
networks if they are subject to common carrier regulations?
Mr. Wheeler. Private sector.
Mr. Scalise. But then when you look at the Title II route,
would the FCC have the authority to regulate broadband pricing?
Mr. Wheeler. So in the vastness of Title II, that is
conceivable. One of the reasons that we are asking for Title II
versus Section 706 comments in this proceeding is to be able to
specifically zero in on what are issues such as that, what are
the----
Mr. Scalise. So you think you may have the ability to
regulate broadband pricing? Is that something you think would
be an open possibility for the FCC?
Mr. Wheeler. Should a full Title II regime be chosen, which
it has not been, we are proposing----
Mr. Scalise. But you are making the proposal.
Mr. Wheeler [continuing]. Section 706.
Mr. Scalise. Right.
Mr. Wheeler. No, we are not--what we are doing is we are
proposing Section 706 as the approach and then we have asked
questions about Title II. And these are the kinds of issues
that come up, will come up in that discussion and that are
going to warrant serious consideration.
Mr. Scalise. But if you deem them telecommunication
services, because that puts broadband into a different realm
than it is today. It is not there right now. If you do choose
to try to put it there, would state public utility--in our
state we have got a public service commission--would those
state public service commissions and other related entities in
the states be able to regulate broadband at that point?
Mr. Wheeler. So what we have proposed is not Title II. It
is Section 706. What we have asked is for a discussion of Title
II and those kinds of issues. But our proposal, for which I
have taken a lot of heat, is not Title II. I have said----
Mr. Scalise. You don't have to go forward with the
proposal.
Mr. Wheeler. I have said----
Mr. Scalise. You can stop taking the heat right now.
Mr. Wheeler. No, I said that Title II was on the table,
that we are looking to look at Title II, and Mr. Waxman has a
specific proposal where he thinks that Title II ought to be a
backup, and that is a proposal that is important and worth
considering. But the proposal that we made is Section 706.
Mr. Scalise. Let me ask you this because it seems like a
one-way street where you are just targeting this toward
Internet service providers. There are a lot of content carriers
out there, too--a lot of members have used the Netflix example
or, Google and other content providers that also have a play in
this realm, that you seem to just be targeting this toward
Internet service providers. And so I am not sure if there is
some axe to grind there, but it just seems like it is a one-
sided approach that you are taking even in the review. And I
wouldn't recommend going down that road for any of these folks.
But I just wanted to point that out.
And one last thing, because I know I am running out of
time, in a February report, the FCC, some of your staff I know
in a working group, recommended eliminating some of the reports
that are out there, the Orbit report, the International
Broadband report, the Modifying Video Competition report and
cable prices--some of those things. I have got a piece of
legislation we have passed out of the Full House twice now,
bipartisan, I think was unanimous earlier--in this Congress
called the FCC Consolidated Reporting Act which really tries to
take a broad view and to eliminate a lot of the outdated
reports, to streamline the reporting process. Something that I
think you have seen bipartisan support to do in the House. We
are trying to get the Senate to take that up. I am not sure if
you have got a comment on what you think should happen there,
if that is something you are supportive of generally,
especially as it relates to the bipartisan bill in the House
trying to move through the Senate to ultimately become law, to
streamline the processes as your staff has suggested.
Mr. Wheeler. So, on the Senate side, it is Senator Heller
who has been----
Mr. Scalise. Yes.
Mr. Wheeler [continuing]. Pushing on this, and I know that
he and Senator Rockefeller are talking about it in terms of
their package of legislation over there.
I definitely agree that there is a plethora of reports and
that we are spending a lot of time that could be better
organized, shall we say.
Mr. Scalise. Including competitiveness in the telegraph
industry, which is still on the books which we are trying to
get rid of in this bill. But I appreciate that and anything you
can do to help us advocate for the advancement. I do think that
is one area where we found a lot of bipartisan support in the
way it passed the House. Hopefully we can get the Heller bill
moved through the Senate as well and get that to the
President's desk.
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Scalise. Thank you very much for your time, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Mr. Scalise. I do not see
any member on the Democratic side. Mr. Kinzinger of Illinois is
recognized.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
being here today with us. I know it is a long day.
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you for your patience, Mr. Kinzinger.
Mr. Kinzinger. Yes, you are welcome. I might be the end.
Wow. But we have a lot of big issues that we want to talk
about. I am just going to hit a couple right now. I would like
to talk to you a little--I know it was touched earlier about
the E-Rate program. I am a big supporter of the intentions of
this program and especially its modernization. And I appreciate
the Commission putting on the recent workshop on this issue. I
have a few concerns I want to address. I represent a rural
district with a number of very small schools and libraries, and
over the past few months I have reached out to a lot of these
entities and asked them what their concern is and asked them
about their participation or their lack of participation in the
program to see what concerns or issues they have with the
program itself.
The number one problem raised in these conversations was
the complexity involved in both applying for and eventually
receiving the funding necessary to move forward in implementing
new technology in their facilities through the E-Rate program.
In hearing this, I actually looked into the issue a little
further and found out that the basic application for funding is
17 pages long. And with additional technologies not deemed
necessary, it can run even longer, i.e., Wi-Fi. I would
actually probably rather punch myself in the face than be the
guy that has to fill this out.
So the complexity of the application process has actually
caused a number of these schools to spend money on outside
consultants to help guide them through this process, and this
is money that is no longer being spent on our students and
automatically puts many smaller rural schools at a disadvantage
as they don't have the funds necessary to pay these outside
consultants essentially leaving individuals in a technological
desert, if you will.
As the Commission continues its efforts to modernize the E-
Rate program, what are your plans to simplify the application
process for these small and rural districts? And also, will you
commit to working to address the issues faced by these schools
who have routinely told me that they simply cannot afford to
pursue these funds?
Mr. Wheeler. Congressman, I share your shock and dismay. We
are going to fix it.
Mr. Kinzinger. Good. All right. Do you have an idea of a
timeframe? How long? This is easy. We are going home.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes, it is going to be part of our E-Rate
modernization program that we are bringing forward. There are
actually a series of things that we are going to begin
administratively even before that rule-making takes place. It
is--yes, sir.
Mr. Kinzinger. All right.
Mr. Wheeler. How do we get online? It becomes an
interesting challenge. So here we are talking about broadband
access for schools and libraries, and we have a 17-page paper
process.
Mr. Kinzinger. Right.
Mr. Wheeler. So, unfortunately, it is not something you can
solve just like this because as I indicated I think to Mr.
Welch, we have awful IT systems. But what I would like to get
to is for your schools, and all schools and libraries, to be
able to get online, to make their filing, to be able to track
that filing and where things stand and to do it less frequently
than annually.
Mr. Kinzinger. Right. Well, I appreciate that. I want to
touch on one other quick issue in the short amount of time, and
again, thank you for your consideration with the E-Rate issue.
I am concerned with the process and policy rationale used to
change the FCC's treatment of broadcast JSAs for the purpose of
the broadcast ownership rules. The decision to count TV JSA's
ownership has the effect of tightening ownership restrictions
without the comprehensive review of the ownership rules that is
required by statute, and your analysis seemed to lack an
appreciation for the public interest benefits fostered by JSAs.
In Rockford, for instance, an area I represent, without
these agreements, the Fox station produces actually a Hispanic
news cast, and they have said that they will not be able to
produce that Hispanic news cast, for instance. While I don't
believe my local TV station should have to fight for a waiver,
and we can have a broader issue on the whole discussion in
general, I do want to say in light of your rule, are you going
to make sure that these stations can take advantage of waivers
and will there be clear, transparent standards for applying for
waivers in this process?
Mr. Wheeler. Thank you, Congressman, because you have
raised a really important point about waivers. The reality as
to why we had to deal with JSAs is there was becoming a cottage
industry in this town, down on K Street, of lawyers figuring
out creative ways to get around the ownership rules that the
Commissions had in place forever. And JSAs were a favorite way
of doing that.
What we have said is that you have to have attributable
ownership as you indicated but that there is a waiver process
to address exactly what you are talking about in Rockford. And
yes it is an expedited process. And it is a situation,
unfortunately, where the process took over and perverted the
underlying rules and the basic concepts of ownership.
Mr. Kinzinger. And we can have that broader discussion when
I have more time. My time is expired. But I will say, I have
heard a lot of concerns from local TV stations even in my
district, and I hope that, you know, while we disagree with the
rule, I hope that you make it very clear how they can apply for
these waivers and how they can get this taken care of.
Mr. Wheeler. Yes. Thank you.
Mr. Kinzinger. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. And thank you.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much. On behalf of Mr. Matheson
and of myself, thank you, Chairman Wheeler, for your testimony
this morning. We look forward to working with you in the
future, and he hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:04 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Lee Terry

I would like to state for the record that I oppose the
reclassification of broadband services as Title II
telecommunications services. We are fortunate to see wireline
broadband speeds continue to increase, whether over cable or
telecommunications networks. A regulatory framework set up in
the 1930's to ensure every consumer receives the same voice
service for a reasonable price is ill-suited for a
communications platform that we rely on to deliver varied
services from video and voice to 3-D printing. I should note
that I am concerned about the proposal to use Section 706 as
well, and believe that however the Federal Communications
Commission proceeds, it should be done very, very carefully.
That said, there is no viable path forward with Title II, and I
believe that should be crystal clear.
----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
