- 21ST CENTURY CURES: EXAMINING BARRIERS TO ONGOING EVIDENCE DEVELOPMENT AND COMMUNICATION

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

21ST CENTURY CURES: EXAMINING BARRIERS TO ONGOING EVIDENCE DEVELOPMENT
AND
COMMUNICATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 22, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-163

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

93-247                         WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                GENE GREEN, Texas
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            LOIS CAPPS, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chairman                      JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JIM MATHESON, Utah
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                JOHN BARROW, Georgia
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DORIS O. MATSUI, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey                Islands
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JERRY McNERNEY, California
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               PETER WELCH, Vermont
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             PAUL TONKO, New York
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                  Islands
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     5
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    83
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, prepared statement........................    83

Witnesses

Josh Rising, Director, Medical Devices, The Pew Charitable Trusts     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Louis Jacques, Senior Vice President and Chief Clinical Oficer,
ADVI...........................................................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Answers to submitted questions...............................    87
Michael A. Mussallem, Chairman and CEO, Edwards Lifesciences.....    21
Prepared statement...........................................    23
Answers to submitted questions...............................    91
Gregory Schimizzi, Co-Founder, Carolina Arthritis Associates.....    36
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Answers to submitted questions...............................   100
Mary Grealy, President, Healthcare Leadership Council............    53
Prepared statement \1\.......................................    55
Answers to submitted questions...............................   106

Submitted Material

Letter of July 22, 2014, from the Lupus Foundation of America to
the subcommittee, submitted by Mr. Pitts.......................    85

----------
\1\ The attachments to Ms. Grealy's testimony are available at
http://docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/20140722/102524/HHRG-
113-IF14-Wstate-GrealyM-20140722.pdf.

21ST CENTURY CURES: EXAMINING BARRIERS TO ONGOING EVIDENCE DEVELOPMENT
AND COMMUNICATION

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 22, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call at 3:00 p.m., in
room 2322, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Joseph R. Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Shimkus,
Blackburn, Lance, Bilirakis, Ellmers, Pallone, Green, Barrow,
DeGette, and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff: Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Noelle Clemente,
Press Secretary; Sydne Harwick, Legislative Clerk; Robert
Horne, Professional Staff Member, Health; Carly McWilliams,
Professional Staff Member, Health; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment & Economy; Heidi Stirrup, Health
Policy Coordinator; Jessica Wilkerson, Legislative Clerk; Ziky
Ababiya, Staff Assistant; Eric Flamm, FDA Detailee; Eddie
Garcia, Professional Staff Member; Karen Nelson, Deputy
Committee Staff Director for Health.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order. The chair
will recognize himself for an opening statement.
In this, the sixth hearing of our 21st Century Cures
Initiative, we are examining continued evidence development and
communication of information regarding treatments and cures in
the real world setting. Discovery of the risks and benefits of
drug or treatment does not end with FDA approval or clearance.
It is often just the beginning of learning about different uses
for drugs and devices, for different indications, conditions,
and populations. Treatment in the real world also brings out
additional information on safety and efficacy, and ensuring
that this knowledge is shared widely among providers, patients,
and researchers is critical.
As a result, the ability of patients, physicians, and
developers to communicate effectively is so important for the
future of cures in this country. Unfortunately, many of the
witnesses and participants we have had before us since the
Cures Initiative began have raised concerns regarding barriers
to communication and evidence development. This hearing is a
direct result of the feedback we have received from patient
groups and other interested parties.
As today's witnesses will discuss, efforts to limit off
label use among the provider community, limitations on
communication found under HIPAA, and the Physician's Sunshine
Act are just a few of the barriers to 21st century cures that
have been raised with us over the past few months. It is my
hope that this hearing allows the members an opportunity to
consider those potential barriers and the role they play in our
healthcare system.
With that thought in mind, I would like to thank all of our
witnesses for being here today, and I will yield the balance of
my time to Dr. Burgess, vice chairman of the subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

The Subcommittee will come to order.
The Chair will recognize himself for an opening statement.
In this, the fourth hearing of our 21st Century Cures
Initiative, we are examining continued evidence development and
communication of information regarding treatments and cures in
the real world setting.
Discovery of the risks and benefits of a drug or treatment
does not end with FDA approval or clearance. It is often just
the beginning of learning about different uses for drugs and
devices, for different indications, conditions, and
populations.
Treatment in the real world also brings out additional
information on safety and efficacy, and ensuring that this
knowledge is shared widely among providers, patients, and
researchers is critical.
In such ways, the ability of patients, physicians, and
developers to communicate effectively is so important for the
future of cures in this country. Unfortunately, many of the
witnesses and participants we have had before us since the
cures initiative began have raised concern regarding barriers
to communication and evidence development.
As our witnesses will discuss, efforts to limit off-label
use among the provider community, limitations on communication
found under HIPAA, and the Physician Sunshine Act are just a
few of the barriers to 21st Century Cures that have been raised
with us over the past few months. It is my hope that this
hearing allows the members an opportunity to consider these
potential barriers and the role they play in our health care
system.
The importance of today's hearing and the reason for our
calling it is really a direct result of the feedback we have
received from patient groups and other interested parties.
With that though in mind, I would like to thank all of our
witnesses for being here today, and I yield the balance of my
time to Rep. ----------------------------------.

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too want to welcome
our witnesses. I certainly look forward to hearing from them
today.
I appreciate the continued series of hearings on the 21st
Century Cures Initiatives. Certainly looking forward today to
exploring the role that healthcare providers, physicians, can
have in increasing communications between patients,
researchers, and those who innovate. Different uses for
therapies are constantly being discovered through information
highways, including social networks, patient advocacy groups,
and physicians sharing information.
There is no doubt that technology and the ability to
communicate easily with people all around the world will change
how we conduct research, how clinical trials are managed, and
how the post-market surveillance of technologies is handled.
We must recognize this fact and be open to rethinking the
traditional means of how we have engaged with our patients. We
must also rethink our expectations of the ease with which
patients may engage with each other. The fact of the matter is
if I get on a plane with my iPad, I have got the New England
Journal, I have got the Journal of the American Medical
Association, and I have got the most current Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology with me. And it is simply a matter of
opening it and reading while on the plane. The ability to keep
up with rapidly-changing and evolving fields is unlike anything
anyone has ever had in the past.
So this is the world in which we live today, and we need to
be open to realizing the benefits that can be drawn from this
fact. And also recognize that while we are exchanging
information, patient advocacy groups are likewise engaged.
So we certainly look forward to a lively discussion with
the panel today. Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the time.
Mr. Pitts. Anyone on our side seek time? Vice chair, Ms.
Blackburn?
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And to our
panel, I want to welcome each of you. There is so much that is
going on in the field of healthcare informatics, and Dr.
Burgess just touched a little bit on that, and also medical
devices. We are going to hear from Edwards Life Sciences about
a heart valve which was approved in 41 countries before it was
approved here in the U.S.
And this is something that is unacceptable when you look at
the length of time that it takes to get these medical devices
through the FDA's process. In Memphis, Tennessee, my home
State, one in four jobs is dependent on medical devices. And
when you look at what is happening in the Nashville area with
healthcare informatics, you realize the importance and the
increasing importance of that as an economic development sector
to our State.
I think it is imperative that we provide a 21st century
regulatory framework for 21st century technology and a
framework that is going to encourage innovation while providing
safe, effective, and new therapies. And with that, I yield back
my time.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. Now filling in
for the ranking member, Mr. Pallone, Mr. Green of Texas, 5
minutes for opening statement.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you and the
ranking member, who will be here shortly, on this continuing
series of hearings on the 21st Century Cures. This is really
what our Health Subcommittee should be about, how we can help.
And following my colleague from Tennessee, although I did not
know that many jobs in Memphis were for medical. I thought it
was just barbecue or Graceland.
Mrs. Blackburn. If the gentleman will yield----
Mr. Green. Briefly.
Mrs. Blackburn [continuing]. It is because of the barbecue
that we need the medical----
Mr. Green. Well, as you know, there is a difference between
Tennessee and Texas barbecue. We like----
Mrs. Blackburn. I would ask the gentleman to yield again on
that. There would not be a Texas if there were not Tennessee--
--
Mr. Green. Well, and I cannot disagree with that because,
frankly, we got all the rebels from Tennessee and helped us win
independence in Texas. But with that, I am going to yield the
balance of my time to my colleague, Congressman DeGette from
Colorado.
Ms. DeGette. Thank goodness. Mr. Chairman, I really want to
thank you for holding this next hearing in this series on the
21st Century Cures. I have got to say I was around my district
all weekend, and everybody I talked to from the Jefferson
County Economic Development Team to the telephone town hall
meeting I had last night, to the OFA people. Everybody was
excited to hear about this bipartisan effort that we are
having, and I am excited, too.
Throughout all of the previous hearings and roundtables
that we have had on all of these topics, we have already
learned a tremendous amount about what role Congress should
play in helping to further advance and accelerate treatment and
cures.
Today the witnesses will talk about examining barriers to
ongoing evidence development and communication. The potential
areas for discussion are far ranging, to say the least, but I
am looking forward to hearing some specifics from the witnesses
on the potential benefits of enhanced data collection and
improved maintenance and secured sharing of data and
information.
These types of evidence development and communication can
and do play essential roles in the drug and device development
and approval processes, as well as in reimbursement
determinations. For example, how can we take advantage of data
and information to more effectively identify patients for
clinical trials that are relevant to their individual disease
or condition? How can we harness the data and information
collected during clinical trials? What about information after
the drug or device is introduced into the market? And how do we
effectively utilize this information while maintaining a high
standard of privacy protections?
On the reimbursement side, how is Medicare's coverage with
the evidence development process currently being used? And how
can we improve these processes to be clear?
Just to talk for a minute about some of the things that are
going on in terms of evidence sharing and data, Mr. Burgess
talked about taking his iPad on the airplane. And I just
literally got off the airplane from Denver where I was reading
this article from The New Yorker this week. Maybe some of you
have seen it. It is about a family who has a child with a very,
very, very, very rare genetic disorder: NGLY1. And they finally
got it diagnosed, but they did not think anybody else had it
until the dad, who is a computer professor at the University of
Utah, wrote a blog which went viral, and everybody read about
it.
And the upshot is that they have now identified patients
with this genetic disorder around the world. They have all met.
They have put together a research consortium. They have people
doing research and writing a paper to be published in a
scientific journal. And they are on their way to try to figure
out what they can do about this very, very rare defect.
These patients did this on their own because they were
sophisticated parents. So what I would like to know is what can
we do to harness this in a much more systemic way so that these
types of communications can occur effortlessly both within the
United States and with our colleagues around the world. So all
of these are important questions.
I really look forward to hearing the testimony today and to
learning about these topics. Thank you very much, and I yield
back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady, and now
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Waxman, 5 minutes for opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Today we
have an opportunity to learn more about several issues that
were raised at our previous meetings on the 21st Century Cures
Initiative. From the first roundtable discussion that kicked
off the initiative, we heard that FDA and NIH are leaders in
driving and using advances in molecular medicine and digital
technology to help get new cures to patients more quickly. They
have also made great strides in improving and streamlining
procedures for conducting clinical trials and in reviewing
innovative new drugs and medical devices.
However, we also heard about impediments that stand in the
way of researchers and companies making full use of these
advances. While patient registries can facilitate enrollment in
clinical trials and help researchers find new research avenues
to pursue, many believe more could be done to encourage their
development and use.
Electronic health care records can help physicians and
sponsors identify patients for clinical trials and evaluate the
effects of drugs already on the market, but privacy concerns
are limiting their use. And although FDA has shown an
increasing willingness to accept data from smaller clinical
trials, the more limited data generated to support FDA approval
may not be adequate for coverage decisions by Medicare or
private insurers. I look forward to hearing more about these
barriers and what can be done to address them.
We should remember, though, that we have a review and
approval system that is already working quite well. It has led
to enormous breakthroughs and coverage of cutting-edge drugs
and devices. FDA reviews and approves drugs faster than any
other regulatory agency in the world. NIH and FDA are world
leaders in clinical trial design and in integrating the newest
science into their policies and approaches while protecting the
health of the patients. And Medicare has demonstrated
flexibility in its national coverage determinations so that
beneficiaries can access these new cures.
I have a great interest in fostering greater access to
innovative drugs, devices, and health services. But I also know
that access to new, innovative medicine alone will not increase
the quality and outcomes patients experience in our healthcare
system. Incentives must be in place for providers to furnish
high quality care to the right patient at the right time in the
right setting of care.
The Affordable Care Act was a major advancement in meeting
these challenges, but we still have work to do. In particular,
we should enact the delivery reforms contained in our
bipartisan SGR legislation. We can make another great stride
forward if we can send this legislation to the President's desk
before the end of this year.
I have a little time left, and I would be pleased--anybody
on our side want it?
If not, I yield back the time, and let us hear from the
witnesses.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman. As always,
members' opening written statements will be made a part of the
record.
We have one panel today with five witnesses. I will
introduce them in the order of them making their presentations.
First, Dr. Josh Rising, Director of Medical Devices, the Pew
Charitable Trust; Dr. Louis Jacques, Senior Vice President,
Chief Clinical Officer of ADVI; Mr. Michael Mussallem, Chairman
and Chief Executive Officer of Edwards Life Sciences
Corporation; Dr. Gregory Schimizzi, Co-founder, Carolina
Arthritis Associates, P.A.; and Ms. Mary Grealy, President,
Healthcare Leadership Council.
Thank you each for coming. Your written testimony will be
placed in the record. You will each be given 5 minutes to
summarize your testimony. And at this time we will recognize
Dr. Rising 5 minutes for his opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF JOSH RISING, DIRECTOR, MEDICAL DEVICES, THE PEW
CHARITABLE TRUSTS; LOUIS JACQUES, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND
CHIEF CLINICAL OFICER, ADVI; MICHAEL A. MUSSALLEM, CHAIRMAN AND
CEO, EDWARDS LIFESCIENCES; GREGORY SCHIMIZZI, CO-FOUNDER,
CAROLINA ARTHRITIS ASSOCIATES; MARY GREALY, PRESIDENT,
HEALTHCARE LEADERSHIP COUNCIL

STATEMENT OF JOSH RISING

Dr. Rising. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone, members
of the committee, I thank you for the opportunity to provide
testimony. My name is Josh Rising. I am Physician Director of
Medical Devices at the Pew Charitable Trusts.
We have an exciting opportunity today to talk about the
future of healthcare, a future where we can harness electronic
data to improve patient care. Advances in technology offer
potential for new approaches to develop medical evidence
through a continuous cycle that begins before a product is
approved and continues as the product is used by patients.
As we move toward this total life cycle approach, we must
consider two important issues. First, we know that clinical
trials are the largest contributor to the cost and length of
product development. We need to use new approaches to decrease
their length and cost without doing away with these trials and
the critical data they provide. Second, we must have the tools
necessary to quickly and efficiently identify problems with
approved drugs and medical devices, and to assess their
performance in real world settings that can be different from
clinical trials.
We are at a key turning point. Electronic health records
today collect more data on patient outcomes than we have ever
had, but we are failing to realize that potential. One
important innovation to harness data from electronic health
records is the registry, large databases that collect
information on groups of patients treated for a particular
medical condition.
Now, imagine if we could conduct clinical trials for a
tenth of the current cost. This is precisely what physicians in
Sweden recently did using an existing registry. They studied
heart attack prevention in more than 7,000 patients, comparing
two different procedures. The data were drawn from electronic
health records, and the trial cost only $300,000, or roughly
$50 per patient. Conducting such a study outside of a registry
in the United States would cost hundreds of millions of
dollars, if not more. We can do this in the United States, too,
but only if we fix the lack of interoperability among
electronic health records and streamline certain electronic
administrative processes.
Second, just as important as ensuring prompt access to new
cures is the ability to detect problems with drugs and medical
devices on the market and assess their performance in real
world conditions. Here, too, registries can help. For example,
an Australian registry of artificial joints found that one type
of Metal-on-Metal Hip failed at a rate more than two times
higher than conventional hips, ultimately leading to a
worldwide recall of the device. Detecting such problems earlier
is vital for patient safety and could save our healthcare
system vast sums.
Pew will soon release a report on registries produced in
partnership with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association and
the Medical Device Safety Group and the EPINet. In this report,
we recommend steps to deliver timely, actionable information
from registries to all stakeholders, including the public.
Now, there are other ways that electronic data can also
improve patient care. One is better use of the brand new Unique
Device Identifier, or UDI, System, which was created by FDA at
the direction of Congress and will result in a unique number
assigned to nearly all medical devices. If we now incorporate
this number into insurance clams, we can use FDA's Sentinel
System to assess device safety problems the same way we do for
drugs. Incorporating UDI into claims will also provide payers,
such as CMS, with the necessary data unavailable elsewhere, to
evaluate outcomes for patients with implanted medical devices.
Adding a UDI field to claims has generated support across
healthcare, including from hospitals such as Geisinger and
Mercy, health plans like Aetna, physician societies including
the American College of Cardiology and the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons, as well as patient and consumer organizations.
Additionally, HHS Secretary Burwell articulated the benefits of
adding UDI to claims du ring her Senate confirmation process.
New mechanisms to collect data both prior to and after FDA
approval can help facilitate faster clinical trials and ensure
that any problems are promptly detected. Congress should work
with the Administration to maximize the potential of these new
data sources to ensure patient access to safe and effective
medical devices.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I
welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Rising follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognizes Dr. Jacques 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF LOUIS JACQUES

Mr. Jacques. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Louis Jacques. From
October 2009 through February 2014 I was the Director of the
Coverage and Analysis Group at the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services. I was the Division Director in that group
from June 2004 until 2009.
We implemented coverage with evidence development and the
FDA/CMS Parallel Review Pilot Initiative. We also revised CMS
regulations pertaining to Medicare coverage and FDA-approved
investigational device exemption clinical trials, and executed
a memorandum of understanding between FDA and CMA.
CMS experience over the past decade is illustrative of the
challenges to the wide adoption of certain innovative
technologies. One, there are innovative products and services
that do not clearly fall within the statutory scope of the
Medicaid program benefit. Two, the available evidence at the
time of initial marketing may not clearly establish the
clinical value of a new technology in the relevant beneficiary
population. Three, historic coding paradigms can be
uninformative to the extent that the insurer cannot identify
the specific item or service for which it is paying. This blind
buying creates reluctance among insurers and hampers the
establishment of brand value for high performing technologies.
I believe there are opportunities. External stakeholders
have requested more opportunities for coverage with evidence
development and FDA/CMS parallel review. While these programs
were articulated in the early 2000s by a prior Administration,
both are included in the 2012 White House National Bio Economy
Blueprint.
Since 2009, CED has essentially replaced non-coverage in
final national coverage determinations, thereby furnishing
Medicaid coverage when it would otherwise have not been
available. By contrast, in the 5 years before 2009, almost half
of all national coverage determinations ended with non-
coverage.
Unfortunately, CMS' ability to furnish CED is limited. CMS
initiates CED under ARC's statutory authority. CMS implements
CED through the formal national coverage determination process.
Due largely to staffing cuts the annual number of NCDs
published has dropped from approximately 12 to 13 in fiscal
years 2007 and 2008 to only five in 2012 and six in 2013.
Current staffing is approximately half of 2007 levels.
Under parallel review, both FDA and CMS maintain their
separate standards. I have no reason to believe that either
agency has toughened its process as a process of parallel
review. While the structure of the pilot contemplates the
possibility of a national coverage determination, parallel
review does not inherently require that CMS undertake the NCD
process. The content of the parallel review engagement depends
on the product's development stage. Ideally, early discussions
with CMS could result in more persuasive pivotal trial,
evidence that leads local Medicare contractors to uniform
coverage.
Results to date are encouraging. One product received
unanimous yes votes and positive comments at its recent FDA
panel meeting, which the company credited to the discussions
with both agencies that inform the design of the pivotal trial.
CMS does not have sufficient staff to match FDA's bandwidth on
potential parallel review candidates. Despite interest from
device manufacturers, the parallel review pilot has been
limited to only two products.
In conclusion, CMS review of clinical trials serves three
goals. First, it provides important financial support for
innovation. Second, the sponsor can obtain CMS feedback on
whether the initial trial design could persuasively inform a
coverage decision. Third, CMS can inform the sponsor of
existing coding or payment paradigms that may apply to the
product.
The current vehicles for coverage in clinical trials are
unnecessarily siloed, preventing the publication of an
integrated, comprehensive policy. I believe this could be fixed
with small changes in statute. The definition of a local
coverage determination could be revised to align LCD authority
with the actual scope of local contractor claims processing
responsibility, thereby enhancing transparency and
predictability. As an alternative to non-coverage, some
stakeholders have expressed interest in new payment paradigms
for early stage devices with immature evidence bases.
Acknowledging the challenges of the Federal administration
budget, stable funding sources should be considered for these
initiatives that are expected to produce downstream benefits.
Their investment requires funding that is more predictable
potentially from the Medicare Trust Fund itself.
Thank you for the opportunity to share my thoughts, and I
would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jacques follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
Mr. Mussallem, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL A. MUSSALLEM

Mr. Mussallem. Yes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman
Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone, Congresswoman DeGette, and
members of the subcommittee. My name is Mike Mussallem. I am
the chairman and CEO of Edwards Life Sciences. I am truly
honored to join the other panelists today to discuss the path
to revitalizing medical device innovation in the United States.
I and the other employees of Edwards Life Sciences, from
our engineers to our valve assemblers, share a passion for
helping patients. I am privileged to lead a company that is the
world leader, and has been for 50 years, in heart valve
replacements.
The reason I am here is that I am worried about innovation
in the U.S. and that it is suffering from increasingly costly,
cumbersome, and risk averse culture in our regulatory and
payment systems. Our recent experience with a transformative
therapy to heart valve replacement patients gives us a unique
perspective on the current climate.
In short, Edwards Technology allows a heart team to deliver
a collapsible prosthetic valve through a catheter into the body
to avoid cracking the chest, stopping the heart, and avoid the
long and painful recovery that goes along with that open heart
surgery.
This has become the most extensively studied heart valve
ever, including an unprecedented four New England Journal of
Medicine articles that demonstrated a triple win, which is a
substantial and sustainable clinical effect, cost
effectiveness, and extraordinary quality of life improvement.
We appreciated a productive relationship with Dr. Jeff
Shuren in FDA, as well as Dr. Patrick Conway and his colleagues
at CMS, whose approach ensured that there was a balanced and
reasonable process for this transformative therapy.
Also in a remarkable effort of groundbreaking collaboration
between medical societies, regulators, and other stakeholders,
we built a comprehensive clinical evidence and quality
measurement tool for this therapy called the TBT registry.
But there is room for improvement. We all know the path to
approval and reimbursement is not easy, and it should not be.
Yet the U.S. approval of this American technology trailed
Europe by 4 years. We are pleased that the FDA leadership
viewed this delay as a catalyst to improve, and we see several
opportunities to remove barriers. I am going to focus on three.
Number one, evidence development mechanisms can be improved
to reduce cost and delay. FDA had recently proposed a number of
improvements to the pre-market clinical trial process and the
post-market surveillance process that hold the promise. And
these have been discussed at this committee. In my view, when
registries are done right, they can yield extremely useful
information about patients' outcome and device benefits.
However, the clinical and scientific benefits of registries
must be balanced with a potentially significant cost burden,
complexity, and potential misuse of that data. In our case,
many physicians told us it takes longer to fill out the 300
fields in the TBT registry than it does to perform the
procedure itself.
Number two, reimbursement incentives need to be aligned
with promoting innovation. Efforts to curb healthcare spending
could have the unintentional consequence of slowing down
innovation in our cost-cutting frenzy. It is imperative to
recognize that medical device innovations become more effective
and more efficient with time and with experience. We need a
system that does not shut the door to reimbursement on day one.
In select cases, coverage with evidence development can be
a tool that allows promising technologies to reach patients
sooner while developing evidence to support lasting
reimbursement. And finally, FDA's vision to improve the
regulatory process must be accelerated. Dr. Shuren and his team
have outlined strategic priorities that strike the right
balance between pre-market and post-market data collection and
improving customer service.
We know FDA is a complex bureaucracy to manage, and our
leaders need a mandate to change more quickly. Congress could
encourage FDA by providing additional support to expedite these
changes and give them room to innovate.
And finally, no discussion about medical technology is
complete without understanding the true impact that they have
on patients. And we meet a lot of patients. To mention one,
Lester Tenney, a true American hero, part of our Greatest
Generation, survivor of the Bataan Death March, and a Japan
POW, had long sought an apology from the Japanese government on
behalf of Federal soldiers. Unfortunately, just as this apology
was agreed upon, he was diagnosed with disabling and inoperable
aortic stenosis. He would not survive long, let alone long
enough to make this trip.
The good news is that Lester received an Edwards trans-
catheter heart valve, was able to travel to Japan, get the
apology. This would not have been possible even 5 years
earlier. And he remains vital to this day and dedicated to
helping veterans. Lester and tens of thousands of other
patients we have had the opportunity remind us every day that
our work is personal. It impacts people individually.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mussallem follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
Dr. Schimizzi, you are recognized for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY A. SCHIMIZZI

Dr. Schimizzi. Chairman Pitts, Ranking Member Pallone,
members of the subcommittee, and honored guests, it is a
distinct honor to be here today and testify before you. My name
is Gregory Schimizzi, and I am testifying before you as a
Member of the Board of Directors and past President of the
Coalition of State Rheumatology Organizations, or CSRO. And I
am a private practice Rheumatologist at the Carolina Arthritis
Associates in Wilmington, North Carolina.
The CSRO appreciates the opportunity to share our views
related to barriers to ongoing evidence development and
communications transparency. Specifically, I will focus on
situations in which valid communications pathways are being
hampered by outdated practices of the Food and Drug
Administration, or FDA, as well as touch upon some unintended
consequence of the Sunshine Act, or open payments, as
implemented by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,
or CMS.
The FDA does not allow pharmaceutical companies to actively
distribute key clinical information even if it is related to
the on-label indicated, unless it is explicitly referenced in
the package insert of that product. By limiting the sharing of
information, physicians are hampered in their ability to gain
all of the firm scientific rationale and medical evidence
needed to treat patients.
So that clinicians may be better informed, the CSRO urges
the FDA to develop standards for qualifying real world data
through a public process, to expand the current process of
review of materials beyond what is included in the package
insert, to also cover other key data, such as sub-population,
pharmaco-economic, or comparative cost data, and to ensure a
timely review process for such information.
As part of the Affordable Care Act, Congress required the
Administration to set up a process by which transfers of value
from certain covered entities, primarily manufacturers of drugs
and devices to physicians, would be reportable. Such reportable
information would then be made publicly available. The overall
goal of this transparency is to make particular potential
financial conflicts of interest more transparent.
However, there are considerable problems with the current
implementation of open payments, including the lack of guidance
and clarity regarding the physician registration process, as
well as the review of dispute process lacking necessary
protection for physicians.
Finally, a recent CMS-proposed rule related to open
payments would severely hamper the flow of information.
Therefore, the CSRO respectfully requests that CMS provide
additional provider-specific guidance for the registration
process and adopt policies that allow for flexibility of
enrollment requirements so that physicians struggling to enroll
remain able to participate in a meaningful manner, ensure an
impartial process for disputing the accuracy of financial
information intended for public disclosure, take steps to
enhance the fairness and accuracy of the program by ensuring
that healthcare providers have access to meaningful mechanism
for limiting the distribution of disputed information, and
reconsider its proposal to eliminate the continuing medical
education exemption, and instead appropriately expand the list
of certified CME accrediting or issuing agencies beyond the
five currently cited in regulation.
As I hope I have outlined today, current practices at both
the FDA and CMS may be inappropriately hampering the exchange
of information, making it difficult for physicians to receive
the information they need to make valuable treatment decisions.
For the FDA, I hope that Congress will examine ways to
allow for more proactive changes among clinicians with
appropriate safeguards to ensure that such information is
truthful and not misleading. For CMS, I hope that Congress can
urge strategic plan programmatic changes to make the
transparency process accurate and appropriately descriptive of
the financial relationships among the various entities.
Thank you once again for allowing me to speak today and to
consider my comments today as well as the other information
captured in my written statement. The Coalition of State
Rheumatology Organizations looks forward to working with the
committee to address these issues. I look forward to your
questions. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Schimizzi follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman.
And now, Ms. Grealy, you are recognized for 5 minutes for
an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MARY GREALY

Ms. Grealy. Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to testify this afternoon. And
thank you as well for the attention you're bringing to the
future of American healthcare, and the ability of the
healthcare system to develop, communicate, and utilize the data
that can lead to 21st century cures.
I am here today representing the Healthcare Leadership
Council, a coalition of leaders from all sectors of American
healthcare. I am very proud that our membership includes
innovators, like Mr. Mussallem, also on today's witness panel.
Our members share this committee's goals for a healthcare
system that is affordable, sustainable, and of the highest
attainable quality, and that is also on path toward curing the
diseases and illnesses that have cost us far too much both in
lives and resources.
Each year, those involved in all aspects of healthcare
generate literally trillions of decisions, communications,
interventions, consultations, treatments, therapies, and
clinical trials. The key to achieving progress lies in
harnessing this massive amount of information and setting
policies and practices in place to productively share and to
use this data.
HLC members have been engaged in this challenge for some
time both as individual innovative companies and collectively.
What I share with you today is our broad-based, multi-sector
perspective on how we can create an environment in which data
can be used to strengthen the entirety of the healthcare
continuum.
There are three areas where I will focus my comments today.
One, the role of the HIPAA privacy law; two, the need for
Federal data policies that enhance access to information to
enable health system improvements and accelerated medical
research; and three, the potential impact of the new Sunshine
Act on the physician industry collaborations that are critical
engines of healthcare advancement.
On the first point, the HIPAA privacy and security laws are
generally serving patients in the healthcare system well, and
should continue to be the guiding rule regarding the
appropriate and effective use of patient health data. There are
certain aspects of HIPAA, however, that warrant continuing
review and discussion.
We need to keep in mind that HIPAA was created at a time in
which policymakers were not thinking about the knowledge that
could be gained by accessing data residing in large databases
and the technological ability to process that data very
rapidly. It may be necessary to adjust the authorization
components of HIPAA to ensure that data can be used effectively
for research.
Also, in order to transmit data and collaborate in its use,
we need to review the utility of having 50 separate sets of
State privacy laws and regulations instead of a single national
standard.
On the issue of Federal data policy, Healthcare Leadership
Council members have developed a set of consensus multi-sector
principles on data policy that I have submitted for the record.
One of these key principles is our belief that access to
Federal health data should no longer be denied to entities
perceived to have a commercial interest. The profit status of
an organization should not take precedence over the larger
question of how best to conquer disease and improve population
health.
Any standard that restricts access to critical, federally-
held health data is, in fact, detrimental to our shared goals
for medical and human progress. We must put the benefit to
patients first.
Finally, we believe strongly that Congress must diligently
monitor the impact of the Physician Payment Sunshine Act. This
is not a criticism of transparency, which our member companies
practice and HLC strongly endorses. We are concerned, though,
about the transparency without context. We are concerned that
physicians may feel stigmatized by the Federal reporting of
their interactions with manufacturers in a way that does not
communicate the patient benefits of such collaborations.
Some of our member companies are already witnessing
physicians withdrawing from collaborative activities, which can
have a devastating impact not only on innovation, but also on
product efficacy and safety. Congress should monitor the
implementation of this law to ensure that both transparency and
innovation are fully achieved.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for the opportunity to
testify today. We believe that this committee's bipartisan
vision for 21st century cures is an achievable reality, one
that can be accelerated by creating a pathway for the
productive use of data that we already possess.
Thank you, and I will be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Grealy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The attachments to Ms. Grealy's testimony have been
retained in committee files and can be found at http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/IF/IF14/20140722/102524/HHRG-113-IF14-
Wstate-GrealyM-20140722.pdf.]
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. Thanks to all
the witnesses for their testimony. I will begin questioning and
recognize myself for 5 minutes for that purpose. I will start
with you, Dr. Schimizzi.
Different uses for FDA-approved drugs and devices are
constantly being discovered, many times for treatment of
different conditions and diseases or for different populations.
Manufacturers of these products have access to robust data sets
and information that is not always limited to the specific
indications listed in their package inserts.
Why is it important that we responsibly allow providers to
have access to such information to ensure that the most
appropriate treatment options are being considered?
Dr. Schmizzi. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. In
rheumatology we see many patients with rare diseases and
unusual autoimmune problems. And we also see patients who are
referred to us by other specialists for autoimmune problems in
their specialty that they do not know how to handle, so they
send them to us.
In our armamentarium of medications, we have an array of
medications that work very well. Some of them are of low
toxicity, and some of them are of high toxicity. In the event
of a new agent being brought to the United States medical arena
having a high safety profile, but lack an indication for an
orphan disease or a critically important problem in another
organ system, like the eye, for example, use of those
medications would be miraculous and have a high margin of
safety if we had access to information. I am just using the eye
as an example. There are other instances as well. Primary
muscle disease is another one.
Medications are available, but the indications are not
there, and they probably never will be because the numbers of
patients who have these diseases is so small, it would take
many years to discover that the indications were there and
millions of dollars, perhaps tens of millions of dollars, to
identify that.
So if we had access to information that these new
medications might be effective in certain other small diseases
that may have been gleaned from the data that was derived from
the direct clinical trials, then that would be extremely
helpful to us and help guide us in a direction that would
increase efficacy, and increase safety, and maybe even decrease
cost and poor outcomes.
Mr. Pitts. Do you believe that the current restrictions on
off label communications are limiting healthcare professionals'
ability to provide the most appropriate treatment to patients?
And if so, what needs to happen?
Dr. Schmizzi. What was the last part?
Mr. Pitts. If so, what needs to happen?
Dr. Schmizzi. Yes, I do believe that the limitation of
exchange of information is hampering the delivery of healthcare
to some of these patients, especially in my sub-specialty. What
needs to happen is that we need to have access to information
that is locked up in vaults in pharmaceutical companies, locked
up in data sets in study information.
For instance, here is a great example that I can spread to
rheumatology. There is a great drug that came out many years
ago to prevent ulcers and to treat ulcer disease and
esophagitis called Prilosec. The generic name was omeprazole.
Prilosec was a mixture of two different mirror image molecules,
D-enantiomer and an L-enantiomer. It is like a right hand and a
left hand.
Well, it came to light that one of the enantiomers was much
more effective at treating ulcer disease and esophagitis, so
out came esomeprazole, or Nexium, which has proven to be more
effective.
What if there were medications on the market right now that
we have that could treat diseases but have side effects, and
yet if we isolated the D-enantiomer and the L-enantiomer, we
would identify which one was effective and which one caused the
problems. I submit to you that there are drugs in our
compendium right now that have D and L isomers, and the data
sets are probably available in the vaults of pharmaceutical
manufacturers that show the D isomer is more effective than the
L isomer. The L isomer has more complications than the D
isomer. So that would be a dramatic improvement.
So such data sets are locked up. We do not have access to
them, and I do not know that we ever will.
Mr. Pitts. Quickly, Ms. Grealy, you mentioned HIPAA. What
kind of changes should we consider to HIPAA to ensure that big
data can be used effectively for research purposes while still
protecting patient privacy?
Ms. Grealy. Well, when the HIPAA law was originally passed,
there was an exemption for healthcare operations, and that
included the treatment and payment for patients. But sort of
outside that scope was research activity.
So I think a very simple approach would be let's include
healthcare research as if it is a natural part of healthcare
operations.
There are probably several other recommendations that we
could make, but I think the key here is to make sure that we
have an appropriate balance between protecting patient
information, and we believe very strongly in that. We also do
not want to erect barriers to having access to that data.
I think a big part of this is having informed consumers,
educated patients, and especially as we are seeing patients
engage more and more in the management of their own healthcare.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady, and my time has
expired. The chair recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Pallone,
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Pallone. I wanted to start with Dr. Jacques, and then
if I have time, ask Dr. Rising a question. But, Dr. Jacques, I
wanted to better understand what you mean when you talk about
the confusion created by Medicare's vague authority and lack of
administrative agility in Medicare coverage and payment
policies for new innovation technologies.
Could you briefly describe the statutory limitations that
apply to Medicare coverage determinations, both as they relate
to coverage with evidence development and local coverage
determinations? And what are your recommendations for how to
streamline these authorities? And then maybe how does this
existing authority impact the decision making framework for CED
study questions, and what data is needed to trigger and end the
CED study?
Mr. Jacques. The reasonable and necessary standard, which
is essentially the coverage standard for Medicaid, those
provisions are 1862(a)(1) of the Social Security Act, which is
then followed by subsections (a) through (p) that parse things
out for prevention hospice and things along those lines.
CED itself is not defined in the Social Security Act, so
CMS has had to rely on the Agency for Healthcare Research and
Qualities Research Authority under Section 1862(a)(1)(E) of the
Act. Thus ARC has to approve every CED decision.
While the scope of a national coverage determination is
described broadly in statute as a decision under Title 18,
local coverage determinations are defined in the Act only as
decisions under 1862(a)(1)(A). Thus, an LCD could not implement
coverage with evidence development. So even if there were an
item or service that is only furnished within one contractor
region of the entire country, a national decision would be
required to implement CED.
I have been told by various stakeholders that CED could be
approached more eagerly if it were not tied to the formal NCD
process. The current framework forces CMS to apply the CED
requirement to all beneficiaries receiving the item or service
in question, regardless of where they live. This is a
particular challenge for beneficiaries who live in the remote
parts of the country where clinical studies do not normally
happen and clinical trial enrollment is, frankly, unrealistic
for many.
A more agile CED paradigm would permit CED to occur in
parallel with other forms of coverage rather than requiring
everyone to fit through the same door.
Mr. Pallone. Now, you also highlight a rapid decline in the
number of national coverage determinations in the last few
years. How has the lack of staff resources within CMS impacted
that decline, and what, if any, impact has this had on coverage
with evidence development?
Mr. Jacques. I believe that staff reductions are the
largest single cause of the decline in number of national
coverage determinations. And the impact of this decline is
broader than CED because it impacts the Agency's ability to
respond to other requests for coverage.
CED itself generally requires more internal staff work to
develop, and it creates an ongoing need after the publication
of the final decision to interact with sponsors who might want
to conduct clinical trials. By my own estimate, it takes about
three times as much internal effort for CMS staff to do CED
than it does to simply say yes or no.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thank you. And I am going to try to
get this in. Dr. Rising, you note in your testimony that the
taste trial conducted in Europe on heart attacks cost a tiny
fraction, perhaps one-one hundredth of what it would cost in
the U.S., because it was able to make use of patient
registries. However, we also heard in Mr. Mussallem's written
testimony that registries can be very expensive to set up and
maintain, and threshold questions must be answered to determine
when and how registries should be used for post-market data
collection.
Now, I am familiar with registries from the law creating
the 9/11 Health Program. It included a provision to authorize a
registry of people who were exposed to toxic dust from the
attack on the World Trade Center on 9/11. But I do not know
much about registries for assessing medical products.
Can you explain how these registries work, and can you
describe what source of impediments to the use exist, including
why they may be harder, expensive to set up and maintain. And I
would like to know your thoughts and what can be done to
facilitate their use.
Dr. Rising. Sure.
Mr. Pallone. You do not have a lot of time to do it.
Dr. Rising. I will in 30 seconds.
Mr. Pallone. OK.
Dr. Rising. So medical product registries, kind of like the
9/11 responder registry, will follow a group of patients with
one exposure for a period of time. So, for example, we heard a
little bit from Mr. Mussallem about their trans-catheter valve
registry, which follows patients who have gotten a valve for a
period of time in order to assess their long-term outcomes.
Now, while registries can be a tremendous source of
information on the post-market performance of devices, there
are some barriers to setting them up. And one of the biggest
barriers is the lack of interoperability between systems. So,
for example, clinical staff need to enter data in the TBT
registry and then enter a lot of the same data again in
electronic health records. So this kind of added burden on the
staff is one of the biggest drivers for why registries are
currently inefficient in the United States.
Now, in addition to these post-market benefits, registries
can have tremendous benefits for innovation as well. One of the
other benefits that we have seen for the trans-catheter valve
registry that Dr. Shuren talked about at the first hearing was
that data from the registry was used to expand an indication
for the device.
So if we are able to take some steps in this country
forward for registries, we should be able to see significant
benefits both on the safety side and then also on the
innovation side of things.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thanks a lot. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognizes the vice chairman of the full committee, Ms.
Blackburn, 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have got just a
couple of questions that I want to go to, and again, I thank
you all for participating with us and working with us.
There is a lot of bipartisan agreement on this. You have
heard different members of the committee speak to that, finding
a pathway forward so that we deal with the regulatory
framework, provide some certainty, and speed up the process by
which innovation and cures are going to get to our patients is
a shared goal. And so, we thank you for that.
Mr. Mussallem, let us go back to the topic of the registry.
We have talked a little bit about that, and you have all talked
about basically the data and the value of the data that can be
found within those registries and the benefit to our--to
patients from being able to utilize the data in those
registries.
So let us talk a little bit about risks that are there for
the patients or cost that is there. And can you give me just a
little bit of an articulation looking at the other side of this
with risk and cost, both the actual dollar cost, or, as Ms.
Grealy mentioned, the privacy, some of the privacy concerns?
Mr. Mussallem. Yes, thank you very much, Member Blackburn.
And I applaud the bipartisan cooperation toward this shared
goal. Registries can be a powerful tool, and we by and large
think they could be very appropriately used. My only caution
that I mentioned in my testimony is that there are some cases
where technologies and/or therapies are well enough known that
can establish a safety and effectiveness standard without going
through that sort of process.
In the case of the TBT registry, in particular, that I
mentioned, the large group of stakeholders ended up generating
this long list of items to be collected. I mentioned 300 data
fields. Maybe when a technology is brand new and unknown you
want to learn an awful lot about it. The problem is that
becomes quite costly. And at some point, it gets too expensive
to maintain.
Ideally you would have a registry that could be whittled
down to those things that are really most critical that you
would like to measure, and there may be a way to populate it
with electronic data that is already being generated, such that
a registry could be a very cost-effective tool.
In the case of the TBT registry, it literally cost seven
figures plus per year for that total cost. That is shared by a
lot of constituents, including manufacturers. But a lot of the
burden rests on hospitals. They have a burden where they
actually pay a fee every year and additionally have to put on
dedicated staff just to fill out those fields. So not something
to be taken lightly.
Mrs. Blackburn. If you had to give us a list of guiding
principles as we look at a framework for developing some of the
registries, what are those three or four principles that you
would articulate?
Mr. Mussallem. I think it is most important to have a clear
risk benefit analysis and also have clear goals set out by the
registry. There should be a set of rules around the registry
and some governance guidelines around it.
Dr. Rising spoke to the work that Pew Foundation has done
in this area. It is actually very thoughtful, done with a broad
group of stakeholders about the value of registries. And I
think that is not a bad guidepost.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. And let me ask you this. Do you
envision any of these registries moving to the point where the
patient could populate some of those cells and fields
themselves?
Mr. Mussallem. Ideally registries would not be expensive to
populate, and any time that they could be filled out
automatically in an electronic patient record or even, as you
suggest, that a patient could do it themselves, this is
important. I mean, some simple things. Is the patient alive? Is
the patient going through a routine of exercise, or what is the
patient's diet? All these things are very potentially powerful
variables that could provide insight to the value of
technologies.
Mrs. Blackburn. Well, we would hope that anybody populating
one of these with an app on an iPad would indeed be alive and
not have their avatar doing it for them.
Mr. Mussallem. Well said.
Mrs. Blackburn. So, oK. Dr. Schimizzi, let me ask you just
a couple of things on off label use. You had mentioned that,
and I am intrigued by this. I think this is an area that it
holds some promise. It is a legal practice, correct?
Dr. Schmizzi. Yes.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. Do you consider it a best practice to
inform a patient that a therapy that is being prescribed is off
label?
Dr. Schmizzi. I think that is best practice, yes, and I
always do.
Mrs. Blackburn. If informed doctors can legally prescribe
off labeled patients who are also well informed, what would be
the current barriers to that practice?
Dr. Schmizzi. Well, the barrier is we need the information
to pick which drug to use in a difficult situation. And that
information is not always available to us.
In the immune system, there are different cells that are at
work, we know that a certain cell is active in one disease. And
if you suppress that cell, we can suppress the disease or cure
the disease. And that agent might be available for a cancer,
but if we can transpose and use that in this patient, that
would probably work. It would be very nice to have that
information from the pharmaceutical company or manufacturer or
innovator who developed that product that, yes, this is very,
very likely an effective way to use this medicine, but we are
never going to study it because they probably never will.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. I will yield back. I am over time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady, and now
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Waxman, 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Affordable Care
Act strengthened our movement away from a healthcare system
that rewards providers for the volume of services they provide
and toward a system that fosters and promotes high quality,
high value care. The bipartisan SGR legislation is to make this
committee's perspective a permanent change in the reimbursement
rate for physicians under Medicare. That legislation passed out
of this committee and the other committees' jurisdiction and
then furthered that aim by incentivizing care delivery that is
coordinated in alignment with consensus guidelines and best
practices, and as efficient as it is appropriate.
Dr. Jacques, in your testimony you speak of the broad
national goals of Federal health agencies to improve public
health and protect beneficiaries' access to products and
services that demonstrate genuine benefit. You suggest that FDA
approval for drugs and devices puts products on the shelves,
but a prudent purchaser should not blindly pay for those
products without regard to how useful or appropriate they are.
Could you speak to this point: should Medicare really be
paying for products that have no real value or paying more for
products that have no added value? How do we balance a desire
for rapid adoption of new technologies with ensuring that
providers can be confident in the safety and benefit of new
technologies as they are held accountable for their use?
Mr. Jacques. New technologies remind me of teenagers, and
both of my children are adults, so I survived raising teens. We
see glimpses of their future promise, but we also recognize
that not all of them are going to be good drivers as soon as we
put them behind a wheel. As a society, we accept this and we
balance their independence with our risks through a variety of
mechanisms, whether it is a learner's permit or a prohibition
on consuming alcohol or driving with friends.
I believe in an ideal health technology system. We would
have one where lessons are learned quickly and disseminated
broadly. That depends on reliable collection, analysis, and
publication of real world data that arise from using patients
who are more typical than those studies in pivotal trials and
who are treated in their communities by their own physicians.
Mr. Waxman. OK. But what does that mean if a doctor wants
to use a new technology, and he has to be confident that this
is going to be safe and it is going to benefit the patient?
Mr. Jacques. I am sorry if I was obtuse. What I was trying
to convey is that the timing of calling the question is as
critical as the content of the question itself. And especially
for new technologies, the issue is being asked to call the
question arguably prematurely to give it a thumb's up or a
thumb's down when, in fact, what you actually have is an
adolescent technology that has promise, but you do not really
know the final answer.
Mr. Waxman. And should we be paying for that through the
Medicare system when we do not know whether it is going to add
any value to what we already have available to us?
Mr. Jacques. There are people who feel strongly on both
sides of that question, sir.
Mr. Waxman. So when we do we call the previous question to
get their vote?
Well, we hear a lot of concern raised from manufacturers on
the cost of data collection to the healthcare system both in
real terms and in delays of bringing new technologies to
patients. However, as you suggest under the 510(k) paradigm,
some devices may be cleared for marketing with no relevant
clinical trial evidence at all. Could you discuss your concerns
with that program and the potential risk to the healthcare
system of Medicare covering such technologies even under its
coverage with evidence development authority?
Mr. Jacques. Yes. While that paradigm is appropriate for
many low-risk devices, I would focus my own attention on that
subset of cleared devices where untested claims of enhanced
benefit are made beyond the predicate device, or where
subsequent evidence may raise questions about the fundamental
impact of the technology.
I think the premise of the 510(k) program makes it more
difficult for a sponsor to articulate an enhanced value
proposition for a technology when it has been found to be
substantially equivalent to an old technology.
And that to me is the critical point in terms of paying for
value. That value proposition that you are essentially better
than something is hard to make if you have not actually been
compared to anything else.
Mr. Waxman. So we may have a 510(k) to get the device
approved, but we ought to know before we start paying a lot of
money for it that it is going to work.
Mr. Jacques. Yes, sir.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognizes the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Dr. Burgess,
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
the ranking member for his generosity in mentioning H.R. 4015,
which was the repeal of the sustainable growth rate formula,
which did come through this committee. We are about at the 1-
year anniversary of that 51 to zero vote. That was a landmark
occasion for the committee. And in many ways, the development
of that SGR policy was very similar to what is happening with
the Cures Initiative. So I think that provides a template that
ultimately could speak to success for the Cures Initiative that
as we opened the doors up, we took information, asked for
information from physicians, from patients, as to what they
needed to see in the repeal of the sustainable growth rate. As
a result, nobody got exactly what they wanted, but we got a
product that was ultimately supportable by both Republicans and
Democrats on this committee, and ultimately did pass the floor
of the House, though we are still waiting on the Senate.
Ms. Grealy, I need to ask you a question about--there is a
bill that Donna Christensen and I have done, H.R. 2663, which
deals with CBO scoring, because oftentimes it seems like there
are good ideas that are developed within the healthcare sphere,
but then CMS will say, but you know what? All we can do--or the
CBO will say CMS just tells us about the cost, so all we can do
is report to you on the cost. So the ability to implement this
new regimen is, in fact, a cost driver for the system, and
cannot be regarded as a cost saver.
And, in fact, in this committee, even though I did not
support the Affordable Care Act, on this committee I recognized
a great deal of anxiety on the part of my Democratic
counterparts in dealing with Mr. Elmendorf at the Congressional
Budget Office. Wait a minute, we get no credit for all of the
savings we are going to get from treating things in a more
timely fashion.
So in your role at the Healthcare Leadership Council, have
you studied that issue at all?
Ms. Grealy. Yes, Mr. Burgess, and we strongly support the
legislation----
Mr. Burgess. I felt you would say that.
Ms. Grealy. You think so.
Mr. Burgess. That is why I asked you.
Ms. Grealy. And delighted that it is bipartisan legislation
as well. But as you know, innovation plays a strong role in
wellness and prevention. And what our members have seen are
long-term savings when you make that investment in wellness and
prevention.
And as you point out, unfortunately CBO, in their
traditional scoring methods, does not give you credit for those
long-term savings. And we know that 70 to 80 percent of
healthcare costs today are going towards the treatment of
preventable chronic disease, and we know that if we make an
investment over the long term, we will see a dramatic reduction
in those healthcare costs. So your legislation would not
mandate that CBO have this longer scoring window, but at least
we would have that option so that you as members of Congress
could see that information and then make your decision on
making those investments, which may have a short-term cost, but
we know in the long term will result in better health and lower
costs for the healthcare system.
Mr. Burgess. Well, oftentimes it seems today we only end up
talking about the costs of a therapy and we do not recognize
the fact that, my goodness, we have beaten one of the big
scourges of people's health. The hepatitis C treatment comes to
mind. Instead of talking about the victory over hepatitis C, a
disease that did not even have a name when I was in residency.
We called it non-A/non-B hepatitis. And now there is a
treatment for it that is, in fact, a cure. That is pretty big
news.
So it is my hope that the Cures Initiative will be able to
focus on those things. Yes, we will talk about price and we
will talk about cost as we go through. But the big news, the
headline is hepatitis C vanquished in our lifetimes, and that
is a big deal.
Dr. Schmizzi, I wanted to ask you a question on the
Sunshine Act and the Sunshine Act provision that was contained
in the Affordable Care Act. It does seem like it was written
pretty broadly, and now the implementation is or runs the risk
of hindering communication and information sharing among
physicians.
So a rule that came out over the 4th of July weekend may
prevent some of the country's most qualified physicians from
giving lectures to fellow physicians through continuing medical
education. Have you heard of providers that are having
difficulty getting access to medical studies or even finding it
more difficult to access continuing education because of the
way this law is being implemented?
Dr. Schmizzi. Excuse me, Congressman. I do not hear of
anything yet, but I can certainly see it coming that the
Sunshine Act provision, the way it is written, can actually
inhibit speakers from wanting to attend or be participants in a
medical conference because of the information that will be
published about them being paid and where the money comes from.
Most institutions, most professional associations get their
funding from member dues, but they also get funding from
industry support in the form of gifts or donations. And those
gifts and donations, if they are identified to be tied to CME
credits, can actually impair the desire of academicians and
thought leaders in medicine to give those presentations in
front of those societies. So it can have a real negative impact
on that. I do not believe it has happened yet in my sub-
specialty, but it certainly is possible.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you for that answer. Mr. Chairman, I
hope that is something that this committee will keep in mind
and continue to monitor as we go forward. I will yield back.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again, thank our
witnesses for being here. A central component in improving the
quality of our healthcare system and developing 21st century
cures must be data-driven innovation. Mr. Mussallem, in your
testimony you talked about the coverage for evidence
development CED determination, how it can be useful if used
appropriately.
However, the challenge of ensuring CED is a tool for the
reimbursement system to give patients access to groundbreaking
therapies rather than the burden that ultimately limit
innovation remains before us. Can you tell us how we might be
able to handle that?
Mr. Mussallem. Sure. Particularly the use of CED, I think,
is valuable for therapies that are new and really have not been
evaluated in the past. In many cases, the therapies that can be
reimbursed are ones that are well understood, and you could
establish the safety and a safe and necessary threshold. But in
the case where you just do not know much because they are
novel, it is helpful to be able to apply CED.
It is not always clear in the beginning of the CED process
exactly what evidence is going to be collected and how much is
necessary. And one of the things that is also not clear about
CED is when does it come to an end? At some point in the
initial stages of a technology, it is very valuable to learn as
much as you can and collect that evidence. But once you have
done that for some period of time, it is appropriate for CED to
sunset so that it does not just become another layer of cost
that sits on the healthcare system.
And so, it is important, I think, to define CED more
thoughtfully and carefully as we think about using it as a
tool. But it has great promise for entering areas that are
unknown.
Mr. Green. OK. Do you have any mechanisms you would suggest
to enhance the coverage of these innovative therapies?
Mr. Mussallem. It is not a simple question. In the case of
trans-catheter technology, CED was used, and it was used that
allows for this important aspect of medical device development
to be evaluated, different than a drug.
Medical technology is one that is an iterative process.
Because we make tools for physicians, often we get a lot of
feedback from physicians and they say, could you make it
better? Could you make it smaller? Could you make it do things
that it does not do today? And we respond to that. And through
those changes, therapy improves dramatically.
And so, a coverage evidence development tool that is
flexible, and this is what was done in the case of trans-
catheter heart valves, allowed for the system to accommodate
new generations, new indications, as the evidence supported it.
So that is a powerful use of that tool.
Mr. Green. Dr. Jacques, is there any other mechanism
available to provide coverage to these new innovations?
Mr. Jacques. There are other mechanisms, including
regulations concerning Medicare coverage for FDA-approved
Category B investigational device exemption trials, the
challenge being that aside from CED and those IDEs, there is
not an obvious path for other sorts of valuable research.
Mr. Green. OK. Anyone else on the panel for those issues or
those questions?
If not, our entire healthcare system is shifting to a model
that embraces shared decision making by informed patients whose
views are valued and considered at every stage of the
treatment. We have heard a great deal about the potential value
for patient preference information and regulatory risk benefit
determinations, particularly in the context of medical device
pre-market approval.
The FDA has emphasized that patient tolerance for risk and
perspective on benefit is an important consideration. It makes
sense for the innovators and regulators to consider patient
perspectives as they develop and evaluate medical devices.
Mr. Mussallem, again, what potential benefit do you see
from incorporating patient preference information in regulatory
determinations, and do you have any suggestion on how it could
be incorporated in the process?
Mr. Mussallem. Sure. All medical technology and all medical
advancements are not created equal. Some can have a profound
impact on patients' lives. In our case, sometimes it is the
only difference between life and death for these patients. So
when you are making that sort of a consideration as a
regulator, you would really love that the regulators, they have
the ability to apply a risk benefit analysis when they are
thinking about what they should do in terms of allowing this
technology to come to patients.
If you keep the bar too high in the pre-market approval
setting, what you might do is in an effort to achieve great
science, again allow patients to not benefit and, in fact, die
or live very poor quality of life. And sometimes it would make
some sense to allow a certain element of risk, certainly to
safeguard against safety concerns, and have a basic level of
evidence, but to study in a post-market setting the true depth
of efficacy in a real-world setting, and then apply that and
make adjustments.
So this is one that you would not want to be unfettered,
but to give regulators, in effect, not only the ability to, but
the mandate to take a risk benefit analysis I think would be a
powerful enhancement for the system and make it a learning
system rather than what we have today.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Lance, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon to
you all. Ms. Grealy, in your testimony you state that the key
to harnessing the potential of real time data lies in putting
the policies and practices in place that allow us to harness
this data. You then go on to state the importance of protecting
confidential health information while also making data
appropriately accessible under HIPAA.
In several of our recent hearings, witnesses have pointed
out the challenges that arise in ensuring that this innovative
technology is HIPAA compliant. Are there ways in which HIPAA
inappropriately restricts the sharing and use of patient data
by researchers and medical providers?
Ms. Grealy. Well, I think it is an ongoing challenge. And
really what are trying to do is find the appropriate balance
between protecting that patient information, but not stifling
the innovation or access. And so we constantly have to keep
that in mind.
And periodically proposals are put forward that really
would consume a lot of resources and time, and really do not
create any particular value for the patient. I will use an
example of that disclosure of everyone who has had access to
the patient information, whether they are within that
healthcare operations that I discussed, which is reasonably
expected by patients.
So I think it is all about making sure that we do not try
to micromanage this, and we really put the patient at the
center of it. And how can we create better value for that
patient? And so, as we are looking at new ways and new access
to information, and I will use as an example of that, as I
mentioned earlier, patient engagement and the new tools for
that, the mobile apps.
And we are spending a lot of time, those of us that have
been minding the HIPAA world for many, many years, working with
those app developers and telling them, as you are approaching
this, we do not want to hinder your innovation, but try to
build into your system up front the appropriate patient
protections and information protections. But again, the key is
let us not stifle that innovation by them, and let us not defer
a whole lot of resources that could be going towards patient
care and treatment and innovation by getting caught up in too
much compliance activity.
Mr. Lance. Is there something we should be doing here in
Congress to make this a better situation?
Ms. Grealy. I would almost say do not do too much.
Mr. Lance. First do no harm.
Ms. Grealy. Yes, first do no harm.
Mr. Lance. To coin a phrase.
Ms. Grealy. Yes. And as we are looking, we have heard a lot
today about registries and how we can use that information. I
would say, again, let us not stifle that access and the use of
that information.
And the other very powerful thing that we are seeing that I
think is going to be make all of this much more available and
much more usable is what is happening with health information
technology. I do not think any of us could have imagined even 5
years ago how rapidly we are nowable to build these databases
and how rapidly we are not able to access that information. And
more importantly, get those best practices to the physicians
right as they are treating the patients and having those
practice guidelines, which is going to go a long way towards
creating that value that we have all talked about in our
healthcare system.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. The Physician Payments Sunshine Act,
usually known as the Sunshine Act, requires manufacturers of
drugs and medical devices that participate in Federal health
programs to report payments to physicians in teaching
hospitals. In your judgment, has that data sharing in this
regard been beneficial to medical innovation? Ms. Grealy?
Ms. Grealy. Again, I would caution, and I think we heard a
lot today on this panel. We all believe in transparency. We
think that is important, and having the disclosures about
collaborations between physician and industry.
What we are most concerned about, and what we have actually
seen already is the chilling effect, that physicians are
concerned. Wait a minute, this is a minimum amount of money. It
is just not worth it to have my name on a list when there is no
context about what was the value of that collaboration.
And I think you heard Mr. Mussallem talk about their
interactions with physicians as they are developing new cures,
new devices. It is absolutely critical. And their partnerships
with academic health institutions, absolutely critical.
So again, it is about balance. We think there should be
reporting this information, but it needs to be in context so
that people know what is the value of having physicians working
with manufacturers, and how does that benefit patients.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. My time has expired. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it
very much. First question is for Dr. Schmizzi. There are about
7,000 diseases and only about 500 treatments available.
Patients with rare diseases frequently have no approved
treatments. This forces these patients to find off label usage
for medication to treat their condition. If the FDA has rules
limiting information to doctors and patients, this could harm a
patient's health. And I know this was touched on earlier.
Our health system should be patient-centered type of care,
in my opinion. Given that, how can we ensure that patients and
their physicians have access to information, whether it be on
label or off label uses, so that it can determine the best
course for treatment?
Dr. Schmizzi. Thank you, Congressman. I think the best way
to do that is to ask the FDA or direct the FDA by legislation,
or statute, or regulation changes, to allow that communication
to go forward. Right that now communication is badly stifled,
and much of the information that pharmaceutical manufacturers
and innovators have is hidden from our view.
Rheumatology treats many diseases that have no defined
treatment. There is no medication that is defined to treat
Sjogren's syndrome. There is not defined treatment, no
medication specifically defined to treat chondrocalcinosis.
Some of these unusual diseases that are not really rare. We see
a lot of people with that, but we have no defined mechanism or
medicine that is approved for the use in these diseases.
But things like Sjogren's syndrome, I am certain that the
pharmaceutical company that has manufactured some of the
medications available today have had crossovers with patients
who have Sjogren's syndrome, and they have data on how those
patients' Sjogren's symptoms improved or worsened, which is
also important to know. Did a particular medication make that
particular subset of symptoms worse?
Those things are important for us to know, but those things
may not be readily available to us. And those would be very
helpful to have.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Would it improve the standard of
care to have these indications on the label, such as ensuring
correct dosage and access to insurance reimbursement? And
should we incentivize sponsors to do the additional studies to
get these off label uses on label?
Dr. Schmizzi. I think incentivization to do some of these
studies on these small diseases would be very, very helpful. It
took 15 years to define that dermatomyositis was treatable with
a medication that has been on the market for 20 years. It took
that long to get a large enough sample size to prove that the
medication really worked. And dermatomyositis is a devastating
inflammatory disease of the muscle that destroys muscle tissue
and skin.
So incentivizing those types of things would go a long way.
And the National Institutes of Health already does that, and
they were the ones who sponsored the actual study on
dermatomyositis. But incentivizing manufacturers to go forward
with some of these smaller diseases would be very helpful, yes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Thank you very much. Mr.
Mussallem, you mentioned that it was 4 years after the EU
approval before the FDA approved the SAPIEN valve. Is the U.S.
typically behind the EU for device approval? Why, and how can
we accelerate the process?
Mr. Mussallem. Yes, it was 4 years' difference. I would say
generally in medical devices and medical technology,
manufacturers would introduce their products first in Europe.
The burden of proof to be able to introduce in Europe is much
lower than the burden of proof required by the FDA.
There is a level of safety that needs to be established in
Europe, but a much lower level of efficaciousness that is
required that is required before it moves to the marketplace.
And it is left to the judgment of physicians and patients on
whether it should be used, and the FDA requires a much higher
level of science to bring it to the United States.
Mr. Bilirakis. How can we accelerate the process here in
the United States?
Mr. Mussallem. Well, there are several ideas, and a number
of them have actually been mentioned by Jeff Shuren, who is
responsible for CDR-8, including trying to think more carefully
and take a risk benefit analysis, and think carefully about
what might be collected in a pre-market setting versus a post-
market setting.
In the cases where patients really need the benefit, if you
were to have a pre-market setting that was not so onerous, but
rather have more extensive study in the post-market setting,
what you could do then is potentially speed these cures to
people that really need it when in the judgment of FDA it was
the right thing to do. And at the same time, make sure that you
are collecting the evidence so that therapies that are winners
get supported and losers get stopped.
Mr. Bilirakis. Well, thank you very much. Appreciate that.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentleman, and now
recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Ellmers, 5
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to our
panel, especially Dr. Schimizzi--welcome--from Wilmington,
North Carolina, one of my very favorite places and just down
the road from Dunn, North Carolina.
Dr. Jacques, I have a question for you. You state that CMS
needs unambiguous authority to review clinical trials when
claims related to these trials will be submitted for Medicare
payment. In what ways is CMS authority in this respect limited
now, and how does this impact the search for cures?
Mr. Jacques. At a fundamental level, one would expect that
the Medicare program or any insurance company would know what
it is paying for as opposed to paying blindly. And my
understanding is periodically Congress asks Medicare how much
research are you paying for, and my understanding is the Agency
has been unable to actually produce a number. So that would be
helpful to know.
I think that Medicare engagement on research would actually
serve a number of purposes because I have found much to my own
frustration while I was a civil servant that there would often
be times when companies would have come in with the data that
they had, and we would sit there around the table going, if
only 2 years ago you had made this small change it would have
made a very large course direction in where you came up.
So the challenge is that Medicare covers routine costs in
clinical trials based on a White House executive order from the
end of the Clinton Administration. There is then a distinct
regulation on FDA Category B investigational device exemptions,
and then there is CED. And in any particular trial, there may
be an overlap of those things, so CED would include routine
costs, for example. There may be CED that might also be
combined in the context of an FDA IDE approval study.
And because all of these things are siloed, it is very,
very difficult at the staff level when a prospective
investigator comes in and says, oK, here is my clinical trial.
These are all the things I want to do. Can you tell me if it is
covered or not. And that can be a conversation that takes
months to get to all the details.
And I believe that if CMS simply had a singular authority
that would relate to this, it could then publish an actual
integrated policy where all the pieces actually fit, and you
were not running all over the place trying to find different
parts of an answer.
Mrs. Ellmers. Mr. Mussellum and Dr. Schimizzi, it looked
like you were very intrigued by Dr. Jacques' answer. Is there
anything that either one of you would like to comment on?
Mr. Mussallem. Yes. We think that just by listening to
comments of Dr. Jacques and others in CMS, we have heard that
there are limitations to what policy allows CMS to do. And also
that there are limitations associated with their staffing
levels, and that is concerning to us. We are dependent on
payment to be able to bring these technologies to patients.
One of their particular things that are most noteworthy is
much of the great medical breakthroughs come from individuals,
or very small companies, or somebody that just has a great
idea. And being able to take that from a napkin to reality is
becoming longer and longer and more and more costly.
And to be able to have a conversation with CMS that clearly
defines a predictable process would be very powerful to those
organizations. And this unpredictability has a chilling effect
on innovation, so that kind of clarity would be very positive.
Mrs. Ellmers. Dr. Schmizzi?
Dr. Schmizzi. I have found that what Dr. Jacques mentioned
about staffing problems being an issue with national coverage
determinations and local coverage determinations, contrasting
one another, conflicting, very intriguing especially because
that is a topic that has really hit us very hard this last year
when we have a patient who may live in North Carolina part of
the year and New York another part of the year, and they have
Medicare. They may be able to get the medication in North
Carolina, but when they go to New York the medication is denied
because the carriers are different and the coverage
determination is different.
It would be really nice to have a uniform set of rules.
Mrs. Ellmers. Centralized.
Dr. Schmizzi. Yes. I mean, that is essentially what the
national coverage determination was meant to do. But I can now
understand, given what I have heard today, that it might indeed
be a staffing problem that does not allow CMS to act on the
national level, and allows individual carriers to make
different determinations in different States, which makes it
difficult for a patient to get the same care in different areas
of the country.
Mrs. Ellmers. Right. Well, thank you. And my time is about
expired, so I will leave it at that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady, and now
recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms. DeGette, 5 minutes
for questions.
Ms. DeGette. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you again for your commitment to these hearings.
Mr. Mussallem, in your written testimony you mentioned some
of the advantages of registries to help with post-market
surveillance. And you talk about the American College of
Cardiology and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons working
collaboratively to create the STSACCTVT registry. Can you talk
to us a little bit more about that registry, when it was
formed, the cost, and who can access that data and information?
Mr. Mussallem. Yes, thank you. It was a remarkable
collaboration. And again, routinely when a new technology is
approved, FDA would mandate a post-approval study. In this
case, the idea of mandating a post-approval study took a couple
of forms, and an alternative was presented to collect data in a
registry rather than collect more extensive data on a smaller
group of people.
Through conversations with CMS--as a matter of fact, this
actually became one where CMS also became partners in this
discussion as well as a number of other stakeholders. It
actually became part of the national coverage determination
because the national coverage determination said we will pay
for this new procedure if you are collecting evidence. And they
did that under the provisions of coverage with evidence
development.
So this registry became multi-purpose, and it did a few
things. One is it became the post-approval study for FDA and to
follow patients on a long-term basis with this new therapy, and
every patient gets this, so it is a very large and powerful
database. It became the tool used for evidence collection for
CMS in terms of their ultimate decision on coverage for
evidence development. And it just became very powerful to the
medical community because here was a set of data that rather
than being managed by a company----
Ms. DeGette. Excuse me. Excuse me. They only give me 5
minutes.
Mr. Mussallem. I am sorry.
Ms. DeGette. And I appreciate every minute of that. Who can
access that data and information from that registry?
Mr. Mussallem. Yes. That is exactly where I was going.
Ms. DeGette. OK.
Mr. Mussallem. This data is managed by the American College
of Cardiology and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons as a matter
of fact. So it is housed within their organization, and so they
have access to it. There is an advisory board that includes
many of the members of those societies that actually ride herd
over that data and publish results from that data on a routine
basis.
Ms. DeGette. OK. Now, there are some limitations, I think,
that you and others have pointed out with registries. And I am
wondering, do you think it is just because we do not have a lot
of experience with it?
Mr. Mussallem. I think there is concern that we do not have
experience with registries, and that is certainly true. We have
no experience, for example, in our field of heart valves.
Ms. DeGette. Right. Right. So we just need to learn. Dr.
Rising, I wanted to ask you quickly along these lines, in your
testimony you talked about the Sentinel Initiative as a
possible alternative or supplement to registries. Can you talk
about how those can work for data collection?
Dr. Rising. Sure. I would be happy, thanks. So Congress
instructed FDA to establish the Sentinel Program in 2007 to
proactively monitor for problems with drugs and biologics on
the market. And in 2012, Congress instructed FDA to expand
Sentinel to include medical devices.
Now, what Sentinel is it uses claims data, almost
exclusively claim data, housed by payers to look for
associations between exposure to a particular product and then
a particular health outcome.
Now, Sentinel could be expanded to devices except that
right now there is no specific information on a device that is
used in care on the claims form. So a payer might have
information that they did a hip replacement that they are
paying for, but they have no information on the specific hop
replacements that were used.
Ms. DeGette. Right. Right.
Dr. Rising. So to expand Sentinel to include devices, a new
field needs to be placed on the claims form. And in general,
and we are a big supporter of using existing structures, such
as claims forms, to capture new information like this.
Ms. DeGette. And, Mr. Mussallem, in your testimony you said
that we need more resources and support for FDA. And I am
wondering what types of resources you think we need. We have
heard others talking about CMS. I am wondering about FDA.
Mr. Mussallem. You know, I think the leadership at FDA has
a pretty clear vision of some things that need to change, and
they have done a pretty good job of articulating that through
their strategic plan.
Ms. DeGette. Right. They have also told us about it, too.
Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The chair thanks the gentlelady. I have a
unanimous consent request. I would like to insert a letter from
the Lupus Foundation of America into the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
Mr. Pitts. This has been another very informative and
important hearing. Thank you very much for testifying today. We
will have a lot of follow-up questions I am sure from members.
We will send those to you. We ask that you please respond
promptly. Members will have 10 business days to submit their
questions for the record. That means they should submit their
questions by the close of business on Tuesday, August the 5th.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[ Whereupon, at 4:39 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

When we first launched the 21st Century Cures initiative in
April, we had a pretty good idea that learning about the
benefits and risks of a drug or device doesn't end when FDA
initially approves or clears the product for use in certain
patients with a specific disease or set of conditions. Since
then, we have heard repeatedly that in many ways it is only
just beginning.
Different uses for drugs or devices are constantly being
discovered by physicians, researchers and scientists in
academia and industry. Particularly in the context of devices,
improvements are continually made to products based on new
evidence being developed about how certain patients are
responding to certain treatments, technologies, or combinations
thereof. We must work to ensure that our regulatory and
reimbursement policies encourage this iterative process and do
not stifle innovation.
This type of ongoing evidence development, collaboration,
and communication must be facilitated, not hindered by any
policies in place that do not ultimately benefit patients. As
part of the 21st Century Cures initiative, I am committed to
evaluating how Congress can play a role in breaking down any of
these legal or regulatory barriers and encouraging
communication and collaboration between and among patients,
doctors, and scientists regarding new data, research, and
results.
At our digital healthcare roundtable, we learned about the
many exciting opportunities to capture and analyze data in
real-world delivery settings to generate meaningful insight and
specific evidence about which type of treatments are working
better on which type of conditions or diseases in which type of
patients-often right down to the molecular level. During our
joint hearing of the Health and Telecommunications
subcommittees, we learned more about the role electronic health
records and increased data sharing can play in that process,
but also heard about the challenges and privacy issues we must
address in order for such potential to become reality.
As we stated from the outset in our first Cures white
paper, the policies we have in place must allow for health care
delivery to serve as a platform for new discovery and
development. This hearing will provide a great opportunity to
learn how we can encourage and reward ongoing evidence
development and not unduly limit how such evidence is discussed
or communicated to patients and providers.
----------

Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

Thank you Chairman Pitts. Today's hearing is a broader
effort to better understand how data collection and the
exchange of patient information can be improved to help
facilitate 21st Century Cures.
The development process of medical products, as we have
learned, has many layers. Throughout our meetings on this
initiative we have heard that FDA and NIH are driving medical
advances and innovative approaches to clinical trial designs.
NIH also develops and funds the basic research that makes
medical advances possible. FDA, meanwhile, has made full use of
early indicators of effectiveness, when the science justifies
their use, to enable it to approve drugs based on more limited
data than would otherwise be possible.
But there are still challenges to taking full advantage of
these advances. For example, we've heard that there are
obstacles to patient recruitment for clinical trials. Today I
hope we can better understand about what methods can be used to
facilitate initial product development but also allow for
further evaluation of the effects of drugs and devices already
on the market. I am particularly interested in the role patient
registries and electronic health records can play.
We all want the best cutting edge medicines and treatments
to get to the patients who need them. But we must also ensure
that we have good tools for post market monitoring. So I'm also
interested in how electronic health records can facilitate such
monitoring and enable greater participation in clinical trials,
while also safeguarding patient privacy under HIPAA.
Another topic we will hear extensively about today is how
drugs and devices, once developed, get reimbursed--highlighting
the process by which new drugs and devices under federal health
programs like Medicare gain coverage. Clinical trials don't
always provide the necessary clinical evidence to enable the
Medicare program to determine whether the coverage of a
particular drug or device is reasonable and necessary for its
particular patient subpopulation. With the inability of
Medicare to negotiate prices and the increasing price of new
drugs and biologics, it is incumbent upon Medicare to be very
diligent in its coverage decisions.
Getting a treatment or a cure to a patient has implications
for industry, payors and patients alike. So how do we ensure
access to these products? In addition, medicines and treatments
alone will not ensure the best outcomes. Providers have a
critical role to play in the quality of care patients receive.
Mr. Chairman, these are complicated issues. I want our
researchers and scientists to have access to the funding
necessary to make discoveries; I want our companies to operate
in an environment where innovations can flourish; and I want
patients to have access to safe and effective treatments. I'm
not entirely sure a package of laws is needed to accomplish all
of these goals, but I'm hopeful that Democrats and Republicans
can work together moving forward to accomplish these goals.
Thank you.
----------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
