- EPA'S PROPOSED CARBON DIOXIDE REGULATIONS FOR POWER PLANTS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EPA'S PROPOSED CARBON DIOXIDE REGULATIONS FOR POWER PLANTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND POWER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 19, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-155

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

92-469 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  GENE GREEN, Texas
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                      JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            Islands
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PAUL TONKO, New York
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

_____

Subcommittee on Energy and Power

ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky
Chairman
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               PAUL TONKO, New York
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            GENE GREEN, Texas
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                LOIS CAPPS, California
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN BARROW, Georgia
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                      Islands
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             KATHY CASTOR, Florida
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Ed Whitfield, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, opening statement....................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     4
Hon. Joe Barton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, opening statement.......................................    10
Hon. Bobby L. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois, opening statement.................................    11
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, prepared statement...................................    70

Witnesses

Janet McCabe, Acting Assistant Administrator, Office of Air and
Radiation, Environmental Protection Agency.....................    12
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Answers to submitted questions...............................    81

Submitted Material

Report of June 2014, ``The Clean Air Act's Track Record: Clean
Air and Economic Growth,'' committee Democratic staff,
submitted by Mr. Waxman........................................     6
Letter of June 18, 2014, from American Lung Association, et al.,
to Senators and Representatives, submitted by Mrs. Capps.......    40
Statement of June 19, 2014, American Forest & Paper Association
and American Wood Council, submitted by Mr. Griffith...........    72
Report, ``A Legislative History of the Clean Air Act Amendments
of 1990,'' Volume I, Book 2, Chapter 2 excerpts, submitted by
Mr. Whitfield..................................................    75

EPA'S PROPOSED CARBON DIOXIDE REGULATIONS FOR POWER PLANTS

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 19, 2014

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Power,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:31 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Whitfield
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Whitfield, Shimkus, Pitts,
Terry, Burgess, Latta, Cassidy, Olson, McKinley, Gardner,
Pompeo, Kinzinger, Griffith, Barton, Upton (ex officio), Rush,
McNerney, Tonko, Yarmuth, Engel, Green, Capps, Doyle, Barrow,
Matsui, Castor and Waxman (ex officio).
Staff present: Nick Abraham, Legislative Clerk; Gary
Andres, Staff Director; Charlotte Baker, Deputy Communications
Director; Leighton Brown, Press Assistant; Allison Busbee,
Policy Coordinator, Energy and Power; Annie Caputo,
Professional Staff Member; Patrick Currier, Counsel, Energy and
Power; Tom Hassenboehler, Chief Counsel, Energy and Power; Ben
Lieberman, Counsel, Energy and Power; Brandon Mooney,
Professional Staff Member; Mary Neumayr, Senior Energy Counsel;
Graham Pittman, Staff Assistant; Chris Sarley, Policy
Coordinator, Environment and the Economy; Peter Spencer,
Professional Staff Member, Oversight; Tom Wilbur, Digital Media
Advisor; Jean Woodrow, Director of Information Technology; Jeff
Baran, Democratic Staff Director, Energy and the Environment;
Phil Barnett, Democratic Staff Director; Caitlin Haberman,
Democratic Policy Analyst; Bruce Ho, Democratic Counsel;
Elizabeth Letter, Democratic Press Secretary; Karen Lightfoot,
Democratic Communications Director and Senior Policy Advisor;
and Alexandra Teitz, Democratic Chief Counsel, Environment and
Energy.
Mr. Whitfield. I would like to call the hearing to order
this morning, and today we will be discussing EPA's proposed
regulations targeting carbon dioxide emissions from existing
electric power plants, which was proposed on June 2nd.
Before I recognize myself for an opening statement, I want
to welcome Ms. McCabe. We appreciate her being with us this
morning.
It is also my understanding that we have a number of
interns here today, some from offices here in the Congress, but
I know we have quite a few also from EPA, so we welcome the EPA
interns as well as the interns from Capitol Hill. And with
that, I will recognize myself for a 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ED WHITFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY

Ms. McCabe, we are delighted that you are here today. All
of us view this as a significant, in many ways unprecedented,
regulation, and pursuant to the Constitution, I can assure you
that Congress is going to do its role and look very closely at
this over 600-page regulation that would dramatically change
the way electricity is produced in America.
And it is certainly a lot more than about coal. This is one
of those regulations that will affect every person in America,
whether it be a manufacturing plant, electric generator, a
consumer of electricity, or whatever it might be, so we--and
this will be the first of many hearings on this regulation.
Now, this proposal looks similar to the cap-and-trade
legislation that the Obama administration advocated for a long,
long time. They attempted to pass it in 2009. It passed the
House, but it was not successful in passing the Senate. Now,
the President, as he has said, is going to act unilaterally,
and he has directed EPA to set rules and regulations that are
essentially, and many of us believe, the majority of us believe
on this committee, at least, they are unworkable and will not
even have an impact on our future emissions of greenhouse gases
or affect global temperatures.
Former EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson confirmed this when
she testified before this subcommittee: We will not ultimately
be able to change the amount of CO
2
that is
accumulating in the atmosphere alone. And then the EPA
Administrator Gina McCarthy summed up the views of this
administration when she testified before this subcommittee,
saying that EPA does not measure whether its regulations and
the tens of billions of dollars spent by the administration
will actually affect future climate change. It is simply part
of an overall strategy to demonstrate the President's global
leadership. So these actions appear to be about removing coal
as an energy source in America and promoting President Obama's
leadership perception in the international community.
Now, beyond the President's unwillingness to listen to the
American people, this proposal raises serious policy and legal
questions. EPA has never been this extreme under 111(d) before.
Instead of the States establishing a performance standard for
units within the source category, EPA is now dictating to the
States the level of emission reductions that each State must
make, so statewide rather than individual units. In essence,
they are requiring the States to alter the way in which
electricity utility systems make power, and in our experience
with oversight of this agency, the proposed rule rarely changes
significantly before it is finalized, so we are talking about a
proposed rule that was just introduced a few--a couple of weeks
ago, but our experience is that even after the comment period,
that rule really becomes final.
Now, the original Clean Air Act respected the appropriate
role for States and local governments. In fact, the statute
begins with the congressional finding that air pollution
prevention is the primary responsibility of State and local
governments. This policy is also reflected in the language of
section 111(d), which has previously been used by EPA in a very
limited and very deferential manner. But with this proposed
rule, as I said earlier, EPA appears to be casting aside all
precedent and expansively interpreting its authority under this
section as a justification to force States to redesign their
electricity-generating systems even though two previous EPA
Administrators have said it will not have any impact on global
warming.
So, is this a power grab? It seems to demonstrate once
again that this administration is getting the reputation that
we hear repeatedly of being a unilateralist; that the President
will decide what is best for America as he did when he went to
the Copenhagen conference in 2009 and unilaterally committed
America to certain emissions without discussing it with the
Congress, without discussing it with job creators.
So we welcome this opportunity to talk to you in depth
about this proposal, and thank you again for being with us.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whitfield follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Ed Whitfield

This morning we will be discussing EPA's proposed
regulations targeting carbon dioxide emissions from existing
electric power plants. On June 2nd the long-anticipated carbon
dioxide regulations for existing power plants were proposed.
This is the first opportunity Congress has had to hear
directly from the agency exactly why it thinks it can issue
this proposal, what it thinks the proposal should do, how the
proposal will be implemented, and what it will accomplish. And
I welcome our witness, Janet McCabe, EPA Acting Assistant
Administrator for Air and Radiation, who has come to explain
the rule and answer our initial questions today. This will not
be our only opportunity to take testimony on the proposal or to
hear from the agency. This is just the beginning of what we can
assure to be a deliberate, careful oversight of the agency's
regulatory action.
I have strong concerns at the outset that this proposal
looks very similar to the cap-and-trade legislation the Obama
administration tried to ram through Congress in 2009. Now, the
President is acting unilaterally in directing the EPA to set
rules and regulations that are essentially unworkable and will
not even have an impact on our future emissions of greenhouse
gases or global temperatures. Former EPA Administrator Lisa
Jackson confirmed this when she testified before this
subcommittee and said ``We will not ultimately be able to
change the amount of CO
2
that is accumulating in the
atmosphere alone.''
And, EPA Administrator Gina McCarthy also summed up the
views of this administration when she testified before this
subcommittee saying, that her agency (EPA) does not measure
whether its regulations and the tens of billions of dollars
spent by the administration will actually affect future climate
change, it is simply part of an ``overall strategy'' to
demonstrate global leadership. These actions are all in an
effort to destroy coal as an energy source in America and
become a ``leader'' in the international community.
Beyond the President's unwillingness to listen to the
American people, this proposal raises serious policy and legal
questions. This proposal is like nothing EPA has ever proposed
before as a performance standard--even more so than any of the
agency's controversial actions targeting the Nation's coal-
based electricity generators. Instead of calling on the States
to establish a performance standard for units within the source
category, it appears that EPA is dictating to the States the
levels of emissions reductions that each State must make, in
essence proposing to require States to alter the way in which
their electric utility systems make power. And, in our
experience with oversight of this agency, the proposed rule
rarely changes significantly before it is finalized.
In its rollout of this proposal, the EPA has repeatedly
emphasized the rule's ``flexibility.'' What EPA describes as
flexibility is really the agency giving itself arbitrary
authority to regulate electricity generation and use as it sees
fit. We don't know for certain what this proposal would require
of Kentucky and other States, but we do know that EPA will make
the final decisions in approving or denying each State's
implementation plans. Further, EPA has made clear in their
proposal that ``[o]nce the final goals have been promulgated, a
State would no longer have an opportunity to request that the
EPA adjust its CO
2
goal.'' And all of this
regulatory control would be coming from an agency that has no
energy policy-setting authority whatsoever, no energy-planning
expertise, and no real accountability should things go badly
for the citizens of these States.
The original Clean Air Act respected the appropriate role
for State and local governments. In fact, the statute begins
with the Congressional finding that air pollution prevention is
the primary responsibility of State and local governments. This
philosophy is also reflected in the language of section 111(d),
which has previously been used by EPA in a very limited and
deferential manner. But with this proposed rule, EPA appears to
be casting aside all precedent and expansively interpreting its
authority under this section as a justification to force States
to redesign their electricity systems.
Coal faces a devastating one-two punch from EPA. First, the
proposed New Source Performance Standards for electric
generating units have all but outlawed new and more efficient,
state-of-the-art coal-fired capacity. And with this new
proposed rule, the agency can begin shuttering existing coal
facilities. EPA implies that a coal unit can become 6 percent
more efficient, but there are many doubts about the real world
achievability of this figure. There are also doubts about EPA's
assumptions that States can simply shift away from using that
coal plant to using natural gas, nuclear or renewables, because
many States such as Kentucky rely on coal to generate over 90
percent of our electricity and do not have an abundance of
resources to rely on. But, if coal can no longer be a
significant part of a diverse energy supply, it will be the
customers and the business community who will feel the very
serious implications that these regulations will have for
electricity affordability and reliability.
There are a great many questions and concerns about this
proposed rule. And, I said, today is only the subcommittee's
first step in its examination of EPA's actions and of potential
consequences of this administration's plans. We look forward to
the testimony of the Acting Assistant Administrator Janet
McCabe and we hope to learn more about what this rule really
means for our country.

Mr. Whitfield. And at this time I would like to recognize
the gentleman from California for his 5-minute opening
statement. Mr. Waxman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
On June 2nd, Administrator McCarthy released a central
piece of President Obama's Climate Action Plan: proposed carbon
pollution limits on power plants. In time historians may
identify this as the moment that America got serious about
tackling climate change.
We know that carbon pollution from fossil fuels is
accumulating in the atmosphere, trapping more heat and warming
the climate. We are experiencing the result all around us in
every part of the country. We also know that power plants are
our largest source of carbon pollution, yet today there are no
limits at all on the amount of carbon pollution they can emit.
The good news is that there are many cost-effective ways to
reduce the pollution. As the proposed rule demonstrates, the
power plants can operate more efficiently, production can shift
from the dirtiest and oldest coal-fired plants to modern
natural gas plants, retirements of nuclear power plants can be
postponed, investments can be made in clean renewable energy,
and we can all contribute by becoming more energy efficient.
The path outlined in the proposal is the path to cleaner air,
better health, a safer climate, and a stronger economy. If we
make these investments in cleaner energy, the United States can
be the world leader in the industries of the future. That is
not just a perception; that can be a reality.
But you would never know that from the House Republicans.
They are using the same scare tactics that opponents of clean
air have always used. The fossil fuel industry and House
Republicans have a credibility problem when it comes to claims
about the economic impacts of the Clean Air Act. I have been in
Congress for almost 40 years, and for 40 years industry has
made doomsday claims that clean air regulations would shut down
businesses, destroy jobs, drive prices skyward, and cripple
economic growth, and they have been wrong every time. This
morning I released a fact sheet that documents some of these
inaccurate claims, and, Mr. Chairman, I ask that this be made
part of the record.
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Mr. Waxman. In 1990, when Congress last amended the Clean
Air Act, electric utilities widely overestimated the cost of
acid rain controls under a cap-and-trade program that we
adopted, and which has been tremendously successful. They
projected allowance prices of 1,000 to $1,500 per ton. The
actual prices were less than $150 per ton.
Ford Motor Company testified that, quote, ``we just do not
have the technology to comply,'' end quote. Not even with
technology, quote, ``on the horizon,'' end quote. In fact, the
industry began making vehicles that met the new standards in
just 3 years. Dupont testified that the provisions to protect
the ozone layer would cause, quote, ``severe economic and
social disruption,'' end quote, while Mobil Corporation
predicted that the requirements for reformulated gasoline would
cause, quote, ``major supply disruptions,'' end quote.
Well, these dire predictions never happened. Today House
Republicans claim that the Clean Power Plan will cause a surge
in electricity bills and effectively end coal use in America.
This is just the same old scare tactic. We heard that it is not
enough to deal with the climate change problem. Well, it is not
in and of itself, but you don't take the--you don't refuse to
take a step in that direction because you haven't taken all the
steps yet.
We have air pollution reductions at the State and local
level. That is the way the Clean Air Act has always worked
under the EPA rules. The Clean Power Plan is eminently
reasonable and achievable. It gives the States the flexibility
to choose how to achieve the reductions. The goals are State-
specific and cost-effective. Polls show the public supports
proposals by large majorities.
It is time for this committee to stop its partisan
obstruction. If my Republican colleagues have a better idea for
protecting our planet for our children and grandchildren, they
should speak up, but just saying no, shortchanging American
ingenuity and condemning the next generation to a world wrecked
by heat waves, droughts, wildfires, and extreme storms is not
an option. If you have another idea, let us hear it, but all we
hear from Republicans is, there is no problem, this is not
enough to solve it, we shouldn't do anything at all, and that
is why I am supporting the President's plan.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
I might respectfully say to the gentleman that we did
present what we viewed as a better plan, the Manchin-Whitfield
bill, that passed the House of Representatives with a large
margin of victory.
Mr. Waxman. Mr. Chairman, if you would yield to me, that
plan simply said EPA may not act.
Mr. Whitfield. No, it did not say that. It said EPA could
set the standard for existing plants, that Congress would set
the effective date, and it also set a standard for now coal-
powered plants. But anyway, we did submit a proposal. It is
waiting in the U.S. Senate for action now and----
Mr. Waxman. Do you think that will solve the problem of
greenhouse gases?
Mr. Whitfield. You said we are not submitting a proposal.
That was one of our proposals.
Mr. Waxman. Did your proposal accomplish solving the
problem?
Mr. Whitfield. We feel quite confident--by the way, our
energy emissions are the lowest today they have been in 20
years, and our Manchin-Whitfield bill would even be--make it
even better.
At this time I would like to--the gentleman from Michigan
Mr. Upton, chairman of the full committee, is not here, so I am
going to recognize Mr. Barton of Texas, and if he does not
utilize all of his time, if he wants to yield to someone else,
that would be great.
Mr. Barton. Does the chairman know if there are other
Members on our side that wish time?
Mr. Whitfield. Is there anyone that would like time? You
want any time, Mr. Shimkus?
OK. All right. Then I will recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Barton, for 5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE BARTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Barton. Well, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of committee, and our witness and
folks in the audience, one could argue that the audacity of
this proposal is so breathtaking that--in and of itself, it is
a health hazard because it literally takes my breath away
that--what they have proposed.
In the case of my State, Texas, if Texas were to implement
this in its entirety between 2012 and 2030, we would have to
reduce CO
2
emissions by 41 percent. Forty-one
percent. We would also, in terms of the national total, have to
reduce CO
2
emissions--our CO
2
emissions
would be 25 percent of the national total in one State.
Now, I understand that Texas is somewhat unique because we
still are creating jobs in our State. We still have an economy
that is growing. In fact, over half of all the net new jobs
created in the country in the last 10 years have been created
in Texas. Most people think that is a good thing, but
apparently the Obama administration thinks that is a bad thing,
so it is punitive in its nature.
As Chairman Whitfield has pointed out, there are no health
claims. There is nobody claiming that this actually improves
the public health, which is the number one goal of the Clean
Air Act. There is no net environmental benefit. Even if one
were to be a global warming believer, which I am not, this
doesn't allege or--that there are any net benefits to changing
global warming.
What it is is an exercise in political arrogance that the
EPA has the power, I believe, and that is debatable, under the
Clean Air Act. All these power plants that are currently in
operation are regulated under section 112 of the Clean Air Act.
This claims that we can now regulate those same power plants
that are already regulated under section 111(d). That is a
questionable legal standing, and I believe that the courts will
overturn this proposed regulation, if it comes to that, on that
basis alone.
My good friend from California in his opening statement
referred to carbon pollution. Well, actually what this is, what
we are regulating, is CO
2
, carbon dioxide, which I
am creating as I speak, and which every person in this room is
creating as you breathe in and out. Now, I don't know about the
rest of the people, but I don't believe everybody that is alive
and breathing is a CO
2
mobile source polluter. That
may be the stance of the Obama administration, but it is
certainly not my stance.
So, calling CO
2
to be pollution doesn't make it
so. I could call Mr. Waxman a conservative, but that would not
make him a conservative; or he could call me a liberal, but
that would not make me a liberal.
Mr. Chairman, we need to seriously review this proposal,
and I think, as the subcommittee does, and, if necessary, the
full committee does, we will come to the conclusion that this
is more of a political proposal than it is an environmental
proposal. And again, I pointed out Texas has to reduce its
CO
2
emissions from the baseline of 2012 by 41
percent; Louisiana, 50 percent; Florida, 28 percent;
Pennsylvania, 25 percent; Arizona, 45 percent; Oklahoma, 40
percent; Illinois, 20 percent; New York, 49 percent; Alabama,
24 percent; Arkansas, 46 percent.
What is glaring about this list, and that is the top 10
States, the State with the greatest population base and the
State with the largest environmental problems, at least in the
Los Angeles Basin, the Golden Gate State of California is not
even on the top 10 list, and they are the number one State in
terms of population.
So I could go on and on, Mr. Chairman, but I have only got
29 seconds. Simply let me say that we have great respect for
the EPA. I voted for the Clean Air Act amendments in the early
1990s. This proposal does not comport with my understanding of
what the Clean Air Act amendments were when we passed them in
this committee over 20 years ago.
With that, I would yield back to the chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back, and at this time
recognize the gentleman from Chicago, Ranking Member Mr. Rush,
for his 5-minute opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BOBBY L. RUSH, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this
important hearing on the EPA's clean power rule. As part of
President Obama's climate action plan to cut carbon pollution
and help mitigate the disastrous effects of climate change,
this rule would allow EPA to use its existing authority under
the Clean Air Act to control carbon pollution from existing
fossil fuel-fired power plants.
And, Mr. Chairman, I must say that this rule cannot be more
timely as these power plants account for the largest source of
greenhouse gases from stationary sources in this country, and
they are responsible for about one-third of the total U.S.
greenhouse gas emissions with no current Federal limits on
their emissions of carbon pollution.
This new proposal seeks to cut emissions by 30 percent
compared with the 2005 levels by 2030, and it gives States
great flexibility with implementing the rule based on their
existing utility infrastructure and policies.
Mr. Chairman, while we hear from some industry groups and
opponents of any type of regulation that these new rules will
be costly and overburdensome, the newly released report by the
Office of Management and Budget contradicts that claim. From
the annual OMB reports to Congress, we know that for the 34
major EPA rules issued between 2003 and 2013, the benefits have
greatly exceeded the cost.
In fact, Mr. Chairman, it was two rules issued under the
George W. Bush administration, the clean air interstate rule
issued in 2005 and the particle pollution rule issued in 2007,
that brought about the highest estimated benefits.
More importantly, the science, Mr. Chairman, is settled.
Climate change is real, and it is negatively impacting the
lives and livelihoods of the American people. You see this in
extreme weather events and everything from extensive flooding
on our coasts to relentless wildfires in the West, to costly
drought and crop loss in the plains and in my beloved Midwest.
That is why, Mr. Chairman, four former Republican U.S. EPA
Administrators who served under Presidents Nixon, and Reagan,
and George H.W. And George W. Bush all praised the agency's
climate change rule in a Senate hearing just yesterday. As
George W. Bush's first EPA Administrator Christine Todd Whitman
told the Senate Clean Air and Nuclear Safety Subcommittee, and
I quote, ``The issue has been settled. EPA does have the
authority. The law says so; the Supreme Court has said so
twice. That matter, I now believe, should be put to rest, Mr.
Chairman,'' end of quote.
The American people expect their legislators to address
this serious threat not only to our environment, but to our
national security. Even President Reagan's former EPA
Administrator Lee Thomas agreed that the science is settled on
this matter, telling the same panel just on yesterday, I quote,
``We know that carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are
warming the atmosphere. We know they have contributed to a more
than 1.5 degree Fahrenheit rise in temperature,'' end of quote.
Mr. Chairman, if Congress refuses to address this issue as
the American people demand, at the very least we should allow
EPA to do its rule, do its job, and act accordingly, then this
rule will go a long way in helping us to begin to address this
dire issue.
I look forward to hearing from our witness today, and I
yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you, Mr. Rush.
The gentleman yields back, his time is expired, and at this
time I am going to recognize Ms. McCabe, because we are going
to give her 5 minutes to give her views on this issue.
And as I said in the beginning, we do look forward to your
testimony and the opportunity to ask you questions. So, Ms.
McCabe, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JANET MCCABE, ACTING ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
OFFICE OF AIR AND RADIATION, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Ms. McCabe. Thank you, Chairman Whitfield and Ranking
Member Rush.
Mr. Whitfield. I am not positive that your microphone is
on.
Ms. McCabe. There we go.
Thank you, Chairman Whitfield, Ranking Member Rush, members
of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify
today on EPA's recently issued Clean Power Plan proposal.
Climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our
time. It already threatens human health and welfare and
economic well-being, and if left unchecked, it will have
devastating impacts on the United States and on the planet. The
science is clear, the risks are clear, and the high costs of
inaction are clear. We must act. That is why President Obama
laid out a Climate Action Plan, and why on June 2nd the
Administrator signed the proposed Clean Power Plan to cut
carbon pollution, build a more resilient Nation, and lead the
world in our global climate fight.
Power plants are the largest source of carbon dioxide
emissions in the United States, accounting for roughly one-
third of all domestic greenhouse gas emissions. While the
United States has limits in place for the level of arsenic,
mercury, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and particle
pollution that power plants can emit, there are currently no
national limits on carbon pollution levels.
EPA's proposed Clean Power Plan will cut hundreds of
millions of tons of carbon pollution and hundreds of thousands
of tons of other harmful air pollutants from existing power
plants. Together these reductions will provide important health
benefits to our most vulnerable citizens, including our
children.
The Clean Power Plan is a critical step forward. Our plan
is built on advice and information from States, cities,
businesses, utilities and thousands of people about the actions
they are already taking to reduce carbon dioxide emissions.
The plan aims to cut energy waste and leverage cleaner
energy sources by doing two things. First, it uses a national
framework to set achievable State-specific goals to cut carbon
pollution per megawatt hour of electricity generated; and
second, it empowers the States to chart their own customized
path to meet their goals.
We know that coal and natural gas play a significant role
in a diverse national energy mix. This plan does not change
that. It builds on action already under way to modernize aging
plants, increase efficiency, and lower pollution, and paves a
more certain path for conventional fuels in a clean energy
economy.
The EPA's stakeholder outreach and public engagement in
preparation for this rule was unprecedented. Starting last
summer, we held 11 public listening sessions around the
country. We participated in hundreds of meetings with a broad
range of stakeholders across the country and talked with every
single State.
Now, the second phase of our public engagement has begun.
We have already had dozens of calls with States and other
stakeholders, and the more formal public process, both a public
comment period and public hearings, will provide further
opportunity for stakeholders and the general public to provide
input. These are not mere words. That is a proposal, and we
want and need input from the public. That is why we have
already engaged States, utilities, and other stakeholders to
get their feedback.
To craft State goals, we looked at where States are today,
and we followed where they are going. Each State is different,
so each goal and each path can be different. The goals spring
from smart and sensible opportunities that States and
businesses are taking advantage of right now.
Under the proposal, the States have a flexible compliance
path that allows them to design plans sensitive to their needs,
including considering jobs and communities in a transitioning
energy world. It allows them enough time, 15 years from when
the rule is final until compliance with the final target, to
consider and make the right investments, ensure reliability,
and avoid stranded assets.
Our plan doesn't just give States more options, it gives
entrepreneurs and investors more options, too, by unleashing
the market forces that drive innovation and investment in
cleaner power and low-carbon technologies.
All told, in 2030, when States meet their goals, there will
be about 30 percent less carbon pollution from the power sector
across the U.S. when compared to 2005 levels, 730 million
metric tons of carbon dioxide out of the air. In addition, we
will cut pollution that causes smog and soot by 25 percent. The
first year that these standards go into effect will avoid up to
100,000 asthma attacks and 2,100 heart attacks, and the numbers
go up from there.
In 2030, the Clean Power Plan will deliver climate and
health benefits of up to $90 billion, and for soot and smog
reductions alone, that means for every dollar we invest in the
plan, families will see $7 in health benefits. And because
energy efficiency is such a smart, cost-effective strategy, we
predict that in 2030, average electricity bills for American
families will be 8 percent cheaper.
President Obama's Climate Action Plan provides a roadmap
for Federal action to meet the pressing challenge of a changing
climate, promoting clean energy solutions that capitalize on
American innovation and drive economic growth in providing a
role for a range of fuels, including coal and natural gas. The
proposal sets targets and a reasonable schedule that can be
achieved by every State using measures they choose themselves
to suit their own needs.
The EPA looks forward to discussion of the proposal over
the next several months, and I look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. McCabe follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Mr. Whitfield. Well, Ms. McCabe, thank you so much again.
And I neglected to mention that she is the Acting Assistant
Administrator over at EPA, and so we do appreciate your being
here.
At this time I would like to recognize myself for 5 minutes
of questions and statements. I have noticed, Ms. McCabe, that
sometimes when we have our question period, we oftentimes make
statements, so I will probably do a little bit of both.
The first thing I wanted to do, I want to read a statement
by a former IPCC coordinating lead article coordinator. His
name is Dr. Stephen Schneider. Of course, that is the
International Panel on Climate Change, which I think is
recognized as the world leader in this issue of climate change.
But Dr. Schneider made this statement. He said, on one hand, as
scientists, we are ethically bound to the scientific method, in
effect promising to tell the truth, which means we must include
all the doubts, the caveats, the ifs, and the buts. On the
other hand, we are human beings, and we want a better world,
and to do that, we must have media support, so we must offer up
scary scenarios, make dramatic statements, and do not mention
any scientific doubt. And then he concluded by saying, so we
decide what must be done to be most effective in getting our
message out.
And I say that because you were really positive in your
statement, and it is our responsibility to raise doubts about
these kinds of regulations that have such an impact everywhere.
And so I just wanted--Dr. Schneider is not the only lead
coordinator that has made these statements. Others have said we
have to make them dramatic to put political pressure on
political leaders. Others have said we use the worst-case model
scenarios.
So, as I said in the beginning, our responsibility is to
try to focus in and see really what is going on here. And so
the first question I would like to ask you this morning, I
touched on it in my opening statement, EPA's carbon dioxide
regulations for power plants are being pursued under section
111(d), and it is my understanding that you all issued
regulations under that section on five occasions. And now
section 111(d) has traditionally focused, and, in fact, of
those five times it has always focused, on emissions standards
for specific sources, specific units, and it has never been
attempted to do it in a statewide way, and that is what your
recent proposal does. It sets a standard that can be achieved
only statewide.
What precedent under section 111(d) is there for this type
of standard setting which has never been done before?
Ms. McCabe. There actually have been six regulations issued
under 111(d), the last one being the clean air mercury rule in
2005, which addressed this sector, and that took an approach
that allowed utilities to trade among themselves to reduce
emissions. But the fact is that what we have done in this rule
is completely within the four corners of 111(d), which directs
us to identify the best system of emission reduction that has
been adequately demonstrated for the particular sector that we
are looking at. And in the case of the power sector, it is a
fully integrated system that encompasses the kinds of
technologies that we included in the rule, and we know that
because that is what we heard from States and utilities. These
are the things they are already doing to reduce carbon from
fossil power plants.
Mr. Whitfield. But, you know, in this rule, you, for the
first time--I mean, you basically are directing the States on
setting up renewable mandates. You are setting the efficiency
of the coal plants. You are determining the natural gas
capacity, what percent of the capacity must be run. You are
setting consumer demand. You are going further than you have
ever done before, in my opinion.
Ms. McCabe. We are not actually setting any mandates in the
rule.
Mr. Whitfield. But you set this out in the regulation.
Ms. McCabe. But they are not mandates. The States have
absolute flexibility to use whatever method----
Mr. Whitfield. Don't they have to meet those four
standards?
Ms. McCabe. They do not have to meet those four standards.
Those were the----
Mr. Whitfield. You have to meet--they have to meet your
target, though.
Ms. McCabe. They have to meet the overall carbon intensity
target, but they have complete flexibility to get there however
they choose, which is what they told us they wanted.
Mr. Whitfield. We are going to explore it some more, but I
have 15 seconds left. I want to ask one other questions. One of
the real concerns we have--now, this relates to the new power
plant rule. We can't build a new plant in America because the
technology is not there that commercially makes it feasible.
The Kemper plant in Mississippi is like a $5 billion cost
overrun. In Europe, they are closing down natural gas plants.
They are mothballing them because natural gas prices are so
high coming out of Russia, so they are building new coal-
powered plants, and last year they imported 53 percent of our
coal exports.
So they have the flexibility, if gas prices go up, to build
a new plant. We don't have that flexibility. Do you think that
that is fair to the American people?
Ms. McCabe. I actually disagree respectfully, Chairman. We
think that new coal plants can be built under the new rule, and
they are going forward.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I would like to recognize the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Rush, for his 5-minute opening
statement.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to commend Ms.
McCabe, I want to commend the EPA, I want to commend all your
colleagues for the way you have approached this proposal. I
think that you have been extremely open during this process of
creating this proposal, and from what I hear today, that this
process has not concluded, that there will be more and more
opportunities for States and stakeholders to add their voices
and to look at this proposal and to engage in positive
commentaries with you on this proposal. You already reached out
and asked for suggestions and been guided by that feedback.
I am from the Midwest, and we get a lot of our electricity
from coal. We have a higher climate pollution, rates are--at
the beginning, starting out at the gate, but also means that we
have more opportunities for cost-effective reductions.
And I want you, if you would, explain to me and to others
in more detail how you develop the States' goals, particularly
for the Midwest, and how the different situations and the
different States are reflected in the individual State goals.
Ms. McCabe. That is a very good question, Congressman Rush,
and one that we have been getting a lot from people, and it
really goes back to the fundamental approach that we took in
this rule, which is to take every State from where it started.
One of the loudest things that we heard from States was please
don't do a one-size-fits-all, every plant across the country
has to meet a certain emission limit. Give us flexibility and
recognize that States are in different places in terms of their
energy mix, the age of their plants, and all that sort of
thing. So that is the approach that we took.
We looked across the whole country at the power sector, and
we looked at the things that people were already doing, and
there are many things that can be done to reduce carbon from
the existing fleet, but we found four that were the most
prominent and the most promising, we thought, to satisfy the
standard of best system of emission reduction. And those things
are let's have the coal and gas plants be as absolutely
efficient as they can be so that we get every--we get every
electron, as many electrons as possible for every ton of coal
that is burned, and we found that a lot of efficiency
improvements are being made across the country.
We then looked at what else are States and utilities doing
to reduce their carbon intensity. Well, they are using their
gas plants more than their coal plants, and that is due to a
lot of reasons, but it results in less carbon, so that was
number two.
Number three was that States all across the country are
looking at increasing the amount of energy they get from
renewable sources, from zero-carbon-emitting sources, and that
is a very positive trend being pursued by a lot of people. So
that was our third element.
And fourth was the great interest across the country, in
almost every State, to employ energy efficiency or demand sites
so that we are more efficient. We know there is many, many ways
to waste less energy, and all of these things are important in
order to bring carbon down, as well as other pollutants.
So we came up with a national framework that set a
reasonable and moderate expectation for each of those four,
recognizing that those were not the only things that States
could do. And we then looked at every State, and we took the
most recent information that we had for the power sector, which
was 2012, and we applied those four building blocks, we call
them, to each State, and that generated a carbon intensity rate
that, if those were applied, that is where that State would
get. And these are things that we think are very reasonable to
achieve.
Mr. Rush. Thank you. Thank you very much.
My constituents, when they heard about this proposed rule,
the thing that was most important in their mind was the price
of electricity. My friends on the other side here, they have
been engaged in a lot of fear mongering about the cost of
electricity is going to increase and be unaffordable by low-
income constituents. And my question to you is how will the
Clean Power Plan affect the electricity bills for my
constituents?
Ms. McCabe. Well, the first and most important thing to say
is that each State will be in charge of designing its own plan,
so that means two things. One is that they will have the
opportunity to take those kind of considerations into--build
those into their plan, but also that EPA at this moment can't
predict exactly what every State is going to do.
We did do some illustrative examples of what States might
do, and so in our regulatory impact assessment, we do include
those numbers, and that we show that with the significant
increase in energy efficiency that will be implemented as a
result of the rule, that electricity bills in 2030, we predict,
will go down because--electricity bills--because people will be
using less energy. We also show that the price of electricity
will go up a little bit, but overall, bills will come down.
I also just want to note that low-income families are most
at risk of the adverse effects of carbon pollution and climate
change and can greatly--will greatly benefit from the health
benefits that will be achieved by this rule.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Rush. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time I recognize the chairman of the
full committee, Mr. Upton of Michigan, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. McCabe, I believe a number of us have concerns with
this proposed rule. EPA, an agency with no energy policy
authority or expertise, and under questionable statutory
interpretation, has now placed itself above State Governments
and public utility commissions on electric-generation issues,
not to mention, DOE, FERC, or other Federal agencies. Last
month the DC Circuit ruled that absent, and I quote, ``clear
and specific grant of jurisdiction,'' end quote, the Federal
Government cannot regulate areas of the electricity market left
by the Federal Power Act to the States, like electricity
generation and intrastate transmission. But what EPA calls
flexibilities in its proposed reg, changing dispatch rules,
mandating efficiency, utilizing other generation sources, are,
in fact, the very intrastate generation transmission and
distribution matters explicitly reserved by the Federal Power
Act for the States.
So where do you see specifically the clear and specific
grant of jurisdiction over intrastate electricity matters?
Where is the cite that you can refer to?
Ms. McCabe. Chairman Upton, this is not an energy plan.
This is a rule done within the four corners of 111(d) that
looks to the best system of emission reduction to reduce
emission. No State is required to enter into any particular
agreement or take interstate efforts. We are not controlling
the power sectors through this.
Mr. Upton. So you don't have a specific cite, right? Is
that right?
Ms. McCabe. I can----
Mr. Upton. Because neither DOE nor FERC has the authority
to dictate how States plan and operate their energy systems, so
if they can't do it, what authority does EPA have to mandate
that the States actually restructure their electric systems and
subject State energy decisions to Federal oversight and
control?
Ms. McCabe. That is not what the rule does. The rule is a
pollution control rule, as EPA has traditionally done under
section 111(d).
Mr. Upton. Well, assuming that you had the legal authority
to go forward with the rule, have you identified all the
Federal and State agencies that would have to play a role in
the redesign of the State electricity systems under the
proposed rule?
Ms. McCabe. We have been talking to many agencies at State
and Federal level, but it is State Governments, as they always
are with respect to 111(d) plans, that will be responsible for
putting these plans together.
Mr. Upton. So, as we look in EPA's budget, and this year
EPA took a reduction in appropriation levels, an agreed-upon
amount in a bipartisan way, from the CR that was passed 6 to 1
last January, have you identified more funding of personnel
that is going to be required at the Federal level to conduct
this review and oversight for existing plants?
Ms. McCabe. These are State plans. The States will put them
together, and EPA will act in its traditional role with respect
to State air quality planning.
Mr. Upton. But you still got--you know, you have got the
hammer to go after them, so are you--is it going to be a new--
new folks engaged in that?
Ms. McCabe. We think States will want to take a leadership
role on this and----
Mr. Upton. What if they don't? I heard the West Virginia
Governor saying that every utility in his State would be
closed. Every coal-fired facility in his State was going to be
closed.
Ms. McCabe. Again, I think that States are going to want to
be in the lead on this plan.
Mr. Upton. I think I know where they want to be.
Ms. McCabe. I also would suggest that our plan certainly
does not require that all coal plants be closed in that State
or any State.
Mr. Upton. Well, I will leave that for Mr. McKinley to ask.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time I would like to recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Waxman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waxman. Doesn't the EPA, under the Clean Air Act, set
standards that States have to meet which affect their energy
resources within that State?
Ms. McCabe. To the extent that it addresses pollution
emissions, yes.
Mr. Waxman. So this is not unprecedented?
Ms. McCabe. It is not.
Mr. Waxman. OK. I understand EPA asked a lot of
stakeholders for input. Did the States ask for greater
flexibility, or did they argue that EPA should just tell them
what to do?
Ms. McCabe. They were very strenuously arguing for greater
flexibility and, in fact, the ability to use some of the very
tools that we have outlined in our proposal.
Mr. Waxman. You indicated there are a number of ways that
the States can meet the objective of reducing the carbon
pollution coming from the power plants, and it is up to the
States to design how to do it, but they have to achieve that
goal.
Ms. McCabe. Uh-huh.
Mr. Waxman. This isn't a mandate from Washington, how to
accomplish the goal. It sounds to me like a mandate from
Washington to achieve the goal.
Ms. McCabe. That is correct.
Mr. Waxman. Isn't that the way the Clean Air Act has always
worked since 1970?
Ms. McCabe. With respect to 111(d) and some other elements
of the Clean Air Act, that is exactly right.
Mr. Waxman. The arguments I hear from the other side is,
one, they don't believe the science; two, they don't think
there is anything to do; three, this is not good enough because
it doesn't achieve the goals; four, it tells the States what to
do. Seems like every one of those points is incorrect, and then
they come up with an argument that this is going to have a bad
impact on the economy. Did you look at whether this will have a
negative impact on the economy, or do you have people who make
the claim that it is going to help the economy?
Ms. McCabe. Well, we looked at the expected impacts on the
power sector, and we also looked at and heard from a lot of
States that are moving forward aggressively with some of the
very measures that we outlined in the proposal, and indeed
those States are enjoying job growth and additional investment
in innovative strategies in the creation of jobs in pursuance
of things like energy efficiency.
Mr. Waxman. I ask that we put in the record a paper that we
drafted of all the quotes over the last 40 years of the
industries who said they couldn't achieve what the EPA was
asking them to achieve under the law passed by Congress on a
bipartisan basis. They said they couldn't achieve it without
closing down their businesses or suffering dire economic
consequences.
We hear exaggerated claims about electricity costs, job
losses, and even impaired electric reliability. These are
doomsday claims. We have heard them before. And in the paper we
put out, we showed how these claims were made and how
inaccurate they were. What has been the history of the advances
made under the Clean Air Act to give us some guidance as to
whether we have to choose between clean air or a strong
economy?
Ms. McCabe. We don't have to make that choice between clean
air and a strong economy, and, Congressman, I think as you have
illustrated, the history of the Clean Air Act shows that we do
not. Air has gotten cleaner, and the economy has grown, and the
United States has been a global leader in pollution-control
technology, energy-efficiency investments, and we expect that
to continue with this program as well.
Mr. Waxman. We heard a claim on the other side of the aisle
that this EPA proposed rule would have no impact on public
health. Can you give us your view of that?
Ms. McCabe. We disagree with that. In fact, as I noted, the
rule will result in 25 percent reduction in soot and smog
pollutants, as well as 30 percent reduction in climate carbon
pollutants. All of these issues affect public health, and
reducing those emissions, taking them out of the air, will
improve public health.
Mr. Waxman. So this isn't just to do with the global
problem of a warming planet that leads to climate change, but
it will have an impact on the health of people near some of
these power plants?
Ms. McCabe. That is right. Those are important cobenefits
of the rule.
Mr. Waxman. Well, I compliment you on the rule. I think it
makes a lot of sense, it gives a lot of flexibility, and it
achieves the goals, and it encourages entrepreneurship to
develop the industry and technology that will make us the
leader in the world to accomplish these goals.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Shimkus, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is great to be
here and--no?
Mr. Whitfield. I am sorry, Mr. Barton actually was on the
list first.
Mr. Barton. No, no, I will yield to John, and then I will
follow up later.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Mr. Shimkus is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I am glad Mr. Waxman is here because he and many of my
friends on the other side have seen this poster before. These
are the real live job losses from the last Clean Air Act.
Kinkaid, Illinois, I have invited you all to come by there,
1,200 miners lost their job under a flexible system controlled
by the State. The State made the decision, this mine closed,
1,200 miners.
So those of us who talk about this debate, we are trying to
save our coal miner jobs in this country, and the President
promised to make electricity generation by coal so expensive
that he would drive that out of our market. Promises--San
Francisco Chronicle, well documented, he is just following up
on his promise, so those of us in the coal region of this
country are under attack, and we have to deal with this, with
our constituency and the debate. So that is why there is a lot
of emotion, as you can imagine.
Also, part of my portfolio of areas, the nuclear portfolio,
the nuclear side, and so there are some curious things about
this rule that begs--that creates a problem based upon States
that had clean-burning nuclear power or generators that have
shut down, but still have a standard by which now they can't
meet because we are incentivizing the closing of nuclear power,
which, if we are into clean air, climate change, we should be
incentivized.
Let me give you an example. 2013, four nuclear reactors
prematurely to close. One of those reactors was Kewaunee plant
in Wisconsin. When you all set the reduction target for
Wisconsin, it did so based on electricity production in 2012, a
year in which Kewaunee was still operating. So, you are
calculating your reductions a year when you have got a nuclear
plant operating, no carbon emissions, that facility closed, now
that State and many States that have nuclear power--I have one
of the largest nuclear power-generating States in the country--
is now disproportionately harmed by these rules, extremely
harmed. So, the result is that Wisconsin will be forced to
compensate for the loss of this plant and reduces emissions
even further than the EPA targeted; is that correct? Is that
analysis all correct?
Ms. McCabe. So let me explain, Congressman.
Mr. Shimkus. Quickly, please, as quickly as you can.
Ms. McCabe. Yes, yes. So this rule addresses the fossil
fuel sector. That is our responsibility under 111(d), so that
is where we start, and our job is to identify the best system
of emission reduction for fossil-fired plants. That doesn't
include nuclear. So in 2012, we looked at emissions in each
State from their fossil generation, and we then looked at what
that best system of emission reduction, from a national basis,
would result in in 2030. We recognize that there are States
that rely on nuclear power that is zero carbon emitting. That
is very good for carbon intensity.
Mr. Shimkus. But we are disenfranchising those States that
have the nuclear option.
Ms. McCabe. We are, in fact, giving States credit for some
portion of nuclear in their compliance plan so that----
Mr. Shimkus. But to meet the standard, they have to even
have more cuts, especially when a plant is closed, because you
are basing that off the emissions in 2012, but their generating
portfolio was based upon a nuclear plant that was operating.
Ms. McCabe. This is not an energy plan for the State. This
is a----
Mr. Shimkus. That is our problem.
Ms. McCabe. But that is not our job to----
Mr. Shimkus. But that is the problem for our ratepayers,
and because if you--if a generating facility that has zero
emissions drops off 1,200 megawatts, 800 megawatts, whatever
the base load is, they have to make that up, otherwise their
costs are going to go up. And so we are not taking into
consideration, in this carbon debate, zero emittant. We should
be incentivizing this; should we not?
Ms. McCabe. We are, and for any State that uses zero-
emitting generation to replace coal-fired generation or to meet
their needs, they absolutely will be able to count that in
their compliance plan and move them towards their goal.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Let me get to these final last few
questions, and I appreciate that answer.
What happens if the EPA doesn't approve a State
implementation plan?
Ms. McCabe. There is a provision--there is a little bit of
language in 111(d) that says if we are not in a position to
approve a State plan, then EPA is to move forward with a plan
for that State.
Mr. Shimkus. You will have a Federal implementation plan?
Ms. McCabe. We are not focused on that right now because--
--
Mr. Shimkus. But that is what the law will be--I mean, the
rule will be.
Ms. McCabe. That is what the law provides.
Mr. Shimkus. What will that Federal implementation plan
look like?
Ms. McCabe. We have not come anywhere near to proposing a
Federal implementation plan.
Mr. Shimkus. I would suggest you start looking at that and
be prepared to answer those questions on that.
I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Yarmuth, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
welcome, Administrator.
Last fall, EPA Administrator McCarthy met with our
Governor, Steve Beshear, to discuss the proposed rule, and,
after that meeting in Kentucky, sent a framework to EPA with
recommendations on ways to develop a rule that would reduce
carbon pollution cost-effectively while offering our State the
flexibility in meeting the new standards. My understanding is
that EPA followed almost all of the Commonwealth's
recommendations; is that correct?
Ms. McCabe. I believe so, Congressman.
Mr. Yarmuth. And those included, again, allowing States to
reduce emissions; flexibly using measures such as energy
efficiency, renewable energy, and fuel switching to natural
gas, rather than forcing States to reduce emissions in any
specific plant; also recognizing differences among States'
resource potential, current generation portfolios, and allowing
a variety of compliance options, including energy efficiency
and so forth, as you said.
But here is another example of how that flexibility can
help. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act established a
rebate program that helps spur development and adoption of
energy-efficient appliances to replace older, less efficient
appliances. General Electric has a major manufacturing facility
in my district, and because of that program, they were able to
bring a manufacturing line of refrigerators from Mexico back to
Louisville and creating hundreds of jobs in the process.
Does the proposed rule allow States to take credit for
reductions achieved through energy-efficient initiatives like
this one?
Ms. McCabe. Certainly any program that encourages, or
incentivizes, or provides for ways for people to save energy,
which means less carbon going up the stack, are completely
creditable under the plan.
Mr. Yarmuth. Well, we are happy that EPA agrees with that.
That is a good example of how to create flexibility, and also
create energy efficiency and help consumers save money and
reduce emissions.
And I am glad the chairman mentioned Waxman-Markey earlier
in his opening remarks, because I was one of a group of 10 or
12 or so Representatives from States that were heavily
dependent on carbon, on coal-based energy, who went to our
leadership at the time--Rick Boucher from Virginia led that
effort--and we basically said to our leadership and to Mr.
Waxman that we couldn't support the bill as it was originally
drafted, that it would have been devastating for our consumers
and our businesses, and they made changes in that bill.
And before I voted for that bill, I talked to all the major
consumers of energy in my district, General Electric being one,
Ford Motor Company has two major manufacturing facilities, the
University of Louisville, the Jefferson County Public School
System, Louisville metro government, UPS, we are the global hub
of UPS.
And not one of those users of electricity objected to that
law, proposed law, and said they were either for it or neutral
on it, saying, ``We could live with it.'' I talked to our
utility company and asked what the impact of that law would be
on residential customers, and they said, ``We think that after
10 years, the average residential user will have their rates go
up 15 percent, if they do nothing else: They don't adjust their
thermostat, they don't change light bulbs, they don't insulate,
so forth. So if they are paying $200 a month at the beginning
of the period, 10 years from now they will be paying $230 a
month.''
So, I felt pretty comfortable that I could vote on that and
knowing that there would be minimal negative impact on my
constituents. So I am glad that the chairman compared what the
EPA rule does now to that law back then, proposed law back
then, which Republicans in the Senate killed.
But I want to get to this whole scare tactic, with
manufacturing businesses being affected and moving out of State
and so forth, because, again, I haven't heard from any of my
major manufacturers and I have a lot of them in my district.
They are not afraid of this proposed rule.
So my question is to you, assuming--it is not easy to move
a manufacturing company. Ford has almost a couple billion
dollars invested in my district, in their two plants. They just
can't pick up and leave even if the energy went up. But you
made an estimate at what the increased potential rates would be
even in the short term of this, and I think it was about 3
percent. Is that correct?
Ms. McCabe. That is correct.
Mr. Yarmuth. So it seems hard to logically predict that a
3-percent rise in a manufacturing company's rates would be
enough of a financial disincentive to force them to pick up a
major investment and move somewhere else. Is that part of the
calculation that you did when you were creating this rule?
Ms. McCabe. Well, energy efficiency is good for everybody
and good for business. I think we all know that, and as you
say, the increases in electricity prices we see are modest in
the short term and then go down over the long term. So I think
businesses will take that into account.
Mr. Yarmuth. Great. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Barton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Am I not correct, Administrator McCabe, when I say that
this proposal that we are discussing today is not actually
required by the Clean Air Act? Isn't that a true statement?
Ms. McCabe. No. It is required when we issue a 111(b)
standard for a sector to then go forward with a 111(d)
standard.
Mr. Barton. Well, I think that is wrong. I think it is
allowed, but I don't see any statutory authority that demands
these proposals. I do accept that there is a Supreme Court case
and a Presidential finding of endangerment that allows the
Clean Air Act to be used. But I see nowhere in this statute
that this has to happen. Do you agree with that?
Ms. McCabe. Respectfully, no. I believe we, the Clean Air
Act does----
Mr. Barton. If you believe that, I want the general counsel
of the EPA to back that up. Will you do that?
Ms. McCabe. Sure.
Mr. Barton. Send it to the committee?
Ms. McCabe. Yep.
Mr. Barton. My understanding that what you are attempting
to propose is directed by a Presidential speech dated June 25,
2013, that was called the climate action plan that has then
been followed up by a Presidential memo where some of these
requirements were directed towards the EPA to implement that. I
would assume that you are aware of this memo.
Ms. McCabe. I am.
Mr. Barton. OK. Can you tell me what the legal force of the
Presidential memo is?
Ms. McCabe. Well, the President's memo and climate action
plan laid out a series of steps that are within the
responsibility of the EPA and other agencies to move forward
with. The President gave us a schedule on which to move forward
with this rulemaking but directed that we undertake the
rulemakings that are within our authority under the Clean Air
Act to address environmental challenges.
Mr. Barton. Well, I accept that the President has the right
to give speeches, and I even accept the fact that the President
has the right to issue memos and, as the Chief Executive
Officer of the Federal Government, to direct that the Executive
Branch, in this case your agency, the EPA, to try to implement
those Presidential memos, but I don't accept that this is
something that absolutely has to be done, and whatever
documentation you can provide that shows that this is a forcing
authority, I would like to have.
In your statement, you went to some lengths to talk about
all the flexibility that the States are going to have. I am
told in the case of Texas, the decisions were made before the
State of Texas even had an opportunity to comment that they
received a memo or a checklist almost after the fact; are you
aware of that?
Ms. McCabe. I am not sure what you are referring to,
Congressman. We had many conversations with States, both
individually and in groups, and of course, this is a proposal,
so we are still taking comment from people. I have had at least
multiple hours of conversation with States even since June 2.
So there has been lots of opportunity to talk with the States.
Mr. Barton. Well, just as an example, are you aware of the
fact that if Texas closed down every existing fossil fuel
generation plant in the State, every one, every coal-fired
plant, every natural gas plant in the State of Texas, that it
would still not meet the new proposed ESPS; are you aware of
that?
Ms. McCabe. The plan relies on States implementing a
number----
Mr. Barton. OK. I am asking if you are aware of that in the
case of Texas. If we shut down every coal-fired plant and every
natural gas plant in the State, every one, we can't meet these
suggested goals.
Ms. McCabe. I haven't done that calculation, Congressman.
Mr. Barton. All right. Well, I suggest that you do it.
Texas would end up with a new source performance standard that
is below EPA's own standard. The EPA standard is 1,000 pounds
of CO
2
per million megawatts, per megawatt of
production, and for Texas to actually meet with the EPA as
suggesting it should, we would have to go down to 791, which is
about 21 percent below your own standard.
I mean, you know, the renewable standard for Texas is based
on the energy renewable portfolio standard for Kansas. Now, I
am not anti-Kansas. I want Mr. Pompeo to know, but Kansas'
electricity demand and generation is 10 percent of the State of
Texas. Texas leads the Nation in renewable generation, and
Texas produces three times as much energy by renewable, as the
next three States combined.
Ms. McCabe. Texas has immense opportunities when it comes
to----
Mr. Barton. And we get no credit for that in your proposal.
None.
Ms. McCabe. Well----
Mr. Barton. None.
Ms. McCabe [continuing]. The State does, actually, and----
Mr. Barton. Well, the State of Texas tells me they don't.
Ms. McCabe. Well, we are happy to have further
conversations with the State of Texas about the goal.
Mr. Barton. My time has expired.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Barton. Put me down as extremely undecided on this
proposal.
Mr. Whitfield. Yes, I will.
At this time, I would like to recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you, Ms.
McCabe, for coming here today.
You mentioned that the EPA predicts a reduction in energy
costs, family energy bills, I take it, by the year 2030?
Ms. McCabe. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. Would you elaborate on that and maybe give us
some idea of what the reduction estimates look like?
Ms. McCabe. Sure. Sure. So as the States implement their
plans, we expect a large reliance on demand side and energy
efficiency measures, that will reduce the number of kilowatts a
family needs to consume over the course of a month, and so when
we project that out, we show that it is about an 8 percent
decrease in a bill, in a family's bill.
Mr. McNerney. So an American family might look to something
almost like 10 percent of reduction in their monthly energy
bills by 2030 as a result of this rule, of the proposed rule?
Ms. McCabe. That is what the proposed rule predicts based
on our forecast. Of course, each State, as I have said, will do
its own plan.
Mr. McNerney. That is not too bad. Would you please
describe the outreach that the EPA conducted to the various
States. Give us some idea of the magnitude of that effort?
Ms. McCabe. Sure. We started last August, well before we
even put pen to paper on the rule. In my experience of decades
in working, first, from the State side, most of my career from
the State side, I am not aware of EPA ever doing this kind of
outreach, and it was broad ranging with all stakeholders.
But in particular, with respect to States, we met with
States in groups, they have regional organizations. We met with
those regional organizations. Our regional offices convene
groups of State officials, both from the environmental and the
energy side, as well as other stakeholders and utilities.
Mr. McNerney. Were most States cooperative, or did they
stand aside and give a, you know, a less cooperative stance?
Ms. McCabe. Oh, I would say that there was great interest
and continues to be great interest from the State officials on
talking with us about the program.
Mr. McNerney. Would you describe the reduction of
conventional pollution, its projected impact on health and the
monetary impacts of those health benefits from these rules, if
implemented?
Ms. McCabe. Sure. So as co-benefits of reducing carbon,
there would also be reductions in particle pollution, nitrogen
oxide, sulfur dioxide, which have very immediate and localized,
as well as regional health benefits and we predict about a 25
percent in reduction of those pollutants compared to what they
would otherwise be in 2030 without this rule.
So that will result in reduced asthma attacks, reduced
emergency room visits, reduced missed days of school in the
billions of dollars of health benefits to the American people.
Mr. McNerney. Is there any way to talk about the return on
investment that might have to be made by the different States?
Ms. McCabe. Well, we do show that for every dollar invested
there's a $7 return in public health benefits as a result of
the program.
Mr. McNerney. And then would these investments be made by
States or by the private entities involved?
Ms. McCabe. Well, they would be made by the private
entities, the businesses investing in technology, investing in
new workers to employ energy efficiency around the State with
all the benefits that those bring.
Mr. McNerney. Well, you know, I understand the four pillars
of this are increasing upbringing efficiency of the different
plants. What could be more reasonable than that? Using gas-
fired plants at 70 percent of their capacity, which is a good
idea if you have a gas-powered plant. In fact, gas is more
affordable now than many other forms, using renewable energy
that the applicable locally to the State and using nuclear as
long as possible, and it is encouraging user efficiency, end-
user efficiency.
So, these are all pretty reasonable, in my mind. I don't
see how that would be viewed, any of those, as too intrusive.
Are there other measures that can be taken that would also help
reduce pollution that are included in this rule, or----
Ms. McCabe. Yes. Those are so reasonable that they are
being done in a widespread manner, but there are other things
that States or utilities can think about doing. There is other
types of fuel switching they can do. They can look at their
transmission systems and see whether there is leakage there
that can be tightened up. So there are a number of other things
that folks can do.
Mr. McNerney. And the last thing is the State flexibility.
I mean, I understand there is a great deal of flexibility the
States have adopted and it will make it a lot easier for the
different States to implement these proposed rules.
Ms. McCabe. Yes, that is right.
Mr. McNerney. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize the gentleman from
Ohio, Mr. Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thanks very much for being with us today. We greatly appreciate
it.
Last week, the Governor of Ohio signed a piece of
legislation citing energy costs leading our growth concern,
that put a 2-year freeze on Ohio's renewable energy mandate
that the State imposed on itself. I would like you to consider
this hypothetical situation going into the future.
Assume that the Ohio renewable energy standard was included
in its State implementation plan, the SIP, and to comply with
the EPA's existing plant rule. Assume also that the EPA
approved that SIP, OK. In that scenario, would the State of
Ohio maintain its discretion to freeze the renewable energy
program in order to protect the interest of Ohioans?
Ms. McCabe. The State would continue to have flexibility if
circumstances change in the State to replace one particular
measure with another, and the proposal lays out the process by
which a State could do that. So there is opportunities for
States to adjust their plans along the way.
Mr. Latta. Let me ask then, would the State have to get
that approval from the EPA?
Ms. McCabe. If a State wants to replace one measure with
another, they would come to EPA and say, this is what we are
doing.
Mr. Latta. OK. And how did the process overall work, and
how much time would it take for a State to get that
implemented, then, if they want to make a change?
Ms. McCabe. Well, we work with States all the time in
circumstances where they wish to change their State
implementation plans and so we work with the State to
prioritize those actions and try to meet the State's needs in
terms of timing.
Mr. Latta. And then also, would Ohio be subject to Clean
Air Act penalties if they didn't first obtain any EPA approval
before they make any implementation to a change at that time?
Ms. McCabe. I don't believe so, Congressman. The provisions
in the Clean Air Act for penalties are pretty clearly laid out
and there is a pretty clear process for when those could be
invoked. So I think in any circumstance like this, we would
work with the State to make sure that they can do what they
needed to do as long as it met the ultimate goal.
Mr. Latta. Well, just to be on the safe side, if you can
get that back to the committee, that they wouldn't face
penalties if that were to occur?
Ms. McCabe. Sure, we will answer further on that.
Mr. Latta. And also, just talking a little bit about Ohio,
we get about 70 percent of our generation in the State of Ohio
comes from coal. In my district, which I have about 60,000
manufacturing jobs, it is even higher than that--that we are a
coal-based generating State, and up in my area of the State, I
also have a very unique situation. I have a lot of electric co-
ops.
So how does the EPA's Clean Power Plan avoid putting these
small co-ops at a competitive disadvantage and especially the
customers? Because, again, in my district, when you look who
they are serving, you are talking about a lot of--I have 60,000
manufacturing jobs, I also have the largest numbers of farmers
in the State of Ohio.
How do you put them not at a competitive disadvantage under
the Clean Power Plan? Because, again, you have got the farmers,
you have got these small businesses out there, you have got a
lot of retirees----
Ms. McCabe. Yes.
Mr. Latta. What happens? How do we make sure they are not
at a competitive disadvantage?
Ms. McCabe. Well, this is where the design of Section
111(d) and the flexibility and the plan really shows its value.
It is because it will be up to the State of Ohio to design a
plan that works for the State of Ohio. I come from Indiana, and
so it is very similar in terms of the types of sources----
Mr. Latta. Well, if I could just interrupt, because you
coming from Indiana, you know that just a few years ago,
especially when the President was talking about his cap and tax
plan, that when Ohio was at about 70 percent generation of
coal, Indiana was at about 90 percent. So they are really in
harm's way when it comes to these new rules and standards. So
excuse me for interrupting.
Ms. McCabe. No, I gave you the opening. I actually don't
think they are in harm's way. I think that the way we have
designed the plan is very respectful of the fact that States
like Ohio and Indiana do rely heavily on coal. They have
different opportunities than States with a different energy mix
and they can design a plan that addresses concerns related to
small rural co-ops, public power, particular concerns.
This plan works. It doesn't require any particular plant to
meet any particular emission rate, and it looks at emissions
over a long averaging period. So that is another way in which
the plan gives lots of flexibility for the State to be able to
adjust to its particular needs, its manufacturing community,
its rural communities, cities, whatever the particular needs
are.
Mr. Latta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My time has expired and I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, I recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I have a little different Texas accent, and I'm sorry
to my colleague from Texas, Joe Barton is a good friend and we
work together on a lot of things.
EPA does have the authority to regulate CO
2

under the Clean Air Act. Supreme Court ruled it and the rule we
are discussing will have significant impact for decades on
industries in my area, in Houston.
The issue of climate change is one of the most important
issues we should face as a Congress. The EPA has constructed a
framework that provides States with the flexibility and
opportunity. It is important to remember those four building
blocks proposed by the rules are not the exhaustive list. The
four building blocks are a prescription for success.
States are allowed to construct a plan that matches their
needs and those in their affected communities and as I said
before, the EPA is legally justified in regulating carbon, and
I would prefer Congress take the lead in doing it. I believe as
elected officials, we have the duty to act on behalf of our
constituents to regulate these pollutants.
Again, Ms. McCabe, I am sure you are aware EPA in my home
State of Texas have had some issues in the past and for more
than 3 years, EPA was responsible for issuing GHG permits which
caused significant problems for our industry looking to build
and expand even new facilities. Just this last week, the
Governor of Texas along with six other State Governors sent a
letter to the President asking him to dispose of the carbon
rule. It is my hope that we will not go down that path again.
My first question, having said that, Ms. McCabe, can you
explain to the committee what concerns your office receives
from stakeholder groups, including States, as you prepared the
rules, and what did EPA do to mitigate these concerns?
And obviously, from my part of the country, I appreciate if
Texas had some input in how you responded to it.
Ms. McCabe. Yes. We heard a number of very specific things
from States and other stakeholders. We heard that States wanted
to be able to, for example, do their own plans or they wanted
the ability to perhaps join with other States and do a multi-
State plan, and our proposal allows for that.
States were very concerned about the time that they would
have for two things: One, to develop a plan; and two, to
actually achieve the carbon reductions, and so our proposal
response to both of those, first, by giving an extended
compliance time period all the way out to 2030 with a long
glide path down to that, but also in response to their first
concern, how long would they have to submit a plan. We have
provided for either a 1- or a 2-year extension for States to
get them some additional time to put their plans together if
they need that.
Another thing that we heard from States is to allow them
the flexibility to either craft their plan around a rate-based
approach or a mass-tons-of-carbon-emitted approach, if that is
the way they wanted to manage their plan, and so our plan
allows for both of those approaches.
Mr. Green. OK. I have reviewed the rule and the four
proposed building blocks. EPA has estimated that the majority
of the carbon reductions from the State of Texas would come
from building blocks, two of them, utilize utilization of the
existing natural gas, combined cycle power plants; however,
there are other additional reductions calculated under building
blocks three and four.
And you may know, Texas has more wind generation than any
other State. Texas is the first State in the Nation to pass
legislation establishing energy efficiency resources standards.
My concern is, EPA has proposed that Texas is capable of
meeting higher renewable energy and energy efficiency demands.
My next questions have to do with the studies conducted
included by EPA to meet these demands. EPA states these
estimates are subject to significant limitations and market
barriers, including consumer behavior.
My next question: Are EPA estimates in the proposed rule
expected to overcome these limitations and barriers?
Ms. McCabe. Well, the estimations that we use for each
building block are based on a national framework. So they are
not individualized to every State, but of course, the State, as
I have said, has the ability to apply them in any way that it
wishes and that it makes sense for them. So if there are market
barriers, for example, to additional renewable energy
efficiency, the State can look to other more reasonable, more
appropriate measures for them to employ.
Mr. Green. OK. I only have 30 seconds.
The State EPA estimates that two building blocks are
expected to raise prices. Further, EPA estimates that 90
percent of the efficiency, energy efficiency comes from the
rate payers. What effect do you think these prices increase
will have on consumer behavior? Will they actually be more
efficient? And won't consumers be more inclined to maintain the
status quo as opposed to paying more for new programs?
The last thing, though, the studies that EPA is relying on,
are they available to the public before the close of the public
comment period so that people can respond to?
Ms. McCabe. Yes, all of our technical support documents in
the studies are available in the docket, which I believe opened
yesterday when the rule was published.
But the answer to your first question is that, we have seen
in States that have very proactive and forward-looking energy
efficiency programs that they are quite successful and that
measures do get implemented and consumers do save money.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, we recognize the gentleman
from Louisiana, Mr. Cassidy, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. McCabe, I will also first make a statement and then ask
some questions.
When you say that utility bills are going to go down by 8
percent, it reminds me of candidate Obama saying that, under
his health care plan, insurance premiums would decrease by
$2,500 per family without increased taxes and without a
mandate. Of course, now they are up by $2,500 per family. When
you say that you are going to give States flexibility, it
reminds me of, ``If you like your doctor, you can keep it.''
Now, I will tell you, I know of a family losing their home.
They have refinanced their mortgage and so it is actually
paying less for that. But their cost of food, gasoline,
insurance is all going up. They have been denied the economic
benefits of projects like Keystone XL pipeline, which now
Canada is going to ship their oil to China to create Chinese
jobs and you want to raise their utility prices.
Now, you may say that conservation will not decrease, but
let's be clear, let's not mislead. The reality is poor people,
those who are lower income are less able to invest in those
conservation measures. This is just going to be a bull's eye on
other families' ability to do things such as keep their homes.
Now, there has been a lot of, this administration has
raised to an art level misleading the American people by doing
certain things, manipulating statistics. But let's at least be
honest about it. Now, I will go to Mr. Yarmuth's question
earlier. If Ford has a decision to invest in Kentucky or to
invest in Mexico, and we are raising their input cost of
energy, we are going to tilt them towards investing elsewhere.
Is that a fair statement?
Ms. McCabe. There are many things that go into people's
decisions.
Mr. Cassidy. Is it a fair statement? If one of your key
inputs is energy costs and you are raising that cost, we can't
compete on labor. So our energy costs have been lower, so
people have been reshoring jobs. Reality is now you wish to
increase those energy costs. Now, that said, doesn't it just
make sense, we will tilt them towards doing further economic
development elsewhere?
Ms. McCabe. I don't think I can agree with that statement.
Mr. Cassidy. I have got to tell you. Somehow, at some
point, we have to be honest with each other. Now, on the other
hand, if you say this is not an energy plan, and you are not
saying any State has to cut down their coal usage or decrease
or eliminate coal usage, but the only way to achieve this goal,
which, if they do not, you will come in with your own plan, is
to eliminate coal-fired plants.
You may say you don't demand something, but the inherent
nature of the rule, the only way it can be reached without the
Federal Government squeezing the State will be to shut down
coal. Do you deny that?
Ms. McCabe. I do, actually, Congressman. The plan predicts
that in 2030, coal will provide 30 percent of the energy----
Mr. Cassidy. So we have something here which is based upon
an analysis of Washington State, which has to have a 90 percent
decrease in their use of carbon, and the only way they get it
is to completely shut down coal.
Now, you may say Washington State does not have this
mandate to shut down the coal, but the only way they get there
is to shut down the coal. So, again, I just feel like there is
a lack of openness.
Let me ask you something else. Has the EPA examined the
ripple effects of this throughout the economy?
Ms. McCabe. The EPA has focused on the impacts in the power
sector.
Mr. Cassidy. But throughout the economy, the users of that
power, the Ford motor plant or Louisiana has $90 billion in
announced construction projects involving polymers,
petrochemical, gas to liquids, industry that will create great
paying jobs for working Americans. Have you analyzed the impact
of this regulation upon that $90 billion of announced expansion
to manufacturing base?
Ms. McCabe. No. No, we haven't.
Mr. Cassidy. Yes. Yes. So these jobs are on the bubble.
There are more families that will lose their homes, and you
have not done the analysis. Now, if you call me skeptical, I
will join Mr. Barton in being incredibly skeptical.
Now, what else do I have here? I am sorry if I seem so
aggravated, but I keep on thinking of that family losing their
home. Their food is going up, their gasoline is going up, their
insurance is going up after they were told it would decrease,
and now we are told that their electricity bill will go down 8
percent. By the way, a coal-fired plant supplies their
electricity. This administration is so busy saving the Earth
they are willing to sacrifice the American family.
Now, I am sorry to be so aggravated but I keep on thinking
of them, and I can't imagine the insensitivity of this
President and this administration to their plight, but it is
evident to see.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. Gentleman yields back.
At this time, we recognize the gentlelady from California,
Ms. Capps, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And may I ask
permission to include in the record a letter from several
public health organizations in favor of this ruling by the----
Mr. Whitfield. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Ms. Capps. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing.
And I thank you, Ms. McCabe, for being here today and for
your hard work on these clean power rules.
I know climate change is a critical issue, and it demands
action, and EPA's clean power rules, I believe, are a major
step forward. Climate change, as we know, is already having
such a wide range of impacts on weather, on food and water
supplies, ocean, health, air quality and so much more. My
background as a public health nurse, I am particularly
concerned about climate change's impacts on public health.
EPA's analysis show that there will be significant health
benefits from implementing these clean power rules, and as I
understand it, these health benefits come on two levels; this
is what I would like to ask your confirmation on.
One, the primary benefit of reducing the greenhouse gas
emissions that are driving climate change; and two, the coal
benefits of reducing emissions of other harmful air pollutants
like sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and particulate matter. Do
you affirm that this is accurate?
Ms. McCabe. That is correct.
Ms. Capps. And some have criticized the methodology used to
evaluate these coal benefits, and they accuse EPA of double
counting. Can you respond at this point, how did EPA calculate
the health benefits of this rule?
Ms. McCabe. Yes, when we look at the health benefits of any
given proposal, we build those on top of the health benefits
that have already accrued from rules that are already on the
books.
Ms. Capps. Right.
Ms. McCabe. So we don't include those benefits. These are
all additive on top of that, incremental.
Ms. Capps. OK. Now opponents of these rules frequently cite
the cost of compliance as a reason not to pursue them, and of
course, we have to acknowledge, there will be compliance costs.
There will also, though, however, be significant benefits and I
would like to argue that the benefits are particularly there
for children and for families.
Ms. McCabe. Yes.
Ms. Capps. Can you add to our discussion here about how the
health benefits of these rules compare to the estimated
compliance cost; in other words, what is that cost benefit
ratio?
Ms. McCabe. Uh-huh, yes. So and, again, the costs that will
be incurred by the rule ultimately will be decided by how the
States choose to go forward with their plans.
Ms. Capps. Right.
Ms. McCabe. But in our assessment, we estimate a $7 to $9
billion cost compared to up to $90 billion health benefits and
in particular, with respect to the health code benefits, each
dollar spent on the rule will generate $7 in health benefits.
And I should note in response to that and in partial
response to the previous question then, that State programs
that will be used to implement these, many of them build in
assistance to low income, rate payers and, again, those are the
citizens and the families that are most at risk and most
vulnerable to the health impacts that we see from air pollution
and from climate change.
Ms. Capps. OK. It is clear that these clean power rules
will have some significant benefits for the American people. I
believe they deserve our support. I hope we can find a way to
work together to get these rules implemented as soon as
possible. I, for one, really don't believe we can afford to
wait any longer.
You know, there are States like California, where I am
from, that have seen some great economic benefits from
renewables and energy efficiencies. As these are implemented,
there are cost savings just in putting people to work on
efficiencies and on developing new resources for renewables.
There is a minute left, if you would like to use it to
outline some of the economic benefits, as these could offset
the cost of a change over.
Ms. McCabe. Yes. So California, clearly, has been a leader
on renewables and investment in energy efficiency, and these
create good jobs that are localized jobs, machining equipment,
installing insulation, weatherizing homes, whether it is
existing homes or new construction. So these are jobs that
happen in our communities and result from these sorts of
programs.
Ms. Capps. Thank you. Just in the quarter of a minute that
I have left, you remind me of some programs that went into
effect with some of our low-skilled workforce during the
recession to get them to weatherize and put in efficiency
opportunities for some of our low-income housing, reducing
energy costs for the occupants of the housing, putting people
to work, learning some new skills that could continue, and this
is, frankly, an ongoing process that as technology advances
will never slow down or stop.
And thank you for your answers.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. This time, recognize the gentleman from
Nebraska, Mr. Terry, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
And I am humored by the argument that this is not a
mandate. I mean, if the Federal agency said I live in Omaha but
I have to make it to Lincoln at a certain time, and I can only
take 45 minutes to get there, that is a mandate. Even if you
left me up to my own imagination of how I would get there, it
is still a mandate, and so it is interesting that we can play
word games, but it is still a mandate and it will have cost.
We are a State that is 72 percent reliant on coal. We are a
State where you take 6 to 7 hours at 75 miles an hour to get
across. So, some of this doesn't make a lot of sense, but I
have reached out to our major public power entities. We are an
all-public-power State, so Omaha public power, Nebraska public
power, as well as our, NDEQ, NPA, our National Power
Association and some of our rules. They are all working
together, that is the good news. Bad news is they are
completely panicked in how to actually do the plan and how to
actually meet the 26 percent mandated reduction. Because we are
72 percent relying upon coal.
So in reaching out to them, they are frustrated in the lack
of direction, what they see as conflicting information from the
EPA on how to move forward. But one of the areas that they
would like to have nailed down is the percentages for
reductions are based on, is it 2012 numbers or 2005 numbers?
Ms. McCabe. Where we look to start to see where States were
was the data, most recent data, which is 2012 so----
Mr. Terry. So that is the baseline, is 2012. Why would they
get confused about 2005?
Ms. McCabe. There isn't really a baseline, but 2012 is
the----
Mr. Terry. How is there no baseline?
Ms. McCabe [continuing]. Is the starting carbon intensity.
The reason that people are confused about 2005 is because 2005
is a year that people have been using a lot to talk about our
progress towards reducing greenhouse gases.
And so in describing the impacts of the rule, EPA has
compared the reductions that will be achieved into 2030 to that
2005 number. But the starting point for this rule is 2012.
Mr. Terry. So bottom line, then, just like you finished,
2012 is the date that the State of Nebraska has to use to
calculate the 26 percent reduction on, correct?
Ms. McCabe. That is the date that we used to calculate
their goal that they need to meet in 2030.
Mr. Terry. So, again, if they are using 2012 as their
baseline to reduce 26 percent, they are OK with the EPA?
Ms. McCabe. As long as their plan shows that they will get
to the goal that is set forth in the rule.
Mr. Terry. For 26 percent?
Ms. McCabe. For 2030.
Mr. Terry. By 2030?
Ms. McCabe. And if that is 26 percent, I don't know the
Nebraska target off the----
Mr. Terry. That is the stated reduction that was told to
the State of Nebraska.
Ms. McCabe. Yes.
Mr. Terry. So now, is there any flexibility in the States
of using a different year as the baseline?
Ms. McCabe. Well, no.
Mr. Terry. OK.
Ms. McCabe. We need to start the States at a----
Mr. Terry. OK.
Ms. McCabe [continuing]. Where they are.
Mr. Terry. No is a solid answer. That is clear. Clear is
sometimes good even if you disagree with it.
Now, if States include a renewable portfolio standard in
their State implementation, does that make it a Federally
enforceable mandate?
Ms. McCabe. So the----
Mr. Terry. De jure or de facto.
Ms. McCabe. Right. The plans will be Federally approved. We
actually lay out an extensive discussion on this issue in the
preamble that we are very interested in getting people's
feedback on because we heard this question a lot, and we are
looking for feedback on how to design that.
But the plan itself would be enforceable so that to make
sure that the reductions would get done.
Mr. Terry. All right. I have got four pages of questions
from our NDEQ in power districts, but we will submit those in
writing to you.
Ms. McCabe. Please do. And we have had a number of
conversations with officials from your State and certainly
would be happy to set up other opportunities.
Mr. Terry. Well, I will state for my last few seconds that
I have talked to some of the board directors of OPPD and NPPD,
and they said the only conclusion they have come to so far is
it is going to cost them, quote, ``a hell of a lot of money,''
end quote.
Mr. Whitfield. And we are going to have more hearings, so
you will have the opportunity to ask more questions, as well.
At this time, recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
the manager of the Democratic baseball team, Mr. Doyle, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Ms. McCabe.
Ms. McCabe. Thank you.
Mr. Doyle. As you know, Pennsylvania generates significant
amount of our electricity from coal, and over the last few
years, we have seen several coal plants retired in Pennsylvania
to be in compliance with the MATS standard. I have heard this
type of early action will be acknowledged, and EPA officials
said on a recent conference call that it is their intent to
credit plant retirements forced by the MATS rule.
So I am curious, how will States and generators get credit
for plants they retire or will retire between 2012 and the
final rule?
Ms. McCabe. So anything that a State does that reduces the
amount of the carbon intensity of the generation in the State,
will be eligible to be part of their plan. So if a State is
closing a coal plant, for whatever reason, and there are many
reasons why coal plants are being closed around the country, if
that power is replaced with either lower carbon natural gas, or
zero carbon renewables, or not as much generation as needed
because of energy efficiency, that will all work to the State's
advantage in building their glide path towards the goal that is
required.
Mr. Doyle. But they will get credit for--I mean, basically
we want to make sure that we are getting credit for doing the
right thing in advance of the final ruling, whenever that final
ruling comes out.
Ms. McCabe. Right.
Mr. Doyle. And you are saying that that will be the case?
Ms. McCabe. Yes.
Mr. Doyle. OK. Can you talk specifically about some of the
opportunities my State might have to reduce carbon pollution
from our power sector? I mean, do you anticipate that coal will
continue to be a big part of our power mix going forward?
Ms. McCabe. I do expect and, in fact, we show across the
country that coal will continue to be about a 30 percent share
of production, and although I don't have the Pennsylvania
figures in front of me right now, a coal intensive State like
Pennsylvania, we presume, would continue to have a significant
amount of its power generated from coal.
And the targets that we calculated, in fact, very much took
that existing energy mix into account and we think that
Pennsylvania, like other coal intensive States, has things that
they can do, and the target was designed to capture the things
that Pennsylvania can reasonably do.
Mr. Doyle. Uh-huh. I want to talk to you a little bit about
the flexibility options in this in terms of the potential for
increased flexibility. So my understanding is that State
specific emission goals were derived from one calendar year of
actual operations, 2012----
Ms. McCabe. That is right.
Mr. Doyle [continuing]. Which people are calling the
baseline year. You know, in the past rules, an average of
several years were used in order to smooth out any anomalies,
and it seems that a 1-year snapshot might yield an inaccurate
starting point, especially if the State had several plants on
extended outages, for example, or some anomalies existed in
2012 that didn't exist in other years.
Would the EPA be willing to consider more flexibility of
sorts, like averaging a few years to establish a more accurate
starting point or baseline?
Ms. McCabe. Yes. I know we will get comment on that issue,
and it is something we certainly would consider and talk with
States about.
Mr. Doyle. And finally, let me ask you about nuclear, too.
Several nuclear generating stations have closed recently, and
it is common knowledge that others are on the bubble and I
realize the main culprit is market conditions, but market rules
in competitive markets disadvantage base load power including
nuclear.
Can we meet the greenhouse gas rules goals if more nuclear
plants close? And since most nuclear plants operate in
competitive deregulated markets, did you consider this in your
analysis?
Ms. McCabe. So the nuclear question is an interesting and a
complicated one, and we did recognize what you have just
reflected going on in the market with respect to nuclear
plants. So we actually have tried to send some signals in the
proposal to encourage the retention of that nuclear generation
that, as you say, is kind of on the bubble. So we definitely
would like to work with States to see how the plan can help
encourage the continued operation of those zero emitting carbon
sources.
Mr. Doyle. And finally, let me ask you about reliability,
too. I mean, one of the most important duties that State
regulators have is to maintain a reliable electric system and
that is vital to our economy, obviously. How does the EPA's
proposal ensure that States can achieve carbon pollution
reductions while maintaining reliability?
Ms. McCabe. Yes, it is a very good question and one that
was paramount in our minds as we worked through the proposal
and also as we consulted with FERC and DOE and other agencies
that have this as a chief responsibility. So there are a couple
of things that we think make it clear that reliability will not
be threatened.
One is the length of time for implementation here. There is
a long period of time for people to plan, and the utilities
sector, this is what they do. They know how to do this, and if
you give them enough time, they can plan accordingly.
The flexibility in the plan, the fact that no particular
plan is required to meet any particular emission rate over any
particular time period is another way in which reliability will
be protected, because States have the flexibility to plan their
resources accordingly, and the fact that we have an annual
averaging periods and longer averaging periods, again, provides
a lot of flexibility. If somebody needs to bring a plant up to
deal with a short-term issue, an annual average allows them to
do that without compromising their compliance with their own
plan.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Olson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair.
Ms. McCabe, I hope you have the same concerns I hear back
home about President Obama's announcement on new regulations
for coal power, carbon regulations. There is a common theme
back home: Why does the EPA that works for me want to kill my
job? Why does that same EPA that works for me want to hurt my
family? Those questions can't be answered here. They will be
answered in November.
I do have a few questions you can answer today. The first
few follow the example of Chairman Emeritus Dingell that
require a yes-or-no answer.
Question one: EPA added a grid safety valve in the 2011
mercury rule as a way to slow implementation if reliability is
threatened. Now America's impartial grid operators, including
the ones that keeps the lights on at your headquarters, have
asked your staff about a similar valve here. My question is,
Will you commit to including a reliability valve in the final
carbon rule? Yes or no.
Ms. McCabe. I can't commit to anything in the final rule.
We haven't even gotten the public comments yet, but it is
something we will certainly consider if people comment on it.
Mr. Olson. It is important, ma'am. We will follow up later
on this.
Second question is: EPA has justified these new rules to
the public with up to $90 billion in, quote, ``climate and
health benefits,'' unquote. Health benefits is an important
phrase. According to the EPA's impact analysis, the vast
majority of this rule's benefits come from cutting traditional
pollution, not carbon. Mostly microscopic dust, PM. We already
regulate PM. In fact, you are just now starting to implement a
brand new ambient air quality standard. My question, being yes
or no, is, Do EPA's national ambient air quality standards
fully protect human health with, quote, ``an adequate margin of
safety,'' unquote? Yes or no.
Ms. McCabe. Yes, they do.
Mr. Olson. That is what I thought. That complies with the
law.
The second question: The entire country would have to apply
with the existing PM 2.5 standard in the coming years, yes or
no?
Ms. McCabe. I am sorry. Can you repeat that?
Mr. Olson. The entire country, all of America, will have to
comply with the existing 2.5 PM standards in the coming years,
yes or no?
Ms. McCabe. That is the air quality standards that States
need to meet, yes.
Mr. Olson. Yes, ma'am. Many parts of the country already
meet the new PM rule. Is that correct? Yes or no.
Ms. McCabe. Yes.
Mr. Olson. OK. That begs the question, your scientists have
just approved a rule designed to push us to perfectly safe
levels of PM. Existing rules will protect America's health and
then some, and yet this new rule says that there will be
billions in new PM protection benefits for EPA to trumpet to
the public, and that begs the question, Is EPA giving this
carbon rule credit for what it is already doing? Are you double
counting?
Ms. McCabe. Well, there are two answers to that,
Congressman.
One is that the PM rule that was just finalized is the
standard. It is not the path to get there, and so States will
need to implement measures in order to reduce PM to meet that
standard, and this proposed plan would be one way for them to
do that. So it could be a critical element of a State's PM
compliance plan.
The second answer to your question, Congressman, is that
the scientists show that there are health benefits from
reductions of PM even below the standard. We set the standards
to protect from a public health perspective at the national
level, but there continue to be health benefits, real health
benefits that are experienced by people when those particle
pollution levels go down, and so it is appropriate, in our
view, to reflect the benefits that will accrue from those
further reductions.
Mr. Olson. I have a letter here that you put out in
December 2012 and January of 2013, a fact sheet on the PM
standard. I want you to square your comments with this
language. It says, and this is your document: ``Emission
reductions from EPA and States rules already on the books will
help 99 percent of counties with monitors meet their revised PM
2.5 standards without additional emission reductions.'' You are
already there. Why do the standards? You have said it. You are
there.
Ms. McCabe. Well, these standards are not driven by PM
reductions. These standards are driven in order to reduce
carbon, which is a climate change pollutant causing significant
health and welfare and economic impacts in this country. The
benefits that we reflected in terms of PM are additional health
benefits that will be achieved as a result of implementing this
carbon pollution rule and but will be real health benefits that
Americans will experience.
Mr. Olson. My time is expired.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time has expired.
At this time, recognize the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Matsui, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
having this hearing today.
Ms. McCabe, I want to applaud the administration in the EPA
for the release of this critically important proposed rule to
cut carbon emissions from existing plants. Now, we already set
limits for other air pollutants, but we let power plants
release as much carbon pollution as they want, yet the effects
of climate change are already being felt across the Nation.
Droughts are becoming more severe, which is putting an
incredible strain on water supply in California, and
specifically my district in Sacramento, where we have
experienced historic drought. In addition, extreme weather from
hurricanes to heat waves is hitting communities across the
country. We can't wait any longer. We have to do something.
In California, as you know, we have made great strides with
a cap-and-trade program, energy efficiency programs and
renewable energy portfolio standards. Nationally, we have
already made progress by moving to cleaner sources of energy
and improving the energy efficiency of our cars, trucks and
buildings. Now, EPA is setting carbon standards for power
plants to protect public health and welfare, and I support
these efforts in making our communities and planet a cleaner
and safer place.
Now, my State has a lot of companies who have invested in
other States. How will EPA determine who gets credit towards
compliance when one State or company has invested in renewable
energy, and clean energy production in other States? I know
that EPA has asked for comment, but we are hoping that the EPA
encourages a fair way of assigning credit.
Ms. McCabe. Yes, we look forward to the public comment on
this and to discussions with people. Basically, we start from
the perspective of States being responsible for the carbon
emissions in their States, but we recognize that there are
programs like renewable energy programs where systems are set
up so that States or companies will invest in renewable
resources that are outside State boundaries. So the proposal
does contemplate letting those States take account of those
investments as part of their plan.
Ms. Matsui. So does California get credit, then, for energy
efficiency programs that deal with imported electricity?
Ms. McCabe. The energy efficiency is a little bit different
from renewable energy. So we are focused there in the proposal
on energy efficiency that takes place in the States that
reflects reductions in use in that State.
Ms. Matsui. OK.
Ms. McCabe. But, again, I am sure we will get lots of
comment on this issue because it is a complicated one, and you
want to make sure that, both, you are not double counting, but
also that all energy efficiency is being counted somewhere in
the right place.
Ms. Matsui. Absolutely. Now, will the EPA have ongoing
oversight of State plans or multi-State plans?
Ms. McCabe. Like we do throughout the Clean Air Act, we
will provide oversight to the State implementation of approval
and implementation of plans as we normally do with State
implementation plans for other pollutants.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Now, California would have to convert EPA's
rate-base standard to a mass-based standard due to programs it
has in place. Will this conversion affect this reduction
target?
Ms. McCabe. It should work out to be just exactly the same;
that is the whole point. And we have a technical support
document that walks States and others through how you would do
that conversion.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Now, would California get credit towards
compliance for its new Pacific coast collaborative with Oregon,
Washington, and British Columbia. The leaders of all four
jurisdictions have agreed to account for the cost of carbon
pollution and that where appropriate and feasible make programs
to create consistency and predictability across the rejudge of
53 million people?
Ms. McCabe. Yes. So if States choose to join with other
States in a plan, they would be able to pool their resources
and pool their targets and be able to put in a joint plan that
we could review and approve. That provides a lot more
flexibility, those can be very attractive arrangements.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Great. Now, did EPA find any parts of the
country that don't have the potential to boost their use of
cleaner energy?
Ms. McCabe. No, every State has many opportunities.
Ms. Matsui. OK. If a State does not comply or create a
plan, can it affect a neighboring State's reduction target?
Ms. McCabe. No, I don't believe so. Each State is
responsible for its own target, and as I said, if they go in on
a joint plan with others, then we would look at that as a joint
plan, but each State is responsible for itself.
Ms. Matsui. OK. There is an interim reduction goal that
must be met by 2020. What happens if the State does not meet
the interim standard?
Ms. McCabe. Well, actually the interim standard needs to be
met on average over the decade between 2020 and 2029, so they
can kind of plan that out.
Ms. Matsui. All right.
Ms. McCabe. They don't have to have a straight trajectory.
There can--there is some States, for example, that know they
are going to have plant closures later in the decade so they
can do less in the first part.
Ms. Matsui. OK.
Ms. McCabe. So, each State's plan will lay out what it
expects to do over that 2020 to 2029 period and show how it is
getting that average.
Ms. Matsui. OK.
Ms. McCabe. And then we will work with the States to help
them along the way.
Ms. Matsui. Great. Well, thank you, Ms. McCabe.
I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentlelady's time is expired.
At this time recognize the gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
Pompeo, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to follow up on a question from Mr. Whitfield. He
asked you for precedent about going beyond the source under
111(d), and you cited the Clean Air Mercury Rule. Are there
other precedents that EPA has for going beyond regulating
existing sources?
Ms. McCabe. Well, we actually don't think this is going
beyond existing sources because it is focused on the fossil
generation, and all----
Mr. Pompeo. But you gave that example where you have gone
beyond the actual source, and you cited the Clean Air Mercury
Rule. Do you have other examples like the Clean Air Mercury
Rule, yes or no?
Ms. McCabe. No. The other examples, though, are industry
specific like this one is.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. And under the Clean Air Mercury Rule,
there is nothing outside of regulated sources that you attempt
to regulate. You could trade among the regulatories.
Ms. McCabe. Correct.
Mr. Pompeo. But you couldn't go beyond that to appliances
as you are proposing here; is that correct? It is a yes or no
question.
Ms. McCabe. That is right.
Mr. Pompeo. And my recollection is the Clean Air Mercury
rule was overturned.
Ms. McCabe. But not on that basis.
Mr. Pompeo. But it is no longer in effect.
Ms. McCabe. It is no longer.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. So, it is gone. It was unlawful, it was
lawless, much like you are proposing here. Yes.
Let me talk about--but have you met with John Podesta in
the course of developing these regulations?
Ms. McCabe. I have.
Mr. Pompeo. How many times?
Ms. McCabe. I don't recall.
Mr. Pompeo. One time, three times, five times, do you have
an estimate?
Ms. McCabe. Not that----
Mr. Pompeo. Do you have a parking----
Ms. McCabe. Not----
Mr. Pompeo [continuing]. Spot at that building? Is it
infrequent?
Ms. McCabe. It is infrequent.
Mr. Pompeo. OK. How many times has your staff met with him
or someone else at the White House on this set of regulations?
Ms. McCabe. Not to my knowledge, or infrequently.
Mr. Pompeo. And Ms. McCarthy, has she met with Mr. Podesta
as well on this set of regulations?
Ms. McCabe. I expect that she has.
Mr. Pompeo. Can you give me the information about the
frequency of those meetings, the location of the meetings, and
the subject matter of those meetings?
Ms. McCabe. I will take that back.
Mr. Pompeo. No, that is not the question. The question is
can you get me the information?
Ms. McCabe. I know. I will take the question back.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. I mean, this is about politics, right?
That is why Mr. Podesta is over at EPA working on this. This
isn't about law, we talked about that. It is about politics. It
is also not about science, and I want to turn to science now.
I talked with Ms. McCarthy about this. I want to make sure
nothing has changed in your view. So you have now 30
indicators. You have gone from 26 to 30 indicators on your Web
site about how you measure impact of what you all call climate
change today.
So I want to ask you a series of yes-or-no questions about
this set of regulations, these carbon regulations, and what you
think they will do to the indicators that EPA uses.
So, yes or no, will this set of rules, when fully
implemented, reduce sea surface temperatures.
Ms. McCabe. I can't answer that. I don't know.
Mr. Pompeo. Will this reduce ocean acidity?
Ms. McCabe. It will contribute to reducing ocean acidity.
Mr. Pompeo. Do you have the data to support that, and can
you tell how much and when we will see reduced ocean acidity as
a result of these regulations?
Ms. McCabe. You can't predict the climate this way.
Mr. Pompeo. I will take that as you have no idea. Is that a
fair statement? You don't know. You have no data. Do you have
any science to support the reduction in ocean acidity connected
to these rules?
Ms. McCabe. We have science to show that increased carbon
in the atmosphere leads to things like ocean acidity, and if
you have less carbon in the atmosphere, you will----
Mr. Pompeo. Decreases in the lake ice. How much--how much
less lake ice will there be as a result of this set of rules?
Ms. McCabe. Same answer I gave you before.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. You don't know. The answer is you can't
show me how much less lake ice. I would just like to see the
data. If you are proposing a set of rules and you have
indicators, it would seem reasonable for the citizens of
America to demand that you say, ``Hey, we think this is the
impact, and so we will--this is what you are going to get in
exchange for all the costs that we have all talked about this
morning, this is what you are going to get. You are going to
get this much less--or this much more of something that is
really good.''
Ms. McCabe. But that is not the way climate science works.
Mr. Pompeo. Right. Yes. Science used loosely.
Have you met with FERC in connection with electrical
reliability and talked to them about the impact?
Ms. McCabe. Yes.
Mr. Pompeo. And tell me about those discussions. Did you--
were there memos? Are there written materials where FERC
provided you information about what they thought the impact of
these rules would be on electricity reliability?
Ms. McCabe. So, I or my staff have consulted with staff at
FERC. They are part of the interagency review process that we
always go through, and so they have given us their input on
electric reliability.
Mr. Pompeo. And do you have--when you say their input, is
there a memo? Do you have a document? Or did you just pass in
the hallway and talk? There has got to be a written document.
Ms. McCabe. I don't believe there are written documents,
but it was more than passing in the hallway. We had discussions
with them.
Mr. Pompeo. They were just discussions about something that
is critical as electrical reliability. We have such a radical
rule, and you didn't ask them to put anything in writing or you
didn't demand and say, hey, tell us what you think in a formal
scientific manner. You just said, hey, let's sit at a table and
talk about it?
Ms. McCabe. We had substantive discussions with them.
Mr. Pompeo. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Tonko, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Administrator McCabe, welcome, and thank you for your work on
EPA's Clean Power Plan.
The President and EPA are doing exactly the right thing by
placing the limits on the amount of carbon pollution that can
be emitted from power plants. Climate change is a serious
threat, as we all know, and we cannot address it without
addressing the biggest source of carbon pollution in the United
States.
In the 2 weeks since the release of EPA's proposed rule, we
have heard a lot of attacks on the Clean Power Plan, so I want
to give you a chance, Administrator, to clear up some of these
misunderstandings. One of the claims is that no one goes to the
hospital for breathing in carbon pollution so there can't be
any real public health benefits from limiting carbon pollution.
Could you please explain how this rule will help protect the
public health from the effects of both conventional air
pollution and carbon pollution?
Ms. McCabe. Yes, thank you. People do go to the hospital
for breathing issues and for other ailments that are caused or
exacerbated by air pollution, so this rule will--by reducing
both carbon but also other ancillary pollutants that are
emitted by coal-fired and other fossil fuel-fired power plants,
will reduce the amount of air pollution in the air, that means
fewer asthma attacks, fewer visits to the emergency rooms,
fewer premature deaths, and fewer heart attacks resulting from
exposure to those pollutants.
Mr. Tonko. Right. There is also talk about the impact on
modest income households. I can tell you representing
households that saw their life savings washed away when their
homes were totally destroyed is an effect that is never totally
recovered, and so, the inaction here can be very expensive.
We have also heard repeatedly that the Clean Power Plan is
a heavy-handed attempt by EPA to regulate the power system and
to tell States exactly how much efficiency in renewable energy
they must achieve. This charge must particularly be--must be
particularly frustrating for you. As I understand it, the
proposal is designed to offer flexibility, as you have
mentioned here today. The proposal sets a target, but it is
left, is it not, to individual States to choose how to achieve
it? Can you respond to this misrepresentation of the proposal?
Ms. McCabe. Yes, it is absolutely left to States, and we
know that States will pick and choose the things that make the
most sense for them, and if energy efficiency is where they
want to put their investment, then they have the ability to do
that. If investing in their existing coal-fired generation can
make it just as efficient as possible is where they want to put
their investment, then the plan allows them to do that.
Mr. Tonko. Right. Thank you. And then, Administrator
McCabe, I am sure that you are aware that New York is a member
of the nine State compact of Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative, or RGGI in the Northeast. Our nine State coalition
has agreed to a cap on carbon pollution, and we have a regional
trading market for carbon pollution credits.
The revenue from the sale of those credits has allowed us
to fund a wide variety of initiatives, including efficiency and
renewable energy, investment in education and training for
jobs, new jobs in clean energy, transitioning of jobs, and
support businesses and initiate plans for climate adaptation.
In short, the RGGI States have accomplished much already.
In fact, since 2009, the nine member State compact has had
an emission reduction by 18 percent, while our economies grew
by 9.2 percent. By comparison, the emission in the remaining 41
States of our Nation, saw that emission reduced by 4 percent
while their economies grew by 8.8 percent. So the track record
is not intimidating. It is actually quite rewarding.
It appears to me that what States are doing under RGGI is
consistent with EPA's proposal. So the States in our coalition
are already on their way to meeting your proposed target. Is
that the case, or are we going to have to rework our
initiatives?
Ms. McCabe. No, that is the case, and the approach that
these States have taken is certainly one approach that States
can choose to take, and as you say, has been very beneficial to
those States and very workable.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Well, I appreciate that because I was
involved in the early discussions about the formation and
implementation of RGGI from my seat at NICERTA. I heard many of
the States claim--the same claims about threats to reliability
and affordability of electricity, job losses, and predictions
of everything short of returning to the days of reading by
candlelight. It didn't happen. I won't say these aren't
challenges. There are challenges, but they are manageable, and
the effort is yielding significant benefits for public health
and the economy.
Ms. McCabe, proponents of action to address climate change
say that requiring coal-fired power plants to control their
carbon pollution is a part of a war on coal. Is the Clean Power
Plan going to eliminate the use of coal?
Ms. McCabe. Absolutely not. In fact, coal will remain
roughly a third of our power supply in this country in 2030
under this proposed plan.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Well, my time has been exhausted, so I will
yield back, and I thank you for, again, appearing before us
today and offering clarification.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Griffith, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. I have to just say, representing a coal
district where lots of jobs have been lost and more expected to
be lost because of these rules, we certainly feel like we are
under attack from Washington, DC, and if it is not a war, it
sure is something that is pretty close to hell. Thank you.
That being said, it is my understanding--and if I could get
yes or no answers, I would appreciate it. It is my
understanding that you are a lawyer by training; is that
correct?
Ms. McCabe. I am.
Mr. Griffith. And it is also my understanding that the
Attorney General of West Virginia, Patrick Morrisey, wrote a
letter to Gina McCarthy on June 6, 2014, regarding these new
rules. In there, I understand the EPA agrees in its technical
documents filed with this proposal that under the plain reading
of the statutory language of section 111(d) found in the U.S.
Code, EPA has no legal authority to regulate CO
2

emissions from power plants under section 111(d). In
particular, section 111(d) of the U.S. Code provides that if
the EPA is already regulating a source under section 112 of the
Clean Air Act, the EPA cannot also establish standards under
section 111(d) for those same sources.
Isn't it true, that in 2012, EPA started regulating power
plants under section 112 under its Mercury and Air Toxics Rule?
Yes or no.
Ms. McCabe. We did issue a regulation under section 112.
Mr. Griffith. Under section 112. So, under the plain
reading of the U.S. Code, and by the way, a plain reading of
the legislation reported from this committee and the
substantive provisions of law enacted by the House and the
Senate, this decision by the EPA foreclosed, the decision to
regulate under 112 foreclosed the agency's ability to regulate
greenhouse gases under section 111. Isn't that correct?
Ms. McCabe. That is not correct.
Mr. Griffith. And you base that upon your new understanding
that the EPA takes the position that they don't read the
provisions of the U.S. Code literally because there was a
technical conforming amendment included in the 1990 Clean Air
Act amendments that you all assert, you and the EPA assert
creates ambiguity in what is the law or about what the law is;
is that your position, ma'am?
Ms. McCabe. This is not a new interpretation. This is the
interpretation that the agency took in 2005 also in the Clean
Air Mercury Rule, that reading of the statute.
Mr. Griffith. And do any of the following still work for
the EPA: Carol Holmes, Howard J. Hoffman, or Wendy L. Blake?
Ms. McCabe. Yes, some of them.
Mr. Griffith. So then the court, in its ruling, made an
error when it said that your position was the opposite of what
you have said just. I read from the opinion that you
referenced, that would be New Jersey versus EPA, 2008 opinion.
For all the lawyers listening in, 517 F.3d 574, quote, ``This
requires vacation of CAMRs regulations, for both new and
existing EGUs. EPA promulgated the CAMR regulations for
existing EGUs under section 111(d), but under EPA's own
interpretation of the section, it cannot be used to regulate
sources listed under section 112. EPA thus concedes that if
EGUs remain listed under section 112, as we hold, then the CAMR
regulations for existing sources must fall. EPA promulgated the
CAMR regulations for new sources under section 111(b) on the
basis that there would be no section 112 regulation of the EGU
emissions and that new source performance standards would be
accompanied by a national emissions cap and voluntary cap-and-
trade program,'' end quote.
From the opinion that you just said where your people
argued the opposite, the courts seem to think they argued what
I think, and that is, you don't have authority if you regulated
greenhouse gases under 112, you don't have the authority--not
greenhouse gases, but regulated the existing coal-fired power
plants, you don't have the authority under 111. How do you
reconcile those two, your thought that this was your position
before and now finding that your lawyers had previously argued
the opposite, at least if the court is not mistaken,and I note
that the case was appealed on other grounds but cert was not
granted?
Ms. McCabe. The CAMR decision was based on a completely
different basis, the decision to vacate the rule.
Mr. Griffith. I understand that, but you just stated here
today that your position--this was not a new position for the
EPA because of this case. This case says the opposite. How do
you reconcile that?
Ms. McCabe. I am not intimately familiar with the court
decision that you are reading. I will be happy to respond to
this, and I am sure we will.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that. Let's just talk about good
basic lawyering then. You know what a scrivener's error is. You
have been around the process for a long time, you have gone to
law school, you understand that when a bill passes, and this
committee does it all the time, when we say at the end, our
chairman will say that, you know, closes by saying the staff
can make technical conforming amendments, what the EPA is
hanging their hat on is a scrivener's error that was a
confirming amendment, and you are saying that a scrivener's
error and the conforming amendment should trump the law of the
United States? Really. With your background and your education,
I would expect a better argument.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman yields back.
At this time I recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms.
Castor, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and welcome.
I think it is very heartening that America is moving
forward to tackle the challenges of the changing climate and
carbon pollution. We are already making great progress when it
comes to the cars we drive and fuel efficiency. We have reduced
emissions substantially and put money back into the pockets of
American families. That has been very positive.
Then look at what has happened with the appliances in our
homes. They are more efficient than ever, and we can do even
better, the building codes are better. New technology is out
there so you can control with your smart phone what is going on
in your own home and save money that way. Again, the new
technology is improved by leaps and bounds, and this is part of
American ingenuity, and we are going to bring that same
ingenuity to tackling carbon pollution from the largest
emitters.
Back home, all I have to do is look around the Tampa Bay
area on top of the huge Ikea store, we have got large solar
arrays, they are saving on their electric bills, the largest
beer distributor in the area has a major warehouse. They said
this makes sense for us now to put solar panels on the roof.
Our local governments have done it at courthouses, and there is
a corresponding benefit that we have created jobs and clean
energy, and we have created new businesses, and we are boosting
small businesses all across my community and all across
America.
So now comes another important piece in the climate action
plan focused on the largest sources of carbon pollution, and
when you review the proposed rule by EPA, I think the hallmark
of it is the flexibility granted to the States. So, by the year
2030, it is almost hard to imagine where we will be at 2030,
but by 2030, States will have to meet these overall pollution
reduction goals.
Now, some people expressed to me, Madam Administrator, that
the rule grants too much flexibility. A State like mine in the
State of Florida at the State level, we don't have much State
leadership right now, surprisingly. The State, I would argue,
that could be the most impacted by the changing climate, the
leaders at the State level had receded from energy efficiency
standards. We don't have any renewable goal at all, so some
folks say, gosh, couldn't have EPA done a little bit better by
setting some targets on energy efficiency and renewables? But I
mean, Mr. Barrow, Georgia is producing more solar power than
the Sunshine State. That is pretty ridiculous. So----
Mr. Barrow. It is a point of pride.
Ms. Castor. Point of pride for you in the Peach State but
not so much from the Sunshine State, but there is progress at
the local level. Like in my home county in Hillsborough County,
they have a waste energy plant that has been expanded, they are
getting greenhouse gas credits. The city of St. Petersburg is a
leader nationally in what they are doing in lighting and solar
power and eliminating methane and waste energy, so here is a
question.
What will States be able to do to harness the improvements
at the local level? And it is not just local governments. It is
nonprofits and it is businesses. How will that count towards
our goal, our State goal of reducing overall carbon pollution?
Ms. McCabe. This is a great point. I think there is
something like a thousand mayors across the country that have
pledged to address carbon emissions in their cities, and it is
just so encouraging and so positive, and the way these programs
will fit into a State's plan is that any measure that helps the
State reduce the amount of energy it needs to produce from its
high carbon sources will be able to be counted in the State's
progress towards their goal. So, all these local programs,
weatherization programs, building efficiency programs, they all
will be able to count.
Ms. Castor. But you all have a State organization that will
able to bring all of that data together; isn't that right?
Ms. McCabe. Well, the State Government is responsible for
the plan under the Clean Air Act, as they always are, and they
know how to do these things, and so we are working with the
State agencies that are definitely thinking about how they will
do this and asking lots of questions, and I think they have the
opportunity to work with their mayors and their utilities and
their local businesses and utilities to make sure they know
what is going on and----
Ms. Castor. It is really a call to action to everyone. We
all have a responsibility to do this, and I think there is a
great potential for cost savings for consumers. It is
interesting that you have identified a potential for reduced
electric bills because of energy efficiency. If you can save,
you save money, but one of the problems, though, is the State
incentives, do not encourage energy efficiency and
conservation. Hopefully we can do better there, don't you
think?
Ms. McCabe. We think States will find that energy
efficiency is a very positive program for them to invest in as
some other States that are further along that path have found.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Mr. Whitfield. At this time, recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Burgess, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
having the hearing.
I appreciate our witness being here so long with us this
morning and your forbearance through our questions.
I want to go back, I think it was Mr. Barton or maybe it
was Mr. Shimkus who asked the question to which you responded
that there would be an 8 percent reduction in electricity
prices in Texas; did I hear that correctly?
Ms. McCabe. Electricity bills. We predict that electricity
bills will go down. This is a national average, not----
Mr. Burgess. Can you provide us with the formula and the
data that you put into the formula to come up with that answer?
Ms. McCabe. Sure. That is all laid out in our regulatory
impact assessment, and the attachment is in the record, so we
will be happy to point you to where that is.
Mr. Burgess. You also said in your opening statement, that
we will avoid 100,000 asthma attacks under these rules. Can you
tell us, since the passage of the Clean Air Act, when I wasn't
here then--I mean, that was before the earth cooled the first
time, it has been so long ago--but how many asthma attacks have
been prevented under the Clean Air Act?
Ms. McCabe. I don't know that figure, but we will be glad
to get you some more information on that.
Mr. Burgess. Does this figure of 100,000 include those
asthma attacks that would have been avoided simply because of
the passage of the Clean Air Act?
Ms. McCabe. The health benefits that we predict from this
rule are associated with the pollution reductions that are
required by this proposal.
Mr. Burgess. Well, now you say pollution reduction, but of
course, this all was predicated on the endangerment finding for
carbon dioxide, and now carbon dioxide has become a regulated
pollutant; is that correct?
Ms. McCabe. That is correct.
Mr. Burgess. So is regulation or reduction of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere going to result in 100,000 fewer
asthma attacks?
Ms. McCabe. The asthma attacks that we associate with this
rule in our analysis are due to reductions in other pollutants
that will happen as the carbon is also reduced.
Mr. Burgess. Can you provide us with the journals that back
up the 100,000 figure as well as the reductions that you are
asserting.
Ms. McCabe. We will be happy to point you to where in the
record we lay out our expectations on the benefits.
Mr. Burgess. I am really not interested, but what I really
would like to see are, are there publications in refereed
journals that will attest to this fact? The ones that I have
been able to find really are rather nebulous about the finding
that reduction of carbon dioxide means a lower number of asthma
attacks.
Ms. McCabe. We will be glad to follow up with you.
Mr. Burgess. And in note planning, I brought my Harrison's
Principles of Internal Medicine with me this morning just in
case we wanted to look at it. I don't see carbon dioxide listed
as a trigger for inciting reactive airway disease.
Ms. McCabe. So, let me clarify because I think I didn't
quite see where you were going. So, there are certain airborne
pollutants that are very clearly associated with exacerbation
of asthma attacks. The impacts that we are seeing from climate
change also can create conditions in which asthma can be
exacerbated, so----
Mr. Burgess. May I stop you there for just a moment because
you seem to conflate climate change with carbon dioxide. My
understanding of the purpose of this rule was because of an
endangerment finding from carbon dioxide, and the asthma
reductions that you are asserting in your testimony this
morning are as a result of reductions in carbon dioxide.
Ms. McCabe. No, that is not correct, so let me be really
clear. The endangerment finding found that emissions of
greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide, created adverse
impacts to public health and welfare, and that is through a
variety of impacts that a changing climate has, increasing
heat, increasing bouts of----
Mr. Burgess. Again, I need to stop you because of time
considerations, but those are relatively nebulous. And when I
review the literature, I don't see the--I mean, this is a
fairly assertive statement that you have made for the record
here in your opening statement, and I don't see the data to
back that up.
But I would just ask that you be careful about the language
because the language--I think I see why that language is being
used, but I don't think it is fair to use that, and I think,
you know, we are oftentimes accused of using fear to motivate
people to be against some of these principles, but here, I
believe you are using fear, who wants more asthma attacks? No
one. But your assertion that asthma will be reduced by 100,000
because of reductions of carbon dioxide in the rule that you
promulgated as a result of a court opinion, I am sorry, it just
doesn't follow.
Ms. McCabe. If I could be really clear then. The health
benefits that we describe as a result of this rule, the asthma
attacks, in particular, are the result of the reductions in
other pollutants that will happen accompanying the reductions
in carbon.
Mr. Burgess. So, I would just simply ask, what have you
been doing? Why haven't you reduced those other pollutants? Why
did it take this activity to motivate the EPA to reduce those
other pollutants if it was within their power to do so all
along under the Clean Air Act?
Ms. McCabe. EPA and the States have been working for many
years to reduce air pollution that results in asthma attacks
and other health effects and has made a lot of success along
the way.
This is an additional program that will result in
additional pollution reductions, and there are real health
benefits associated with those.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Burgess. Mr. Chairman, I have some additional
questions. I will submit those for the record. I appreciate
your indulgence.
Mr. Whitfield. Absolutely, yes, we do have some other
questions, and we are going to have some more hearings.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Barrow, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barrow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Ms. McCabe, for being here.
I am sort of in a lonely place in this committee, you know.
Sometimes I think a lonely place is the only honest place to be
in this town, but you be the judge.
I accept the scientific evidence of a climate change. I
accept the scientific evidence and the common sense that tells
me if you take all the carbon that God put down in the ground
and belch it in the air, we are going to have an impact on
climate sooner or later. I accept that.
But I reject previous legislative attempts to address this
problem, and I don't accept and don't agree with the current
administration's efforts to do this by regulation, mainly
because I don't think that it will work, but they will
definitely hurt. They won't work, especially when you consider
it in isolation or when you consider it against the backdrop of
what is taking place in the rest of the world, and so I think
we need to take another approach in this basically.
And the debate between those folks that say we need to put
mandates out that in the hopes that technology will arrive, you
know, on time, to the rescue, and those who think you ought to
invest in technology, I am firmly in the technology first camp,
and I don't think we are doing that with these regulations.
But, you talk about a number of things that we are doing
that some folks are doing someplace, everybody ought to try and
use those tools to try and get where we need to be. You talk
about things like making coal plants more efficient, talk about
shifting from coal to natural gas, talk about more renewables,
you talk about consumer efficiency in a variety of different
ways. Nowhere in there did I hear you talk about shifting from
coal to nuclear.
Of the existing technologies that are on the shelf, nuclear
is the only one that can provide significant base load capacity
with zero emissions. My question is, does shifting from coal to
nuclear count? Should it count?
Ms. McCabe. It should and it does.
Mr. Barrow. All right. In Georgia and in South Carolina, we
are the only ratepayers I know of in the Nation making
significant investments in shifting from coal to nuclear. In my
district at Plant Vogtle, we are adding the two next nuclear
power generators to come online in this county. Vogtle 3 is
going to come online in 2017. Vogtle 4 is going to come on in
2018. How are they going to get counted toward the goals they
are going to be held to in 2020 of getting down to 891 pounds
per kilowatt hour?
Ms. McCabe. So when those megawatts are produced by a
nuclear plant with zero carbon and they replace megawatts that
were produced by a plant that emitted carbon, those will be
counted for the State, and they will help it get towards its
final goal.
Mr. Barrow. So, you are telling me the time between these
come online in 2017 and 2018, the reductions that take place
then will be counted toward the goal that you set for us of
getting 891 as the adjusted average?
Ms. McCabe. They will, and with those plants as part of
Georgia's----
Mr. Barrow. Base.
Ms. McCabe [continuing]. Base and how they produce their
power, that it will help address, or achieve the carbon
intensity goal, absolutely.
Mr. Barrow. Well, let me put this in context. In 2005,
Georgia utilities were belching about 2,000 pounds per kilowatt
hour into the atmosphere, and we have already achieved a 25
percent reduction in that amount, getting down to about 1,500
as of 2012. So in the 7 years between 2005 and 2012, we have
already achieved a 25 percent reduction.
Now, against the President's goal of achieving a 30 percent
reduction for 2005 to 2030, how come we haven't already gotten
there? Why are we still being required to cut it from 1,500
down to 891 in 2020 and 834 in 2030?
Ms. McCabe. Well, each State is in a different place and
they have made different progress, but what we did in our rule
was we looked at these reasonable and existing technologies
that people can use and how much more is reasonably able to be
done.
Mr. Barrow. My point is, though, we are already achieving a
25 percent reduction and are shifting from coal to natural gas.
One of tools in the toolbox you say we have got, and we have
got plans to shift even more from coal to nuclear in 2017 and
2018. We have already achieved 25 percent of the starting goal
of reducing what we were producing in 2005 to 2030 by 30
percent. We are most of the way there. Why do we have to cut it
in half even further?
Ms. McCabe. This rule was not set up to achieve a specific
goal of reduction. That is not the way it works. It was set up
to look at what the available technologies are, and for each
State, that results in a different trajectory and a different
ultimate goal.
Mr. Barrow. But we are utilizing two technologies, one you
specifically list and one you haven't listed, need to add it to
the mix, shifting from coal to nuclear, and we are already most
of the way there.
Let me put it another way. Let me put it another way. It
makes no sense to me that a little old itty bitty State like
Wyoming is going to be held to producing, belching, 1,700
pounds per kilowatt hour into the atmosphere while a big old
State like Georgia is going to be required to belch out no more
than 834 pounds of CO
2
per kilowatt hour.
Makes even less sense to allow a little old itty bitty
State like North Dakota to do 1,783 pounds in 2030, whereas a
big old State like Texas has got to do no more than 700-and-
something. That makes no sense to me in terms of whatever you
want to do, whatever the existing technologies are, and that is
a problem I have got with this whole approach.
Ms. McCabe. We would be glad to spend more time with you,
Congressman, and explain how those targets got----
Mr. Barrow. This will take a lot explaining. Thank you,
ma'am.
Mr. Whitfield. The gentleman's time is expired.
At this time I recognize the gentleman from West Virginia,
Mr. McKinley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to try to keep this issue in perspective and
maybe have to get at the 30,000-foot level to look at this,
because you know, according to the EPA's own Web site, it says
that 82 percent of all manmade CO
2
comes from areas
outside the United States, and so, to me, it is kind of
ludicrous, as we have this discussion, to think that we are
going to improve--we are going to have health benefits to
America and we are going to start reversing the climate change
when 82 percent of those contributing to CO
2
are
exempt around the world.
It just--I can't think of any other way that we are going
to make this policy work than by engaging the rest of the world
into this discussion. But this experiment that he wants at 30
percent is just--it doesn't seem to be working. If we go back
to the Kyoto protocol, it called for a 5.2 reduction in
CO
2
emissions, but by the end of that protocol, the
globe had already, had increased by 10 percent and just ignored
what was being documented.
So, while we want to experiment, while this administration
wants to experiment by reducing 30 percent, the International
Energy Agency is already predicting that by 2030 the rest of
the world is going to be producing 40 percent more
CO
2
around the world.
While we are experimenting with reduction, the rest of the
world is not following our lead, they are going to 40 percent.
Just consider China and India alone. With this chart, you can
see that, this is what they are going to be doing. Over this
time period, China is going on the introducing 557,000 more
gigawatts of coal-fired power house; India, 519,000. In that
time period, by 2030, China is going to increase their
CO
2
output by 60 percent while we are decreasing 30
percent. India is going to increase by 50 percent their
CO
2
output while we are decreasing our 30 percent.
This administration just seems to be ignoring that China
burns more coal than the rest of the world combined, and no one
is following this lead. We seem to be operating in a vacuum.
Just recently the EPA Administrator, former Administrator--
EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson said U.S. action alone will not
impact world CO
2
levels. Do you agree with that?
Ms. McCabe. I----
Mr. McKinley. Yes or no.
Ms. McCabe. I take your word that she said it.
Mr. McKinley. She said that just yesterday. Former EPA
Administrator William Riley said, absent action by China,
Brazil, and India, what we do will not suffice.
Ms. McCabe. I don't think anybody disagrees that action is
required by many countries to address climate change.
Mr. McKinley. So what we are doing--so, with these
regulations, we are ignoring the global reality that the rest
of the world is not following us. We are going to affect our
American economy. We are going to put it at risk where already
the numbers are predicting that anywhere from $9 to $40 billion
annually we are going to pay for this experiment.
We are going to be increasing our utility bills. We are
going to be putting Americans out of work. We are going to
disrupt our manufacturing base. We are ignoring the advice of
the predecessors with EPA over this thing, so I am going ask
you a quick--a year from now, if China and India and Japan have
not reduced their CO
2
emissions, will you withdraw
this regulation?
Ms. McCabe. We are not----
Mr. McKinely. Just yes or no.
Ms. McCabe. No.
Mr. McKinley. OK. How about 2 years from now? If no one is
following, will you withdraw it?
Ms. McCabe. Congressman, this rule----
Mr. McKinley. Is that no?
Ms. McCabe. I can't speak to what----
Mr. McKinley. So, I would say in the final rule then, since
you mention it earlier, in the final rule, you said that it is
not final. We have--final language has to be worked out, so
will you agree to insert metrics into this? Engineers, we deal
with metrics. We want to see how you measure success, so will
you put into the final bill a metric that says that if
America's economy is tanking because of this or the world isn't
following and they are continuing to increase their
CO
2
emissions, that this will void this rule? Just a
yes or no.
Ms. McCabe. I don't believe that would be an appropriate
thing to do under a Clean Air Act rule, Congressman.
Mr. McKinley. OK. So, again, trying to paint the final
picture here as we go with this. This experiment in working
separate from the rest of the Nation is kind of--and you
yourself have mentioned, efficiency. As an engineer, I agree
with you about efficiency, but when I think of it, what comes
to mind is someone insulating their home and then opening all
the windows. What have we accomplished with this? We are not
working in concert with the rest of the world. They are not
following us.
So for us to expect to have health benefits from something
while 82 percent of the rest of the world are exempt from this
is ludicrous.
I have to--my time is expired. I am sorry. I hope we can
have more of a dialogue and follow back up with this. Thank
you.
Ms. McCabe. Happy to. Happy to. We are absolutely not
ignoring other countries, and we have many activities focused
on it.
Mr. McKinley. You and I both know they are not joining us.
Mr. Griffith [presiding]. The gentleman's time is expired.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Engel, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome and
thank you, Administrator McCabe, for joining us here and for
your testimony.
I want to give you a chance to perhaps answer some of the
things--questions that Mr. McKinley asked because there are a
couple of arguments that we hear over and over again from those
who oppose U.S. action on climate change.
First, they say this is a global problem so why should the
U.S. act first, and secondly, they say even if America acts, it
is not going to solve the problem anyway because other
countries are going to ignore it, so why bother. As far as I am
concerned, there is no question that climate change is a global
problem, and it demands a global solution, and it doesn't mean
that we wait for other countries to act first.
So, to the contrary, I would say progress on big global
problems almost always requires United States' leadership, and
I don't think anyone would claim that the world will
meaningfully make a slow climate change without U.S. leadership
and action.
I wanted to give you a chance to answer some of the
specifics because it is hard when you have to answer just yes
or no to say what you really feel, so----
Ms. McCabe. Yes. I appreciate it, Congressman, and I agree
with the way you have characterized this.
There is no question it is a global issue. There is no
question that countries beyond the United States are going to
have to take action. This has been the case with other
environmental problems in the past. I also agree and the
President agrees that the United States has a responsibility to
act here both because we are a significant contributor. We are
the second largest, I believe, contributor, and because we are
a world leader, and we work in the international community with
other countries, with China, with India, with other countries,
and are working with them to get them to look at similar sorts
of approaches so that we can together address this global
environmental problem.
Mr. Engel. So on the specific issue of climate change, can
you tell us why American leadership is particularly critical on
this particular issue?
Ms. McCabe. Well, the global impacts of climate change
affect us here in the United States, they affect our citizens
and our families, and so we have a responsibility to do
everything that we can to encourage and work with other
countries to have them take the kinds of steps that we
ourselves are showing we have the leadership to take here at
home.
Mr. Engel. Well, and also, as you mentioned, the United
States is one of the world's top emitters of carbon pollution,
and in order to be a credible negotiator, I think we need to be
able to urge and approach other countries to do more. We need
to take action ourselves, you know, walk the walk.
Ms. McCabe. That is correct. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. Engel. Not just talk the talk. So how will EPA's
actions to cut carbon from power plants, in particular,
strengthen the United States' ability to influence the
direction of international negotiations on climate change?
Ms. McCabe. It already is having an impact when we meet
with other countries in these discussions to see that a major
world leading economy is putting its money where its mouth is,
so to speak, and taking affirmative steps to address carbon.
And so that shows that it can be done, it shows that a country
has moved forward in that regard, and that puts pressure on
other countries to do similar or explain why they can't.
Mr. Engel. Now, power plants are the largest single source
of our emissions and the source of huge emissions worldwide,
and so obviously, to be credible, we need to address power
plants, and by doing so, we can help other countries understand
that it can be done. I would assume you agree with that
statement?
Ms. McCabe. I do agree, and by moving forward with our
power companies, we can be on the forefront of technologies and
the types of methodologies that we can then help other
countries with which will benefit our manufacturers and our
innovators here at home.
Mr. Engel. So let me ask you, you have talked about it, but
I want to give you again you know, a chance to enhance your
statement. When those who oppose action say that this rule
won't solve the problem so why should we bother, why should we
bother?
Ms. McCabe. It is an extremely important step to help solve
the global problem for the United States to move forward with
real meaningful reductions in carbon.
Mr. Engel. So I would just like to say, and I assume you
agree, and tell me if you do, no single action to reduce carbon
pollution will ever stop climate change but we will never
address this problem without many individual actions, so these
actions do add up to a meaningful difference.
Ms. McCabe. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. Engel. OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman yields back. Thank you.
And now recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Pitts, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Administrator, many coal-fired power plants have
spent millions of dollars to comply with the EPA's final
Mercury and Air Toxics rule MATS. Despite the retrofits, many
of these plants would operate significantly less or potentially
retire under EPA's proposed rule which contemplates greater
utilization of natural gas. My question is, how does the
proposed rule prevent the problem of stranded assets?
In other words, for coal plants that have made millions of
dollars of investments to be compliant with MATS, but may not
be able to meet the requirements of this rule, there are plants
in my State that have spent hundreds of millions or even
billions of dollars to comply with the Mercury and Air Toxics
rule. Do generators and their customers and their investors
just have to eat these costs?
Ms. McCabe. It is a good question, Congressman, and
hopefully I can give you a couple of answers to it. So, one way
in which we anticipated avoiding this kind of situation is
providing a very lengthy trajectory for compliance. So, going
all the way out into 2030, that gives utilities the time to do
two things. One is to plan carefully so that the plants in
which they have made significant investments, they can get all
the value out of those investments and also to plan to make
sure that their fleet is being managed over time.
The other thing is that where the coal-fired fleet in this
country is aging, as I am sure you know right now half of the
plants are in their 40s, I think, and 10 percent or so are 60
years old or older, so, so there is a transition going on in
the industry already, quite apart from MATS and quite apart
from this rule.
And the flexibility that this rule provides will allow
States to focus on and utilities to focus on investing in the
plants that have a long life ahead of them and make the most
sense in order to continue to be key parts of the portfolio and
perhaps not to invest in the oldest plants, the ones where it
doesn't make as much sense economically to put investments into
them. So that is how this rule helps avoid those kinds of
situations, which we agree is a very important thing to do.
Mr. Pitts. In your calculations in developing the rule, did
you take into account the loss of jobs as a result? Did you
quantify these as to the impact by State?
Ms. McCabe. Well, again, as I said before, since the States
will ultimately decide exactly what their plans are, all we
could do was to do some illustrative examples, and in our
regulatory impact assessment, we did look at the potential job
losses and job gains associated with the rule. That is all laid
out there.
Mr. Pitts. Now, under the proposed rule for existing power
plants, EPA is requiring of each State develop a State
implementation plan and to submit it to EPA for approval. What
if a State chooses not to participate? Would EPA impose a
Federal implementation plan in that regard?
Ms. McCabe. The Clean Air Act does provide that if a State
doesn't submit a plan, that EPA would do one. I will tell you
right now that we are not focused on that right now. We are
focused on making sure that States understand the opportunity
is here for them, and we are confident that States will want to
be in the lead on this program.
Mr. Pitts. Well, we saw that many States didn't want to
establish their own programs to implement Obamacare and trying
to implement that at the State level. If EPA were to impose a
Federal implementation plan in their State, what does EPA
envision that plans would look like?
Ms. McCabe. We really haven't thought that through, and any
proposed Federal plan, we would go through a public process to
get people's views on that.
Mr. Pitts. Would you take over energy planning for the
States and decision making like about their electricity mix,
would you take over planning that electric rates for consumers?
Ms. McCabe. No, Congressman. Our job is to look at the
emitting facilities, the coal-fired power plants, and look at
ways to reduce the emissions from those power plants, and any
proposed plan would be squarely within our authority.
Mr. Pitts. All right. Combined heat and power facilities
are already inherently efficient. What has EPA done to prevent
those facilities from being swept into the 111(d) rule? Will
you take measures to ensure that those facilities are not
adversely impacted by this proposal?
Ms. McCabe. Actually, combining power is a very efficient
way of generating electricity, so those kinds of facilities
will be very helpful to States in putting their plans together.
Mr. Pitts. My time is expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Griffith. The gentleman's yielded back.
We now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Kinzinger, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
being here on a long day, and thanks for your service.
The EPA has recognized in the past, and I believe they have
tried to recognize in this current rule that retaining nuclear
power generation is a cost effective means in reducing carbon,
and I appreciate that. As we, unfortunately, witnessed in
Wisconsin, 8 years of carbon emission reductions brought about
by the construction of renewable energy were wiped out with the
closure of a single small nuclear reactor.
I believe it is important to talk about this, given the
fact that nuclear is the only base load power supply that runs
around the clock without producing carbon. Understanding the
current outlook on the nuclear industry, I have some concerns
with the direction our regulatory agencies have been taking in
regards to allowing them to operate and would like to ask you a
few questions on the EPA's outlook for nuclear power going
forward.
In past models of climate change compiled by your agency,
major questions surrounding the degree to which nuclear power
is technically, politically, and socially feasible have been
raised. Does the EPA still consider the use to be a major area
of uncertainty?
Ms. McCabe. I don't know that I can speak to that,
Congressman. We do recognize that nuclear power is an important
aspect of clean generation, and as I said before, we have tried
to signal in a proposal and encouragement towards retaining
existing, and we know that new is being planned and built, and
that squarely will be advantageous to a plant, but we recognize
that there are existing challenges beyond our control for the
industry.
Mr. Kinzinger. And I understand the proposed rule relies on
an EIA study that shows 6 percent of the nuclear fleet being at
risk, but they are still expected to continue their operations
going forward. In addition to this, economic modeling of
climate legislation by EPA, EIA, and others has consistently
shown that dramatic growth in nuclear energy is necessary to
reduce carbon emissions and that constrained development of
nuclear energy dramatically increases the cost of compliance.
What will happen if the EPA's assumption that these plants
currently at risk will continue to operate with that assumption
is incorrect, what will happen?
Ms. McCabe. Well, it depends on what a State would choose
to do to replace the nuclear generation, so we hope and expect
that there would be opportunities for States to go with lower
or other zero emitting generation renewables and also rely
significantly----
Mr. Kinzinger. Make a ton of windmills or something, right?
Ms. McCabe. There is a lot of wind power being built in the
country, significantly a growth area, and energy sufficient----
Mr. Kinzinger. Takes a lot of wind, though, to replace a
nuclear power plant.
Ms. McCabe. It does.
Mr. Kinzinger. Does the EPA have the legal authority to
compel those plants to continue their operations?
Ms. McCabe. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Kinzinger. Do you know, does any agency currently have
that authority?
Ms. McCabe. I couldn't speak to that, Congressman.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. And so a recent modeling done by EPA
determined that 44 new reactors would be necessary to satisfy
performance standards based on the Lieberman and Warner bill
from 2008, and another showed that an additional 96 gigawatts
of new nuclear power capacity would be needed by 2030 to meet
standards set out in another proposed piece of legislation from
2009.
Does the EPA believe we can make meaningful reductions in
carbon dioxide emissions from baseload power generation while
still ensuring reliable and affordable power without
substantial growth in nuclear power generation?
Ms. McCabe. Well, I do, and I will note that the--that our
proposal here is not legislation like you have described. It
takes a very different approach, which is what is reasonable to
expect the existing fossil plant to do and for States to do to
reduce the carbon intensity, and it takes every State where it
is. So if we see nuclear coming on the ground, we consider it.
We are not counting it. We are not assuming other nuclear
construction that is not already contemplated.
Mr. Kinzinger. Do you know how many new--under the proposed
rule, do you know how many new nuclear reactors would be needed
to meet those standards?
Ms. McCabe. Well, I think we are aware of maybe 5 that are
under construction now, and so we took account of those, and we
didn't take account of others that aren't yet built.
Mr. Kinzinger. OK. And currently there is eight licenses
under review by the NRC right now. I just want to reiterate
that 100 percent of nuclear power generation is carbon free,
and not only will every plant be necessary to ensure compliance
with any future mandates but many more will need to be brought
on to ensure affordable and reliable energy is available
throughout the country. And I think that the key is we want to
talk about affordable and reliability, we need a lot of nuclear
power plants to come online.
I thank you for your time and your patience today, and I
yield back.
Mr. Griffith. All right. In closing, let me note that the
committee has outstanding document requests relating to our
investigation of EPA's adherence to the Energy Policy Act of
2005 and its rulemaking for new plants. It has been 4 months
since we initiated these requests, but the EPA has been
decidedly slow in its document production. Can you tell me who
at the EPA ultimately is accountable to the committee for
responding to its requests?
Ms. McCabe. The agency will respond, and we are working on
them. We have responded to various requests, and responses are
under way.
Mr. Griffith. All right. And will you commit on behalf of
the Administrator that the EPA will produce outstanding
documents and fully comply with our requests?
Ms. McCabe. I won't make a commitment on behalf of the
Administrator, but we will certainly do what we need to do to
be responsive.
Mr. Griffith. Will you commit to have your staff work with
our staff to ensure the committee has what it determines is
necessary to fulfill its oversight obligations?
Ms. McCabe. Our staffs work very well together, and again,
we will do what we need to do in order to be responsive.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you. We will have questions for the
record forthcoming. I would ask that you provide your response
in a timely fashion, particularly given this rule appears to be
on a very fast track with the administration. Will you commit
to providing us responses to these questions within 60 days?
Ms. McCabe. Right now I can't commit to a timeframe because
I don't know how many questions there will be or what will be
involved, but we will do our best to be as expeditious as
possible.
Mr. Griffith. All right. With that, I want to thank you for
being here today and for the testimony that you have given us
and the members for their devotion to this hearing, and that
will conclude our hearing.

[Whereupon at 12:23 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

[all]
