- H.R. lll, THE GLOBAL INVESTMENT IN AMERICAN JOBS ACT OF 2013

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. ___, THE GLOBAL INVESTMENT IN
AMERICAN JOBS ACT OF 2013
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, MANUFACTURING, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 18, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-32

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

energycommerce.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
82-185                       WASHINGTON : 2015

_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky                 Chairman Emeritus
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             GENE GREEN, Texas
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          LOIS CAPPS, California
Vice Chairman                      MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JIM MATHESON, Utah
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   JOHN BARROW, Georgia
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            DORIS O. MATSUI, California
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana                  Islands
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas                    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     JERRY McNERNEY, California
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PETER WELCH, Vermont
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         PAUL TONKO, New York
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade

LEE TERRY, Nebraska
Chairman
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    PETER WELCH, Vermont
DAVE B. McKINLEY, West Virginia      JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JIM MATHESON, Utah
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
BILL JOHNSON, Missouri               DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BILLY LONG, Missouri                     Islands
JOE BARTON, Texas                    HENRY A. WAXMAN, California, ex
FRED UPTON, Michigan, ex officio         officio

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Lee Terry, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Nebraska, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Janice D. Schakowsky, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, opening statement...........................    12

Witnesses

Francisco J. Sanchez, Undersecretary of Commerce for
International Trade, United States Department of Commerce......    13
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Answers to submitted questions \*\...........................   110
Nancy L. McLernon, President and CEO, Organization for
International Investment.......................................    37
Prepared statement...........................................    40
Linda Dempsey, Vice President, International Economic Affairs,
National Association of Manufacturers..........................    49
Prepared statement...........................................    51
Matthew J. Slaughter, Associate Dean for Faculty, Tuck School of
Business, Dartmouth University.................................    62
Prepared statement...........................................    64
Answers to submitted questions...............................   111
Martin Baily, Senior Fellow, Economic Studies, Bernard L.
Schwartz Chair in Economic Policy Development, Brookings
Institute......................................................    69
Prepared statement...........................................    72
Answers to submitted questions...............................   113
Celeste Drake, Trade and Globalization Policy Specialist, AFL-CIO    81
Prepared statement...........................................    83
Answers to submitted questions...............................   115

----------
\*\ Mr. Sanchez did not respond to submitted questions.

Submitted material

Discussion draft.................................................     4

H.R. --------, THE GLOBAL INVESTMENT IN AMERICAN JOBS ACT OF 2013

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 18, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing, and Trade,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:33 a.m., in
room 2322 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Lee Terry
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Terry, Lance, McKinley,
Pompeo, Kinzinger, Johnson, Long, Schakowsky, McNerney, and
Barrow.
Staff present: Charlotte Baker, Press Secretary; Kirby
Howard, Legislative Clerk; Nick Magallanes, Policy Coordinator,
CMT; Brian McCullough, Senior Professional Staff Member, CMT;
Andrew Powaleny, Deputy Press Secretary; Shannon Weinberg
Taylor, Counsel, CMT; Michelle Ash, Democratic Chief Counsel;
Jacqueline Cohen, Democratic Senior Counsel; and Will Wallace,
Democratic Policy Analyst.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LEE TERRY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEBRASKA

Mr. Terry. So welcome, everybody. Good morning to our
panelists and guests. The purpose of today's hearing is to
highlight the importance of foreign direct investment in the
United States and learn more from our experts on how lowering
barriers to foreign investment in our country can have
significant benefits for our economy as a whole. I hate to
steal the undersecretary's thunder, but his testimony lays out
some of the facts that deserve being mentioned more than once.
In 2010 U.S. affiliates of foreign firms employed over 5.3
million workers--as I understand, that is now 5.6 as of today--
and the average salaries are 77,000 per year. These firms
accounted for 41.3 billion worth of research and development
efforts and 149 billion worth of capital expenditures in that
same year. In the manufacturing sector alone, FDI inflows were
nearly 84 billion in 2012, according to the National
Association of Manufacturers.
These statistics tell us a clear story: increasing capital
in the form of direct foreign investment has positive effects
on manufacturing, increased exports, job creation, and U.S.
competitiveness. It is just that simple.
Unfortunately, these rosy statistics fail to tell the whole
story. Foreign direct investment in the United States has
fallen drastically over the last few years, relative to other
nations. According to the testimony we will here today from the
organization for international investment, the U.S. share of
foreign direct investment has dropped from 41 percent in '99 to
17 percent in 2011.
The reality is that, while the U.S. remains an economic
leader, the other nations are catching up. The statistic I just
mentioned is indicative of that. Companies want to manufacture
in a country where there is fair corporate tax code, a high
degree of regulatory certainty, and a set of policies that
welcome investments into the country.
The United States can't rest on its laurels. We need to
take a hard look at some of our national policies and assess
whether they are stunting our ability to attract companies to
the U.S. that have proven they create jobs and will help grow
our economy. The legislation that we will be introducing in the
following days, the Global Investment in American Jobs Act of
2013, is just the first step in that process.
Given what we will learn in today's hearing from a panel of
experts--and we have heard in our last three meetings focused
on manufacturing that this should be a no-brainer. Investing in
American jobs is not a partisan issue when companies like
Toyota and Honda choose to open up manufacturing facilities in
Kentucky or Texas or Tennessee or Ohio or South Carolina or
Georgia. Notice Nebraska wasn't on there. Neither was Illinois,
so there is room for improvement.
Ms. Schakowsky. Yes.
Mr. Terry. We heard from some of our executives just last
week that when they opened the doors, thousands of jobs were
created directly and indirectly. Local, state, and federal tax
revenues went up not because marginal rates went up but because
the economies in those cities and States grew and more people
are working. We heard from these companies and how they helped
change the communities they became part of, contributing
through outreach programs like workforce training and
charitable giving.
If our legislation, the Global Investment in American Jobs
Act of 2013, can succeed in highlighting what the U.S. needs to
do to and attract more of our great companies to our shores,
then it is a win-win for every American and workers.
The U.S. can still be one of the most much attractive
places in the world to invest capital. We have a large and
affluent consumer base, a strong rule of law when it comes to
intellectual property, and one of the best and most productive
workforces in the world. It is my hope that today's hearing can
help us highlight some areas where barriers on foreign direct
investment currently exist so that we can build upon the
positives I just mentioned and not only compete for but win the
opportunities for foreign direct investment.
I want to thank all of our panelists for coming here today
and especially Mr. Sanchez. Thank you for being here as well.
You are a key part of this effort and have done well.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Terry follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Lee Terry

Good Morning and welcome to our panelists and other
guests.The purpose of today's hearing is to highlight the
importance of Foreign Direct Investment in the United States,
and learn more from the experts on how lowering barriers to
foreign investment in our country can have significant benefits
for the economy as a whole.
I hate to steal Under Secretary Sanchez's thunder-but his
testimony lays out some facts that deserve being mentioned
twice. In 2010--U.S. affiliates of foreign firms employed over
5.3 million workers making an average of $77,000 per year.
These firms accounted for $41.3 billion worth of Research and
Development efforts and $149 billion worth of capital
expenditures that same year. In the manufacturing sector alone,
FDI inflows were nearly $84 billion in 2012, according to the
National Association of Manufacturers.
These statistics tell a clear story: increasing capital in
the form of direct foreign investment has positive effects on
manufacturing, increased exports, job creation and U.S.
competitiveness. It is just that simple.
Unfortunately, these rosy statistics fail to tell the whole
story. Foreign direct investment in the United States has
fallen drastically, relative to other nations. According to
testimony we will hear today from the Organization for
International Investment, the U.S. share of foreign direct
investment has dropped from 41% in 1999 to 17% in 2011.
The reality is that, while the U.S. remains an economic
leader, other nations are beginning to catch up. The statistic
I just mentioned is indicative of that. Companies want to
manufacture in a country where there is a fair corporate tax
code, a high degree of regulatory certainty and a set of
policies that welcome investments into the economy.
The United States cannot rest on its laurels. We need to
take a hard look at some of our national policies and assess
whether they are stunting our ability to attract companies to
the U.S. that have proven they create jobs and help grow our
economy. The legislation that I will be introducing in the
following days, the Global Investment in American Jobs Act of
2013, is the first step in this process.
I hope that every member of this subcommittee, on both
sides, will be willing to cosponsor this legislation. Given
what we will learn in today's hearing from our panels of
experts and what we have heard in our last three hearings
focused on manufacturing, it should be a ``no-brainer.''
Investing in American Jobs is not a partisan issue-when
companies like Toyota and Honda choose to open up manufacturing
facilities in Tennessee and Kentucky and Ohio and South
Carolina-we all win. We heard from some of their executives
just last week. When they opened their doors, thousands of jobs
were created, directly and indirectly. Local, state and federal
tax revenues went up--not because marginal rates went up--but
because the economies in those cities and states grew and
because more people were working. We heard from these companies
how they helped change the communities they became a part of--
contributing through outreach programs like workforce training
and charitable giving.
If my legislation, the Global Investment in American Jobs
Act of 2013, can succeed at highlighting what the U.S. needs to
do to keep attracting more great companies to our shores, then
it is a win for every U.S. worker.
The U.S. can still be one of the most attractive places in
the world to invest capital. We have a large and affluent
consumer base, a strong rule of law when it comes to
intellectual property and one of the best and most productive
workforces in the world.
It is my hope that today's hearing can help us highlight
some areas where barriers on foreign direct investment
currently exist-so that we can build upon the positives I just
mentioned and not only compete for, but win, opportunities for
more foreign investment.

#  #  #

[The discussion draft follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. So I yield back the rest of my time and now
recognize that Ranking Member, Ms. Jan Schakowsky.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am hoping that
we can keep our run of bipartisan hearings and work. We have
got a good string going so far. And I thank you for holding
this hearing on draft legislation to attract further foreign
investment in the United States.
I welcome the witnesses, especially Mr. Sanchez, this
morning as our first panelist and look forward to all of the
testimony.
In the interest of promoting good jobs and overall economic
growth, I agree that we should consider ways to increase
investment in this country, both domestic and foreign. The
United States is the global leader in attracting foreign direct
investment. There is more foreign direct investment in America
than anywhere else, and we are consistently ranked as number
one of the easiest places to do business.
There is a strong incentive to invest in America. Our
economy is continuing to recover from the Great Recession and
we remain the best place on Earth to find talented, motivated
employees. In order to access all that our country has to
offer, foreign investors know that they will be required to
meet labor, health, environmental, and consumer standards.
Strong standards protect workers in the communities in which
these foreign investments occur, and they are essential for
long-term economic growth in this country.
Our economy is built on the middle class and those who
aspire to it, and it is imperative that our attempts to expand
foreign investment strengthen rather than undermine worker
protections, compensation, and job security. Just as the best
American companies observe high labor standards, so must
foreign investors understand that a well-compensated and well-
protected workforce will drive the future growth of their
corporations and our overall economy. It is imperative that
foreign investors respect our local, state, and federal
environmental protections.
I believe that climate change is the greatest challenge we
face as a planet and as a Nation. Reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, protecting our waterways from harmful toxins and
chemicals, and shifting toward cleaner energy sources is
essential if we are to thrive for generations to come. Our
effort to encourage foreign direct investment should align with
our efforts to combat climate change and help us transition to
a clean energy future.
Finally, it is essential that we maintain restrictions on
former foreign investment and industries that are critical to
public safety, national security, and a strong domestic
workforce. Those restrictions help ensure the safety of the
American people and the security of American jobs.
I have listed some of the things that I am concerned about
on foreign investment, but I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses about how we can continue to drive foreign direct
investment in the United States that promotes good jobs, a
clean environment, and the security of the American people.
And I want to yield the balance of my time to Mr. Barrow.
Mr. Barrow. I thank the ranking member for her time. I
appreciate it.
I cosponsored this bill in the last Congress because it is
a step in the right direction to grow American jobs. Every time
I go home, I am reminded how investors overseas can spur jobs
here at home by tapping into the infrastructure and workforce
we have right here in America. Belgian companies like Solvay in
Augusta, French companies like Alstom in Waynesboro, and Irish
companies like Covidien in Augusta can invest in any country in
the world. They are proud to invest in Georgia's 12th District.
And the families that work for them take just as much pride in
their work.
We have the best workers in the world and we like it when
companies all over the world compete for workers in Georgia. I
will continue supporting job-creating efforts like this, and I
look forward to today's hearing.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Terry. Very good. No other requests for opening
statements. Mr. Sanchez, we will recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF FRANCISCO J. SANCHEZ, UNDERSECRETARY OF COMMERCE
FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Mr. Sanchez. Chairman Terry, thank you very, very much.
Ranking Member Schakowsky, distinguished members--is that
better?
Mr. Terry. Yes.
Mr. Sanchez. Oh, that is a lot better. Distinguished
members of the committee, thank you very much for inviting me
to speak to you today about the Department of Commerce's work
to attract and retain business investment in the United States.
With your permission, Mr. Chairman, I will summarize my
statement and submit my full testimony for the record.
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
At the outset, I want to thank the committee and the
members of the House who have introduced legislation focusing
on global investment. This is a clear recognition of how
important the role that foreign direct investment plays in
strengthening our economy. Such an effort reinforces a very
simple truth: that, as a free market economy, the United States
encourages investment from both domestic and foreign sources
and that this investment leads to economic growth and job
creation.
In 2010, which was until this morning the latest available
data we had, U.S. subsidiaries of foreign-owned farms employed
5.3 million U.S. workers. As Chairman Terry just recognized,
that number now is up to 5.6 million. And what is really
important, I think, is that these are high-paying jobs with an
average compensation of over $77,000 per year. And these firms
also spend tens of billions of dollars expanding their
facilities, purchasing equipment, and investing in research and
development that keeps our economy at the cutting edge of
innovation.
So the bottom line: increasing the investment of attracted
and retained investment to the U.S. is absolutely critical to
growing our economy. And the good news is that the United
States is the world's largest recipient of foreign direct
investment. Companies from around the world choose to do
business here in the United States and take advantage of the
unparalleled business climate, which includes our innovative
and stable market, a skilled and well-educated workforce,
strong intellectual property rights protection and enforcement,
and a stable regulatory climate.
In addition, the United States has trade agreements with 20
markets, giving firms with U.S. operations access to a global
marketplace. In short, the U.S. is a great place to do
business.
Nevertheless, as the chairman pointed out, economies
worldwide, as they open up and liberalize, we are now faced
from these other economies increased competition to attract new
investment projects and retain existing ones. Our States,
regions, and local communities need a federal advocate to help
win new investments because we are now competing with at least
159 countries that have investment promotion programs, and on
average these programs spend about $58 million annually.
In this new climate, the U.S. needs to be actively engaged
in foreign direct investment, making SelectUSA a valuable
initiative. President Obama launched SelectUSA in 2011, as a
first-ever U.S. government-wide initiative to promote and
facilitate business investment in the United States.
SelectUSA's unique services complement States' efforts and
provide federal information and ombudsman services to firms
seeking to invest, seeking to remain here, seeking to expand
or, in many cases now, return to the United States. And this
work is generating results.
Since June 2011, SelectUSA has responded to over 600
investor inquiries, assisted with over 100 ombudsman cases, and
counseled nearly 140 U.S. cities, States, and regions. And that
is just the start. We aim to build on this momentum in a
variety of ways. One vehicle will be for SelectUSA to host an
investment summit from October 31 to November 1 right here in
Washington D.C. The SelectUSA investment summit is designed to
highlight the benefits of the U.S. business climate to
investors and help them engage with U.S. economic development
organizations.
In addition, SelectUSA will work to keep pace with the
increase in investment, inquiries, cases, and, we hope, many
successes. It will also continue to leverage the partnerships
and relationships that we have with other federal agencies, as
well as creating new ones. The Commerce Department will
continue do all that it can to attract and retain business
investment.
I want to take a moment to thank the other agencies that
have been diligently working to strengthen this initiative, and
I want to thank you again for the opportunity to discuss this
important topic. I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sanchez follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you very much.
At this point we will start our questions, and I really do
appreciate you being here.
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Terry. It means a lot to us. And so your statement was
very strong about the need and the importance of direct foreign
investment, and I appreciate the strength of that statement.
So you agree that we should take a look at approaches to
make U.S. more competitive in attracting these foreign
companies to invest here? That is your mission, right?
Mr. Sanchez. That is part of our mission is to make sure we
maintain a competitive business climate.
Mr. Terry. Does the Commerce Department currently have any
expertise in evaluating policies that affect our
competitiveness in the world marketplace in attracting foreign
investment?
Mr. Sanchez. One of the things that the International Trade
Administration has--and that is the business unit that I have
the privilege of overseeing--is manufacturing services. And it
does a lot of outreach to our business sectors. And so we are
constantly interacting with them, getting feedback from them on
what is working and what is not working. And we try to keep
that dialogue going constantly, and as we learn that, share it
with relevant agencies.
Mr. Terry. So with that type of collaboration you feel
comfortable that you could provide us with a study of where we
can improve or remove barriers?
Mr. Sanchez. Well, we are not the only agency that can
contribute to that, but we certainly have a lot to say on it
and we would welcome the opportunity to be a part of that
dialogue.
Mr. Terry. I appreciate that. Now, if a study like this is
undertaken, who would you rely on in your staff to help piece
this together?
Mr. Sanchez. Well, we have a number of----
Mr. Terry. Is he sitting here today, or she?
Mr. Sanchez. I think part of that team----
Mr. Terry. I think the one with the grin is probably, yes--
--
Mr. Sanchez. The one who is feeling the weight of the new
task. I am sure part of that team is right here in this room.
We would probably draw on a number of people within the
International Trade Administration, but I suspect we would want
to draw on other relevant business units within the Department
of Commerce, including NIST, PTO, Bureau of Economic Analysis,
as well as reaching out to other relevant agencies.
Mr. Terry. Well, I would appreciate that. And 180 days, do
you feel that that is an appropriate time period? What is your
feedback?
Mr. Sanchez. Mr. Chairman, I probably would want to look at
the scope of the study before I gave you a specific number, but
if Congress mandated us to do that, we would certainly make
every effort to provide a good study within the time requested.
Mr. Terry. Fair. You went through a series of numbers--or
the number of countries that we compete with is what, 160 did
you say?
Mr. Sanchez. Well, there are at least 159 that have active
investment promotion programs and the average budget for those
programs is about $58 million.
Mr. Terry. So did you have any initial beliefs of where we
should focus to remove barriers, or become stronger--ways to
strengthen our ability to attract the foreign investment in the
United States?
Mr. Sanchez. As I mentioned in my testimony, we already
start with a good attractive business climate. If you look at
indicators that are put out by The World Bank, the World
Economic Forum, and other groups, we consistently rank most
often in the top 5, perhaps sometimes in the top 10, as one of
the best places to do business. So we, fortunately, start from
a very good place.
One of the things that we have to do, and this is why
SelectUSA was launched, is we have to recognize that more and
more countries are seeking in foreign investment. And so we can
no longer just rest on our laurels, we can no longer just say,
look, we are a great place to do business; come. We have to
actively promote. And I think that is one of the areas that we
need to really pay attention to and that is what SelectUSA
seeks to do. And your attention to this legislation into this
effort is indicative that you and this committee recognize
that.
Mr. Terry. And in that regard of working in a collaborative
way you mentioned in your statement with SelectUSA of working
with the States. What do you feel the States' roles are and
what have you seen from the experience of trying to attract
foreign investment? How are the States doing? What should they
be doing better? Who is doing best?
Mr. Sanchez. Well, I think--and I believe this is the
philosophy of SelectUSA--is that the States have the primary
role of promoting foreign direct investment. That has been
their role; it should continue to be. SelectUSA should be more
of a facilitator, a supporter of those efforts.
So there are things that we are able to do that helps them.
For example, SelectUSA is leveraging the offices that the U.S.
and Foreign Commercial Service have in 72 countries around the
world and 100 cities here in the United States. And that is an
important value added that we provide. Most States don't have
that kind of coverage. In fact, no State that I know of has
that coverage. My home State of Florida has 14 offices abroad
and I believe that is the largest grouping of offices that any
State has anywhere in the world.
So presence outside of the United States is very important,
helping them reach out as we get leads, connecting them to the
economic development organizations. So I think these are the
kinds of things that we play a very good complementary role
with the States.
Mr. Terry. Thank you very much. And my time is expired. And
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Jan Schakowsky.
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Sanchez.
Before I begin our hearing I want to say congratulations. I
understand that you are among a short list of candidates being
considered for the United States trade representative and I
wish you the very best of luck.
Mr. Sanchez. You are very kind. Thank you very much.
Ms. Schakowsky. I have a question about greenfield
investment, new investment versus merger and acquisitions.
Preparing for this hearing presented us with some conflicting
information. On the one hand, we are told that the reason we
need to do this study and to promote foreign direct investment
is because the United States is losing investment, as our
chairman pointed out, losing investment opportunities to other
countries such as Mexico and India, developing countries. I
would agree that we should be concerned if that is the case and
we need to promote that U.S. is the best place to invest.
Now, the other hand, the most recent data available
indicates that 85 percent or more of the foreign direct
investment occurs through mergers and acquisitions. So if the
vast majority of FDI is used to acquire preexisting United
States' businesses that were previously owned by Americans, I
am less clear about the benefits.
In many cases, a large foreign firm is expanding into the
United States by buying out smaller U.S. businesses. In these
situations, the end result is often either the same number of
jobs or even somewhat fewer jobs. In fact, a recent study
concluded that despite the productivity gain that is associated
with foreign ownership, any dollar of foreign direct investment
from merger and acquisition sales has a weaker effect on growth
than a dollar of foreign investment that stems from greenfield
investment, which occurs when an investor builds a new
productive unit from scratch.
So my question is, if you could tell me what the Department
of Commerce is doing, what you are doing, your administration
is doing to distinguish between these two types of foreign
direct investment and what changes could be made to the draft
legislation so it focuses more intensively on greenfield
investment?
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you very much, Representative
Schakowsky, and again, thank you for your kind words at the
start of your question.
SelectUSA starts with the premise that the United States
has an open investment environment. And I agree with you that
new investment that creates new jobs is very, very appealing
and we have had the privilege, through SelectUSA, of working
with a number of companies that have made those kinds of
investments.
I would also point out, however, that oftentimes there are
investments being made acquiring companies that can use that
added revenue, or in some cases if they don't get that revenue,
those businesses might shut down. And so attracting foreign
direct investment that takes over an existing company isn't
always a net negative. In many cases it is a net positive. And
so we look at it more broadly, that we are attracting
investment and that that investment does a number of things.
They often buy new equipment. They often expand facilities.
They then, in turn, often add to our exports because what they
manufacture here often then gets re-exported.
So we will continue to focus on supporting investment here
that, our hope is, will add to the net jobs, as most of the
foreign direct investment, I believe, has, though I have not
had the opportunity to read this study. And I will do so, and I
would appreciate if I could get a copy of that study.
But generally, we focus on helping attract this investment
that has all this ripple effect net positive activity for our
economy.
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me get one more question. The Bureau of
Economic Analysis at the Department of Commerce is responsible
for measuring foreign direct investment. BEA used to carry out
a survey of businesses that differentiated between growth and
greenfield investment and investment growth from merger and
acquisition. In 2008, it had to cancel this survey for budget
reasons but the President's 2014 budget proposes to reinstate
it. Why not get quickly here--the GAO, NBER, and the National
Academy of Public Administration have each recommended that BEA
expand its foreign direct investment data and that provided
specific recommendations to the Bureau on what parts of its
efforts would be most viable to expand.
So I commend the Department of Commerce for seeking to
resume this collection. Yes or no, should the Congress
appropriate funding for this survey differentiating between
Greenfield investment and investment through acquisitions?
Mr. Sanchez. As I said, Representative Schakowsky, I have
not read this study, though it sounds like you make a
compelling argument for taking a hard look at this since we
have done in the past through our Bureau of Economic Analysis.
And we certainly were closely with the Bureau of Economic
Analysis and I would certainly work closely with them to get
this information either through their efforts or through other
appropriate efforts.
Ms. Schakowsky. It used to be that regardless of the policy
decision we make as a consequence of having this information
would inform how we move forward. So I thank you for that.
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you.
Ms. Schakowsky. I yield back.
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you very much.
Mr. Terry. The gentleman from Missouri is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you for being
here today.
And Ms. Schakowsky was making reference to a trade position
that you may be up for, and trade was one of the few things
that we were able to handle in a very good bipartisan fashion
in the last Congress up here. So good luck in that endeavor,
and if I can be of any assistance to you, I would love to. We
got the Columbia, Panama, and Korea Free Trade Agreements done
last year that they had not been able to do for 6 or 8 years.
And we also were successful in extending permanent normal
trade relations to Russia, which didn't do anything except help
our manufacturers. We were already trading with Russia and a
lot of people didn't realize that when Russia went into the WTO
last July, that if we didn't change some things and change the
old Jackson-Vanik law that dated back to the Cold War era--that
we needed to get rid of that so that we could help our
manufacturers and farmers here at home.
So thank you and good luck on your endeavor there.
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you very much, Congressman.
Chairman, would you invite me to come regularly to testify
before this committee?
Mr. Long. I haven't gotten to the bad part.
Mr. Sanchez. Yes.
Mr. Long. I still have time.
Mr. Sanchez. Oh, no.
Mr. Terry. You may want to wait.
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you very much.
Mr. Long. But what is SelectUSA's function with regards to
state and local development organizations, and to what extent
are the Federal Government's efforts duplicative of the state
and regional economic development organizations?
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you very much for the question,
Congressman.
As I mentioned to Congresswoman Schakowsky, SelectUSA plays
a facilitator role and we are very much a demand-driven
organization, demand driven largely by state and local
governments who seek out our assistance. And so, for example,
we have done about 140 consulting engagements with state and
local governments in helping them seek out opportunities, work
better with the Federal Government on foreign direct investment
initiative.
Mr. Long. And you have done that through SelectUSA?
Mr. Sanchez. Yes. SelectUSA, which was stood up in June of
2011, and we have worked with state and local governments from
the very start. It really is the cornerstone of how SelectUSA
works.
Mr. Long. Well, I have a personal friend, good friend, that
works for the State of Louisiana. I am from Missouri--but for
the State of Louisiana in this type of economic development.
And my thought was it might be better to allow them to compete
than for businesses to handle the promotion and leave the
Federal Government out of it. The Federal Government is always
overreaching, always trying to do too much. We have the
sequester going on and I just question whether this is
necessary.
Mr. Sanchez. Well, first of all, the State of Louisiana has
been a great partner with us. We recently worked on an
investment by a South African firm by the name of Sasol that is
going to make a very, very important investment in the State of
Louisiana. And at the request of the State of Louisiana, we
worked very, very closely with them in a number of ways.
One thing that we are doing in that particular example is
introducing that company to the relevant federal agencies that
they are going to have to interact with. So just a few months
ago, after the announcement, we put together a meeting with all
of the relevant federal agencies at the Department of Commerce.
They all came. The CEO of the U.S. subsidiary had a chance to
present their project to these federal agencies. So that is one
example of how we are working at the request of the State of
Louisiana to support their FDI promotion efforts.
And again, as I mentioned in an earlier response to
question, through the U.S. Foreign Commercial Service we have
offices in 72 countries around the world. No State has that
kind of reach outside. The State of Florida has 14 and that is
the most of any State. And we are able to leverage those
offices to identify potential companies, potential targets. And
we are going to continue to play the facilitator role, not the
lead role, but the facilitator role.
One more thing, Congressman, is that we are competing
against 159 other countries that use the full weight of their
efforts of their governments to advocate on behalf of
investment in their country. And when we are competing, say
against Mexico or Canada or perhaps a country in Europe versus
United States, it really does help to have a federal advocate
supporting that investment right here in the United States.
Mr. Long. Wouldn't you agree that it would go a long way is
if we tried to make this the best place in the world to do
business?
Mr. Sanchez. It is and I am all for that.
Mr. Long. I think we have got some work to do there and I
yield back.
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Long. I now recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sanchez, I appreciate you coming to my district a year
or two ago. It was a very successful event and we heard a lot
of positive feedback from that.
Mr. Sanchez. Well, thank you. We did an export promotion
event as I recall.
Mr. McNerney. That is right. I appreciate that.
I am also interested in ensuring that the American firms
are able to find local talent to fill skilled labor positions,
and I support the SelectUSA initiative.
I am also curious about any partnerships you may have with
educational institutions. Does the initiative include efforts
to address deficiencies in our educational system to make sure
that our workers are attractive to businesses as they move into
this country?
Mr. Sanchez. We are very much aware that, while we have a
very well-educated workforce, we have some gaps in technical
training. And although the Department of Commerce does not
itself have programs that are focused on education or technical
training, we are working very closely with the Department of
Labor, with the Department of Education, with the Department of
Defense that has programs in place of finding jobs for
returning military personnel, as well as spouses of military
personnel.
So we certainly provide feedback and look for ways to work
with our federal agencies in identifying ways that we can help
with this gap in technical training.
Mr. McNerney. But you don't have the relationships with
universities, or technical schools to give them guidance in
what would be useful to employers?
Mr. Sanchez. The Department of Commerce certainly interacts
regularly with educational institutions, but we defer to our
sister agencies who have a more direct role in education,
whether it be the Department of Labor or the Department of
Education.
Mr. McNerney. Well, you have been around many districts in
this country and seen a lot of what the local governments due
to attract investment and businesses to come into their
communities. Could you give us just a couple of little examples
of how that has been helpful or hurtful to the effort of local
communities? Some of the things that the local communities have
done that have been helpful, if you could, and some that have
been hurtful, just to give us an idea of what might be useful.
Mr. Sanchez. Well, I would say the first thing is just
showing up. And that is actually having a presence in the
market, letting the world know that they are open for business,
they want to attract foreign direct investment. And so those
communities and those States that really make this a priority,
really put together a robust promotion program, are going to do
better. And so I would encourage States to take an active role.
And part of the role of the SelectUSA is helping States and
helping local communities put together robust export promotion
programs.
Mr. McNerney. So, for example, right now, Governor Brown,
the Governor of California, is in China promoting California as
a place to do business and you are suggesting that that is
helpful and positive.
Mr. Sanchez. Increasingly, governors and other local
leaders are going overseas to attract foreign direct
investment, and I think that that effort should pay dividends.
It seems to in a number of States, and I am sure it will pay
for California to be active internationally.
Mr. McNerney. What about the negative side? Are there
things that some of our local governments are doing that are
detrimental to our trade attractiveness?
Mr. Sanchez. Well, I believe that just like the United
States needs to be attractive, create a good business climate--
and generally we do that, at least as evidenced by the
indicators of the World Economic Forum, the World Bank, and
other indicators, so do local communities and state
governments. So to the extent that they create attractive
business climates, there are going to do well. And to the
extent that they don't compete as effectively with other
communities--and I would say I am using the term communities
not just within the United States, but they are now competing
with communities around the world. I would say communities need
to measure themselves against communities worldwide. And that
to me is an important effort for States and communities that
want to be serious about attracting investment.
Mr. McNerney. Well, you know if I was a Beijing businessman
and I was breathing the air in Beijing day in and day out, I
would look at the San Francisco Bay Area and say, hey, this is
a much cleaner place. I would like to go there. Does that come
in to the calculations at all for those folks, do you think?
Mr. Terry. May I suggest Omaha's air is even cleaner than
San Francisco's.
Mr. McNerney. I yield back.
Mr. Terry. All right, the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr.
McKinley, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. Secretary Sanchez, at the risk of
ending the kumbaya questioning that have occurred here, I have
got two questions that I am curious where you may be coming
from on. The easier one, perhaps, first is, we of numbers of
businesses in our district that they are small companies that
have been victims of dumping, and Commerce has told them that
they can file an action and they have pursued that but they
find out it is going to cost, for example, in this one 1.2
million to file an action. These small companies can't afford
$1.2 million to fight that, so they are giving in. And as a
result, we are seeing more dumping occurring here in this
country.
Is there a role for the government, perhaps, to step in for
companies that are undervalued or have the inability to come up
with $1.2 dollars to fight? Is there someplace that we might be
able to help them?
Mr. Sanchez. Congressman, I share that frustration. I have,
under the----
Mr. McKinley. What is the solution? I don't want the
whining because that is what I am doing.
Mr. Sanchez. Yes.
Mr. McKinley. I am trying to find what is the solution?
Mr. Sanchez. We make every effort to help companies prepare
for an antidumping petition. Within the budget constraints that
we have, within the staffing constraints that we have, we make
every effort to provide advice and counsel for them. That has
its limits, but we do everything that we can to help small and
medium-size companies that feel that they are being hurt by
companies that are dumping. And so within those constraints, we
do everything that we possibly can and I suspect that we are
not able to do all that we could or all that would like to----
Mr. McKinley. We really you don't have--other than maybe
giving some help, there is no way to help pick up that cost for
them?
Mr. Sanchez. Within the existing budget that we have, we do
what we can.
Mr. McKinley. OK. Second question is further to do with
dumping. We know that foreign companies, their dumping doesn't
all occur in one; it can be spread out over different
businesses. But one company may be--so it is called, as you
know, is targeted dumping. And this administration has just
come out in supporting some recent determinations on targeted
dumping, particularly about Fu Fang Biotechnical. And that
decision or that report has just come out in early March. Are
we revisiting that or is this something that--because we know
that Fu Fang had 68 percent of its sales varied among different
customers, so they can dump on one and then charge more in
another, and that avoided their dumping charge. How can we
protect that if the administration is saying I will support
that? And they have that--he signed off on this on March 4,
said he agrees with that process.
Mr. Sanchez. Congressman, I need to review that particular
case before I respond on that. I do know that we do, I believe,
a very good job within the constraints that we have of
enforcing our trade laws, we also do it in compliance with our
international obligations. And I would need to look at this
little more carefully, and I would be happy to do so and get
back with you.
Mr. McKinley. I hope you can, because we are seeing--just
20 some years ago we had a very vibrant steel industry in the
northern section of West Virginia with 30,000 steelworkers. We
now have less than 1,000 steelworkers. Now, think about that.
Primarily, they will say up and down the line that this had to
do with trade and dumping. And I hear a lot of people talking
about trying to help but I don't see the activity. I don't see
where that has really stepped in. People said we will look at
it. We will reconsider that. But in the meantime, nearly 30,000
steelworkers have lost their jobs.
And here it is again where people are saying they can't
come up with $1.2 million to fight back against these
agreements and then the administration coming out and saying
they are going to support this decision. I just wanted to
question you about that. If you can find it--I don't see a
number on it, but I will be glad to give you my copy.
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you. I promise to look into it and get
back to you.
Mr. McKinley. OK. Thank you very much.
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. McKinley. Mr. Pompeo of Kansas,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Mr.
Secretary.
In your written testimony you expressed that one of the
concerns foreign companies often have in considering direct
investment is their difficulty entering and exiting at U.S.
borders. A major employer in my district, Learjet, has a major
foreign direct investment from a company called Bombardier in
Canada. They are a great employer in our district. They have
done a phenomenal job of taking care of our team in Kansas and
building a great airplane.
They have a shuttle in which they fly employees back and
forth from different facilities in Mexico and Canada. They
bring team members; they bring parts back and forth. They have
been prevented from flying directly in to Wichita because of
the Customs and Border Protection folks said they don't have
the requisite staff on site. It forces Bombardier to clear
customs someplace else late at night. It is very, very
challenging and costly and, I think, discouraging to them to
continue to grow their asset in Kansas. I know the company has
worked very hard to try and coordinate with customs. Our
offices have tried to do the same. We have engaged your folks,
the ombudsman's office, in that process. But we have had little
success, to be honest with you, getting CBP to become engaged.
Thoughts on how that process may be strengthened so that
companies that do put their capital risk in America can get in
and out and do the things they need to do, both to be
successful in their endeavors but also to grow jobs in America?
Mr. Sanchez. Well, Congressman first of all, thank you for
reaching out to SelectUSA to let us work on that. Bombardier
has been a great source of foreign direct investment. They
spent a lot of money here, created a lot of jobs, and I believe
we are still working on that case. What I can tell you is that
I will personally follow up with our team and also reach out to
Customs and Border Patrol and see what options that might
exist.
I know that over the last several years they have made a
special effort to balance the needs of security at the border
with making sure that they don't impede legitimate business.
And I applaud them for that effort and we are going to continue
to work with them more broadly on policies that make it easy
for businesses like Bombardier to invest here. And I will
personally look into this one in particular.
Mr. Pompeo. Thank you, I appreciate that. Actually, this is
happening in districts all costs country, the same issue. And
so it is just very important that these folks can get in and do
the business they need to do here or they will ultimately be
discouraged from those investments.
Changing topics just a little bit, we had a long hearing on
the Keystone XL pipeline yesterday, lots of different views,
but I would be interested in your take. Do you think that this
kind of highly visible, highly politicized discouragement of
foreign direct investment is being observed by other folks who
may want to bring capital to America and has an impact on their
decisions to invest here in the country?
Mr. Sanchez. Well, Congressman, I think that everything
that we do, particularly from an investor's point of view, gets
looked at. I will say this: that in general, this case I know
there are a lot of strong opinions on both sides. One of the
good things that we do have going for us is that energy costs
here are going down. And that is increasingly becoming an
attractive incentive to bring investment to our shores. So we
certainly are focusing on ways to highlight that and it is my
hope that we will continue on that path and we will be able to
use that as an opportunity to bring more investment here to the
U.S.
Mr. Pompeo. Great. I appreciate it. I just think when
companies want to come here and do business and follow our laws
and all of our processes that to have an administration just
make it so difficult and so political and put them through the
ringer, I think the world watches when these things happen and
I don't think it is productive to what it is that you all are
trying to accomplish and what we are trying to do here through
this legislation this morning.
You know, the last thing I will say, so we have a piece of
legislation we are debating that directs this interagency
study. I think there are lots of studies out there. I think we
all have a pretty good handle on what folks are looking for
when they make capital decisions to decide whether to invest
here or not. So I am happy to take a look at this and see what
it is going to cost and how much burden it is going to place.
But I think we all have a deep recognition of what it is, what
folks are really looking for when they are trying to figure out
where to spend their money and invest. So thank you for being
with us this morning.
Mr. Sanchez. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Pompeo. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Pompeo. And that concludes our
questions for you, Secretary Sanchez. I appreciate your time.
We tell witnesses after they are finished testifying that we
may have written questions that will be submitted to you and I
know I have a few. But they are along the same----
Mr. Sanchez. Great.
Mr. Terry [continuing]. Lines of just trying to gather
information to help us guide our efforts here. So if you can
respond to those in a timely manner, we would greatly
appreciate it.
Mr. Sanchez. I look forward to receiving your written
questions and I thank you and the ranking member and the
members of this committee for the opportunity to speak on this
very important topic, and I appreciate your interest in this.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Terry. Well, thank you for your efforts.
And now, we will take a slight pause as we rearrange chairs
for the next panel.
Thank you, everybody. I want to introduce this panel. We
have Nancy McLernon, President and CEO of the Organization of
International Investment; Linda Dempsey, Vice President of
International Economic Affairs of the National Association of
Manufacturers; Matthew Slaughter, Associate Dean for Faculty,
Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth University; Dr. Martin
Baily, Senior Fellow of Economic Studies at the Bernard
Schwartz Chair of Economic Policy Development with the
Brookings Institute; then, last to testify in line would be
Celestine Drake with the Trade and Globalization Policy
Specialist with the AFL-CIO.
And welcome, all of you. Thank you for coming here today.
And we will start right away. Each of you will have 5 minutes.
At 5 minutes if you are still talking, I will lightly tap and
that will mean summarize.
So now, Ms. McLernon, you may begin.

STATEMENTS OF NANCY L. MCLERNON, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
ORGANIZATION FOR INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT; LINDA DEMPSEY, VICE
PRESIDENT, INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF MANUFACTURERS; MATTHEW J. SLAUGHTER, ASSOCIATE DEAN FOR
FACULTY, TUCK SCHOOL OF BUSINESS, DARTMOUTH UNIVERSITY; MARTIN
BAILY, SENIOR FELLOW, ECONOMIC STUDIES, BERNARD L. SCHWARTZ
CHAIR IN ECONOMIC POLICY DEVELOPMENT, BROOKINGS INSTITUTE; AND
CELESTE DRAKE, TRADE AND GLOBALIZATION POLICY SPECIALIST, AFL-
CIO

STATEMENT OF NANCY L. MCLERNON

Ms. McLernon. Good morning. Chairman Terry, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, I
want to thank you for the opportunity to testify this morning.
I applaud your leadership in holding this timely hearing on
legislation to enhance the Nation's ability to attract and
retain global investment.
The Organization for International Investment is an
association exclusively comprised of U.S. subsidiaries of
global companies. Our mission is to ensure the United States
remains an attractive and the most attractive location for
global investment.
This hearing comes at a time when the United States is at a
crossroads facing serious economic and fiscal challenges. And
while the U.S. remains the top location for foreign direct
investment, its share of worldwide FDI has dropped
significantly over the past decade. This really is a national
challenge, one that impacts every State in every congressional
district in this country. Simply put, it is no longer enough
for the U.S. to merely be open to global investment. We must
proactively have a strategy to leverage all the tools within
our reach if we hope to remain competitive for high-value FDI.
For this reason, my organization and our member companies
strongly support the Global Investment in American Jobs Act of
2013.
FDI has long been a catalyst for economic growth in this
country. U.S. subsidiaries of global companies in-source 5.6
jobs to the United States and support an annual payroll of over
$400 billion. Their employees earn an average compensation well
above the private sector average pointing to the high-end
nature of the activities that they have in this country. These
companies are in high-value fields like advanced manufacturing,
life sciences, R&D, and engineering, generating the types of
jobs and economic activities that enhance U.S. competitiveness.
Furthermore, they reinvest heavily in their U.S. operations and
spend heavily on new equipment, upgraded facilities, and new
construction, all of which demonstrate a long-term commitment
to their U.S. operations.
I will give you a few examples: Astellas pharmaceutical R&D
facility in Northbrook, Illinois; Case New Holland exporting
Unionville tractors from Racine, Wisconsin; Philips Healthcare
developing advanced medical imaging technologies in Highland
Heights, Ohio; and Rolls-Royce partnering with local Virginia
schools to teach STEM education and train manufacturing workers
in Prince George County.
But in spite of all these vital contributions, the extent
of their impact throughout the economy is actually not very
widely understood. FDI has traditionally occupied something of
a blind spot in U.S. policy. The growing importance of global
cross-border investment makes it essential for FDI to play a
more prominent role in U.S. economic policy in the years ahead.
And the potential for additional FDI provides a tremendous
opportunity for economic growth in the U.S.
As I mentioned earlier, the U.S. share of global cross-
border investment has dropped. We currently garner about 17
percent. There is no reason we cannot grab more market share.
Additionally, the United Nations estimates that multinational
companies are currently sitting on some $5 trillion in cash in
the wake of the global economic downturn. We can give those
companies a reason to unleash that investment here.
While there are no magic formulas, enhancing U.S.
competitiveness for FDI will certainly require progress in key
macro policy issues, including reforming our tax code,
advancing a more expensive Free Trade Agreement, modernizing
America's infrastructure, implementing a program with energy
policy, and developing a workforce that can compete for the
jobs of the future.
But importantly, we must also make sure that once the U.S.
wins a new investment that we provide good aftercare and we
ensure that the U.S. subsidiaries of global companies have the
ability to succeed and grow their business here on a level
playing field with homegrown companies. The U.S. must avoid
policies and regulations that disadvantage or discriminate
against companies that are headquartered abroad.
Given our unique advantages, the U.S. is fully capable of
improving its competitive edge for FDI. We have an enormous
domestic market, abundant natural resources, strong rule of
law, and a culture of innovation and productivity. We need to
couple those advantages with a better understanding of what
kinds of policies and best practices position the U.S. to
successfully recruit global companies.
The Global Investment in American Jobs Act seeks to do just
that. The legislation recognizes that the U.S. cannot compete
for 21st century investment with a 20th century policy mindset.
It aims to equip policymakers with a forward-thinking strategic
approach to capture new investment in this increasingly
competitive, yet opportunity-rich, global environment. The
interagency review and recommendations would provide Congress a
roadmap for further action to attract global manufacturers,
service providers, and innovators to our shores. If enacted,
the legislation will send a powerful message at home and abroad
that the U.S. is working to improve its investment climate for
FDI in a thoughtful and bipartisan manner.
I would like to thank the subcommittee again for the
opportunity to testify and I look forward to questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. McLernon follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Well done. Ms. Dempsey, you are now recognized
for your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LINDA DEMPSEY

Ms. Dempsey. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Terry,
Ranking Member Schakowsky, and members of the subcommittee. I
welcome the opportunity to testify today on behalf of the
National Association of Manufacturers, the oldest and largest
industrial trade association in the United States.
The NAM represents small and large manufacturers in every
industrial sector and in all 50 States, including many foreign-
headquartered companies that manufacture throughout our Nation.
As this subcommittee knows well, manufacturing is the engine
that drives the U.S. economy by creating jobs, opportunity, and
prosperity. A robust international trade and investment
approach are vital to the success of manufacturing in the
United States.
In particular, FDI into the United States plays a critical
role in growing manufacturing. While fluctuating yearly,
foreign investment in manufacturing has shown substantial
growth since 2003, with important benefits for the U.S.
economy. In 2012, FDI inflows into the United States in
manufacturing equaled nearly $83 billion, accounting for nearly
half of those inflows.
While the United States has remained the largest recipient
of FDI through 2012, we have heard from my colleague that
global competition for FDI is rising sharply and the U.S. share
of that FDI is on the decline. From the NAM's perspective, we
should be working to help grow FDI into the United States,
which grows manufacturing and jobs, innovation, and economic
opportunities.
The NAM's 2013 Growth Agenda presents four goals for
manufacturing resurgence in America. The NAM's first goal is
very much the subject of this hearing: to make the United
States the best place in the world to manufacture and to
attract FDI. The goal of the legislation before this
subcommittee is an important one: to spur policy improvements
that will help the United States further attract FDI, including
through requiring an interagency review of policies and best
practices with recommendations for further action. We hope the
report will result in concrete proposals and action and
encourage the Subcommittee to continue working on this
legislation and moving it forward.
We also recommend that the report consider the
recommendations from the President's Council on Jobs and
Competitiveness, which called for a national investment
initiative.
The U.S. open investment policy that this legislation
reaffirms is supported through a number of different aspects of
U.S. law, regulation, and policy. The United States generally
treats FDI on a nondiscriminatory basis, unless there is a
threat to national security as determined by CFIUS.
The U.S. open investment policy is also supported through
the U.S. Bilateral Investment Treaty program, BITs, which began
about 4 decades ago. The United States has in place 38 BITs
including, most recently, with Rwanda that secure reciprocal
and open investment frameworks with interested countries. The
BIT program helps secure U.S. investment abroad, which is also
focused on reaching consumers and is a huge driver of U.S.
exports, as well as R&D and capital expenditures here in the
United States. A robust BIT program, which includes the strong
investor state enforcement mechanisms, is a vital part of the
U.S. open investment policy.
Yet, given the increasingly competitive environment for
FDI, the United States cannot stand still. From the
manufacturing perspective, the United States faces significant
challenges of our own making. It is 20 percent more expensive
to manufacture in the United States than in other major
industrialized nations. The United States continues to have the
highest corporate tax rates among major industrial countries,
and 2/3 of all manufacturers pay taxes at the individual rate.
To make the United States the best place in the world to
manufacture and attract FDI, we urge Congress and the
administration more broadly to work together to create a
national tax climate to promote manufacturing and embrace an
all-of-the-above approach to energy, modernize and invest in
infrastructure, ensure that the benefits of regulations justify
their cost, implement commonsense legal reform, reduce
healthcare costs, and ensure robust export opportunities for
manufacturers in the United States, including through an
aggressive trade policy agenda, have open markets, and provides
competitive export financing, and works to ensure that our
trading partners protect intellectual property and play by the
rules.
By addressing the multitude of these policies that shape
global competitiveness, the United States will be able to
increasingly attract and retain the kind of foreign investment
to sustain and grow manufacturing here in America.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dempsey follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Wow, perfect timing.
Mr. Slaughter, you are now recognized for your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW J. SLAUGHTER

Mr. Slaughter. Thank you, Chairman Terry, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, and fellow members. Thank you very much for
inviting me to testify on these important and timely issues of
how global investment can contribute to American jobs and
overall economic strength.
In my remarks, I will stress that although the U.S.
subsidiaries of global companies have long made large
contributions to U.S. jobs and overall economic strength, the
past need not be prologue. There recently were some trends that
America's attractiveness to these companies may be waning. To
support the U.S. economy amidst a still-fragile labor market
and overall recovery, policymakers should strive to sustain an
environment in which global firms can thrive here.
Research for the United States and many other countries has
long documented that globally engaged companies tend to perform
better than purely domestic companies do. The U.S. subsidiaries
of global companies, despite accounting for far less than 1
percent of all U.S. businesses, perform large shares of
America's productivity-enhancing activities that lead to high
average compensation for American workers.
For the most recent year of data available, 2010, or as of
this morning, 2011, contributions of these companies included
the following: 5.8 percent of all private sector output, over
14 percent of all nonresidential private sector capital
investment, almost 18 percent of U.S. exports of goods, and
over 14 percent of the total research and development perform
by all U.S. companies. All of these activities contribute to
millions of well-paying jobs in America.
In 2011, these U.S. affiliates employed 5.6 million
workers, 5 percent of total private sector employment. In 2010,
their total compensation averaged over $77,000 per worker, more
than \1/3\ above the average for the rest of the private
sector. Of these jobs, nearly 2 million were manufacturing and
the U.S. subsidiaries of global companies have long had
relatively high unionization rates. In 2007, over 12 percent of
these firms U.S. employees were covered by collective
bargaining versus just about 8 percent for all private sector
workers.
And finally, U.S. subsidiaries of global companies support
U.S. jobs through their supply chains. In 2010, these
subsidiaries purchased almost $2 trillion in intermediate
inputs from other U.S. companies.
Despite these strengths of the past, over the first dozen
years of the 21st century two worrisome trends emerged
regarding the presence and dynamism of U.S. subsidiaries in
global companies. First, although many of their non-employment
activities continued to grow, their U.S. employment did not.
There were about the same number of Americans working in these
companies in 2011 as in 2002.
The second worrisome trend is that the U.S. share of global
foreign direct investment has fallen sharply. The U.S. share of
the world stock of FDI fell from over 41 percent in 1999 to
only about 17 percent in 2009.
Taken together, these two worrisome trends of the past
decade suggest that the U.S. economy has become a less
attractive location for global companies to establish and
expand their operations. And these trends have emerged while a
steadily rising share of the leading global companies are
headquartered outside of America. The options that the world
presents to global companies have expanded dramatically in
recent years due to policy liberalization and related
accelerated economic growth in so many countries. The United
States cannot rest on past success and take the U.S. engagement
of these global companies for granted.
A vigorous optimistic future for inward investment in
America is very possible, but achieving this optimistic future
will require crafting new U.S. policies to boost FDI inflows
and the related employment and other productivity-enhancing
activities of these companies.
An important first policy step would be for the Secretary
of Commerce to oversee an interagency review and report of
America's global competitiveness in attracting FDI, as
specified in the Global Investment in American Jobs Act of
2013. The baseline information from this report would provide
an excellent guide to refining U.S. economic policies and
promotion and ultimately U.S. economic performance.
Let me here recommend second important policy step: higher-
quality U.S. Government data. U.S. Government statistics
currently do not capture the full extent and evolution of the
U.S. operations of global companies. This is in no way a fault
of the dedicated public servants working at these statistical
agencies. Rather, it simply reflects the fact that many of the
business surveys conducted and analyzed by these agencies were
created decades ago in ways that today fail to encompass the
modern and ever-evolving complexity of business in America.
Here in the 21st century, if we want to best craft U.S.
economic policies to support American workers and their
families, then we need to find a way to update and expand many
of our key economic statistics on how these global companies
work.
Thank you again for your time and your interest in my
testimony, and I look forward to answering any questions that
you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Slaughter follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you. And Dr. Baily, you are now recognized
for your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARTIN BAILY

Mr. Baily. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Terry and Ranking
Member Schakowsky, and the other members of the committee for
the opportunity to present my testimony today. I would like to
submit the full statement for the record if I may. And there
are a couple of typos in it that I would like to correct before
it gets submitted, which I just discovered.
I do think that making America the location that attracts
good foreign companies is a very important task. And I think
really the same things that attract foreign companies will
encourage American multinational companies to invest more in
the United States. And as one of the earlier panelists noted,
there is a lot of money sitting out there that we would love to
see invested here to improve the recovery.
There have been quite a few numbers already put out here
and I am going to just comment on them rather than reprise what
is in my testimony. I just want to comment on a couple of them.
One is, I think, it is obviously a concern if our share of FDI
has gone down. I think there is a certain thought that it is
inevitable with emerging economies growing. They are much
poorer than we are. They are growing faster than we are. There
is going to be more investment taking place in those economies
than in the U.S., so I don't think we should get down on
ourselves too much if we find that investment elsewhere is
growing relative to the U.S. I think that is just part of life.
And the second point I would make is to note that really a
lot of the investment that comes from overseas is going into
manufacturing. I think that is important. We have heard that
the manufacturing sector is important. It is an area where we
maybe haven't had enough domestic investment. We would like to
see more. We want exports to grow. We want to get a more
balanced trade picture for the United States so I think it is
particularly helpful that foreign investment comes into the
U.S.
One thing, though, to remember, since a lot of the
investment is concentrated in manufacturing and since
manufacturing employment generally has been on a rather
declining trend as a fraction of total employment, we are going
to see that the employment in foreign companies in the United
States is not necessarily going to look as good as investments
in some other industry just because of the industry that they
tend to be in. And again, I don't think that is something that
we are necessarily going to change because manufacturing is an
area with a lot of productivity growth, a lot of automation,
and so employment growth tends to be slower there or declining
there relative to other industries.
The other point I would notice on the investment is that so
much of it comes from Europe and Japan, really our friends and
allies, and I think that does make a difference in the way that
we think about it. Many of these companies are used to
operating with environmental regulations. They are used to
operating with their labor standards and so on. So I think a
lot of the companies that are coming in such as from Germany,
from Switzerland, and so on, these, by and large, are going to
be good neighbor companies in terms of what they do and the
practices that they have.
I say a little bit in the testimony about pros and cons.
Since I have only got 2 minutes left, I am going to talk a
little bit about what I think might be the best ways to make
the United States more competitive.
The first thing I will say is we need to get the
macroeconomics right. I know it is a hard concept to get
across, but I think as long as we have a shortage of national
saving over national investment in our economy, we are going to
be running trade deficits because one is the counterpart of the
other. So while I don't want to balance the budget tomorrow, I
think that would be disastrous in a weak recovery. I do think
that is something we need to do over the next 10 years. We have
to make room for more export growth, more manufacturing growth,
and one way to do that is to get a better balance between
saving and investment.
The second point I would make is on trade agreements, and I
think that is something where, you know, it would be great to
work on a multilateral basis. If not, we do need to work, as I
think you said here, on bilateral agreements. That is where one
of the typos is. One of the major German auto companies that
has invested in the United States to serve the U.S. market has
decided to locate one of its other plants in Mexico because
that is a location where they are going to export from
primarily. And they feel they have better trade agreements
operating in Mexico than they would in the United States. So, I
think, that is a sign that we need to do more on the trade
agreement side if a company that, say, wants to wants to export
into Latin America decides to locate in Mexico rather than in
the U.S.
On the corporate income tax, I agree with the sentiment
generally. I think, you know, again, we need to get more tax
revenue from somewhere. I don't see how we are going to balance
the budget over 10 years if we don't get more tax revenue. But
we have to recognize that corporations are mobile. We have to
be in step with other countries around the world, both in terms
of what our marginal tax rate is and whether or not we tax
companies on their foreign earnings or whether we tax them on
the activities that they do here in the United States. So I
think basically we need to get our corporate tax in line with
where our competitors' is.
I am running out of time here, but just quickly I think we
do need to do a bit more to improve the skills of our
workforce. There are good community colleges that are doing
that. The Department of Defense has shown some tremendous
ability to give them their soldier skills in short periods of
time, so I think there are a lot of things we can do in terms
of vocational training and technical training to improve the
quality of our workforce. And it is not that the workers are
bad; it is just that they don't have some of the skills that
they need.
And then, finally, I will mention taking advantage of the
energy boom and that has been mentioned here already. I think
this has been a massive change--a game changer--for the U.S.
economy, this discovery of energy sources. I think there are
environmental concerns about it, absolutely. But I think we can
meet those concerns and have cheaper energy, cheaper natural
gas, which will really increase the attractiveness of the
United States, both for domestic companies and for foreign
companies. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Baily follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you very much, Dr. Baily.
And Ms. Drake, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CELESTE DRAKE

Ms. Drake. Thank you, Chairman Terry, Ranking Member
Schakowsky, members of the committee. Good morning. I
appreciate the opportunity to testify on behalf of the AFL-CIO
on the critical issues of economic development and job
creation. I have submitted written testimony for the record and
will highlight a few key points here.
Any discussion of where our economy is going should begin
with a discussion of where we have been. Between the Great
Depression and 1980, America's economic strategy centered on
policies designed to ensure a virtuous cycle of rising
productivity, rising wages, and increase public and private
investment that led to even greater productivity. Regulatory
policy was critical to this strategy, including food, product,
and workplace safety, a strong minimum wage, and the National
Labor Relations Act giving workers the right to organize and
bargain collectively. This national strategy led to the period
of the highest sustained economic growth in American history
and gave birth to the modern American middle class.
Since 1980, the United States has embraced a different
economic strategy, one that has reversed the prior pattern of
shared prosperity. We have sought to maintain our status as the
world's largest consumer market while at the same time seeking
to compete globally by lowering our labor costs. As part of
this approach, the overall direction of regulatory policy since
1980 has weakened worker protections to reduce labor costs,
left consumers and investors at the mercy of bad actors on Wall
Street, and even promoted consolidation instead of competition
in certain sectors. The result has been, not surprisingly, a
series of financial bubbles and skyrocketing consumer debt.
As the Committee looks to increase foreign direct
investment as one of the many tools we can deploy to help
restore the American dream, the AFL-CIO would like to be a
partner in that effort. We welcome foreign investment, as you
do, but we caution that the review proposed in the discussion
draft of the Global Investment in American Jobs Act of 2013
should be performed carefully, lest its recommendations prove
more harmful than helpful.
While we welcome the changes made from last year's version
of the bill, we continue to have serious concerns. For example,
by not excluding from the review laws and regulations of
general applicability, it is possible that those performing the
review will consider financial services policies, such as Dodd-
Frank, or important worker protections, including occupational
health and safety rules, as near barriers to investment.
Instead, we suggest that the review regard them as important to
providing a good investment climate that includes a stable
financial system and healthy and productive workforce.
As you know, the U.S. is a premier destination for foreign
investment. In comparison to other countries in which investors
are required to create joint ventures for nearly every
investment or pressured to transfer important technology or
intellectual property, the U.S. has a very open system. There
are, of course, a few important limitations on foreign
ownership and control, such as those in the aviation and
communication sectors. Again, the AFL-CIO encourages the
Committee to ensure the review takes a balanced look at these
limitations and consider their very important public purposes
before simply categorizing them as barriers to investment.
These policies are designed with important purposes,
including national security and domestic economic growth. In
some cases they may even encourage investment as foreign
enterprises seek to become American enterprises to expand their
reach, which brings me to a final caveat. The AFL-CIO urges the
Committee to ensure that the review recognize that while FDI
can contribute to the creation and maintenance of high-skilled,
high-paying jobs, such an outcome is not inevitable. State-
owned and -controlled enterprises in particular may not invest
with a goal to operate in the U.S. for the long-term, but
instead, could acquire strategic technology that could, at
worst, jeopardize our national security. They may also engage
in predatory or anticompetitive behavior that our trade
remedies cannot reach to their operations here, or they may
operate their businesses in ways that could reduce average
wages, benefits, and working conditions instead of lifting them
up.
Given these risks, we also encourage the Committee to
consider reversing the current policy of providing foreign
investors with extraordinary legal rights through FTAs and
investment treaties.
In sum, we look forward to working with you to promote the
growth of the American economy through investment that creates
high-wage, high-benefit jobs that restore the path to middle
class. I thank the committee for its time and would be pleased
to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Drake follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Terry. Thank you, Ms. Drake.
And now, we go to the question part of our hearing.
And so my first question will be to Ms. McLernon, Ms.
Dempsey--well, we will just go right down the panel. Give me
your opinion in helping us prioritize what is the most
significant barrier/incentive that is either blocking or
helping foreign investment in the United States. In essence,
what is the low-hanging fruit? Ms. McLernon.
Ms. McLernon. Great question. So I think what is really
important about this bill is that it seeks to uncover those
very things. We mentioned all the macro issues here today that,
in general, can provide a better business opportunity. But our
policies over the long haul don't really take a look at the
impact that they will have on companies that are not
headquartered outside the United States, what type of impact it
will have on them that it does not have on companies that are
headquartered here.
Mr. Pompeo talked about something that was simple in terms
of getting executives in and out. But there are also more
direct hits in terms of government contracting, access to
grants. We want a level playing field for these companies and,
as I said, not to just win the investment, but ensure once they
are here that they have every opportunity to succeed. And
sometimes that discrimination is direct and obvious, but many
times it is inadvertent.
And what I think that this legislation and what this study
can do is it puts investment policy front-brain. We can think
about these things before policies are enacted so that we don't
have to go and patch things up afterwards in order to make it
OK for a foreign company to be here.
Mr. Terry. Ms. Dempsey.
Ms. Dempsey. Thank you. I agree a lot with my colleague on
the FDI side, but I think we cannot lose sight as this
legislation does not, that there are business climate issues
that affect both domestic and foreign manufacturers. And this
legislation, I think, will be important, frankly, to both. Some
of these issues will be foreign investors looking at the U.S.
market. But there are other issues that will impact, I think,
manufacturing more broadly in the United States and are
relevant.
Mr. Terry. Mr. Slaughter.
Mr. Slaughter. I echo the previous two comments. I would
add, I think, one of the most immediate things the U.S. can do
to improve the investment climate would be reform our tax code.
On a lot of indicators we have one of the highest-burden tax
codes in the world, both in terms of the statutory effect of
tax rates and the complexity of our tax code. So I would put
that at the top of the list.
Mr. Terry. Mr. Baily.
Mr. Baily. The three things that I hear most from
companies: number one, that they have to spend a lot of money
on training and skills so that they would like to see a better
job. And that is, obviously, a state and local function to an
extent. The second is taxes, which you have mentioned. And
again, it is not that our corporate tax collects a whole a lot
of revenue, but I think the complexity and the marginal tax
rates are a concern. And then the third thing I hear is really
the complexity of, sort of, permissions and environmental
rules, and it is not--a want to make clear, I don't want to
dismantle our environmental rules----
Mr. Terry. No.
Mr. Baily [continuing]. But the speed of getting
permissions, the ability to coordinate across agencies and
between the federal, state, and local government makes for a
lot of complexity and a lot of delay. And that is what I hear
is a concern.
Mr. Terry. Ms. Drake.
Ms. Drake. Thank you. We think one of the main things
inhibiting investment here is the misperception that it is too
expensive to invest in manufacturing in the United States. And
we hear this from firms that have re-shored and explained that
they thought it was going to be so much cheaper to invest and
produce elsewhere. And when they really that looked at the
numbers and the extra cost of producing elsewhere and shipping
back to the United States, they found that it is a good deal
and there is a good value here. So I would echo what
Undersecretary Sanchez said about getting the word out and
doing promotion.
Mr. Terry. OK. Ms. Dempsey--well, I tell you what. We can't
answer this in 50 seconds so I will put the rest of my
questions in written form to you all.
And at this time, I will recognize Jan Schakowsky for her
questions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. I wanted to ask Ms. Drake. A
portion of your testimony is rights provided to foreign
investors should not exceed rights of domestic investors. Can
you elaborate on exactly what you mean by that?
Ms. Drake. Absolutely. So a foreign investor, if the
foreign investor is from a country with which the United States
has an FTA, a Free Trade Agreement; or a BIT, a Bilateral
Investment treaty, has certainly legal rights through the
investment chapter and through the process guaranteed by the
investment chapter, which is investor-state dispute settlement,
to have a complaint that may have reduced the expected profit
or somehow didn't provide what the international law calls the
minimum standard of treatment, and skipped domestic court, so
skipped state courts and federal Article III constitutional
courts--go to an international arbitration panel and pursue
this challenge. And it is, in some ways, similar to the 5th
Amendment takings challenge under the Constitution, but it has
got a broader definition of what property is; it has got a
broader definition of what a takings would be.
And we hear from small domestic manufacturers that they
simply can't challenge their complaints about local, state, and
federal regulations and laws in the same way. And they feel
that all investors in the United States should have to go
through the same system that respects our democratic process
and democratically enacted laws and regulations.
Ms. Schakowsky. So let me ask just a broader question then.
How would you revise, including, I imagine, taking what you
just said into account, that the current draft of the Global
Investment in American Jobs Act to achieve the goals that will
not only attract foreign investment but also look at our
domestic workers.
Ms. Drake. For that particular issue, we would add a
provision that asked the Department of Commerce to really look
at the FTAs and BITs that we have made and whether the
extraordinary legal rights given to foreign investors somehow
inhibit or discourage domestic industries and make an unlevel
playing field. So just with that addition of something to look
at, we think it could be very useful.
Ms. Schakowsky. In your testimony, Dr. Baily, you draw a
distinction between greenfield investment and investment that
stems from merger and acquisition, and I asked Secretary
Sanchez about that, too. Do you think there would be merit in
the following one: BEA, once again, conducting a survey that
distinguishes between greenfield investment to having the
review and report and the draft bill under consideration take
this difference into account?
Mr. Baily. I would certainly like to see that additional
data. I think it would be very helpful. So yes, I would. I do
think that there are advantages that you can get from
takeovers. There are obviously some takeovers you don't want
and you mentioned those about proprietary technology and so on.
You have to be careful. But in many cases a company that gets
taken over may have been in difficulty. The new company may
bring in investments, and we have seen that in the steel
industry and other places.
So I am not against takeovers, necessarily. But I agree; it
would be helpful to know what is what and what the data says.
Mr. Schakowsky. There was one other section, Ms. Drake,
that was of interest to me that had to do with a Chinese
company and somehow our, not inability, but making it difficult
for CFIUS to actually secure the information that we need to
make sure that information they get from American companies
isn't used in the wrong way and counter to CFIUS rules. I
wonder if you could talk a little bit about that?
Ms. Drake. CFIUS actually has a very small mandate and it
doesn't really look at greenfield investment. It doesn't look
at equipment sales contracts. And so there are various ways
that it may not be catching all of the investments or equipment
purchases or other contracts here that could have an impact on
our national security. So consistent with some recommendations
made by the U.S.-China Economic and Security Commission and
even the Heritage Foundation, which you won't find me quoting a
lot, we would recommend that that the Committee take a look at
possibly expanding the mandate of CFIUS so that they can really
look at all of their potential investments that they need to
not with an eye of stopping FDI at all but just to make sure
that we are protecting our national security and economic
security in the way that we need to.
Ms. Schakowsky. Things that have dual purpose, for example?
Ms. Drake. Yes. There is an example in my written testimony
of AVIC acquiring Nexteer and it is this steering technology
that also has a military purpose, and that transaction has
already gone through, but there is some question now about the
technology being transferred to China. Will it be used for
military purposes? And the information seems to all be in
China, and there is no way, at this point, to really know if it
will be used against the United States in a military way or it
won't be.
Ms. Schakowsky. OK. I thank you for your testimony and your
suggestions.
Mr. Terry. Thank you.
At this time, I recognize the vice chairman of the
committee, Mr. Lance.
Mr. Lance. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To Dean Slaughter, in your testimony you indicate that
there are two worrisome trends. First, although many related to
non-employment activities, U.S. employment flatlined from 2002
to 2010 and then dipped from 2007 to 2010. Would you elaborate
briefly to us on that?
Mr. Slaughter. Sure. So over much of the past 10 to 20
years before the decade of the 2000s the presence of the U.S.
affiliates of foreign multinational companies had grown on a
lot of dimensions, employment being an important one.
Employment had almost doubled over about a 15-year period. But
employment has not been growing, and I think again from the
broad policy perspective that, I think, many of us share of
trying to have good jobs and good wages, one of the really
important things is these global companies tend to have a whole
nexus of productivity enhancing things of investing a lot in
human resources, investing a lot in capital of new ideas
through R&D. So those tend to be good jobs at good wages.
And so thinking about, per the topic of this hearing,
policies that could try to allow that employment to increase
would be great.
Mr. Lance. And Ms. Drake, might you respond to that as
well? I would certainly be interested in the position of your
great organization.
Ms. Drake. Thank you very much. The data on, for instance,
the high wage rates paid by foreign investors is really good
information. We would like to see further expansion to get down
into the weeds on that information because foreign investment,
approximately, it is--roughly 40 percent of all foreign
investment is in manufacturing.
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Ms. Drake. Manufacturing tends to have higher wages anyway.
And in the U.S. economy overall, there is only about 10 percent
of the employment is in manufacturing. So there--I think there
are some deeper questions about whether it is really bringing
wages up. And if it is, we should do everything that we can to
promote it. But if we find that in certain sectors foreign
investment is negatively affecting wages and benefits, we
should look at that and see if we can do anything in a policy
way to turn that around so that all foreign direct investment
would be good for workers in bringing wages and benefits up.
Mr. Lance. What sectors in particular are you referring?
Ms. Drake. Well, one particular concern is auto
manufacturing. And there has been a trend for foreign auto
manufacturers to hire a lot of temp workers. And there is an
article from the Washington Post that I would like to submit
for the record that talks about this use of temp workers. And
what it has done is it makes it less competitive than for
existing American auto manufacturers to not do the same thing.
So as there are competitive forces on wages and we want those
competitive forces to be bringing wages up rather than down.
Mr. Lance. Dean Slaughter, would you comment?
Mr. Slaughter. I just echo Ms. Drake on the concern about
measurement, but some of the best academic and policy work that
has been done on this shows that when you control for industry,
you control for location in the U.S. of manufacturing plants
that are part of multinational companies, they tend to pay
consistently about 10 to 15 percent more. And not just for the
non-production workers but for the production workers as well.
We can up measurement on these things. As always, it is really
important and more data would be great. But there is a lot of
evidence that these wages are high.
Mr. Lance. And then, Dean Slaughter, you say secondly, a
worrisome trend is that the U.S. share of global FDI has fallen
sharply. And we are working in a bipartisan way on this issue.
Could you elaborate briefly on that aspect of your testimony?
Mr. Slaughter. Sure. I picked up on something that Dr.
Baily said, which is I think as there is faster economic growth
in China and India and a lot of parts the world, I think it is
inevitable that that faster growth will bring some decline in
the U.S. share of world FDI flows.
Mr. Lance. Yes.
Mr. Slaughter. But what is striking is how much more
dramatic the fall in FDI shares for U.S. have been compared to
our share of GDP or other economic measures. And so that gets
to the need to have a policy environment that supports the
growth of these companies here.
Mr. Lance. And this is a relatively new trend only in the
last decade, your second point, and that is why we are trying
to work through this issue in a bipartisan capacity?
Mr. Slaughter. Yes. So in the '90s, it was the opposite.
Mr. Lance. And was that due to the stronger economy in our
country in the 1990s in your judgment?
Mr. Slaughter. So that had a lot to do with it. We had a
strong productivity boom in the second half of the 1990s and
that overall strong growth and jobs and incomes was part of
what attracted these companies here.
Mr. Lance. And might I respectfully suggest that was due to
bipartisan cooperation, a Democratic president, and Republican
control of the House in the late 1990s.
Mr. Pompeo. Do it again.
Mr. Slaughter. Absolutely.
Mr. Lance. I hope that is possible. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Lance. Let's see, Mr. Long.
Mr. Long. I am hard to miss. What do you mean let's see?
Mr. Terry. Yes, I meant get out of the way.
Mr. Long. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Drake, you just mentioned temporary workers, hiring a
lot of temporary workers. Describe to me what a temporary
worker is.
Ms. Drake. A temporary worker is hired through a temp
agency and many of them very large the United States. And the
temp agency is then the actual employer of record, responsible
for the wages and taxes and benefits of that worker. And they
can be on a short-term--when these agencies started, it was
your secretary is sick; you need a temp for the day. As this
Washington Post article describes--and it is not just foreign
employers that are doing that, it is an economy-wide trait----
Mr. Long. What date is that? What date was that that came
out?
Ms. Drake. Oh, this is an older article. It is Monday,
October 11, 2004. But this is still the pattern. Temporary
workers can be hired from anything to----
Mr. Long. I think I was still in high school.
Ms. Drake. That makes you younger than me. They can be
hired for 30 days, 90 days. Some are temps for 2 years or
longer in many places. It makes it--typically, the temps are
paid less, have lower benefits than the permanent workers, and
their goal is to someday be hired on as a permanent employee.
Mr. Long. OK. I am actually, if I decipher and tried, 4 or
5 months older than the AFL-CIO. So we both came along in the
same year.
I had a constituent come to me the week before last, I
believe, maybe 2 weeks ago. I was home and they said we are
coming to see Roy Blunt, our Senator; we are coming to see
Claire McCaskill, our Senator; and we are coming to see you
because we want you to understand, Congressman, how onerous
this ObamaCare, Affordable Care Act, whatever you want to call
it. I don't think ObamaCare is a pejorative anymore or ever was
or whatever because the President calls it that. But anyway,
let us call it ObamaCare. And they said we want you to know
what this is doing. And I said, well, what do you mean? He
said, well, we have 53,000--this is a local employer.
Obviously, they have tentacles across United States. They have
places of business in several States. He said we have 53,000
employees and the best we can decide is we are going to have to
take those employees and go--not have anyone over 30-a-hour-a-
week employee.
Is this of concern to you at the AFL-CIO that--are you
hearing these types of things about complying with ObamaCare
and how we are going to get it done by 2014?
Ms. Drake. I don't work in the healthcare department but
from what I know of we are not hearing those complaints. We are
concerned that those complaints are being made. We think that
the Affordable Care Act was a bipartisan compromise. I know
that there were a lot of Republican ideas incorporated into the
bill and every attempt was made to make it affordable for
employers, for workers, for the country. And we would hope that
employers would do their best to provide the healthcare for
their workers through the system in the ACA so that they have
healthy productive workers.
So we wouldn't want to prejudge that it is going to be
something that is unaffordable or is not to work. We strongly
believe the opposite.
Mr. Long. I had you define temporary worker for me but I
don't think I am going to ask you to define bipartisan because
we might have a different understanding of that if ObamaCare
was a bipartisan effort.
But I want to read from an article in the Wall Street
Journal. It wasn't back in 2004; it was the day before
yesterday. A labor union representing roofers is reversing
course and calling for the repeal of the federal healthcare law
citing concerns the law's cost for ensuring members. Organized
labor was instrumental in getting the Affordable Care Act
passed in 2010 but more recently has voice concerns that the
law could lead members to losing their existing health plans,
which is what my constituent told me. He said, Billy, we
provided much better healthcare. Now, we are going to have to
cut everyone back to a temporary status or less hours.
The United Union of Roofers, Waterproofers, and Allied
Workers is believed to be the first union to initially support
the law and later call for its repeal. And on the Republican
side, we have tried several different ways, which is debatable
whether those will work or not. Whenever you vote 32 different
ways to defund the Act and do away with it, and when you don't
have the White House and you don't have the Senate. But now
that it has gotten through the Supreme Court and they have
ruled that it is the law of the land and it is coming to
fruition, I am just going to ask you to be on guard because
when you start having people that employ 53,000 people telling
these stories--and they are not uncommon. This is not some far
out there, somebody in a tinfoil hat--I hear tapping----
Mr. Terry. That is not hearing things.
Mr. Long [continuing]. That is dreaming these things up. So
in all honesty, I think this is just going to compound until we
find out that we at least need to delay implementation at the
least. When you have roofing unions that supported the thing
saying it is not doable. So I am not trying to pick on you but
I am just--the AFL-CIO, I want to see what you are hearing. And
thank you all for your testimony here today.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Long.
Ms. Drake, you suggested an article be entered into the
record. Was that already part of your statement that is part of
the record?
Ms. Drake. It was not.
Mr. Terry. OK. So ordered. \*\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\*\ [The information was unavailable at the time of printing.]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ms. Drake. Thank you very much.
Mr. Terry. At this point, the gentleman from West Virginia.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In Ms. Schakowsky's earlier remarks she was talking about
the jobs in our manufacturing and how important it is for our
middle class. And if you were here during my comments with
Secretary Sanchez was the concern about the loss of our steel
industry in northern West Virginia. We have, indeed, both of
those were owned--they were foreign investments, major foreign
investments. One of the prime reasons that we lost both of
those 30,000 jobs was because of trade. So I am just curious.
Ms. Dempsey, maybe you can--and Ms. Drake, you can ply into
this.
But in some consideration to try to encourage more further
investment in America, how conceivable would it be, and what
would be the effect for people considering investment if they
were made aware that through a trade agreement or a trade
settlement that a company is found to be coming in
inappropriately putting business out? As I understand, that
money, those penalties now go to the U.S. Treasury. What would
be the message if we could put it in this bill or in this study
to see that that money goes back to the individual companies
that are aggrieved, and not only the companies that are
aggrieved but also to the employees that have lost their job as
result of this. I think it is far more helpful to our middle
class if we are helping the people that have been hurt rather
than the Federal Government getting the largess of that.
What would be the effect of that, do you think, if
investors knew that their companies could be protected?
Ms. Dempsey. Perhaps I can start, Congressman. Thank you.
You know, I started my career as a trade remedy lawyer bringing
it cases for the last U.S. fan manufacturer here in the United
States for the U.S. steel industry in the 1990s. And these are
important issues and we at the NAM take enforcement of our own
trade laws just as importantly as we take enforcement of other
countries' obligations and trade agreements and everywhere
else.
The issue you raise about where the disbursement of the
funds goes is something that had been tried in the United
States and we lost the WTO ruling on this. It is not something
that is viewed in the international rules as a way forward.
I will say that I believe that the strong enforcement you
generally see in the United States for our trade remedy laws--
not that it is perfect--but the strong enforcement is something
that attracts companies here, that they know that there is a
better chance that they will be operating on a level playing
field, that the competition from imports will be on a level
playing field. The one issue we have heard the most, though,
from our companies right now is an issue that is before the
Ways and Means Committee which is if there is circumvention of
those anti-dumping and countervailing duty orders, they take
too long to get enforced. And so we support something called
the Enforce Act so that those rules are enforced.
But the issue of the payments back is a complicated one. I
think there are other things in terms of domestic manufacturing
we need to do to improve the opportunities for those companies,
as well as the manufacturing community at large.
Mr. McKinley. Ms. Drake.
Mr. Baily. Can I make a quick comment on that? Would you
give me 30 seconds? No, you want to talk to her.
Mr. McKinley. After her.
Mr. Baily. Excuse me.
Ms. Drake. Thank you. I think your idea on remedies is a
good one. And as the AFL-CIO tends to disagree with many of the
strictures sent down by the WTO--so maybe that is something
that can be addressed with WTO reform.
To get to your earlier question to Undersecretary Sanchez
about who can bring a case and is there adequate assistance for
cases, we would support a broader definition that cities and
communities could bring cases, that workers could work together
with cities and communities and the employers to get the
resources needed because these cases are very expensive. And we
would support the Department of Commerce providing additional
assistance beyond what they are currently doing.
And I think one other thing with regard to your dumping
concerns, with these state-owned enterprises investing and
operating in the United States, it is possible that they are
getting subsidized inputs, tax rebates, no-cost financing so
that they can be here essentially producing what would be a
dumped product if they made it in their home market, but they
are producing here and our current trade remedy laws can't
reach them.
Additionally, there has been some recent investments by
Chinese state-owned Corporations, SinoPac, for instance, in oil
investment. And I am not a practicing trade remedy lawyer but I
spoke to some before this hearing and it is not clear that if
they import what would be dumped product to themselves that our
trade remedy laws could get at that because if it is within the
same company, it may not enter commerce, and it may not be
subject to our anti-dumping laws.
So there are a lot of interesting things to look at here in
order to make sure that competition is level and balanced and
that domestic companies and domestic jobs are really
strengthened rather than put at risk.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you.
Mr. Terry. I would request, respectfully, a unanimous
consent for an additional minute so that Mr. Baily can answer.
Mr. Baily. Thank you so much.
While it is clear that we need to enforce our trade laws
and it is true that trade has been an important issue in the
steel industry, with all due respect, I would say that I doubt
if the loss of almost 30,000 jobs is really attributable to
trade, because if you look at a steel plant today compared to
one some years ago, now you see, you know, four people and some
computer monitors, whereas before, you saw lots of people down
on the production lines. It has become a very automated company
that doesn't hire a lot of people.
And the second thing is, is that we have had a terrible
recession so that the demand for steel, it really collapsed in
the recession. It is coming back now, but I don't think it is
where was. So I think there are some domestic issues also
associated with some of those jobs.
Mr. McKinley. When China is producing six times the amount
of steel that we have, and just a few years ago we were both
producing the same quantity of steel, it tells me something is
going on in China, whether it is currency manipulation or what.
Mr. Terry. All right. Thank you, Mr. McKinley.
And now, Mr. Johnson of Ohio is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Baily, before I ask my question, I am not sure--I live
in steel country, as Mr. McKinley does. I don't know what steel
plants you go to where you have got four, five people running
computers that produce steel. That is not the way it is
produced along the Ohio River in the plants that are in my
district. You have got hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of
people that are employed in those.
But let me get to my question. I like trade also. I believe
in fair trade. You know, the idea of free trade to me is a
vernacular that troubles the American people. You say the term
free trade; it conjures up ideas of Chinese ships pulling up to
docks and offloading technology and products that disadvantage
of our workers back here at home. I have advocated for a while
changing the vernacular to talk about export optimization
agreements rather than free trade agreements, because that is
really what we are trying to get to. We make it here, we
innovate here, we sell it there.
So with that in mind, you recommend that the U.S. enter
more free trade agreements. Where do we stand relative to
similarly situated nations in terms of the number of trade
agreements enforced?
Mr. Baily. I will make a quick comment and then I am going
to defer to my friend Matt Slaughter, who can probably give you
a much better answer than I can. Yes, to say it is only four
people, obviously, that was a bit of an exaggeration. But
productivity really has gone up.
Mr. Johnson. Oh, I agree with that. I agree with that.
Mr. Baily. And you got the electric arc furnaces and so
on----
Mr. Johnson. I am sorry. I have got 5 minutes so let's go
to the free trade questions.
Mr. Baily. So let me defer the answer to the free trade
question if I may to----
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Baily [continuing]. Dean Slaughter.
Mr. Slaughter. So the U.S. has about 23 trade agreements
enforced with other countries in the world. Many of them are
older, many of them are--no disrespect to our trading
partners--with relatively small countries for which--and you
want to talk about export optimization; they are not large
markets. So part of how we ideally get out of the world
financial crisis is build more jobs and activity in America,
link to selling things to the rest the world. I think there is
a tremendous opportunity for the United States to expand the
free trade access that we have to a number of other growing
countries.
Mr. Johnson. And in terms of export, increasing exports,
right?
Mr. Slaughter. Absolutely.
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Slaughter. Imports have a lot of values as well but
absolutely on growing exports.
Mr. Johnson. We are on the same page. The administration is
currently engaged in TPP negotiations and plans to enter
negotiations with the EU this summer. Are there other glaring
omissions other than TPP and EU in our stable of free trade
agreements in your mind?
Mr. Slaughter. Sir, what I will add, I guess, is we can
think about organizing not only on country lines but industry
lines as well.
Mr. Johnson. Um-hum.
Mr. Slaughter. So if we think about manufacturing deftly
managed through United States, but we have a lot of large and
growing industries and services for which there is a lot of
barriers in trade and investment around the world. So as a
complement to think about negotiating with countries, I think
there is great value in thinking about finding industries in
which a lot of Americans work throughout a lot of districts
where we could open up foreign markets.
Mr. Johnson. Sure. Dr. Baily, you also testified that we
should take advantage of the natural gas energy boom, and I
certainly agree with that. Much of that steel manufacturing
that I talked about in eastern and southeastern Ohio is a
result of that. If production were to slow or to be stopped
altogether in oil and natural gas, in your opinion, how would
that impact our ability to attract or retain FDI?
Mr. Baily. It feels a little like a leading question but I
think there is no question as to the answer, which is that if
it were----
Mr. Johnson. She mentioned lawyers earlier. A lawyer
doesn't ask a question they already don't know the answer to,
right?
Mr. Baily. But it certainly would make the U.S. less
attractive for investment for both domestic companies and
foreign companies.
Mr. Johnson. Great. Great. What do you think, as it relates
to trade, as it relates to manufacturing, if you could name
three things that we should do to bring manufacturing back here
to America--I met with a bunch of labor folks this morning that
are concerned about their jobs being outsourced. If there were
anything that we could do, two or three, what would be the top
three things that you would recommend we do to improve our
position where our trade is concerned and retain manufacturing?
Mr. Baily. Well, Chairman Terry asked us a somewhat similar
question and I think I give the same answer here. I think we do
need to do more to make sure we have the skills in the
production workers. We have the finest universities in the
world, but many particularly of our young men are not going
to----
Mr. Johnson. So workforce development?
Mr. Baily. Workforce development. Number two is harmonizing
our corporate tax with the rest of the world so that it is less
complex and the marginal rate is lower.
Mr. Johnson. We are on board.
Mr. Baily. And then the third is around--as I said, I am
strongly in favor of our environmental standards; we need
those. And I am concerned about global warming but we need to
make sure that you can get permissions and there is
coordination between States and the Federal Government and
among federal agencies and that that process can move more
quickly.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Dr. Baily.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the time.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
And that concludes the members from asking questions. No
one is left.
So I want to thank all of our panelists for your incredible
testimony and help today. It really has been a great assistance
to us. You gave us more to think about including, Ms. Drake,
where I think you turned around a few conceptions. We were
under the impression that we should be exempting from any
consideration of labor laws, and I think you are suggesting
that we need to have that discussion in this. So we will have
to vet through that, which means we also have the opportunity
to submit written questions to you, which my members will have
only 10 days to get to you.
So that is my admonition to my colleagues is they have 10
days to get their questions put together. We would appreciate a
quick turnaround in your answers for those questions.
And at that, that concludes this hearing.
[Whereupon, at 11:27 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
