- PPACA IMPLEMENTATION FAILURES: WHAT'S NEXT?

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PPACA IMPLEMENTATION FAILURES: WHAT'S NEXT?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 11, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-108

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

89-657 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman

RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 HENRY A. WAXMAN, California
JOE BARTON, Texas                      Ranking Member
Chairman Emeritus                  JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania        ANNA G. ESHOO, California
GREG WALDEN, Oregon                  ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
LEE TERRY, Nebraska                  GENE GREEN, Texas
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             LOIS CAPPS, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
Vice Chairman                      JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana             JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio                DORIS O. MATSUI, California
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            Islands
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            KATHY CASTOR, Florida
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PETE OLSON, Texas                    BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia     PETER WELCH, Vermont
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
MIKE POMPEO, Kansas                  PAUL TONKO, New York
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
BILLY LONG, Missouri
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina

_____

Subcommittee on Health

JOSEPH R. PITTS, Pennsylvania
Chairman
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Member
ED WHITFIELD, Kentucky               JOHN D. DINGELL, Michigan
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois               ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MIKE ROGERS, Michigan                LOIS CAPPS, California
TIM MURPHY, Pennsylvania             JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          JIM MATHESON, Utah
PHIL GINGREY, Georgia                GENE GREEN, Texas
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington   G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey            JOHN BARROW, Georgia
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana              DONNA M. CHRISTENSEN, Virgin
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky                  Islands
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia         KATHY CASTOR, Florida
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     HENRY A. WAXMAN, California (ex
JOE BARTON, Texas                        officio)
FRED UPTON, Michigan (ex officio)

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hon. Joseph R. Pitts, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     2
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Hon. Tim Murphy, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, opening statement................     3
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     4
Hon. Henry A. Waxman, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, opening statement...............................     7

Witnesses

Kathleen Sebelius, Secretary, Department of Health & Human
Services.......................................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Answers to submitted questions...............................    67

Submitted Material

Letter of November 18, 2013, from Anthony Weil to Courier News,
submitted by Mr. Pallone.......................................     6
Two redacted letters, submitted by Ms. Schakowsky................    40
Letter of December 1, 2013, from Julie Welch to President Obama,
submitted by Mr. Pitts.........................................    60
Letter of October 29, 2013, from Gary Lauer, Chairman and CEO,
eHealth, to President Obama, submitted by Mr. Burgess..........    65

PPACA IMPLEMENTATION FAILURES: WHAT'S NEXT?

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 11, 2013

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph R. Pitts
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Pitts, Burgess, Whitfield,
Shimkus, Rogers, Murphy, Blackburn, Gingrey, Lance, Cassidy,
Guthrie, Griffith, Bilirakis, Ellmers, Barton, Upton (ex
officio), Pallone, Dingell, Engel, Schakowsky, Matheson, Green,
Barrow, Castor, Sarbanes, and Waxman (ex officio).
Also present: Representative DeGette.
Staff present: Clay Alspach, Counsel, Health; Carl
Anderson, Counsel, Oversight; Gary Andres, Staff Director; Ray
Baum, Senior Policy Advisor/Director of Coalitions; Sean
Bonyun, Communications Director; Matt Bravo, Professional Staff
Member; Karen Christian, Chief Counsel, Oversight; Noelle
Clemente, Press Secretary; Paul Edattel, Professional Staff
Member, Health; Brad Grantz, Policy Coordinator, Oversight and
Investigations; Sydne Harwick, Legislative Clerk; Brittany
Havens, Legislative Clerk; Sean Hayes, Counsel, Oversight and
Investigations; Robert Horne, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Alexa Marrero, Deputy Staff Director; Katie Novaria,
Legislative Clerk; Monica Popp, Professional Staff Member,
Health; Chris Sarley, Policy Coordinator, Environment and the
Economy; Heidi Stirrup, Policy Coordinator, Health; Tom Wilbur,
Digital Media Advisor; Ziky Ababiya, Democratic Staff
Assistant; Phil Barnett, Democratic Staff Director; Stacia
Cardille, Democratic Deputy Chief Counsel; Brian Cohen,
Democratic Staff Director, Oversight and Investigations, Senior
Policy Advisor; Hannah Green, Democratic Staff Assistant;
Elizabeth Letter, Democratic Assistant Press Secretary; Karen
Nelson, Democratic Deputy Staff Director, Health; Stephen
Salsbury, Democratic Special Assistant; and Matt Siegler,
Democratic Counsel.
Mr. Pitts. The subcommittee will come to order.
The Chair will recognize himself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. PITTS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Throughout this year, various administration officials,
including you, Madam Secretary, have sat in this room and
repeatedly told the American people that implementation of the
Affordable Care Act was on schedule.
As we have seen from the disastrous rollout of
HealthCare.gov and documents showing that the October 1
deadline could not be met, that was false.
In fact, every major promise the administration made about
the ACA, from being able to keep your health plan if you like
it, to being able to keep your doctor if you want to, the very
premise of health reform in the first place, that the
Affordable Care Act would make health coverage more affordable,
has proven to be wrong.
My constituents have repeatedly expressed to me that they
feel they were lied to by the administration about the real
effects of this law.
In addition, we are also learning that millions may be
improperly enrolled in Medicaid as a result of the disastrous
rollout--resulting in Washington, yet again squandering the
hard-earned dollars sent to the Federal Government by our
constituents.
Words start to lose their meaning when they are delivered
by individuals who have either misled this committee or were
woefully ignorant of the disastrous consequences that have
unfolded since enactment of the ACA.
The last time you were here, Madam Secretary, you said ``I
know that it isn't fair to ask the American people to take our
word for it.''
While millions of Americans are being harmed by this law,
my constituents do not trust the administration when it comes
to the Affordable Care Act, and it is they who are suffering
because of these broken promises.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pitts follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Joseph R. Pitts

Throughout this year, various administration officials,
including you, Secretary Sebelius, have sat in this room and
repeatedly told the American people that implementation of the
Affordable Care Act was on schedule.
As we have seen from the disastrous rollout of
healthcare.gov, and documents showing that the October 1
deadline could not be met, that was false.
In fact, every major promise the administration made about
the ACA--from being able to keep your health plan if you like
it, to being able to keep your doctor if you want to, to the
very premise of health reform in the first place, that the ACA
would make health coverage more affordable--has proven to be
wrong.
My constituents have repeatedly expressed to me that they
feel they were lied to by the administration about the real
effects of this law.
In addition, we are also learning that millions may be
improperly enrolled in Medicaid as a result of the disastrous
rollout--resulting in Washington yet again squandering the hard
earned dollars sent to the Federal Government by our
constituents.
Words start to lose their meaning when they are delivered
by individuals who have either misled this committee or were
woefully ignorant of the disastrous consequences that have
unfolded since enactment of the ACA.
The last time you were here, Madam Secretary, you said, ``I
know that it isn't fair to ask the American people to take our
word for it.''
My constituents do not trust the administration when it
comes to the ACA, and it is they who are suffering because of
these broken promises.

Mr. Pitts. And I will yield to the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Upton.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This committee has
conducted extensive oversight of the President's health care
law. Many of the administration's top health officials have
testified over the last year, including the Secretary. They
repeatedly looked us in the eye in the spring, summer, and
fall, and assured us that in fact everything was on track. But
our oversight has produced documents showing the frantic chaos
of missed deadlines and delays behind the scenes.
Sadly, it seems that the administration's assurances about
being ready to launch were just as empty as the President's
promises that this law would mean lower costs while allowing
Americans to keep the coverage and doctors that they have and
like. And millions of Americans are now enduring the harsh
reality of canceled plans, the burden of finding a new doctor
and the financial strain of higher premiums set to shock family
budgets.
Far too many Americans who are happy and satisfied with
their health care coverage on January 1st of this year have had
their worlds turned upside down as we approach January 1st of
2014.
This is a matter of trust. It is time for the
administration to be honest with folks like Mary Swanson in
Kalamazoo, Michigan, my constituent, who, along with her
husband, has lost a self-described excellent plan. No more
false promises, no more political games, no more questionable
testimony, it is time for transparency and the truth, and I
yield the balance of my time to Dr. Murphy.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]

Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton

This committee has conducted extensive oversight of the
president's health care law. Many of the administration's top
health officials have testified over the last year, including
the secretary. They repeatedly looked us in the eye--in the
spring, summer, and fall--and assured us everything was ``on
track.'' But our oversight has produced documents showing the
frantic chaos of missed deadlines and delays behind the scenes.
Sadly, it seems the administration's assurances about being
ready to launch were just as empty as the president's promises
that this law would mean lower costs while allowing Americans
to keep the coverage and doctors they have and like. Millions
of Americans are now enduring the harsh reality of canceled
plans, the burden of finding a new doctor, and the financial
strain of higher premiums set to shock family budgets. Far too
many Americans who were happy and satisfied with their health
coverage on January 1, 2013, have had their worlds turned
upside down as we approach January 1, 2014.
This is a matter of trust. It is time for the
administration to be honest with folks like Mary Swanson in
Kalamazoo, Michigan, who along with her husband has lost a
self-described ``excellent'' plan. No more false promises. No
more political games. No more questionable testimony. It is
time for transparency and the truth.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIM MUPRHY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Chairman Upton. And thank you for
being here today, Secretary Sebelius.
As the chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, I worked with my fellow members to conduct
oversight of the President's health care law. We have had
several people before our committee who have talked about its
implementation. Some of the concerns and questions you raised
in the first part of this year, increased premiums, the burden
of this law on small businesses, whether the implementation was
on track and the costs have come to fruition.
Documents uncovered by the O&I Subcommittee show that the
administration knew months before the October 1 start-up of
open enrollment about problems with the Federally facilitated
marketplace. And yet every administration official came before
us testified before the committee this year that implementation
was on track.
Now we are just 2 weeks away from the January 1 start of
coverage, and what should the American public expect?
Unfortunately, the record of transparency has not improved. The
administration has continued its pattern of announcing delays
to the law over the holiday weekend, most recently the 1-year
delay of the online enrollment to the SHOP program. And it
failed to acknowledge problems when the writing is on the wall.
In the meantime, millions have received a pink slip from their
insurance plan, and others are facing unaffordable care with
new higher rates.
Last month, a top CMS official told the committee that 30
to 40 percent of the Web site was yet to be built. I hope you
will be able to provide, get some answers for us today. I hope
you also commit today to help speed up the response to the
committee's document request. Two boxes of documents in 2
months is not a good response. Thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The Chair now
recognizes the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Pallone,
5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairman Pitts. Let me just say
that I'm sorry that you couldn't find a way to accommodate
members to attend the Nelson Mandela memorial and not miss
today's important hearing. Many of the Democrats are at that
memorial service today, and I know that Mr. Waxman made a
reasonable request that was denied, and I wish that it hadn't
been the case. But in any case, we are moving forward. I
listened to what my Republican colleagues just said about the
Affordable Care Act, and Madam Secretary, and I don't know
where the reality is on their part. Sometimes I think that they
are living on Mars rather than Earth. I heard consequences,
things like disastrous consequences, harm, suffering, harsh
reality, world turned upside down.
I mean, they should have been at my forum. I had a forum
Monday night in Highland Park which is one of my towns, on the
ACA, and I heard just the opposite. People were happy because
they were able to enroll. Some were Medicaid recipients who
weren't eligible for Medicaid before. Many of them, you know,
were remarking about, you know, the ability to get insurance
for the first time.
So you know it just boggles my mind to hear these
Republican comments about a world turned upside down when the
reality is that the Affordable Care Act is working. People are
getting insurance who didn't have it, people are getting
affordable insurance with good benefits. I mean, that is the
reality that I hear when I am home, and I am not making it up.
I mean, I will take any of them to my forum if they want to.
Regardless, let me welcome you, Madam Secretary, for
joining us again. I understand you have been in front of our
committee more than any other and we are grateful for your
service and your valuable time. I am eager to hear what I know
is positive news about the enrollment of coverage under the ACA
and the law's implementation. Republicans seem to be saying
things haven't improved. They have improved a lot, and
certainly the Web site has improved a lot. It is really
unfortunate that the Republicans continue to focus their time
and effort trying to obstruct and sabotage the ACA rather than
working on a constructive way to make sure that as many
Americans as possible are able to benefit from it.
I am proud of this law. And I wanted to mention a story,
one of my constituents from Piscataway, New Jersey, wrote a
letter to the editor of a local newspaper describing his
experience with health insurance pre and post implementation of
the health exchange, and I ask that the letter be submitted for
the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pallone. I won't read it, but this gentleman found a
plan on the exchange that cost less than the price of his
previous plan. It has better coverage, better deductible,
better out-of-pocket maximum, better copays, better
prescription drugs. His experience demonstrates that this is a
quality product that people want to sign up for. I will leave
it at that because I am yielding now to Mr. Waxman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY A. WAXMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much for yielding to me. I want
to echo your statement about the regrets that we have that the
majority wouldn't postpone this hearing so that all members
could attend the memorial for Nelson Mandela.
Obviously, more Democrats feel that the reason they wanted
to be there was more important than to be here. They shouldn't
have had to make that choice. Madam Secretary, I want to
welcome you back to our committee.
HealthCare.gov is much improved since you last appeared
before the committee. Millions more have applied for coverage
and signed up. In fact, we just learned today that enrollment
in November quadrupled over the October enrollment.
All told, as of November 30, 365,000 people have enrolled
in private coverage, 1.9 million were through the process just
waiting to pick a plan, andenrollment has been speeding up each
and every week. As a result, we are beginning to hear the
stories of people finally getting the security and peace of
mind that comes with quality health insurance. And some of
these stories are very powerful. Barbara from my district
recently found out that her policy was going to be canceled,
and she had been rejected in the past for more affordable
policies because of her back problem. In a new policy she
obtained on the exchange, her deductibles were cut in half, she
will save hundreds more on free preventive care, and her
premiums will never shoot up if she has a serious health event.
These success stories are happening in every State and
district in the country, though you wouldn't know it from the
Republican members' comments. Joanne from Florida had been
uninsured and hadn't seen a doctor in years. She has repeatedly
tried to enroll without success, and then this week, she
purchased a plan for only a few dollars a month. When that
finely occurred, she burst into tears. Our exchange director in
California has said that this is a common experience.
I know this law is controversial, Mr. Chairman, that is
because of hundreds of millions of dollars, opponents have
spent trying to demonize the law. I think Republicans are
afraid that this law is going to be popular when it is fully in
effect. The public is tired of the partisanship from a divided
Congress. Mr. Chairman, I want to make one request, and this
will be the last statement I want to make now. I hope that the
Secretary gets more respectful treatment from all the members
than she received in the last hearing. At a minimum, she should
be allowed to answer questions. The last time she was
interrupted over and over again.
There are more Republicans here today than Democrats. We
are all going to get our chance to ask questions, a lot of
Democrats won't because they chose to be at the memorial
service, but whoever asks the question, the Secretary should be
able to answer her questions and not be rudely interrupted and
not have the cheap shots she had to endure the last time.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. The gentleman's
time is expired.
Without objection, all members' opening statements will be
made a part of the record.
On our panel today, we have the Honorable Kathleen
Sebelius, the Secretary of the Department of Health & Human
Services. Thank you again, Madam Secretary, for coming. I urge
all members to use proper decorum and permit her to respond to
the questions. But we only have so many minutes. I understand
members will be trying to get as many questions in as they
possibly can, and we will try to operate the gavel strictly and
fairly.
Madam Secretary, thank you for coming. You will have 5
minutes to summarize your testimony. Your written testimony
will be placed in the record. At this time the Chair recognizes
the Honorable Secretary Sebelius, 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KATHLEEN SEBELIUS, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
& HUMAN SERVICES

Ms. Sebelius. Well, thank you, Chairman Upton and Ranking
Member Waxman, Mr. Pitts, Mr. Pallone, members of the
committee, since I was last here on October 30th, our team has
been working around the clock to improve HealthCare.gov. We
committed to making the site work smoothly for the vast
majority of users by the end of November, and after several
hundred software fixes and hardware upgrades, we have achieved
this first benchmark.
While there is still more work to do, we have made great
progress. HealthCare.gov is working faster, responding more
quickly and we are able to handle larger volumes of concurrent
users. Pages that once took 8 seconds to load are now
responding in under a second. The site's error rate which once
topped 6 percent has been driven down to below 1 percent. The
system has more redundancy and stability, and we can now handle
50,000 simultaneous users and more than 800,000 daily visitors.
Now as more Americans give HealthCare.gov a second look,
they are finding the experience is night and day compared to
where we were back in October. And they are responding by
shopping for plans and enrolling in greater numbers. As Mr.
Waxman has said, more than four times as many enrolled in the
Federal marketplace in November as enrolled in October.
In the first 2 months, nearly 1.2 million Americans either
selected a marketplace plan or received a Medicaid or CHIP
eligibility determination with nearly 365,000 people selecting
a plan and 803,000 receiving a determination.
An additional 1.9 million people have made it through the
application and determination, but have not yet selected a
plan, and we expect that as more folks talk things over with
their families and learn about their new options, more will
enroll. To those who have been frustrated with the experience
so far, we are asking you to come back.
It is now easier than ever to shop for plans and enroll on
line, over the phone, on paper, in person or directly through
an issuer or agent. More than 5 million Americans have dialed
into our call center in the first 2 months, 450,000 have
received assistance from more than 19,000 trained assisters.
And in the first week of December alone, HealthCare.gov
received nearly 5 million visits.
Open enrollment for health insurance continues for 3-1/2
more months, so there is still time. To put this in
perspective, most private insurance plans offer open enrollment
for only a few weeks.
Now we continue to be relentless in our efforts to improve
HealthCare.gov, and we are committed to learning, adapting,
improving and acting on the feedback we received from consumers
and issuers alike. As I told this committee at the end of
October, the initial launch of HealthCare.gov was flawed,
frustrating and unacceptable. And I believe strongly in
accountability and our obligations as public servants to be
good stewards of taxpayer dollars.
Now that the Web site is working more smoothly, I have
determined it is the right time to begin a process of
understanding the structural and managerial policies that led
to the flawed launch so we can take action and avoid these
problems in the future.
Today I am announcing some initial steps I have taken. I
have asked our inspector general, Dan Levinson, to investigate
the development of HealthCare.gov including contractor
acquisition, the overall management of the project and
performance and payment of our contractors. I have asked CMS
Administrator Marilyn Tavenner to create a new position of
chief risk officer at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services and to expedite the search and hiring. This will be a
full-time employee charged with assessing risk management
practices and developing strategies to minimize those risks.
And let me be specific. I will instruct this officer to
look at IT and contracting management practices starting with
HealthCare.gov and the risk factors that impeded a successful
launch. I will ask for an initial report in the first 60 days
with recommendations on how we can mitigate risk as we move
forward. And I have instructed CMS to update and expand their
employee training, they will be required to adopt best
practices for contractor and procurement management, rules and
procedures, including internal communications and processes.
These actions build on reforms we have already made which have
led to significant improvements in the Web site. It includes
the addition of Jeff Zients as the management expert and
consultant to Administrator Tavenner and me, selecting QSSI as
the systems integrator and changing the day-to-day CMS
management of HealthCare.gov.
Fixing a flawed Web site has proven challenging, but it is
nothing compared to the challenges that American families face
every day, particularly those families who don't yet have
health coverage, families who are one medical bill away from
bankruptcy, one diagnosis away from not being able to afford
their mortgage or their rent. And these efforts are about them.
Before the Affordable Care Act, as many as 14,000 of our
neighbors were losing their coverage each and every day. The
market operated inefficiently, we as a Nation paid more and got
lower health results.
Today, health care cost growth has been driven down to the
lowest levels in 50 years, and millions of Americans are
already benefiting from new rights and consumer protections.
With the new marketplace, choice and competition among private
market plans is now available to millions of Americans. But our
work is not done until every eligible American has the
opportunity to access affordable coverage.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sebelius follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady. I will begin
questioning and recognize myself 5 minutes for that purpose.
Madam Secretary, based on current trends, it is likely that
more individuals will have lost coverage on January 1st than
will have gained it under the law. HHS released data this
morning stating that approximately 364,000 Americans have
selected a plan through a State or a Federal exchange. Is that
correct?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pitts. Of these 364,000 Americans, do you know how many
of those individuals will actually have coverage in effect on
January 1, 2014?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, once they pay their premium, they will
have coverage in effect.
Mr. Pitts. So you don't know. These are the ones who have
just selected plan but haven't paid their first payment on the
premium?
Ms. Sebelius. Some may have paid, some may not. We are
giving you the enrollment numbers.
Mr. Pitts. Do you even--this is a critical statistic, it is
clear HHS knows the number of Americans who essentially have
put a plan in their shopping cart. Your testimony includes data
on the number of users who can use HealthCare.gov
simultaneously and the number of Web site hits. However, this
most critical statistic, the number of Americans who will
actually have coverage effective January 1, do you have an
estimate?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, I think 365,000 through the end of
November have enrolled in coverage, and we are dealing with the
issuers to confirm their actual payment.
Mr. Pitts. Would you define ``enrollment''? Define what you
mean by ``enrollment.''
Ms. Sebelius. We are giving you the numbers of individuals
who have chosen a plan.
Mr. Pitts. But not actually paid their first premium----
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct.
Mr. Pitts [continuing]. Or received a card?
Ms. Sebelius. Through the end of November, yes. Payment
isn't due as you know, sir, until mid December in order to be
fully covered. So we don't have those numbers, and I think most
Americans probably will not pay until their money is owed.
Mr. Pitts. So you can't guarantee the actual number of
constituents who have coverage that they----
Ms. Sebelius. Not until they pay their premium.
Mr. Pitts. In October, the AP reported that a September 5
memo sent to you listed monthly enrollment targets for the
exchanges, and this memo indicates that your target enrollment
number for the end of December is 3.3 million. Based on HHS'
release this morning, your Department is more than 3 million
off their target number, isn't that correct?
Ms. Sebelius. Through the end of November, that is correct,
sir.
Mr. Pitts. Some news reports have indicated that as many as
5.6 million individuals have had their policy canceled. Isn't
it the case that on January 1, more Americans will have their
coverage canceled than will have enrolled in an exchange?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, sir, I don't know where the 5 million
number comes from. I know people have been told that their
health plan doesn't necessarily match the ACA compliant plans.
They are not in a grandfathered plan, and a number of those
individuals have already re-enlisted and enrolled in plans. So
losing coverage and being notified that the plan that they had
doesn't exist anymore are two very different things.
Mr. Pitts. Now much like the millions of cancelations in
the individual market, the Affordable Care Act requires group
coverage to also comply with HHS standards, and many of these
plans could be canceled next year as well.
Madam Secretary, the issue with the canceled plans and the
President's broken promise that if you like it you can keep it,
this is because some of those individual plans did not comply
with the health care law's 2014 requirements, correct?
Ms. Sebelius. That is true, sir, or they did not stay in a
grandfathered plan. What the law said from the outset is if
insurers left the plan in place that an individual had in March
of 2010, and there are millions of Americans who are in those
grandfathered plans, that the plan stayed in effect through the
implementation of the Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Pitts. Now, what about small group market plans used by
small businesses and their employees. Don't these have to
comply with the ACA standards?
Ms. Sebelius. In the same way. If the grandfathered plans
stayed in effect, they could still be in effect. If not, the
consumer protections that are available through the Affordable
Care Act would come into play.
Mr. Pitts. Could some small group plans be canceled because
they do not comply with the ACA?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir. And, again, insurers cancel plans
each and every year. They change plans, they change networks.
That is part of the market strategy.
Mr. Pitts. Madam Secretary, before passage of the health
care law, President Obama routinely promised that the average
family would save over $2,000 on their premiums. Would you
agree today that this simply is not true, every family will see
premium decreases? Some will see increases? Yes?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Mr. Pitts, I think that the President
talked about health care costs going down for Americans. I
think that we have adequately documented that health care
costs, indeed, have gone down based on the trajectory that we
would have seen, absent the Affordable Care Act, underlying
health costs are rising at the lowest rate in 50 years,
Medicare costs have risen at this lowest rate, Medicaid costs
have actually come down per capita throughout the country, and
private insurance rates are rising at the lowest level that
they have in decades. So Americans are seeing a very different
cost trajectory than they would have absent the passage of the
Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Pitts. My time is expired. Thank you, Madam Secretary,
for your responses. The Chair now recognizes the ranking member
Mr. Pallone 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again, Madam
Secretary, I don't want to keep beating a dead horse here but
this whole idea that we hear from the Republicans that the
world is turned upside down and this, ACA is a disaster is just
the opposite. As you point out, health care costs you know are
going down, rates are rising at a less of a level. This whole
idea of the President saying if you like it, you can keep it, I
mean the President didn't say that if you had a lousy health
insurance policy that didn't cover everything that he was to
suggesting that insurance companies continue to sell it and
therefore you buy it. I was at the Rules Committee the other
day when the President issued his executive order, and I had
one of my colleagues from Florida, one of my Republican
colleagues, talk about how his constituents should be able,
should have the freedom, she used the word ``freedom,'' to keep
his or her health plan that cost $60 a month. And I asked,
well, what is this health plan? It didn't include
hospitalization. I don't think the President meant that you
should have the freedom to keep a health insurance plan that
didn't include hospitalization, I mean, if you want it, his
executive order says you can do it, but I think it is absurd to
keep arguing over these lousy skeletal plans.
In any case, the reality is that enrollment is
accelerating, and I wanted to ask you about enrollment. The
numbers released today are impressive, and I wanted to get some
broader context from you on how enrollment is progressing. We
always expected enrollment to be slow in the early months, and
that is what happened in Massachusetts when they implemented
the health care reform. In the first month, only .03 percent of
people in Massachusetts who ultimately signed up actually
enrolled. But the clear trend in the report released today in
the reports from the States is that enrollment is surging. In
November, there were four times more enrollments in private
plans than in October, more than 1.2 million enrolled in
private plans that were found eligible for Medicaid, and more
than 1.9 million people were eligible for marketplace coverage,
employees were enrolled as soon as they select the plan, 3.7
million have applied for coverage. But the most important fact
is the trend, the pace of enrollments at the end of the month
was double the pace at the start of the month, and that trend
appears to be continuing.
Press reports have indicated that more people have signed
up for private coverage through the Federal marketplace on
November 30th and December 1st than signed up for all of
October. Another press report noted that more people selected a
plan in the first week of December than selected one in the
whole of November.
These are exciting signs. So just given the technical
issues we have had and the corresponding delays in much of the
outreach campaigns, how would you measure the progress at this
point in terms of enrollment?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Mr. Pallone, I don't think there is any
question that the flawed launch of the Web site put a damper on
people's enthusiasm about early sign-up. We had a lot of
visitors early on who got very frustrated and have not
reengaged. We have been inviting them back to use a newly
improved site, and we are seeing some very, very positive
trends in that direction.
So I don't want to minimize the dampening effect that the
flawed technology has, not just on the Federal Web site, but I
think on news reports also, I think dampened enthusiasm at the
State level. It was hard for California, for instance, to
ensure people that their site was fine while there was a lot of
news day in and day out about the flawed site.
Having said that, we are seeing very, very positive trends.
We are seeing a lot of people reengage. And it is about not
only just the numbers of individuals, but at the end of the
day, hopefully getting the right mix of individuals and we know
that a lot of younger Americans are very tech savvy, want a
fully functioning, easy-to-operate site and so getting
HealthCare.gov up and running correctly also helps with some of
these targeted numbers.
Mr. Pallone. I appreciate that. Let me just say, I only got
50 seconds here, at my forum, as I said, which was very
successful in Highland Park and people were happy with what we
were doing the other night, they were particularly pleased that
you had that option where you didn't have to, you know,
basically provide all your information, but could comparison
shop without actually enrolling. I thought that was very good.
And still do encourage people to use alternatives. I know
you are right, a lot of people like to use the Web site. But I
know there were a lot of people at my forum who were, you know,
calling the 800 number, going to community health centers, and
also we had some insurance agents and brokers there, and I
think that I notice that there is, I think we should encourage
that as well as alternatives.
Ms. Sebelius. We have been conducting some pilots with a
large number of insureds in key States. I think they have gone
extremely well. We are encouraging insurance companies to have
their agents and brokers directly enroll, and I think that
experience has been very productive and we are working closely
with them on the kind of technology fixes that they would find
most effective.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Madam Secretary. The Chair now
recognizes the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Upton, 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So the goal was
to enroll 7 million Americans by the end of March, 365,000
folks enrolled through the end of November, premiums are due
beginning mid December. I wonder, Madam Secretary, if you could
tell us after Christmas somewhere between Christmas and New
Year's as to how many people actually do pay the premium that
is due, if you could share that number during the Christmas
break with us.
Would that be possible if you could get a number mid
December?
Ms. Sebelius. Chairman Upton, we--the deadline to enroll is
the 23rd, the deadline to pay is the end of the year, so we
will not have a number until some time in early January.
Mr. Upton. So the first of the year? Can you let us know
that first week as to how many people actually paid?
Ms. Sebelius. I will let you know as soon as we have the
numbers, sir.
Mr. Upton. You indicated to Mr. Pallone that, in fact, the
launch was flawed. Knowing what you know today, do you wish, in
fact, that you had delayed the launch beyond October 1st?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I certainly wish we could have saved
millions of people a very frustrating experience and had a
smoother technology launch. I acted on the best information
that I had. And going forward, I think that having an 8-week
delay in a fully functioning site is enormously frustrating to
millions of Americans and their families.
Having said that, I think there are millions of people who
are going to begin receiving health coverage that they never
had January 1st and into the new year, and so on balance, I am
not sure what the right answer is. The law's benefits went into
effect January 1st. People needed some time to sort out
options. We clearly put a dent in that time, but there are
going to be millions of Americans with new health coverage, and
that will continue on into the new year.
Mr. Upton. So knowing what you know today, you would have
started the launch October 1?
Ms. Sebelius. I would have probably done a slower launch
maybe with fewer people and done some additional beta testing,
which is part of what has happened, frankly, in the early
months of the launch to identify what problems we had.
Mr. Upton. So let me go a little deeper. So what grade, if
you could give yourself, not you, but HHS, the grading of the
launch from A to E or incomplete what would you give the----
Ms. Sebelius. Mr. Chairman, I have already said that I
think the launch was flawed and failed and frustrating for
millions of people. Unacceptable, we want to both figure out
exactly the chain of events, what went wrong, which is why I
have asked the Inspector General help do this investigation. We
have made some changes.
And what we are doing is moving forward. We want to make
sure that the millions of people who are eager for affordable
health coverage have that opportunity before March 31.
Mr. Upton. So you announced the IG investigation yesterday.
Do you wish that you had started that maybe this summer asking
some tough questions in terms of where things were knowing what
you knew back then?
Ms. Sebelius. I didn't have cause to ask the IG to be
involved last summer, no, sir.
Mr. Upton. The day after Thanksgiving, the administration
announced that States would be permitted to use incomplete
enrollment information to sign people up for Medicaid. Is it
possible that by using incomplete enrollment information,
States could be enrolling folks the most vulnerable, by the
way, for Medicaid who are not actually eligible?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, we are working very closely with States
around Medicaid eligibility, making determinations based on
States' specific laws which they have an opportunity to sign
off on. So when someone presents at the Web site, and we review
their eligibility criteria based on the law of Michigan, we
determine preliminary eligibility and send that file to the
State.
At the same time the State is doing the same thing for
people from Michigan who may come to the State Medicaid office
thinking that they are Medicaid eligible and are determined to
be marketplace eligible they are returning the files to us.
Mr. Upton. But the information is incomplete, is it not?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, I am not sure what you are referring to.
We are gathering data and information and eligibility. And
again, the State makes the determination based on their State
law and based on the information that we have selected.
Mr. Upton. So are income and residency requirements a part
of that information that has to be verified?
Ms. Sebelius. I am sorry incoming----
Mr. Upton. Income and residency.
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir. The State again makes the final
Medicaid determination. We make the preliminary determination
and send an individual to the State. If the State doesn't
confirm that they meet those requirements, they will not enroll
the individual. We have now, as of last night, again, got the
systems automated so these files will be sent automated, but we
are also sending what we call flat paper files with full
information to the States and working one at a time with
States, particularly those States like Michigan which has
expanded Medicaid for their population to make sure that the
data is verified. By the State makes the final Medicaid
determination, not the Federal Government.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Madam Secretary. The Chair now
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Waxman, 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Waxman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I know that there is a lot of politics around this issue.
And I certainly understand that changing to a system that is
more fair and stable for every American, not just a few, but
every American, is not easy. But all of this is exacerbated by
wild propagandists' politicized statements that have been made.
Even today, the chairman said more people will have lost their
coverage than will get coverage. Well, that absolutely cannot
be true. It is not true. The Congressional Budget Office, which
is not Democratic or Republican, it is nonpartisan, they
estimated that 7 million people will sign up for health
insurance in the first year, and that 25 million people will be
newly insured in 2016. That is really a major accomplishment.
Now we hear Republicans saying more people are losing their
policies. But who are those people? We hear estimates that 80
million people will lose their insurance. When you look at that
statement, they are saying that people who have a change in
their policy have lost it. For example, when they get free
preventive services now covered, oh, that means they are losing
the policy they had. Or if young adults can stay on that policy
up to age 26, Republicans say see they are losing that policy.
Well, that doesn't make sense--unless you are trying to
exaggerate numbers.
There are some small businesses in this country who have
offered their employees skimpy plans. And now they are being
told they have got to have minimum standards in those plans, so
they are complaining a lot because they are going to have to
provide decent, quality, reliable insurance. And a lot of them
are helping fuel this argument.
So to say that 80 to 100 million people may lose their
insurance is absolutely crazy. It is just not true. And it is
especially galling to some of us when we hear Republicans so
saddened by people losing their insurance when we recognize
that they want a status quo which means repeal the Affordable
Care Act where we had 50 million people uninsured. That didn't
bother them.
So I just think that we ought to put this in perspective,
Madam Secretary. This is not about this law, and it is not
sincerely concern for the uninsured. It is just a political,
constant political attack. The Republicans did not want to work
with the Democrats, they didn't want to work with the
President. If this bill has problems, let's work together to
fix them, not talk about how it is no good, it is all terrible.
Because I am hearing from a lot of people.
And I think the headline in The New York Times captured
this. The article was titled, ``Amid the Uproar Over Health
Law, Voices of Quiet Optimism and Relief,'' they are voices
like Stephanie from Lansdowne, Pennsylvania, who had a
frustrating experience trying to submit her application for the
first 2 months, and then after visiting a navigator at the
local library, she signed up for a policy that will cost $113 a
month with no deductible. And what she said is, I am one of the
people whose plans were canceled and signing up this time was
just the easiest thing in the world.
They are the voices of Ellen and Meredith from San Diego in
2012 they lost their coverage because they no longer lived in
the plan service area. When they applied for new coverage,
Ellen was denied because of carpal tunnel system. Now they have
a plan through the exchange of $142 a month instead of the
$1,300 a month they were paying before. They have a higher
deductible than their old plan, but lower co-pays. And here is
what they described their feelings, we felt we didn't have to
panic or worry. If not for the Affordable Care Act, our ability
to get insurance would be very limited if we could get it at
all.
Madam Secretary, you have traveled around the country talk
to people about this law. Do you think most people look at this
as a political issue? Or are they willing to put politics aside
and look at the plans being offered and make the decisions of
what is best for their family?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Mr. Waxman, what I find is a lot of
people are eager for information. They are confused by what
they read and hear. And frankly, the launch didn't help that.
But as people understand their options and choices, I find that
there is enormous enthusiasm, often huge relief. A lot of
individuals who received the notice of cancelation are unlocked
from a policy choice that they did not feel was good for them
or their families. They were kind of locked into a plan. And I
talk to people every day who now have 40 or 50 choices, a range
of marketplace plans, the option to pick and choose.
That isn't to say that there aren't some individuals who
would have preferred to stay in their plans, which is why I
think the President decided on the transition policy in the
marketplace. But a lot of individuals----
Mr. Waxman. They didn't know what they had offered to them
on the exchange.
Ms. Sebelius. Who received cancelation notices are thrilled
with the choices that are now available to them.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Madam Secretary. The Chair now
recognizes the vice chair of the full committee, Mrs.
Blackburn, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
I want to talk to you about data security and privacy.
First off, I know you have seen the USA Today story about
people in California having their information released to
insurance agents, and this all happened after they had gone to
the exchange.
We are hearing from other States that people are having
that same experience with Federal exchanges. So have you talked
with the California exchange about releasing that information,
help them to realize this is inappropriate to release that
information?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I don't think there is any question
that there is an issue about releasing anybody's personal
health information as was done in California. And there have
been certainly conversations about that. As you know, we don't
run the California exchange. That is no excuse. Privacy and
security are hugely important.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK. How is the information being released?
Who is releasing it? Who all has access to that? And when it is
released, are people paying for that information? And who gets
the proceeds from the sell if you are selling that information?
Ms. Sebelius. I am not sure. Are you talking about the
California specific incident.
Mrs. Blackburn. I am talking about any of these exchanges
where people are getting----
Ms. Sebelius. Well, to my knowledge, the California
incident is an isolated case. We have no information--there is
certainly no information about anybody at the Federal
marketplace for the 36 States release----
Mrs. Blackburn. I think we are all getting some questions--
--
Ms. Sebelius. Well, there is no information released, and
actually, we don't store personally identifiable information on
the hub.
Mrs. Blackburn. Will you help us look into this and get to
the bottom of it? Because people are getting phone calls, and
that means their information is being released.
Now, if somebody is benefiting, and if that is being sold
or if there is some kind of transaction on that, we need to
know that, Madam Secretary.
Let's go on and talk about calls----
Ms. Sebelius. But I would suggest, Congresswoman, the fact
that they are getting phone calls also maybe if they are
customers of an insurance company who is contacting them
because their policy may be up for renewal. Those calls are
underway.
Mrs. Blackburn. I don't think that is quite the case.
But let's go on and talk about cost. $600 million is what
we know has been spent on the site so far. I am referencing The
Washington Post on that. How much money in total has been
spent? We are still waiting for the answer to that question
from you. We would like to know how much you have obligated
since October 1 for the cleanup of this exchange? How much
money do you anticipate obligating through March of 2014? And
since you are going to have the IG do an investigation of the
contracting, are you going to make these contractors pay this
taxpayer money back?
Ms. Sebelius. Congresswoman, to date, through the end of
October, and I am giving you the cleanest audited numbers that
we have, we have obligated $677 million for the total IT costs,
and have outlaid 319 million of that 677. Some of that includes
work clearly in the month of October, we will give you regular
updates as we have newly audited numbers. I have asked the IG
to become involved because I think it is very appropriate to
look at all aspects of not only the management practices, but
the contractor expenditures, the specs in the contract, the
payment issues----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK.
Ms. Sebelius. And I will act based on his recommendation.
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, so 677 million is what you have
obligated through the end of October.
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct.
Mrs. Blackburn. Of this year?
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct.
Mrs. Blackburn. So would you give us the additional----
Ms. Sebelius. Through the end of October, yes, that is the
obligated amount. We have spent 319 million of that 677 through
the end of October.
Mrs. Blackburn. We are going to continue to watch that cost
number very closely.
Delays. It seems like every holiday brings another delay.
So what should we expect for Christmas and New Year? We have
had a total of 13 administrative delays to major aspects of the
law. And it seems like whether it is July 4th or any of the
holidays, Thanksgiving, we get a delay. So what are we looking
at for Christmas Eve and Christmas and New Year's Eve and New
Year's Day?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Congresswoman, I would say that we have
extended the deadline for enrollees from the middle of December
until the 23rd recognizing that people need some extra time
over the holidays----
Mrs. Blackburn. OK, into the future, what can we expect?
Ms. Sebelius. To choose a plan. They don't have to pay
until the end of December in order to be fully enrolled, and we
are working with insurers to make sure there is a smoother
transition into the new year.
Mrs. Blackburn. Yield back.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I now yield to the
ranking member emeritus, Mr. Dingell, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Dingell. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your courtesy
and for holding this important hearing.
Madam Secretary, welcome, and thank you for being here.
As we all know, the Secretary is the famous daughter of a
former member of this committee, an outstanding member from
Ohio. Madam Secretary, we continue to hear nothing but scare
tactics from the other side of the aisle. Rather than
encouraging people to sign up for health insurance, doubt is
being created where none exists or should. I am first to admit
that the implementation of the law has not gone as smoothly as
I would have liked, but that is, in no small part, due to the
intransigence of many of my colleagues who have deliberately
thrown wrenches in the gears at every opportunity.
Moreover, my constituents continue to tell me about the
benefit ACA continues to bring them. And I would like to share
a few letters I have received recently and I ask unanimous
consent that they be put in the record.
One of my constituents wrote as follows, ``I find it
absurd, embarrassing and an enormous waste of time, money and
human capital to see the taxes being used in Washington right
now to defund the Affordable Care Act. As an individual who has
a sibling with MS, a father with lung cancer and a sister with
a high-risk pregnancy, I can say with absolute personal
authority that the Affordable Care Act will help and is
critical to the welfare of families like mine.''
Another constituent wrote, ``I am registered with
HealthCare.gov so that I can study and compare premium prices
and I am currently paying for my 60-plus employees in Ohio and
Michigan. I am extremely pleased that even gold coverage plans
are half of what we were paying now. There are 72 gold plans
being offered. Now that is competition. So let's stop playing
politics, look past the spin and realize what tremendous good
ACA has already accomplished for the American people, and what
more it could do if we will get together to make it as
successful as it could be.''
Madam Secretary, I would like to begin by asking you some a
few questions about fixes to the Web site.
Madam Secretary, is it correct that the error rate on
HealthCare.gov is under 1 percent, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Madam Secretary, the capacity has increased to
allow 50,000 concurrent users and more than 800,000 visitors
daily, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Eight hundred thousand minimum a day could
come on the site.
Mr. Dingell. Now, as the Web site has improved, we have
also seen an increase in the number of enrollments through the
Web site. Today we got more good news about enrollments.
My question, is it correct that 258,000 people selected a
plan through both Federal and State marketplaces in November
bringing the overall enrollment number to 364,000?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir. 365,000.
Mr. Dingell. Well, Madam Secretary, over 1.5 million people
have been eligible, have been determined eligible for Medicaid,
yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. About 800,000 Medicaid eligibilities have
been determined.
Mr. Dingell. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Are you confident that enrollment will continue to increase
quickly in the coming weeks and months? Yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. We are seeing a very positive trend, about
four times as many people enrolled in the Federal marketplace
in November as opposed to October, and we are seeing an upward
trend in December. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. People like--Madam Secretary, people like my
constituents I mentioned earlier are seeing reduced costs when
purchasing insurance through the marketplace.
Is it correct that a recent Rand report found that premium
tax credits will reduce out-of-pocket costs for average
marketplace participants by 35 percent, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I think, sir, if people are eligible
for subsidies, they will see a significant decrease over the
comparable plan.
Mr. Dingell. I am running out of time. So you have to give
me yes or no.
Did the CBO project that 8 in 10 Americans who obtain
coverage through the marketplace will be eligible for
assistance to make their coverage more affordable, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. I think the preliminary estimates were that
is what the uninsured population certainly look like, yes.
Mr. Dingell. So ACA also benefits people who don't purchase
their health insurance through the new marketplaces.
Now, Madam Secretary, is it correct that thanks to ACA, 3.1
million young Americans, adults, have been able to stay on
their parents' plan, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Dingell. Now, Madam Secretary, 7.3 million seniors have
saved over 8.9 billion on their prescription drug costs thanks
to provisions in ACA that closed the Medicare part D donut hole
and that that donut hole will be totally closed in the year
2020?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Dingell. You have been very courteous, and I thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize
the chair emeritus of the full committee, Mr. Barton, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Barton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I ask my
questions, first of all, merry Christmas. And who was your
father who served on the committee from Ohio?
Ms. Sebelius. John Gilligan from Ohio.
Mr. Barton. John Gilligan. See, I wasn't there then.
Ms. Sebelius. But you may have served with my father-in-
law, Keith Sebelius. So we had people on both sides.
Mr. Barton. Just on a personal issue. Let me get to the
unfun part and go to the questions.
Mr. Henry Chao of CMS, when he was here several weeks ago
in response to a question of Congressman Gardner of Colorado
made a statement that 40 percent of the computing system hadn't
even been built yet, that all of what he called the back end
hadn't been built, which I would assume would be the accounts
payable and accounts receivable and income verification and
things like that.
Could you tell us what is being done to try to get that
ready by January the 1st since almost half the system
according, to Mr. Chao, hadn't even been built yet?
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, I am not exactly sure what Mr.
Chao was referring to, but I can certainly tell you where we
are in the build. I think the emphasis was getting the consumer
facing portion ready for October 1. As you know, that didn't go
so well. The financial management system which is getting the
insurance companies, their money for accelerated tax credits
and for cost sharing is due to go into effect in mid January.
There are also some other pieces of the puzzle, not income
verification. That is done as part of the application at the
very front end in order to qualify someone. So that is all
built in.
Mr. Barton. Well, do you agree with Mr. Chao that a large
part of this system hasn't been put together yet? And if so,
aren't you concerned about that?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, it is in the process currently of being
put together. The income issues, again, I want to clarify for
the committee that, because it has been a bit of a
misunderstanding, accelerated tax credits and cost sharing
don't go to consumers, they go to companies. We are dealing
with 2 to 300 companies. And it will, we have a system that we
have announced working with companies where they will be paid
in a timely fashion as this process is being built.
Mr. Barton. I don't want to beat a dead horse. But we all
agree that the Web site to try to enroll people has not worked
very well, to be as polite as possible. Now that is the easy
part. So now we are down to, in January, there are lots of
people that think they are going to have insurance that don't
have it now. And the part of the system that when they go to
the doctor or to the hospital and they give them their new
insurance card that they check to see if they are covered and
what the coverage is, that is not there. And there is no system
there to pay people. There is no system there to determine
whether this doctor or this hospital is eligible, and you still
want to get this thing started on January the 1st?
Ms. Sebelius. Congressman, I think it is not an accurate
statement. We certainly have a plan, and we have vetted it and
discussed it with insurers that they are very comfortable with
to get them----
Mr. Barton. They were also very comfortable that October
1st was going to work, and----
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, this is--people will be enrolled. That
system is in place, that is what the application is about.
Mr. Barton. After this, we will have you back here in mid
January or February talking about this problem.
Ms. Sebelius. This is reimbursing insurance companies. At
the end of the day, it has nothing to do with enrollment. And
enrollment will----
Mr. Barton. I am not saying it does have anything to do
with enrollment. Let me go to my second----
Ms. Sebelius. When people go to the doctor and go to the
hospital they will have a card. They will be----
Mr. Barton. I have got a minute left. I have got one more
question. I want to put the slide up that says on Section 1401.
Under the law, Section 1401 says that if you go through a State
exchange to get insurance under what we call Obamacare, that
you are eligible for a subsidy. If you don't go through that
State exchange, you are not eligible for a subsidy. Now, IRS
has ruled that we don't have to obey the law. We are going to
give the subsidies if we go through the State exchanges or not.
What is HHS's position on obeying the law, and doing what the
law says, which would mean almost everybody who signs up for
Obamacare is not eligible for a subsidy because they are not
going through the State exchanges?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, we have deferred to our partners at the
Justice Department, and at the Treasury for----
Mr. Barton. Now, what is your position? What is the HHS's
position?
Ms. Sebelius. We have referred to our partners. This is in
litigation, as you know, right now.
Mr. Barton. I am asking what your position is? You are not
worried about obeying the law?
Ms. Sebelius. We feel that the law covers both State and
Federal exchanges.
Mr. Barton. That is not what it says.
Ms. Sebelius. The recommendation of the Justice
Department----
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. I recognize the gentleman from Utah, Mr. Matheson, 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Matheson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam
Secretary, thanks for joining us today.
You know, we have already had one hearing on the Web site
before now. We are all aware of some of the challenges of the
rollout. You know, when you come before a committee there is
all kinds of things--other topics I would like to raise with
you, issues about the health insurance tax, or difficulties
some providers are having with meaningful use, Stage 2, but in
the--I think this hearing is more about rollout of Web site
itself, and so I will focus on that in my questions today.
I think we all know that, and you have acknowledged the
criticism of the Web site when it was coming out. Let me ask
you a question. As we go forward, have you developed sort of a
master list of the issues that still need to be resolved, or
the issues you are trying to anticipate as we move forward from
today?
Ms. Sebelius. We are doing that on an updated basis, yes,
sir, both on a policy side and on a technology, and user side.
Mr. Matheson. So that is not a static list. That is an
evolving list. As time goes on you see other things?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Matheson. OK, is it possible for that list to be shared
with the committee or is that something that we could see on
this committee, or----
Ms. Sebelius. As you say, it is not a static list.
Mr. Matheson. Right.
Ms. Sebelius. It is a dynamic list, and it is basically
anticipating what the next policy changes are, what happens.
You know, we are happy to give the committee an outline, but I
don't think there is any great secret to it.
Mr. Matheson. OK. OK. You know, I wanted to talk about some
of the issues that--addressed with the 834 form, or I know the
error rate has been dropping and enrollment is increasing at
the same time, so you kind of have these lines going in
opposite directions, both favorable directions. But that being
said, do you have a sense of how many enrollees may have 834
errors that need to be addressed?
Ms. Sebelius. What I can tell you, Congressman, is we know
in the early days, there were a serious number of error, and we
are in the process of actually hand-matching individuals with
insurance companies. They have added some important personnel
to the tech team so that they are helping to identify where the
bottlenecks were and fixes. We are seeing a vastly improved
system, but we want to go back and make sure----
Mr. Matheson. Right.
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. That everyone who thinks they
are enrolled in the early days is actually matched with a
company, and that the company folks are matched on our end, and
that process is very much underway, and a lot of fixes have
been----
Mr. Matheson. Right.
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. Added in October or November for
the 834s.
Mr. Matheson. And in terms of that declining error rate,
how do you calculate that? Is that an average of all of the
plans or is that a snapshot of the subset as you go forward?
How do you go about figuring that out?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, it isn't really plans. It is looking at
the site and determining the errors that occur along the way,
so pages that came up, or people got locked out or dumped out,
or wouldn't accept an ID, and that has really been the roadmap
to what really needed to be fixed and that has been a very
dynamic process that is still underway.
Mr. Matheson. Right. And following up a little bit on what
Mr. Barton was asking you about some of the issues more on the
back end, you know, I guess CBO has predicted about 6 million
individuals are potentially going to seek subsidies, and for
folks, not everyone is going to start up January 1. I
understand the open enrollment period goes beyond then. But as
these first month's premiums for the folks starting January 1
are coming up, is there--are we going to have this system in
place, where these subsidies and these payments at the back? Is
the back-end system going to be structured in a way where the
subsidy payments are going to be able to be made for this first
month of participation?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir. They will be made and they will be
made in a timely fashion, and they are made in a way that the
insurers have agreed that works for them. So as the full system
is being automated, there is a step in the early months to make
sure that the payment to insurers, again, an individual will be
enrolled, qualified for a subsidy. The insurer will accept a
premium. At that point, that individual is insured, and has
full benefits. Starting in mid-January, the insurance companies
then receive reimbursement for the tax credit and cost sharing,
if it is eligible for individuals, so it is a two-step process.
Mr. Matheson. Right.
Ms. Sebelius. One affects the individual. The second
affects the companies, 2- to 300 companies total. We have a
system that, again, has been signed off by them in terms of
getting them paid in a timely fashion and we will absolutely do
that.
Mr. Matheson. And the subsidies go directly to the
insurance companies?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir, not to the individual.
Mr. Matheson. OK. And so when we hear about these problems
about needing to build up the back end, you are saying that
this particular component you have got----
Ms. Sebelius. Well, there is a manual workaround, I would
say, for virtually everything that isn't fully automated yet.
It is in place. It just will be manual until the automation is
fully complete and we have tested it and made sure it works.
But in the meantime, the payment system will absolutely go
forward.
Mr. Matheson. OK. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman,
thank you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize
the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Dr. Burgess, 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Secretary,
welcome back to committee. I may not have an opportunity to go
through all of the things on the list. We have submitted
questions for the record in the past. We have not received
answers to those. So let me, again, encourage you to respond to
previous questions and to these question, because they are
important and constituents are asking us, in fact, constituents
on a telephone town hall earlier this week, single mother,
earns just over the amount so good for her. She has got a good
job; works for a small employer; lost their insurance in the
small group market.
Now she is being hit with a premium, an unsubsidized
premium for which she is not eligible for a subsidy of $1,500 a
month for her and her child. I mean, when you were working
through the nuts and bolts of establishing this law, did that
situation come to mind? Were you concerned at all about that
individual?
Ms. Sebelius. I am concerned about all individuals having
affordable health coverage, yes, sir.
Mr. Burgess. Well, apparently she doesn't have affordable
health coverage. In her opinion, she lost her employer small
group market coverage.
Ms. Sebelius. The employer chose to drop the coverage then.
Mr. Burgess. Because of the expense involved with that. OK,
you were here in April. I think it was April 18th. You had just
received 2 weeks prior a Red Team discussion document from
McKinsey Group. My information is that you were briefed on this
report 2 weeks prior. That is what is listed on the final page
of the report. Let me just play a little clip of our
interaction from April.
OK, that is going to take too long. Let me just tell you
what we are dealing with. The study that the McKinsey Corp--
Group put together dealt with the readiness of HealthCare.gov.
I was asking you about the readiness, and you replied that we
are moving ahead. We have a Federal hub on track and on time.
Do you recall that exchange between the two of us?
Ms. Sebelius. I am sure that exchange took place, sir.
Mr. Burgess. But here is the question. Two weeks before you
were told by the McKinsey Corporation or the McKinsey Group,
that number one, they weren't allowed--they found extensive
problems. They weren't allowed to change the launch date. The
thing had to launch at full volume, and that no one was in
charge. The completed project was a moving target. So you were
aware of all of that when you came and testified before the
committee in April, were you not?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, I asked for the McKinsey Group to come
in 6 months ahead of launch date and give us an analysis of
their best advice. I was briefed on it and we acted on their
recommendations.
Mr. Burgess. You were the one who commissioned the McKinsey
Group report?
Ms. Sebelius. Pardon me.
Mr. Burgess. You were the one who commissioned the McKinsey
Group?
Ms. Sebelius. We asked for them to come in, yes.
Mr. Burgess. You yourself?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Burgess. Well, again, I just have to ask you, what did
you do with that information because you weren't being honest
with us 2 weeks later when we were talking about it in
committee.
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, I would disagree. We wanted the report 6
months out to make sure that we had independent eyes and ears
look at the readiness, look at the challenges, and we took
their advice very seriously. I would tell you, sir, that their
primary advice focused on the reliability of the hub. They
thought that would be where the large number of problems
occurred. We focused a lot of time and attention. We looked
at----
Mr. Burgess. And may I submit that they were actually
accurate in that assignment.
Ms. Sebelius. The hub has worked beautifully from start to
finish.
Mr. Burgess. Look, you have testified this morning that
there is--people cannot actually make their payment now when
they go on HealthCare.gov.
Ms. Sebelius. No, that is not accurate, sir. I said a lot
of people haven't yet made their payment. Their payment isn't
due.
Mr. Burgess. I was unable to make my payment on
HealthCare.gov on the Federal exchange from the State of Texas,
and I was told you can't make that payment. I have not----
Ms. Sebelius. When you are an insurance company you don't
pay the Federal Government. We are the sign-up site and you
make the payments directly to the insured.
Mr. Burgess. OK, December 23rd, you said if someone has
worked through the process, they are going to be covered. But
payment may not have been made, is that correct?
Ms. Sebelius. What I said, sir, is that you have to be
enrolled by the 23rd, and make a payment by the end of the year
in order to be fully insured. And the insurance----
Mr. Burgess. Who is going to guarantee that the doctor that
sees that patient on January 4th is actually covered for that
visit? Are you going to make----
Ms. Sebelius. Same as they do today. You are enrolling in a
private insurance plan. You have to pay your premium in order
to----
Mr. Burgess. What if that patient doesn't make the premium
payment? You said they are covered December 23rd, but they
never write the check. They never make the payment.
Ms. Sebelius. Then they are not covered.
Mr. Burgess. But they think they are covered.
Ms. Sebelius. They are not enrolled. And at every point
along the way on the Web site, they are told they until they
make the payment----
Mr. Burgess. Well, are you going to make good for those
doctors who see those patients the first couple weeks of
January who then have their cash flow interrupted? I will just
tell you, for practicing, in a small practice, you get your
cash flow interrupted for 2 or 3 weeks, that is big trouble.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, again, if an insurance company gives an
enrollment to a customer, they will make good with the
provider. We tell people over and over again, they are enrolled
when they make a payment. We turn their name over to the
insurance company.
Mr. Burgess. But you said earlier this morning----
Ms. Sebelius. And that insurance company deals with their
new customer.
Mr. Burgess [continuing]. If they are enrolled by the 23rd,
they are not going to be covered.
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, not until they pay, and that is what
every step along the way.
Mr. Burgess. Do you know how hard it is to actually make
that payment, pull the billfold out and actually make the
payment? Have you done that yourself?
Ms. Sebelius. I have not.
Mr. Burgess. Well, I am going to tell you, it is almost
impossible. I have never seen a business where you get to the
point, the fundamental business transaction, you are going to
make the payment, and you can't do it.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Barrow, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Barrow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being with us today. I am glad there has been
some progress since the last time we met, but I am still
concerned what is going to happen when the insurance that is
mandated under that goes live at the first of the year. I voted
against the health care bill, in large part, because I thought
the whole thing was just unmanageably big to begin with, and I
am worried that we have only seen the tip of the iceberg. I
hope I am wrong about that.
I want to ask you about other approaches toward the
fundamental chore of trying to get folks enrolled in plans
required under the Act. Are there other--are there other
insurance plans out there that are Internet-based? Aren't there
other folks who are selling health insurance on Internet-based
exchanges?
Ms. Sebelius. I think some of the companies haveInternet
sites, and I know that the Esurance, eHealth brokers have a
variety of plans available. I can't tell you how broad based
that is, but I know a number of companies you can either sign
up in person with an agent or broker, or sign up online.
Mr. Barrow. To what extent were efforts made to reach out
to such folks to try and learn from what they are doing, or to
try and utilize the technology that they are already utilizing
to sell health insurance on the Internet?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I think there was a lot of outreach,
and a lot of conversation about what works and what doesn't. I
would suggest that this is a unique, integrated product because
not only is an individual identified and verified, but can
qualify then for a tax credit and cost-sharing based on his or
her income, can be qualified for not only the Federal
marketplace, but Medicaid CHIP services, and in the Federal Web
site, each plan, each State offers a different number of plans,
each State has a different set of Medicaid rules, and each
State has a different level of benefits.
So it is basically an integrated system that tries to get
you to the right place so you can make a choice.
Mr. Barrow. Well, are private health insurance plans that
are operating on their own Internet-based health exchanges,
actually able to take advantage of the unique features of the
law, the fact that you get subsidies if you are income
eligible, the fact that there are specific packages that are
required----
Ms. Sebelius. Not unless they verified that information
through the hub. No one can have----
Mr. Barrow. Is that being done? Can it be----
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Barrow. It is being done?
Ms. Sebelius. It is.
Mr. Barrow. Through private insurance companies?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Barrow. Who?
Ms. Sebelius. They don't have direct access to the hub.
They come into the hub through CMS----
Mr. Barrow. I understand that. I understand the aspects.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Blue Cross Blue Shield and Web plans
are doing this direct enrollment all over the country now that
the site is functioning.
Mr. Barrow. Well, the reason I ask is, if there are other
sites, other Internet-based exchanges already functioning, it
seems to me that it would be a very helpful approach to have
all hands on deck in trying to do that.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I am sorry. To clarify, they are. The
eHealth insurance folks are now engaged and involved. The
broker is involved in that. The companies are directly involved
as well as individuals navigating on their own.
Mr. Barrow. Are you telling us that folks who would
otherwise be able to get health insurance through
HealthCare.gov can get their insurance through a private
Internet-based exchange such as eHealthinsurance.com?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, it again, has to--if they are subsidy
eligible, they need to touch the hub and get that verified so
that that subsidy goes forward with----
Mr. Barrow. Who is the ``they'' that need to do that? The
insurance companies you are dealing with or the customer?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, sitting in the office with a broker;
they can do it with the eHealth insurance folks; they can do it
on their own; they can do it with a navigator. They can do it
on the call center. So there are a whole variety of ways that
individuals can do that. If they are not subsidy eligible, if
they make more than $46,000 as an individual or about $92,000
as a family, they can just go directly enroll in a marketplace
plan with their----
Mr. Barrow. I recognize that, but again, back to the point
you began with, the role that HealthCare.gov is supposed to
provide is to try and match folks up with the subsidies as well
as the products that are out there and you are saying that can
be done through private exchanges that exist right now. It
doesn't have to be done through HealthCare.gov.
Ms. Sebelius. Again, they--the subsidy eligibility which
involves verification of income, verification of citizenship,
verification that you are who you say you are----
Mr. Barrow. Right.
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. Has to touch HealthCare.gov.
Other than that, the enrollment process can be done in any----
Mr. Barrow. That touching, that front door that is provided
by a private Internet-based exchange communicates with folks in
the back room at the government, on the government end, is that
correct?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, again, they do not have access to the
Social Security database, to the IRS database, to the Homeland
Security database, that is the piece that verifies the
individual's eligibility, and can move them forward, but that
is being done now by agents and brokers, by the eHealth folk,
by a variety of people along the way.
Mr. Barrow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman yields back his time. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Kentucky, Mr. Whitfield, for 5 minutes for questions. I would
like to ask the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Dr. Murphy, to
take the chair.
Mr. Whitfield. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam
Secretary, thank you for being with us. Mr. Waxman admonished
us to treat you with respect, and I think that certainly, we
should do that, and we want to do that. But I will tell you, my
very first concern is with the constituents that we represent.
And some people have said that we are simply trying to put
obstacles up for the successful implementation of this Act. And
I can tell you for myself and many others, we are here because
our constituents are genuinely concerned and upset about what
is going on. And a lot of it begins with the way this bill was
passed.
When it came to the floor, the most comprehensive change
for health care in America that has ever been undertaken, no
one could offer one amendment to the bill. And I would--so
there are very deep feelings about this still, and many health
care experts today say that we are going quickly to a two-
health care system. We are going to have one health care system
for wealthy Americans, and then everyone else is going to be
under the Affordable Care Act.
And that is exactly what has happened in other countries
that have gone down this path. Now, when this legislation
passed, your office was given immense powers and decisionmaking
authority, and we know that many regulations have been written.
Could you tell me how many pages of regulations have been
written to implement this Act?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, I can get you that number. I do not
know.
Mr. Whitfield. Do you have any idea?
Ms. Sebelius. I don't know how many pages.
Mr. Whitfield. Do you have a range?
Ms. Sebelius. I would like to get you accurate information.
Mr. Whitfield. I mean, is it 100 pages, or----
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, I will get you information.
Mr. Whitfield. So you don't know.
Ms. Sebelius. I just told you, I don't know.
Mr. Whitfield. OK. Now, the President went all over the
country talking about how this is going to save money, people
are going to have lower premiums. And I can tell you, those of
us on the Hill who have been going on the DC health exchange,
have discovered that our premiums are certainly much higher
than they were, and when we talked to our constituents going on
the exchanges, we are discovering that the majority of them,
their premiums are much higher. And my understanding, OMB has
said that the subsidy will cost the taxpayers over $1 trillion.
We have been told that--I am sorry?
Ms. Schakowsky. Will save.
Mr. Whitfield. Will save? Well, the subsidy will cost the
taxpayers $1 trillion. Somebody has got to pay for it. And I
would also like to ask you a question because of what is
perceived as a real inequity in this system, how some people
are being favored, other people are not being favored.
When you go to the rotary club and speak, and people ask
you, do you have to go on to the exchange? Does the President
have to go into the exchange? Do the political appointees have
to go onto the exchange? And you say no, does that--do you
think that is fair that the rest of the American people have to
go under this exchange, but you and the people in the
President's--in the executive branch of the government do not
have to go on the exchange?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, sir, I would tell you that the vast
majority of Americans with insurance also will not be on the
exchange; 177 million people have----
Mr. Whitfield. But I am asking about you.
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. Employer-based coverage. It is,
as I said to this committee, in October, illegal for me to go
on to the exchange. I misspoke slightly because the reason it
is illegal for me, which I knew, is I am an old lady. I am
Medicare eligible. It is illegal for a company to sell me a
policy because----
Mr. Whitfield. You don't have to go under Medicare, though.
Ms. Sebelius. I am not allowed to be sold a policy in the
private market, if you are over 65, and I am.
Mr. Whitfield. Thank you for your comments, but the bottom
line is the executive branch of government does not have to go
on the exchange. Everyone else does have to go on the exchange.
Now, in addition to the $1 trillion that the taxpayer is
going to pick up on the subsidy, they are going to pick up
another $710 billion because the President agreed that the
Federal Government would pay more of the State Medicaid cost.
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, that is fully paid for in the health
care law, and in fact, CBO has estimated that it reduces the
deficit----
Mr. Whitfield. It is fully paid for by the taxpayer
dollars, by general fund dollars.
Ms. Sebelius. Unlike Medicare Part D this actually, this
bill was paid for----
Mr. Whitfield. And then let me just tell you this. The
President said that everyone's premiums would be free. The
President said that people would be able to keep their plan.
The President said they would be able to keep their doctor. It
is turning out that that is simply not the case, and so there
is a lot of frustration, and we are upset about it, and my time
is expired. So thank you.
Mr. Murphy [presiding]. Thank you. The gentleman's time is
expired. Ms. Schakowsky, you are recognized next for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me clarify some things using the
Dingell yes-or-no strategy. Is it not true that the
Congressional Budget Office said that 8 out of 10 Americans who
will go to the marketplace, will qualify, should qualify for
assistance?
Ms. Sebelius. I think that is true.
Ms. Schakowsky. And yes or no, is the Affordable Care Act
paid for? I know you referred to that, but if you could explain
that.
Ms. Sebelius. It is paid for, and in fact, again, the
Congressional Budget Office estimates that it will reduce the
deficit in the first 10 years by about $120 billion and then
over the next 10 years, reduce it closer to $1 trillion. So
defunding, or delaying, or repealing the Affordable Care Act
actually adds to the deficit.
Ms. Schakowsky. And isn't it true that many of the people
that have gotten these letters about the cancellations will be
able to go to the marketplace and find something better, or at
least as good?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, again, in the individual insurance
market, which is what we are talking about, the plans change on
a very rapid basis, are constantly refreshed. So having a plan
cease to exist is not a novel idea. There are a significant
percentage of people who will be grandfathered in, have the
same plan they had in March. They don't change at all.
For others, they will have choices, many of them that they
never had before, both to get some assistance, financial
assistance if they don't have affordable coverage in their
workplace, get some financial assistance paying for health
coverage, but also be able to choose in a competitive
marketplace and not be locked out because of a preexisting
condition; not pay 50 percent more because they are a woman;
not be worried about being dropped or kicked out if they get
sick down the road.
Ms. Schakowsky. You know, we have been going by anecdote,
and so I wanted to just read you a letter that I got. I am
going to contribute to the anecdote pile from Jeanine and Jeff.
It says: ``Since so much of the Affordable Care Act debate has
focussed on anecdotes instead of the many benefits, such as not
denying coverage for preexisting conditions, and coverage for
young adults under 26, we thought we would share with you our
positive experience with the Web site. Like many American
families, our young adult children asked for help reviewing the
options and making the health insurance decisions while they
were visiting us over Thanksgiving weekend. We went to
HealthCare.gov and it worked. Not only did the Web site work,
but it was easier to navigate and faster than the Web sites of
the private-sector health insurance companies. The other good
news is that our daughter, Erica, is pregnant with a baby due
in March of 2014. Her current health insurance policy is
expiring on December 31st, and were it not for the Affordable
Care Act, it is unlikely that a woman who is 6 months pregnant
would have been able to obtain health insurance at all. The ACA
is helping her just when she needs it the most.''
I have two others that I would actually like to submit for
the record, positive stories that I am getting.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Schakowsky. We are getting more and more of those
stories, and I just want to say to you, Madam Secretary, I am
absolutely confident that the role that you played in bringing
affordable health care to millions, tens of millions of
Americans, will go down in history as one of the great
achievements of our country throughout its entire history. And
I just want to thank you for that. I understand and fully agree
that the rollout was, you know, is unpleasant, and as horrible
as it could have been, probably, but by the new year, and into
the new year, we are going to find all of these stories.
My understanding is that 39 million people went to the--
either State or Federal Web sites during November. Is that
true?
Ms. Sebelius. I think that is accurate. We know we had, at
least at the Federal Web site, 5 million visitors in the first
6 days of December.
Ms. Schakowsky. And what do you think that indicates?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, as we have seen all along there is
tremendous interest. There is now a very updated and easy-to-
use anonymous shopper that will give people information before
they go on and enroll, and what we are seeing is people coming
back several times. This is an important decision. It is
important for them and their families. And visiting the site,
they are eager for information, and they are desperate, many
people, for affordable health coverage that they have never had
before in their lives.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Murphy. The gentlewoman's time is expired. I now
recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Shimkus, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. I am going to try to be nice, and polite, and kind.
And it is difficult because we are frustrated because we really
want to get some of the truth out. Last Congress, you
testified, and to me, and to this committee, that we actually,
we double counted the $500 billion; $500 billion was counted to
preserve Medicare; $500 billion went to--was credited to pay
for Obamacare. You admitted that. So you can't tell us that
this is paid for when we double counted $500 billion. I just
want to put that on the record. And as for the amounts of
enrolled, in Illinois 1,300 have enrolled in a plan, 1,300.
Twenty times more have enrolled in Medicaid. And this Medicaid
explosion, either--that are enrolled fraudulently, or enrolled
through woodworking, or enrolled through the new expansion are
going to kill the States.
Madam Secretary, when Amazon.com records a book sold, they
record a book sold by based upon someone who has paid for it,
not what is in their shopping cart, and not what is on their
wish list. So our concern is this 364,000 number is fraudulent,
because it is not those who have purchased plans yet. And so I
would ask that when you return, that you give us actually who
has purchased plans. Do you understand our frustration with
that?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, as you well know, we did not take over
the private insurance market. People will purchase plans.
Mr. Shimkus. But you are telling us that those who--just
shop are enrolled.
Ms. Sebelius. I told you, sir, who is enrolled.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, that is why we are frustrated, because we
just don't get the truth out of you.
Ms. Sebelius. This isn't Medicare, and we don't have to
enroll in a government plan.
Mr. Shimkus. Let me go to my next question. Let me go to
the next question. I had my phone on, and when my phone rang, I
left it on because I wanted to talk to a Democrat State Senator
from my State of Illinois, who is on the insurance commission.
And he said, and I quote, ``Mandated preventive services are
laid directly on premium prices.'' Now, so it is--you cannot
say, as you had numerous times, that these preventative care
services are ``free of charge,'' can you?
Ms. Sebelius. They are free to the consumer, yes, sir.
Mr. Shimkus. There is no free lunch, Madam Secretary. If
the premium is increased because of the mandated coverage based
upon a State Senator from the State of Illinois, a Democrat,
who is in oversight of the insurance of the State of Illinois,
and he says, when you mandate coverage, it is rolled directly
on premiums. As premiums increase, that is paying for these
services. You cannot say that these are free of charge.
Ms. Sebelius. Again, consumers will not have a copay or
deductible. And I think that----
Mr. Shimkus. Will you admit they will have a higher
premium?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, no, I do not. I think what a lot of
actuaries----
Mr. Shimkus. OK, all right.
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. Will tell you is if you have
preventive care, and prevent a more costly hospital stay,
cancer episode, down the line, that actually lowers the
premium. It doesn't raise it.
Mr. Shimkus. All right, I got it. We are just going to
agree to disagree. It is like talking to the Republic of Korea
or something. Last question.
Ms. Schakowsky. Mr. Chairman, you have to let----
Mr. Pallone. Mr. Chairman, you have to let--we said in the
beginning----
Mr. Shimkus. I do not have to----
Mr. Pallone. We said we were going to let the Secretary
answer the question.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman controls the time. If the
Democrats want to yield some time----
Mr. Pallone. I know, but you have to leave her the
opportunity to answer the question.
Mr. Shimkus. I do not have to allow her----
Mr. Pallone. Yes, you do. We all agreed on that at the
beginning. You have to allow the Secretary answer the question.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman will suspend. The gentleman will
suspend. Give the Secretary time to answer questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Last question. Madam Secretary. Through the
great work of Congressman Chris Smith, we know that of 112
plans offered to congressional employees, and Members, only
nine offer--nine policies exclude abortion coverage, and I have
his flier that he handed out to us.
Madam Secretary, you promised last time you were here, that
you would provide me a National list of those who cover and
those who do not cover abortion and abortion services. We have
yet to receive that list. Now, folks are shopping now, and I
will tell you, when we went through this last time, we received
a call from my office, from someone in the country, who was
pro-abortion thanking me for that question, because they want
to know. We need that list, Madam Secretary, and if they are
shopping today, we need that list today. When will you provide
that?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, every plan lists planned benefits and
the one plan benefit that they must list by law is abortion
services. So as a shopper goes on, I would highly recommend
that they look in the plan benefit section. Check for the
coverage they are interested in.
Mr. Shimkus. OK, the last time I was here I held up
numerous policies that were not explaining that. In essence,
you promised to provide the list of those insurance plans. All
we are asking is for you to keep your promise.
Ms. Sebelius. It is the summary of benefits and plans. I
guess we could go on----
Mr. Shimkus. Will you provide us a list?
Ms. Sebelius. I will ask the----
Mr. Shimkus. You promised the last time.
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, it is on the Web site.
Mr. Shimkus. Will you promise--if it is on the Web site,
can you provide it?
Ms. Sebelius. It is available.
Voice. Regular order.
Mr. Murphy. Madam Secretary, were you going to answer the
gentleman's previous question?
Ms. Sebelius. Pardon?
Mr. Murphy. Were you able to completely answer the question
that the gentleman asked prior?
Ms. Sebelius. I assume so.
Mr. Murphy. OK, thank you. Mr. Green of Texas is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, thank
you for being here and taking time to testifying. First of all,
let me give a little history lesson. And I know my colleagues
are upset that this bill was passed at night, the Affordable
Care Act in 2010. I was here in 2003, and the prescription drug
plan did also not allow amendments on the floor of the House,
and I remember walking out of the front of the Capitol and
seeing the sun rise from the east that morning on a
prescription drug plan. So we were there all night. So you can
dislike the law, but you can't say because it was passed at
night or that there were no amendments on the floor, you did
the same thing as the majority and that is not uncommon for
comprehensive bills that we have on the floor.
Mr. Burgess. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Green. No, I won't yield. I only have 5 minutes. The
other issue is, the reason that the administration is not
covered on the exchanges, any employer, or employee who has
employer-based insurance, doesn't need to go to the exchanges.
Now, Members of Congress are the exception of our own doing. It
was part of the bill that came from the Senate. And believe me,
I disagree with a lot of the things that the Senate put in that
bill, and I know my ranking member and I both have some issues
with the way the law is now and we would like to change it.
But the House bill, we had hours and hours of amendments in
this committee. I had 30 amendments on my own, and a number of
them were bipartisan that were adopted by voice vote. So our
committee had plenty of time to debate this bill. We did that
to prescription drug plan, too, because I was here in 2003. We
had a lot of committee amendments, but not out on the floor,
and we didn't have one on the floor either. But let me get to
my questions.
First of all, since the launch of the exchange on October
1st and problems with HealthCare.gov Web site are glaring and
unacceptable, and I know you took responsibility for it along
with the President. I am pleased that we have seen a great deal
of progress made since then, and I hope that we continue to see
success in the area, and that the Affordable Care Act can
deliver on its promise to make coverage available and
affordable to Americans who are stuck with unfair and unstable
individual market health care, the insurance market. But that
market is still available even though in a lot of cases that is
why the Affordable Care Act was needed. It was broken. What
fixes are still need to be made to make the experience of
purchasing health care on HealthCare.gov easier for consumers?
Is this an onward process that you are learning every day,
I hope? Because in business, we learned every day that fix--
serve our customers.
Ms. Sebelius. We are definitely learning every day,
Congressman, and I would say since I was here last, the greatly
improved anonymous shopper feature is on. We just added today,
the automated Medicaid transfers recognizing that some States
are not able to accept them in an automated fashion, so we will
do both. We have added Cuidado de Salud which is the Spanish
version of the Web site experience that rolled out last week.
We are in the process, as I said, of building the financial
management, but each and every day we learn something from
consumer experience. It is a process where each week we are
adding fixes, identifying problems, and will continue to do
that. This is a first-of-a-kind product, and we are going to
continue to make the experience more smooth for consumers.
Mr. Green. Well, and it is important for the Web site to
work. Because in the middle of November we had an event in
Houston where we had 800 people show up on a Saturday morning,
and we used paper applications. That is my next question. The
400 or so people who filled out those paper applications in
that 4 hours on a Saturday morning, how are they being dealt
with through the exchanges?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, sir, we have a number of people who
used paper applications early on or PDF applications, and we
are recontacting each and every one of those people, offering
them either somebody to help them walk through the Web
experience, or inviting them to do it themselves so that is
very much underway on a casework basis. We want to make sure
that anybody who filled out a paper app is actually welcomed in
the system and gets through the process by the 23rd if they
want coverage January 1st.
Mr. Green. Well, I think it is interesting though, because
my colleagues objected to the marketplace. But you know, the
marketplace was actually a compromise in the Senate. You know,
the House bill that passed did not--we had an exchange, but it
was separate because we also a public option on that exchange.
So it is only market-based. And when I went on to buy our
insurance, and I agree with my colleagues, my insurance has
gone up. Like you, I am over 65. And you rate wife and I, we
are going to pay higher premiums. We did have trouble even
through the one for the Members of Congress. But most of the
people in our country are not going to deal with the exchange
because if their employer continues to provide their coverage,
they don't have to worry about this. And I can also say that I
have had dozens and dozens of seniors because of all of the
misinformation out there, who are confused, who have Medicare.
And say, I am concerned about my Medicare. Well, Medicare has
only been benefited by the Affordable Care Act. And again,
thank you for your time.
Mr. Murphy. The gentleman's time is expired. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes. First of all, Madam Secretary,
thank you for being here, and I also want to thank you for
getting the mental health parity regulations done. Those are
very important and you put a lot of work into it. Thank you.
And there is more work we all have to do on mental health
issues, and I would welcome an opportunity to meet with a
number of us to talk about some of the things we need to do to
help mental health in America. And I appreciate your dedication
to this. I also want to thank you for this analysis. It is
helpful for us to really see some breakdowns of what is taking
place with regard to the States and the marketplace. I want to
ask some clarifying questions to see if you know or if you can
find out on this.
Of those who have signed up, you have a list of those who
signed up for Medicaid and CHIP marketplace. Do we know how
many were previously eligible for Medicaid? Not those that were
added on who were previously eligible. Do we know that number?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, I don't know those numbers and we are
trying to get those numbers at the State level. Again, we know
that a lot of people even in non-expansion States have come
forward and now are presenting themselves as Medicaid eligible.
But how--what is the old rules and what are the new rules, we
are getting that number from the States.
Mr. Murphy. Will you be able to find out that amount? So we
had the previous level and now it is up to 133 percent of
income or whatever it is in various States. It would be nice to
know how many were previously eligible and just never signed
up.
Ms. Sebelius. Right.
Mr. Murphy. And how many are newly eligible and signed up.
Thank you, if you can get us that information.
Ms. Sebelius. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. Also, in terms of the analysis of the data
which is very important, of those who have----
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, and I am sorry, can I interrupt one
second?
Mr. Murphy. Yes.
Ms. Sebelius. There is actually a third category. We know
that there are people who are currently enrolled in Medicaid
who are sort of reenrolling.
Mr. Murphy. Yes. Yes.
Ms. Sebelius. So they are not new to either category, but
they actually are renewing.
Mr. Murphy. Precisely, yes. We would like to know that.
Ms. Sebelius. And they are part of that, to look at that
three-way breakdown.
Mr. Murphy. The renews previously eligible but didn't sign
up and newly eligible. Thank you.
Ms. Sebelius. Yes.
Mr. Murphy. Also, of those who have gone to the
marketplace, the Federal and State marketplace but are not
Medicaid, how many were previously uninsured but are now
covered? Let me roll these out. How many were insured but had a
plan canceled so they are covered? Do we have that kind of
information? Is that things that we are able to get?
Ms. Sebelius. We may be able to get some of that from the
insurance companies. We would not collect that specific
information, sir.
Mr. Murphy. And people are talking about whether or not the
policy cost them less or more. Obviously, it is critically
important to have the facts on this. Is there a way that your
office, or is there anything built in where we can actually
find out how many people are paying more, how many people are
paying less?
Ms. Sebelius. Again, we will rely on companies because we
are talking about formerly insured to----
Mr. Murphy. They may switch a plan.
Ms. Sebelius. They may switch a plan. They may have paid
something, but that is really going to be company data, not
data that we would have. No one newly insured would have that
comparison so it is---
Mr. Murphy. We have heard different opinions and it would
be great if we had facts on this so that would be helpful. And
of the demographics, when I talked to some people who were
insurance brokers or agents, they are describing that many of
those who are signing up are people who may have had some
health problems, have seen some high costs already, and they
are going to the marketplace to find some of the cost. And
there is also groups who may be healthy, and they are seeing
some price changes there, too. Obviously, if the health care--
if the Affordable Care Act was designed to help those sign up
who are not able to afford health insurance before, or who are
having difficulty because they had some illness, will we have
breakdowns based upon those factors?
Ms. Sebelius. Again, we will be able to tell you hopefully
in the not too distant future, demographic breakdowns. Because
we don't collect personal health information from anyone
because there is no longer a preexisting condition, nobody is
medically underwritten anymore which everybody was in the
individual market. We won't be able to tell you who of the
population is sick, or not sick.
Mr. Murphy. The next item is the question on the
questionnaire, the Federal questionnaire which asks people if
they have a condition of a disability or mental health problem,
or emotional problem. I guess we could look at that data if
people would check that box it would tell us something.
Ms. Sebelius. For Medicaid eligibility, sir, there is a, I
think a question on pregnancy, and a question on disability.
Mr. Murphy. Yes, yes.
Ms. Sebelius. And those are the only two questions because
that may qualify someone of a different income category for
Medicaid. So those are the only two, I think, health
information that is collected, but we don't have personal
health information collected.
Mr. Murphy. OK, we will need to get those facts. You had
mentioned you asked McKinsey about the readiness of the
exchange for the October 1 launch. Did the White House
encourage you to ask this, or was that a decision you made on
your own?
Ms. Sebelius. We made the decision going forward.
Mr. Murphy. And why was that?
Ms. Sebelius. I think it is prudent to invite people who
have not been directly involved with building a product to take
a look at their--get their assessment on how things are going,
what the problems are, and do it enough in advance that
hopefully you can take their advice.
Mr. Murphy. I would love to know from you and follow up
with you, what changed because of that report. Let me ask this:
The President said that if people have suggestions to improve
what is going on, he would like to know. I am wondering, you
have been immersed in this for quite a while. Are there some
recommendations you have for Congress of what we need to do to
take care of some of the problems we are facing?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I certainly think that we will know a
lot as we complete this first year of open enrollment. I would
love the opportunity to come in and discuss those with this
committee and others. We are--this is, as you know, the final
phase of the 3.5-year implementation that has been underway,
and I would say that we know a lot about young adults that we
didn't know then. We know a lot about some of the preventive
care issues. As you say, mental health is going to be a part of
this. So I think we will have a list to actually share with
you, and we would love to work in a bipartisan fashion to
actually fix the bill.
There is no question that a brand-new bill, you know, will
take some amendments and hopefully move forward, but I would
welcome that opportunity.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. My time is expired. I now recognize
the gentlelady from Florida, Mrs. Castor for 5 minutes.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Secretary
Sebelius, I am very pleased to see all of the progress that is
being made with HealthCare.gov. Reports from consumers, and
recent enrollment numbers suggest that individuals using the
Web site to obtain quality affordable health insurance are
having a much smoother and more successful experience. Thank
goodness.
Reading over the statistics from the new report, I was very
surprised that the State of Florida is leading enrollment out
of all of the States on the Federally-run exchanges because we
have had so many political roadblocks. There has been so much
misinformation. This is good news for Floridians and it makes
me wonder what if the Web site had been working great right off
the bat? These would probably be doubled. So I know families
and individuals have more time. We really want to push over the
next few weeks, but you said they have 3.5 months?
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct, Congresswoman, and as you
know, because you have been a key part of this, I think the
assistance of not only key Members of the congressional
delegations throughout Florida, but mayors, civic leaders,
health care providers, navigators, assisters are stepping up
and really getting information to people who desperately need
it. Florida has one of the highest numbers of uninsured
Americans in the country, and clearly, people are eager for
information and welcome the opportunity to make some choices
for themselves and their families that they have never had
before.
Ms. Castor. In fact, I had one report yesterday that a
local enrollment fair at a church, they signed up 50
individuals on Sunday. And then I have this email from the
Tampa Family Health Centers, the two stories. Juana Rodriguez,
a 63-year-old woman who has been without health insurance for 3
years stated: What a blessing to finally have insurance. She
said this with a smile and replied how she was finally able to
afford her medications for a preexisting condition. Her tax
credit is $530, and she purchased insurance for just $35 a
month. And then Robert Welch, a 29-year old single young man
who had no insurance for the past few years. He works for a
small business, and his employer was not able to afford private
insurance. He was able to get a tax credit for $2,200. And his
premium is $28. He was extremely pleased, and agreed to share
his story, but he said he was too shy to speak in public. So
Robert. We are sharing your story today, and I am grateful that
now we can replicate his good-news story. But we have a long
way to go.
Now, on his small business question, it--we are all a
little bit disappointed that the shop, the small business Web
site is not going to be up and running as early as we would
have liked, but does that affect the tax credits that are
available for small business owners, those tax credits that
encourage small businesses to provide health insurance, or to
help make it more affordable for their employees?
Ms. Sebelius. No, Congresswoman, it will not impact that.
As you know, we had earlier suggested that at the Federal
level, and this is different in some of the States, but at the
Federal level, year one we would not be able to aggregate
premiums and give employees of businesses under 50 a choice.
That will happen in 2014. The tax credits are very much in
place. We have, again, a process where we are working with
agents and brokers which is a way that small business owners
have gotten coverage traditionally.
Ms. Castor. And their accountants, because some are not
very sophisticated. There are three or four employees,
especially in a tourism field State. You know, a lot of
restaurant owners.
Ms. Sebelius. But the tax credit this year will go to a 50
percent tax credit for eligible employers. It is a tax credit
that did not exist before the Affordable Care Act. It has been
at 35 percent. It rises to 50 percent, and we will absolutely
be enrolling. We have thousands of applications for shops. We
are working to get folks enrolled and shop is different than
the individual market where business owners have a 12-month
enrollment period because of the timing of plans, so shop
owners, or small business owners will be able to enroll each
and every month as their employee insurance comes up for
renewal.
Ms. Castor. OK, and then they file for the tax credit when
they file for their----
Ms. Sebelius. That is correct. In 2015, they would be
eligible for that.
Ms. Castor. So planning now, if you are a small business
owner looking into that, because I don't think that many small
businesses understand that a very robust tax credit that is
growing from 35 percent to 50 percent, might make a huge
difference.
Ms. Sebelius. And the Small Business Administration has
been a terrific partner in that effort. They are using their
channels to do a lot of outreach and education.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Mr. Pitts [presiding]. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Lance, 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Lance. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good morning
to you, Madam Secretary.
Ms. Sebelius. Good morning.
Mr. Lance. My questioning will be in two parts. First,
regarding the rule of law, and second, regarding the Medicaid
expansion. Regarding the rule of law, I will be going into an
exchange, if that is how I read the statute, even though I
didn't vote for it, and hope that it is replaced, and those who
work with me in our office will be going into the exchange. And
I would urge other Members, for example, Senator Reid, that as
I read the statute, that is the rule of law.
In answer to Ranking Member Waxman, you indicated, and I
certainly agree with this, that the President decided on the
transition policy even though the statute, as I read it, has
requirements that begin on January 1st, 2014.
From your perspective, Madam Secretary, what is the
statutory authority for the President to have announced the
transition policy?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, I think the statutory authority is the
enforcement discretion which is available under the law to us,
and the President has asked us to use our enforcement
discretion to not pursue penalties against insurers who would
voluntarily decide to allow a transition of individuals in a
market plan to continue in that market plan. This defers to
State regulators. They get the first call because they regulate
the marketplace, and then insurers, there is no mandate to
insurers. It is voluntary, but it allows them to take up that
option.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. So from your perspective, the ability
of the President to do that is based upon enforcement
discretion. I respectfully disagree with that. Thank you for
answering the question.
Number two, and Mr. Barton did raise this, as I read the
statute, there are subsidies for State exchanges, but not
subsidies for the Federal exchange, and I presume that that was
placed into the statute to encourage States to have their own
exchanges; a carrot-and-stick approach. From your perspective,
Madam Secretary, what is the statutory authority for permitting
subsidies for the Federal exchange?
Ms. Sebelius. Again, sir, I am not a lawyer, and I would
defer to the Department of Justice for the statutory authority.
I think the framework is that I am mandated by statute to pay
the subsidies, and that I think the interpretation is both by
the OMB, which is sort of the appropriation leader on this, and
the Department of Justice that the authority is consented to
even though it is not explicitly spelled out. But again, I am
not the lawyer. I would defer to them.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. Let me state, it is my legal position
that the courts will rule against the administration in this
regard, and obviously, this is now before the courts. In the
3.5 years since the ACA's passage, has the President ever
proposed a legislative change to any aspect of the law?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, I am trying to refresh my memory. I
cannot answer that question, but I will----
Mr. Lance. Certainly.
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. Come back with an answer.
Mr. Lance. It is my understanding that the President has
never asked for any statutory change whatever, and he has
made----
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I can tell you one that I do recall
that I think has been in his proposals. We do have a provision
involving State waivers of Medicaid expansion and then into the
marketplace that is timed to start at 2017. He has suggested,
and I think it is part of our budget proposal, that there
actually--that date be accelerated so that States would have
full authority. There are other provisions I think in our
budget plan, not necessarily pieces of legislation, but coming
through that way that we could get you enumerated.
Mr. Lance. Thank you. And then finally regarding the
Medicaid matter, I have great concerns that many who have
signed regarding Medicaid expansion were eligible before, and I
know you are not able to provide those figures today, but I
would like, at an opportunity that is convenient for you, Madam
Secretary, to have those figures because it is my belief that
quite a few are--were already Medicaid eligible, and are not
based upon the new law.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes, 5
minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you Madam
Secretary, for being here. You have been very stoic in the face
of a lot of adversity over the last few weeks. You have
accepted responsibility for which you, yourself, characterize
as a failure in the launch of the Web site, but have obviously
been aggressive in trying to improve the situation. The
evidence that you presented today suggests that things are on
the mend, and a lot more Americans are being able to access the
government Web site which is the portal to affordable health
care for them.
I think if you step back, the bigger story here is just
there were previously millions of Americans who were
essentially trapped in a world where they could not access
health care. There was literally no options available to them.
If they had a preexisting condition, even the substandard plans
that were offered in individual market often did not provide
any option for them.
So they didn't even have the opportunity to complain or
face the challenges that now some of them are facing. But the
fact that they are trying to access an option of affordable
care, and yes, encountering some difficulties in having to push
through those, et cetera, even that is progress, because before
they didn't even have that chance. But I think it is important
for us to keep that in perspective, and that is why, I think
you said earlier, I heard someone say that, or maybe it was
Chairman Waxman, that one of the common emotional responses for
people when they actually can enroll is they break down in
tears, because of their years of pent-up frustration, and not
being able to access affordable care.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, Congressman, we know that again, in the
individual market, which is the market that the new
marketplaces are addressing, a large number--national studies
show that it could be as many as 25 percent of people who tried
to buy a plan were turned down totally. So no plan, at no
price.
Mr. Sarbanes. OK, right.
Ms. Sebelius. And then you have people who were
individually medically underwritten, virtually everyone in the
marketplace. And that is very beneficial if you are healthy and
don't have any likelihood of a preexisting condition, and
typically, if you are male. It is not very beneficial if you
are not. And if you get sick along the way, or if you are
diagnosed, you could be, again, medically underwritten going
forward to eliminate the condition that you need the care for.
Mr. Sarbanes. Right.
Ms. Sebelius. So the choices were somewhat limited to a lot
of people.
Mr. Sarbanes. The promise of this is to create a new normal
for the American people where the option of getting health care
is real, and that wasn't the way it was before for tens of
millions of Americans.
Ms. Sebelius. Depending on where they worked. If you worked
for a company, and the vast majority of large employers
offered----
Mr. Sarbanes. Then you had the access.
Ms. Sebelius. And you weren't medically underwritten and
you weren't penalized based on age, you were in as long as your
employment. But if you worked for yourself, if you were an
entrepreneur, if you were a service worker and didn't have
affordable coverage your options were greatly----
Mr. Sarbanes. But even that system is going to be more
rational going forward because as you eliminate discrimination
based on preexisting conditions, you address the problems of
portability that we saw before when somebody leaves one
employer and goes to the next, those are all fixes that are
going to improve the employer-based system as well.
In terms of the challenges, obviously the launch of the Web
site was much more difficult than was expected, but there were
always going to be challenges. There are going to be new
challenges, there are things, you know, you look around the
corner, there are going to be difficulties and challenges
associated with some of the payment issues that are going to
happen down the line. These were always going to be there.
There were always going to be difficulties. This is a major,
major structural change to the health care system which is
going to improve it eventually, but we have to anticipate that
there are going to be difficulties and we have got to soldier
through those. That is the American ethic, right, is you take
challenges and you overcome them.
And then the last time comment I just wanted to make is I
think one of the issues is that a lot of the people who are
coming and finding new plans and maybe they have to pay a
little bit more or maybe the deductible is higher in some
instances, for example, but what they don't compare it against
is the exposure they had under the old plans that maybe they
never had the occasion to experience and so that is the apples-
to-apples comparison we have.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. We have 15
minutes left. We have seven members still to ask questions. We
will go to 2 minutes per member. The Chair recognizes Dr.
Cassidy from Louisiana for 2 minutes for questions.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you Madam Secretary. In your answer to
Mr. Shimkus, did you really mean to say that the Affordable
Care Act has not resulted in increased premiums for the
nonsubsidized?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, what I said is preventive care----
Mr. Cassidy. No. No. Are premiums higher----
Ms. Sebelius [continuing]. Doesn't add to the cost of
premiums overall in terms of the long-term health care costs.
That is what our description was.
Mr. Cassidy. So you are ascribing it to the preventive
health care aspect.
Ms. Sebelius. That is what he asked me, that is what I
answered.
Mr. Cassidy. Now, Jonathan Gruber, one of the architects of
this bill, has said that this bill is basically income
redistribution. Now obviously though the taxes that are a
trillion over 10 years but there is also the increased premiums
people are paying for their policies if they are not
subsidized.
Do you have an estimate of how much increase, what is the
amount of increased taxes people--excuse me, increased premiums
people are paying to subsidize others on the exchange?
Ms. Sebelius. No, sir, I don't, and I think you can only
talk about increased premiums, and I think Dr. Gruber would be
one to suggest that if you compare like benefits to like
benefits----
Mr. Cassidy. Let me go on. Danny from Baton Rouge is losing
his coverage. He says that this is my apocalypse now. The
company I have, my family coverage went up 371 percent. Monthly
premiums for a family of four from $245 a month to 913 with a
$4,000 deductible. Wow, I think Danny would like to choose his
benefits as opposed to that.
Many small businesses, according to your office, are going
to lose their benefits; as many as 66 percent of employers,
according to your analysis, will lose their grandfathered
status.
Do you think administration would support my employee
Health Care Protection Act which would allow workers to keep
their group health care plan they have now in 2014 and beyond?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, as you know, the snapshot is not our
office estimating anything. It was a description of the
turnover that existed prior to 2010 in the individual and small
group market, those statistics that you cited. And I think in,
again, the small group market, there are lots of plans that are
grandfathered, there are other plans that are offering
transition in early renewals, and we are watching that every
day.
Mr. Cassidy. Can I get an answer to my question? Will the
administration approve the same law that is given for the
individual that if a small business wishes to keep their
policy, they would be allowed to do so?
Ms. Sebelius. The President's suggestion about a
transitional policy applies to both the individual and the
small group.
Mr. Cassidy. Beyond 2014?
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Engel from New York 2 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to say that
New York is a good example of what is possible when the Federal
Government has a willing and enthusiastic partner in ACA
implementation. And we have set up our own exchange, we have
hospitals participating in the various delivery system reform.
Our Medicaid program is expanding. States that have fought to
make the law work for their citizens like New York are finding
success.
Secretary Sebelius, I would like to know what your
experience has been in States that have obstructed efforts,
mainly Republican Governors, to implement the ACA compared to
States that have adopted all of its measures? Are Americans
experiencing an easier time obtaining affordable health care
coverage in States that have their own exchange, and has the
refusal of some States to expand Medicaid affected the rollout?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I think that, Congressman, what we are
seeing every day is Governors actually considering the Medicaid
expansion. Some, as you say, in New York, California, others
adopted very early on. We were pleased yesterday that the
Governor of Iowa indicated an interest in moving ahead on
Medicaid expansion. That was not certain. The Governor of
Pennsylvania recently also indicated his interest in doing the
same. So we are working actively with States around the
country.
I think it is enormously difficult for consumers in States
where there is no Medicaid expansion, they hear about the
opportunity for affordable health coverage only to find out
that they earn too less to qualify for a tax credit in the
marketplace and really they have no viable option at all, and
that I'm told by our navigators on the ground, our assisters,
the people in community health centers is one of the worst
conversations that they can have in this period.
Mr. Engel. Well, we speak with the Governor of Kentucky the
other day. And he explained to us Kentucky generally a
Republican State, where it is working really, really well,
where you have a Governor who is a partner who wants to see it
work, it can work, and it should work. And I hope that more
Governors would continue to do what is in the best interest of
their constituents rather than playing political games. Thank
you.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentleman. I now recognize
the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. You just mentioned Kentucky. Eighty
percent of the people signing up on our exchanges are on
Medicaid. And it has been a concern of mine, I was in State
government before. And Medicaid as a national program has 72
million people, and we are expecting an increase of 25 million
over the next 10 years. And I do believe Medicaid is important
for low income children, disabled, seniors that it was designed
for, but do you believe Medicaid should be a program of last
resort or has it become just its own insurance program as it is
now?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, first of all, I think the enrollment
numbers are about 51 million, not 72. But also Medicaid has
played I think a critical role for lower income Americans not
only offering a wide range of health benefits but at a lower
cost per capita than private insurance and that Medicare.
Mr. Guthrie. I actually don't want to be rude, but he has
cut us down to a couple minutes so the question I want to get
at though is your department has estimated that about 5 million
Americans who have previously purchased insurance through their
employer will move to Medicaid, and that is from the Office of
OACT, the Office of Actuary, it is the number we got. And are
you familiar with that, that we are looking at, over the next 4
years estimates of 5 million Americans who have employer-based
insurance will move to Medicaid?
Ms. Sebelius. I am not aware of that. The Office of Actuary
really is an independent office, but I can check into that.
Mr. Guthrie. It is a part of CMS.
Ms. Sebelius. I'm not familiar with that specific number.
Mr. Guthrie. That is just a concern because the estimate is
it would be $20 billion in this group of people who previously
purchased health insurance through their employer who will be
moving into Medicaid because of the Affordable Care Act.
The question that Chairman Upton had about income, there is
a question with Chairman Upton about income verification and
residency verification. I know that is up to the States to do,
but the States who don't expand Medicaid, the information right
now, is it just trust the Federal Government's numbers, right?
Right now that is what they are being asked to do right now?
Ms. Sebelius. Again, sir, we don't enroll anyone in
Medicaid. What we do is look at income eligibility, and based
on the State law, send that individual's name and the
information that has been collected to the State. The State
actually is the connection between the individual and Medicaid.
Not the Federal Government.
Mr. Guthrie. But because of timing by the January 1st, they
are going to have to just accept it.
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, and that is going on right now. The
process. But we don't enroll in Medicaid we just----
Mr. Guthrie. But they have to take your data.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. The Chair recognizes Mr. Griffith 2 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Sebelius
let me just let you know that I agree with Representative
Leonard Lance's legal reasoning on the matters that he brought
up earlier in his testimony. I do find it interesting that when
we're listening to my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
when they talk about scare tactics, this is similar to what
they said back in the summer and in September, when we were
holding hearings because we were hearing that the plan wouldn't
be ready on October 1, and so I am just concerned that we are
going to have some of that same kind of thing now that we are
being attacked for asking questions. We are just trying to get
the information. And it is not that we are interested in scare
tactics or witch hunts, it is a matter of we are trying to get
to the bottom of a lot of these problems that we are concerned
about out there.
And obviously one of the tactics they said, well, this is
all just political but you certainly have accepted
responsibility and you don't believe that we caused the
problems with the Web site, therefore making the public
distrust it, isn't that correct?
Ms. Sebelius. I do not believe you caused the problems with
the Web site, sir.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you. Some of my colleagues implied
maybe not that you, but somehow we are responsible for all of
that distrust out there and I don't think that is accurate.
Also I don't believe that the Federal Employee Health
Benefit plan is a skimpy plan. Some of the folks said that the
reason that costs were going up is that people had skimpy
plans. Well, I was previously on the Federal Employee Health
Benefit plan, and my family is facing 117 percent increase out
of our pocket, that is out of our pocket increase, to go on to
the exchange here in DC, and so you don't think the plan you
have is skimpy do you?
Ms. Sebelius. No, sir, I don't but as you know----
Mr. Griffith. And you prefer to stay on that plan, don't
you?
Ms. Sebelius. The new marketplace plan have some age rating
that the Federal Employee Health Benefit program did not so you
are going to see younger employees paying a lot less and older
employees paying more.
Mr. Griffith. That is one of the reasons--I'm running out
of time. Let me say this, too, in regard to Medicaid. One of
the problems that you are having is you are sending people to
the States based on income alone. And in Virginia, most States
they have an asset amount. In Virginia, it is only $2,000. So
they may have sufficient income to--they may not have enough
income but they qualify for Medicaid under income, but they
don't qualify for Medicaid because they own a house. And I
asked some experts on this previously and they said they have
to choose whether they want their asset or whether they want
the Medicaid.
Ms. Sebelius. Again, the State law and the State Medicaid
enrollment officials will make the determination of whether
that individual will be enrolled. When they present at the
marketplace, based on 133 percent or less and in Virginia right
now it would be based on a lot less because Virginia has not
raised their Medicaid eligibility.
Mr. Pitts. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Ms. Sebelius. We would make a determination and refer that
name, and they make that----
Mr. Pitts. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Georgia,
Dr. Gingrey, 2 minutes.
Mr. Gingrey. Madam Secretary, I want to begin the question
about the Medicaid program. My Governor, Nathan Deal of Georgia
particularly wants an answer to this question and I am sure all
the other 49 Governors would too. The American Affordable Care
Act force States, they force States to retain the eligibility
requirements of Medicaid through the maintenance of effort
provision going back to 2009.
With the expiration of these provisions, States will
finally have the flexibility to tailor their Medicaid program
to best address the health care needs of their Medicaid
populations.
Now, this is the question. Will the Medicaid MOE,
maintenance about to expire, for all States beginning on
January 1, 2014?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gingrey. Thank you. Madam Secretary, I want to ask you
real quickly. In regard to eHealth plans, this company,
California-based company, I think, 10 years old, we talked
about it earlier in the discussion, I think they spent about
$100 million developing their program allowing people to go
onto their Web site and find plans, and yet we spent seven
times that much reinventing the wheel.
Can you tell me why we didn't just use that technology or
maybe some other Silicon Valley company to have a public-
private partnership rather than starting over from scratch? And
who made that decision?
Ms. Sebelius. Well, sir, I would tell you that while there
are some comparisons with the eHealth situation, there are a
number of features very different in the Federal Web site that
were required eHealth doesn't determine citizenship
eligibility, it doesn't identify the Social Security number. It
doesn't----
Mr. Gingrey. But did you make that decision or was that
made by someone else?
Ms. Sebelius. What decision, sir?
Mr. Gingrey. The decision to start over from scratch.
Ms. Sebelius. Well, I don't think they did start over from
scratch. They actually, I think, along the way, adopted a
number of the known technologies that were in place----
Mr. Gingrey. Let me ask you finally, I don't want to run
out of time, how many times did you actually visit with the
President since 2009 or 2010 when you came on board? How many
personal visits did you have with him at the White House
regarding the Affordable Care Act?
Ms. Sebelius. A lot.
Mr. Gingrey. Can you verify that?
Ms. Sebelius. Yes.
Mr. Pitts. The gentleman's time is expired. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Bilirakis, 2 minutes
for questioning.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it.
Thanks for holding this hearing.
Madam Secretary, in a proposed rule in November, CMS
announced that they were considering increasing payments to
insurance companies with sicker than average customers through
the risk corridor program under section 1342 of the ACA. This
program is supposed to be financed by insurance companies
participating in the Exchange, but the proposal appears to put
taxpayers on the hook. Specifically the rule states that, and I
quote, ``This proposed adjustment may increase the total amount
of risk corridors payments that the Federal Government will
make ,,, [and] reduce the amount of risk corridors receipts
...''
Did you, Madam Secretary, estimate how much more money
taxpayers would have to pay to insurance companies under this
proposed rule?
Ms. Sebelius. Sir, the risk corridor has always been a part
of the Affordable Care Act and was anticipated for the first
couple of years to be used for reinsurance and risk corridors
for the new marketplaces. So we did put out a proposed rule. We
talked about the fact that we would look carefully at what the
enrollment is at the end of 2014 in order to determine going
forward.
Mr. Bilirakis. Madam Secretary, did you estimate how much
money----
Ms. Sebelius. We won't know anything about what that risk
corridor looks like until we get more enrollment numbers.
Mr. Bilirakis. OK. The rule says, and I quote, ``We cannot
estimate the magnitude of this impact on aggregate risk
corridors payments and charges at this time.'' I would like to
get to the next question.
Do you think it is responsible to put taxpayers on the hook
for insurance companies' losses in the Exchange? Do you think
it is responsible to make these payments without even
estimating the cost?
Ms. Sebelius. Again, sir, it will be based on what the risk
pool looks like. We always knew that in the first couple of
years, the market would be attracting some customers and not
attracting others and that there would be some risk in what we
are hopeful for as the Affordable Care Act continues into
maturity is that we have mature pools. We knew the first years
would need this kind of risk adjustment.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady and now
recognizes Mrs. Ellmers, 2 minutes for questions.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being with us.
I have some specific questions to ask about some of the--
essentially the promises that the President made to the
American people as he was rolling out the idea of the
Affordable Care Act. One of those promises being, if you like
your doctor, you can keep your doctor, period.
Can you commit to the American people today that this is
true and that they will be able to keep their doctor?
Ms. Sebelius. Congresswoman, I think that, as you well
know, in the private market, networks change on a constant
basis. The President is not overtaking the private health
insurance market. There is----
Mrs. Ellmers. You are absolutely right, but the promise
that was made to the American people so that this piece of
legislation, which is now law, was passed was that they would
be able to keep their doctor, yes or no?
Ms. Sebelius. Again, most consumers will have the
opportunity to pick and choose a network that continues their
doctor. There is nothing in the law that has their doctor lost
to them.
Mrs. Ellmers. There is nothing in the law. But there are
networks that are now very narrowed as a result of the law, is
that not true?
Ms. Sebelius. Insurance companies make network decisions
day in and day out. Any insurance company----
Mrs. Ellmers. That is not the promise that the President
made. Did the President not make that promise to the American
people?
Ms. Sebelius. This is the private insurance market that
changes networks on basically a daily basis.
Mrs. Ellmers. Then why in the world, Madam Secretary, did
the President make that promise to the American people?
Ms. Sebelius. I think the President was trying to assure
people that the law did not require them to lose their doctor.
They have a network to choose from----
Mrs. Ellmers. No, I don't believe that he was reassuring
the American people that they would not lose their doctor. I
think he was reassuring the American people that if this law
passed, that they would be able to keep their doctor. So
therefore today you are basically saying no, that this is not
the case.
Ms. Sebelius. I am saying that there is, again, this is the
private insurance market where insurance companies develop
networks and change them on a regular basis----
Mrs. Ellmers. And the American people would be able to keep
their doctor if they pay more, according to Ezekiel Emanuel.
Ms. Sebelius. They can choose a network where their doctor
is available----
Mrs. Ellmers. And pay more?
Ms. Sebelius. They can choose a plan where their doctor is
not available based on the kind of premium, the kind of
deductible, the kind of situation they have. They have a
choice.
Mrs. Ellmers. I see my time has expired so thank you, Madam
Secretary.
Mr. Pitts. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
That concludes our questioning at the present. Madam
Secretary, we will have some follow-up questions we will send
to you. We ask that you please respond promptly.
We have a couple of unanimous consent requests.
I would like unanimous consent to submit to the record a
letter from Dr. Julie Welch, an emergency medicine physician
and educator from Indianapolis. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Dr. Burgess.
Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Gingrey
referenced an offer from eHealth to the President to provide a
platform for the market exchange, and I would like to submit
his letter for the record, and I will make this part of a
question for the record that I will do in follow up.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pitts. Ranking member has a unanimous consent request.
Mr. Pallone. One is from my constituent in Piscataway,
Anthony Wiehl, that I referenced. Another is the one that Ms.
Schakowsky referenced. These are the different individuals
impacted by the ACA.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection.
Mr. Pallone. And then there is a third one from Ms.
Schakowsky.
Mr. Pitts. Without objection, so ordered.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, for your patience for
responding to all of our questions. I remind members they have
10 business days to submit questions for the record, and that
means they should submit their questions by the close of
business on Tuesday, December 31st. Another important hearing.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, for your indulgence. Without
objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:19 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]

