- ADDRESSING THE SCOURGE OF ANTI-SEMITISM IN EUROPE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADDRESSING THE SCOURGE OF ANTI-SEMITISM
IN EUROPE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

December 12, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-118

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: www.foreignaffairs.house.gov, docs.house.gov,
or www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

59-622pdf                 WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. MCCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER SMITH, New Jersey        GREGORY MEEKS, New York Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania      BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISAA, California      GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida      AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK GREEN, Tennessee      TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas      DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA SALAZAR, Florida      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      SARA JACOBS, California
AMATA RADEWAGEN, American Samoa      KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas      SHELIA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio          Florida
JIM BAIRD, Indiana      GREG STANTON, Arizona
MIKE WALTZ, Florida      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
THOMAS KEAN, New Jersey      JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
CORY MILLS, Florida      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
RICH MCCORMICK, Georgia      JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      JASON CROW, Colorado
JOHN JAMES, Michigan      GABRIEL AMO, Rhode Island
KEITH SELF, Texas      BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director

Sophia A. Lafargue, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE

THOMAS KEAN, New Jersey, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts,
DARRELL ISSA, California                 Ranking Member
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
KEITH SELF, Texas                    GABRIEL AMO, Rhode Island

Katherine Earle, Subcommittee Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

REPRESENTATIVES

Opening Statement of Chairman Thomas Kean, Jr....................     1
Opening Statement of Ranking Member William Keating..............     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Elan Carr, Chief Executive Officer, Israeli-American Council.     4
Prepared Statement of Elan Carr..................................     7
Rabbi Abraham Cooper, Associate Dean and Director of Global
Social Action, Simon Wiesenthal Center, Chair, U.S. Commission
on International Religious Freedom.............................    12
Prepared Statement of Rabbi Abraham Cooper.......................    15
Dr. Matthew Levitt, Former-Wexler Fellow, The Washington
Institute for Near East Policy.................................    23
Prepared Statement of Dr. Matthew Levitt.........................    26
Ms. Simone Rodan-Benzaquen, Managing Director, American Jewish
Committee Europe...............................................    36
Prepared Statement of Simone Rodan-Benzaquen.....................    39

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    64
Hearing Minutes..................................................    66
Hearing Attendance...............................................    67

Responses to Questions for the Record

Responses to questions for the record to Dr. Levitt from
Representative Amo.............................................    68
Responses to questions for the record to Dr. Levitt from
Representative Titus...........................................    70
Responses to questions for the record to Ms. Simone Rodan-
Benzaquen from Representative Titus............................    72
Question for the record to Mr. Carr in Europe from Representative
Amo............................................................    77

ADDRESSING THE SCOURGE OF ANTI-SEMITISM
IN EUROPE

----------

Tuesday, December 12, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Europe
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:43 p.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Thomas Kean, Jr. (chairman
of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Kean. The Subcommittee on Europe of the House Foreign
Affairs Committee will come to order. The chair would like to
remind our guests today that demonstrations from the audience,
including the use of signs and placards, as well as verbal
outbursts, are a violation of the rules of the House. The
purpose of this hearing is to shed light on antisemitism in
Europe, especially the spike of antisemitism in the aftermath
of the horrific Hamas terrorist attacks in Israel on October
7th.
I would also like to welcome the gentlelady from North
Carolina, Ms. Manning, who is joining us today. She will
participate in today's hearing following all other members. I
now recognize myself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN THOMAS KEAN, JR.

Good afternoon and thank you to our witnesses for
testifying before the subcommittee today. Antisemitism is a
scourge in Europe and around the world that we must tackle
head-on. After the murder of six million Jews during the
Holocaust, the world made a promise: never again. These words
only have meaning if all of us are willing to act and stop
evil.
After years of rising antisemitism in Europe, we are seeing
a terrifying surge in anti-Jewish hatred after Hamas' October
7th attack. In the 2-months since Hamas' massacre of over 1200
men, women, and children, synagogues and other Jewish
institutions have been burned, Jewish memorials vandalized,
Jews attacked in their homes and on the streets. This is not
1930's Germany. This is Europe in 2023. It is time to act on
the words never again and time to act is right now.
While antisemitism is a problem across the European
political spectrum, I am deeply concerned by how antisemitic
activities penetrated the mainstream of the political left in
Europe. Antisemitism used to be relegated to the fringes of the
far left and the far right, but now we have started to see
antisemitic rhetoric come from prominent mainstream leftist
figures in Europe, including some that are in their country's
governing coalitions.
Antisemitism is beginning to infect wider swaths of
Europe's political left. If this trend is not reversed, it
could lead to a dangerous normalization of antisemitism in
European politics.
Russia and Iran are fanning the flames of antisemitism in
Europe. Dating back to the Soviet era, Russia has amplified
antisemitic narratives in Europe to sow chaos and confusion and
to distract the West from Russia's other malign behavior.
When he served as special envoy to monitor and combat
antisemitism during the Trump administration, one of our
witnesses, Mr. Carr, correctly labeled Iran as the world's
chief State sponsor of antisemitism. Iran promotes flagrant
antisemitism in its public messaging and regularly provides a
platform for European Holocaust deniers. Just like they're
working together to destroy Ukraine, Russia and Iran are now
working together to inflame antisemitism and to sow division.
But antisemitism is not just a problem in Europe. Here at
home, in our universities, antisemitism is rampant. Last week,
three Ivy League presidents testified before Congress and
refused to say that the calling for the genocide of Jews is
considered bullying or harassment. It is no wonder that Jewish
students feel unsafe and threatened.
Academia here in the United States and in Europe has a
moral responsibility to make plain that they do not tolerate
antisemitism. Unfortunately, what we are witnessing all too
frequently is an abject failure of leadership in combating
antisemitism at too many institutions.
Regardless, it is my belief that we can work with our
European allies to counter this threat and to protect Jewish
communities. We must tackle this issue head-on and identify
what needs to be done to combat and defeat antisemitism in
Europe.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member, the gentleman
from Massachusetts, Mr. Keating and any statement that he may
have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER WILLIAM KEATING

Mr. Keating. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing today and for our witnesses, some of whom have
traveled great distances to be here today. It is happening at a
time when the Jewish people celebrate a Festival of Lights and
Hanukkah. Yet, even those lights can't eclipse the seriousness
of today's hearings.
On October 7th, 2023, that date marked an inflection point
in the fight against antisemitism here in the United States and
Europe and around the world. The terrorist attacks by Hamas,
which I wholeheartedly condemn, unleashed a fury of antisemitic
attacks against Jewish communities. The scale of the
antisemitism we have seen since October 7th and the variety of
the forms it takes with swastikas drawn on our buildings to
threats on synagogues to physical violence, as well as the
spectrum of offensive and threatening comments and actions
anywhere in between these acts, reminds us very clearly of the
threats the Jewish people face on a daily basis.
In response to the October 7th attack, the Biden
administration and many governments in Europe, the focus of
today's hearing, have been united in support of the Jewish
people. I commend those governments, many of whom have had
their own dark past with antisemitism. I commend those
countries who have been vocal and who have worked to ensure
both the physical and emotional security of Jewish communities.
We must also be clear in our separation of the Jewish
people from the State of Israel. Jews should never be held
responsible for the actions of Israel or any other government
for that matter. Targeting Jewish communities with hate and
violence is not defending the human rights, for instance, of
Palestinians. It is antisemitism.
Jewish communities in Europe are feeling the impact of this
most recent rise in antisemitism. Authorities in France, in
Germany, and the United Kingdom, and across Europe have
recorded record numbers of antisemitic incidents. We must also
acknowledge that inadequate data collection has resulted in
numerous antisemitic attacks being ignored or not even being
recorded.
While we have seen a rise in antisemitism since October
7th, the data shows that the threat of antisemitism in Europe
is pacing and pervasive. Last year, a survey of ten European
countries, the Anti-Defamation League found that, roughly, one
in four respondents harbored ``extensive classic antisemitic
beliefs,'' including 37 percent of those respondents in Hungary
where Prime Minister Orban's backsliding government has cloaked
his antisemitism in Hungarian nationalist rhetoric.
Specifically, Orban has praised Hungary's rule during the
Second World War who deported thousands of Jews who later
massacred and who was an ally of Hitler as ``an exceptional
statesman,'' a statement that's been condemned by the Anti-
Defamation League and, at the same time, he has referred to his
critics as crafty and speculative with money, clearly
antisemitism tropes.
We must also acknowledge that the U.S. is not immune to the
threats posed by antisemitism. It is our obligation to call it
out wherever it presents itself. As Ambassador Deborah Lipstadt
says often, antisemitism is the canary in the coal mine and the
harbinger of hate and violence that extends to all minority
groups around the world. It threatens our values, our
democracies, and our very way of life.
Thankfully, significant steps have been taken in the U.S.
and Europe to combat antisemitism, and they should not go
unrecognized. In 2021, for example, the European Commission
published the first-ever EU Strategy on Combating Antisemitism
and Fostering Jewish Life. As of July of this year, 17 EU
member states have published their own national strategies on
antisemitism, and eight other member states are in the drafting
process.
In May 2023, the Biden administration also introduced the
United States National Strategy to Combat Antisemitism, which
not only recognizes antisemitism as a global problem but charts
a concrete path for increasing awareness of antisemitism,
improving the safety of Jewish communities, and building a
collective response, including with our European allies,
response to the hate and violence espoused by antisemites.
We have also acted here in Congress. In November, I
introduced H. Res. 872, along with House Task Force on
Combating Antisemitism co-chair Brian Fitzpatrick, to reaffirm
the need to work with Europe to combat antisemitism and fight
hate wherever it is present. I thank my colleagues from both
sides of the aisle who have co-sponsored, including
Representatives Manning, Schneider, and Granger, who have
worked for years on this issue.
Of course, there's significant work still to be done, and I
look forward to the testimonies of our witnesses to better
understand the threat posed by antisemitism and how we can find
from Transatlantic solutions permanent ways to deal with what
is a permanent threat to Jewish life around the world. So thank
you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Keating. Others members of the
subcommittee are reminded that opening statements may be
submitted for the record. We are pleased to have a panel of
distinguished witnesses before us today on this important
topic. Mr. Elan Carr is the Chief Executive Officer of the
Israeli-American Council. Rabbi Abraham Cooper is the Associate
Dean and Director of Global Social Action at the Simon
Wiesenthal Center and also the chair of the Commission on
International Religious Freedom. Dr. Matthew Levitt is the
Fromer-Wexler fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East
Policy. And Ms. Simone Rodan-Benzaquen is the Managing Director
of the American Jewish Committee Europe.
Thank you for being here today. Your full statements will
be made part of the record, and I will ask you to keep your
verbal remarks at 5 minutes in order to allow for member
questions.
I now recognize Mr. Carr for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ELAN CARR, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, ISRAELI-
AMERICAN COUNCIL

Mr. Carr. Chairman Kean, Ranking Member Keating, Honorable
members, thank you for inviting me to testify before you today
and thank you for focusing on the crisis of rising antisemitism
which poses a threat not only to Jews but to society itself. My
name is Elan Carr, and I am the CEO of the Israeli-American
Council, the advocacy and mobilizing organization for the
Israeli-American community. During the last administration, I
served as the United States Special Envoy to Monitor and Combat
Antisemitism.
Members of Congress, antisemitism has been rising
dramatically in much of the world over the last decade, and
Europe is no exception. In 2018, the European Union's
Fundamental Rights Agency conducted a survey of Europe's Jews,
and the results were alarming. Ninety percent of those polled
said that antisemitism was rising; 85 percent rated it as the
biggest social or political problem in the country; 40 percent
feared that they would be physically attacked within the year.
Who could have imagined that less than 80 years since the end
of the Holocaust Jew hatred would be surging, even in the very
countries where the Holocaust occurred?
The October 7th pogrom in Israel dramatically accelerated
the trends of the past decade. More than 1,000 antisemitic
attacks occurred in France in the month after October 7th. In
the first week following the Hamas massacre, Germany saw a 240-
percent increase of such incidents. And in the 2-weeks after
the massacre, the crimes against Jews in London jumped 1,350
percent.
One might have thought that the mass murder and mass
kidnapping of Israeli children, women, and men, often in acts
of incomprehensibly sadistic cruelty, would have, at least
temporarily, quieted the world's Jew haters. On the contrary,
as Ranking Member Keating powerfully pointed out, the massacre
catalyzed a global antisemitic frenzy in which Jews have been
attacked, bullied, harassed, and in which genocide against Jews
has been either openly or tacitly celebrated.
Three distinct extremist ideologies are driving this
disturbing surge in Jew hatred both in Europe and here at home.
Racial supremacists on the far right see Jews and Jewish
organizations as a threat to the cultural or religious purity
of the West. Militant Islamists consider Jews to be dangerous
heretics who have no place in society and certainly no place in
the Middle East. And neo-Marxists on the radical left pervert
concepts of social justice to define Jews as apex predators
within an intersectional hierarchy of systemic oppression and
racism. This view targets both diaspora Jewish communities and
the Jewish State, such that Israel is seen as a white-passing
colonialist power against whom any form of so-called resistance
is justified. Propagators of all three poisonous world views
use the internet and social media to great effect, spreading
their venom virally and globally at the speed of a click and
rapidly radicalizing thousands.
It is important to remember that each of these ideologies
pose a threat to all of us, to our pluralistic societies and
democratic values. These are destructive movements whose goal
is to dismantle fundamental aspects of our civilization. At
stake, therefore, in this fight is not only the future of the
global Jewish community but the very survival of modern Europe
and American as we define it today.
Rather than dwell further on the extent of the problem,
allow me respectfully to propose seven tangible measures that,
if implemented, would go a long way to reversing this terrible
trend. First, the United States should encourage our European
allies to subsidize the cost of security for Jewish
communities. Static security personnel for synagogues and
Jewish schools is an essential measure, especially now. Some
European governments partially subsidize that cost, for
example, the United Kingdom. Many others do not. U.S. diplomats
should press our allies to help defray reasonable costs of
their Jewish community security requirements.
Second, Europe must correct the hostile climate in its
universities. Student leaders in multiple European countries
reported to me that the price Jewish students must pay for
physical safety on campus is their complete divorce from
Zionism and the State of Israel. It should go without saying
that it is antisemitism to coerce Jews to forego aspects of
their Jewish identity, including Zionism. Since October 7th,
the campus climate has become dramatically worse. Thirty days
after the massacre, the European Union of Jewish Students
reported a horrendous increase in antisemitism. Even university
officials have been a source of the poison. For example, the
trade union for the staff of University College London passed a
motion calling for a mass uprising against Israelis and
``intifada until victory.'' These are university officials.
Widespread antisemitism in educational institutions is
doubly dangerous in that it produces the next generation of
antisemites while inculcating fear in the next generation of
Jews. U.S. officials can apply pressure here.
Third, we should work with our allies to supplement, to
implement the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance's
definition of antisemitism. Europe has been a leader in
adopting the definition, but, for it to be effective, it must
be implemented, for example, by incorporating it into the
training of law enforcement personnel and university
administrators and by employing it as a teaching tool in
schools. We should work with our allies to do that.
I want to take a moment to thank Congressman Lawler of this
committee who has been a leader in adoption of the IHRA
definition.
Fourth, European countries should refuse to harbor militant
Islamists. A moderate French imam recently called for the
deportation of all militant Islamists who are not citizens of
France, and France has previously expelled several radical
imams. Militant Islamist populations are a threat to everyone.
European governments would be wise to act in exercising their
legal authority.
Fifth, we should hold our allies accountable for casting
consistently anti-Israel or pro-Iran United Nations votes. Some
European countries repeatedly vote in favor of overtly anti-
Israel resolutions. Just last week, the United States cast the
lone vote at the Security Council to veto a one-sided
resolution. We are grateful to the Biden administration for
doing the right thing here. We should follow up by pressuring,
punishing, or publicly challenging countries whose U.N. voting
record reflects enduring hostility to the Jewish State.
Sixth, we should devote resources to countering the
torrents of hate on the internet and on social media while
complying with First Amendment values.
Seventh, and finally, we should work with European
countries to combat antisemitism proactively through
Philosemitism. No war has ever been won only by playing
defense. Going on the offense means proactively inculcating and
understanding and appreciation of the history of the Jewish
people and the values of Judaism that have played a central
role in the development of the West. Here, thanks to bipartisan
congressional authorization, every May is Presidentially
declared to be Jewish American Heritage Month.
The United States can play a central role in globalizing
the practice of Jewish Heritage Month.
Members, these seven measures do not exhaust the list of
what may be done, but they represent actions that will likely
produce far-reaching results. If we focus on achievable steps,
I am confident that we can roll back the scourge and build the
better and more just world that our children and grandchildren
so richly deserve.
Thank you again for your time.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Carr follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Carr. I now recognize Rabbi Cooper
for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF RABBI ABRAHAM COOPER, ASSOCIATE DEAN AND DIRECTOR
OF GLOBAL SOCIAL ACTION, SIMON WIESENTHAL CENTER, CHAIR, U.S.
COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM

Rabbi Cooper. Thank you, Chairman Kean, and I appreciate
also the opening statement from Ranking Member Keating.
As the only rabbi on the panel, I am going to try to do my
best to be non rabbinic and stick to 5 minutes. So as a result,
the statistics that are all shocking, some of which the
previous speaker has already outlined, we will also hear from
someone who is based in Europe, but I just want also as a word
of caution, in Germany, a study by the University of Bielefeld
shows that only one-fourth of antisemitic acts of hate crimes
were reported by the victims. So if the BKA listed 4,400 crimes
in Germany from October 7th to December 11th, we can be pretty
sure the majority of those incidents were linked to the Hamas
war and targeted the Jewish population.
Two weeks ago, I was at the OFEK Counseling Center in
Berlin. Professionals do the intake from the Jewish community.
They are completely overwhelmed. There were then, from October
7th to December 6th, 647 requests from Jewish community for
help. There is a grand total of about 250,000 Jews in all of
Germany. So the situation there is quite overwhelming, and I
would also say, while we certainly welcome the idea of
antisemitism czars or monitors across Germany led by Felix
Klein, a very well-suited person, we've also had to call out
two of those czars for their antisemitism, Michael Blume, as
well as Gerhard Rohle, who, instead of backing the Jewish
community, have made statements that have actually legitimized
Jewish hatred.
Let me go directly to a list of suggested recommendations
that could be applicable to all countries in Europe. No. 1, the
safety of Jewish residents. We need to implement enhanced
measures, including increased surveillance, to ensure the
physical safety of Jews in Europe. And, yes, it has come to
that in many locations.
Second, when necessary, relocation support. Provide support
for Jews in high-risk areas to relocate to safer locations.
No. 3, hate crimes legislation. Enact stronger hate crime
laws with stiffer penalties to deter antisemitic acts. There
are many, many rules and laws that are on the books in Europe,
but, clearly, the enforcement and the penalties need to be
stiffer because we are facing a tsunami.
No. 4, detention and deportation of illegal Islamist
operatives. Detain or deport operatives of illegal Islamist
entities, such as Hamas and Hezbollah, and all of whom commit,
as we know, serious acts of antisemitism.
No. 5, it is important for countries like Germany, but not
only, to establish partnerships for receiving back rejected
asylum seekers.
No. 6, which is already actually underway in at least one
of the states in Germany, one of the prerequisites for
citizenship is the recognition of Israel. Require recognition
of Israel's right to exist and make a commitment against
antisemitism for all immigrants seeking citizenship in the
western democracies, and also be in a position to revoke
citizenship of dual citizens who commit serious antisemitic
acts.
No. 7, and this is specifically for Europe, online hate
speech monitoring. Develop and implement strategies to monitor
and combat online hate speech, especially on social media,
collaborating with tech companies to degrade the marketing of
such hate and eventually remove such content.
No. 8, and I'll probably hear it from each of the speakers,
set and enforce guidelines against antisemitism on university
campuses. The right to free speech much not include calls for
genocide of Jews or physical violence against Jews.
No. 9, empower law enforcement to enforce existing laws
more stringently. Two weeks ago, when I was in Berlin, I met
with the head of the largest police unions, 200,000 members.
They are asking for more guidance, for more education, and for
more signals from the political establishment about making sure
they can move against demonstrations that feature symbols of
terrorist groups like Hamas or ISIS and chants of anti-Jewish
slogans. In order to do that, law enforcement personnel have to
be educated about the pernicious impact of antisemitism and
they must be instructed by the political establishments, left,
right, and center, to enforce the law more stringently.
No. 10, develop a coherent asylum policy that permits
entrance of individuals after approval. Asylum seekers across
Europe must not automatically receive permission to stay until
a decision regarding their status is clarified and completed.
Number 11, I didn't know I would be sitting next to the
world's expert, but I will just say freeze and disrupt Islamist
funding infrastructure. Destruct the financial networks of
entities like Hamas and Hezbollah that are linked especially to
Turkish and Qatari banks. Cease foreign funding of mosques and
of the training of imams. We need collectively to prevent
mosques receiving overseas funding that enables external
influences. Monitor mosques systematically for antisemitic
rhetoric and act decisively in the case of violations.
Holocaust and Israel education. This, I'll just say, there
are three or four different areas, but the most important part
would be, as Elan Carr just said, we want to educate young
people in Europe about the core values of the Jewish people,
not just don't hate a particular group. And when it comes to
the commemoration of the Holocaust on either side of the
Atlantic, I think we have reached the point that we should only
attend the memorial programs for dead Jews with people and
institution who show respect and concern for live Jews. I say
that as the Associate Dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a
leading institution devoted to the teaching of the lessons of
the Holocaust.
Two more points. We need to do away with UNRA. You might
say what does UNRA have to do with antisemitism in Europe and
the United States. It's very simple. If nearly 90 percent of
the people in Gaza backed October 7th, these are people who
grew up and went to school in UNRA schools. They were taught
not peace curricula but war curricula. And so we need to do
away with UNRA and begin to treat Palestinians as adults, put
the money in escrow, create systems in which they can control
their own educational systems but in a way in which the donor
nations can actually see what is being taught.
Finally, besides, of course, supporting the Abraham
Accords, we must make sure that every European country
designates the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps as a terrorist
organization. Thank you.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Carr follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kean. Thank you, Rabbi Cooper. I now recognize Dr.
Levitt for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW LEVITT, FORMER-WEXLER FELLOW, THE
WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR NEAR EAST POLICY

Mr. Levitt. Chairman Kean, Ranking Member Keating,
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today and discuss the
potential terrorist implications of the sharp rise in
antisemitism in Europe. I want to say what an honor it is in
particular to appear on this panel with the people sitting to
my right, my left.
Last week, I visited Israel and saw first-hand the horrific
results of the massacre Hamas carried out targeting Israeli
communities on October 7th. I bore witness, a term we really
haven't used since the Holocaust, to what is left of Kfar Aza
and the atrocities Hamas executed there. Hamas has vowed to
``repeat the October 7 attack time and again until Israel is
annihilate'' which explains why Israel is fighting to dismantle
the Hamas governance project in Gaza and deny the group the
ability to carry out such attacks in the future.
This war, which Israel did not start and did not want, was
the war Hamas always wanted. What Hamas could not have
anticipated is that, even after carrying out such a brutal
attack, the group would enjoy vocal support in pockets of
antisemitic protests around the world, including in Europe and
the United States.
Most protesters are rallying against the war and casualties
in Gaza, but an alarming number protest Israel's right to
exist, praise Hamas and the October 7th attacks. An alarming
number have crossed from protesting Israeli actions to
targeting Jews in general. In the most recent case, a 16-year-
old was arrested in Austria for trying to procure a weapon to
attack a Vienna synagogue, as if that will create a Palestinian
State.
As a result, Israel's National Security Council issued a
travel warning for over a dozen countries, including the UK,
France, and Germany, warning Israeli citizens to take
additional precautions while traveling in those countries.
That's the reality for Israelis and Jews around the world
today.
These antisemitic incidents create an echo chamber which
rationalizes and legitimizes violence targeting Israelis, Jews,
and anyone seen as supporting them. Taken together, this
antisemitism creates an environment ripe for increased
terrorism. Consider, for example, the rise in use of hate
speech and symbols, threats and intimidation and violence at
these protests. A number of protestors have displayed overtly
pro-Hamas and antisemitic symbols at pro-Palestinian protests.
German police broke up a pro-Hamas celebration led by Samidoun,
a front organization for the U.S. and EU Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine, which Germany has since banned from
operating in the country. The use of hate speech and
antisemitic imagery not only perpetuates the violent hatred
that fueled Hamas' on Israel but can and does result in acts of
real world violence against Israeli and Jewish targets
worldwide.
Ilkka Salmi, the Europe Union counterterrorism coordinator,
recently noted his concern that the Gaza crisis is producing
tensions in Europe which could lead to polarization, which
could then, in turn, lead to terrorism in Europe. In the days
following the October 7th attack, a number of Hamas and other
terrorist leaders called for protests around the world. Khaled
Meshaal, for example, a senior Hamas official currently
residing in Qatar called for a day of rage. This sparked
widespread fear around the world, particularly in Jewish
communities. Here in the United States and in the UK, for
example, Jewish schools closed their doors. Children of Israeli
diplomats were warned not to attend public schools for their
own safety.
Some protestors have adopted radical pro-Palestinian
symbols and slogans, ``from the river to the sea, a phrase
that, by definition'', calls for eradication of the State of
Israel, not the creation of a Palestinian State. Demonstrators
here in Washington insisted that Palestinians should resist
Israel ``by any means necessary,'' a phrase which condones the
use of terrorism.
In the weeks since October 7th, a variety of terrorist
organizations have issued calls for violence. Al-Qaeda in the
Arabian Peninsula released a statement calling on Muslims
everywhere to target and kill every Jew, American, and British
citizen. Far right neo-Nazi groups have done the same.
Accelerationist groups have done the same. The German Federal
Office for the Protection of the Constitution found that
October 7th galvanized a wide variety of extremist groups based
in Germany from the far left to the far right, as groups from
both ends of the ideological spectrum took to social media to
spread disinformation and advocate expressly for violent
action.
The most pressing security challenge in the West, in the
U.S. and in Europe both, to emerge from October 7th and the
resulting war is the threat of inspired plots and lone-actor
terrorism. The FBI director has warned of this. European
officials, including EU Home Affairs Commissioner Ylva
Johansson, have warned of this. And while many people associate
the tactic of inspiring lone actors and small groups to carry
out acts of terrorism with Sunni jihadist groups, like al-Qaeda
and the Islamic State alone, Iran and its proxies have actively
created online networks aimed at inspiring Shia jihadist
attacks, as well.
In a report discussing the emergence of lone Shia actors in
the United States several years ago, the National
Counterterrorism Center described the occurrence of a
catalyzing event as one key risk factor they are looking for
that could lead to an increase in lone actor terrorist attacks
from Shia extremists. October 7th certainly qualifies as such
an event, which, compounded by the staggering increase in
antisemitism across the globe, has inspired terrorist groups to
mobilize their followers to violence.
Earlier this year, I co-authored a Washington Institute
study with Moustafa Ayad, the Executive Director for Africa and
the Middle East and Asia at the Institute for Strategic
Dialogue, which dug into Iranian efforts to inspire Shia
homegrown violent extremist attacks. This has created a variety
of networks and websites, echo chambers spanning various
digital platforms championing martyrdom as something noble,
theologically sanctioned, and could potentially participate in
real world harm, especially in the wake of the October 7th
attacks.
This all is especially true given the staggering spike in
antisemitism around the world. As Ilkka Salmi, the U.N.
counterterrorism coordinator, notes, I think there is a
possibility that pro-Palestinian demonstrations, notably
unauthorized ones, could give rise to violence against real or
perceived supporters of Israel, including Jewish citizens and
their institutions. EU member State governments should do all
they can to protect European Jews from such violence. The
reality is that they have their work cut out for them. Thank
you.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Levitt follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kean. Thank you, Dr. Levitt. I now recognize Ms. Rodan-
Benzaquen for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SIMONE RODAN-BENZAQUEN, MANAGING DIRECTOR,
AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE EUROPE

Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. Chairman Kean, Raking Member Keating,
distinguished committee members, thank you for the opportunity
to discuss the scourge of antisemitism in Europe today. As
director of AJC's eight European offices and with a very
diverse background from across Europe, I can attest that,
although contemporary antisemitism in Europe has been a problem
for at least two decades, the terrorist programs of October 7th
have marked a significant turning point. We have seen an
explosion of antisemitic hate crimes across the continent. As
an example, Germany reported a 320-percent increase. In
Britain, antisemitic incidents quintupled in the month
following October 7th. And France saw almost four times the
total reported acts since October 7th then in all of 2022.
It is as if a deep-seated antisemitic passion has been
unleashed on October 7th without shame. Consequently, many
European Jews live in fear, adopting strategies to conceal
their Jewish identity. An AJC survey conducted before October
7th had already shown that one-in-three French Jews avoided
showing any outward sign of their Jewishness. Since October
7th, it has become increasingly common for Jews to remove
mezuzahs and even alter Jewish-sounding names on doorbells and
delivery apps to avoid being targeted.
Before and since October 7th, different distinct
manifestations could be observed. A far left anti-imperialist
post-colonial faction epitomized by figures like former British
Labor lead Jeremy Corbyn and French far-left leader Jean-Luc
Melenchon, who have demonized Israel Zionism and even Jewish
institutions and individuals, their narrative enables
antisemitism to be cloaked in the guise of antiracism,
anticolonialism, and even antifacism, resulting in the
exclusion and targeting of Jews.
They have tried to appeal to a second tier, anti-Zionists
and often ideologically radical elements within the Muslim
communities, some of whom we have seen in the streets of
London, Berlin, Stockholm, and elsewhere. Meanwhile, far right
populists, while some are claiming to protect Jews, often
maintain a certain ambiguity, never fully distancing themselves
from white nationalists and, in particular, in central and
eastern Europe, continue to engage in historical revisionism.
Even just today, as we are speaking, a far right Polish member
of parliament extinguished in an outrageously antisemitic
gesture a Hanukkah menorah with a fire extinguisher in the
Polish parliament.
As has been the case in the past, these sources often
merge. Since October 7th, our own internal AJC studies have
shown a notable increase in pro-Hamas and antisemitic content
on social media, propagated not only by Islamists and radical
pro-Palestinian but also by far left and even far right social
media accounts. In response, most European governments have
shown commendable action, particularly in protecting Jewish
sites. But more needs to be done.
The first step involves establishing a very clear zero
tolerance policy applicable in all settings, from universities
to the streets to social media. Europe has indeed very strong
hate crime laws. These include the social media space, in
particular, since the EU has voted the Digital Services Act, or
the DSA, which imposes significant obligations on social media
platforms. But the situation still has not improved because
more needs to be done to actually apply the law.
Second, it is crucial for governments and policymakers to
address all forms of antisemitism without turning it into a
political ball game. Too frequently, antisemitism is treated as
a political weapon with the right and left blaming each other,
which only serves to worsen the problem rather than resolving
it.
Third, antisemitism is not about Jews. It is never about
Jews. It is about the surrounding society or the culture or the
country. It is an early warning system, a sign that the society
itself is breaking down. According to our own AJC survey, 73
percent of French and Germans believe that antisemitism is
indeed not the problem of Jews but of society as a whole. But
little is being done by governments and policymakers to
actually help translate this into policy.
Fourth, a crucial strategy in combating antisemitism
involves a transformative approach to education, including by
understanding that certain fringe ideologies, like post-
colonialism and post-modernism, in universities have allowed
antisemitism to thrive. Education ministries and universities
need to make sure that educational systems actually encourage
open dialog and critical thinking, rather than ideologies.
Finally, addressing both the symptoms and root causes of
antisemitism is essential. This means confronting external and
internal forces that exploit societal weaknesses. Countries
like Qatar, Iran, China, Turkey, and Russia, wage to various
degrees a covert war against the West, often promoting
antisemitism. They use media outlets, fund political parties,
universities, religious institutions, and deploy social media
bots to sow division. The Times reported that half a dozen UK-
based groups with direct ties to Tehran were active in pro-
Palestinian marches in London, displaying Iranian propaganda.
Germany recently raided the Iranian-linked Islamic Center in
Hamburg. Yet, neither the EU, nor the UK, have designated the
IRGC as a terrorist organization, despite the fact that it has
posed a direct and immediate threat to Jewish communities. And
as for Hezbollah, an artificial distinction between the so-
called military and political branch in EU, is still kept.
The Stars of David that were found in Paris after the
October 7th attacks were ultimately linked to Russia's
Doppelganger Network. And while Europe has shut down Russia
today after Russia invaded Ukraine, Al Jazeera and AJ+ continue
to disseminate problematic content.
Internally, policymakers must tackle the issues that fuel
extremism by promoting responsible democratic debate and
actually fostering a culture of compromise. Combating
antisemitism effectively requires a comprehensive effort from
the entire society. It is imperative for Europe but also for
American to actually wake up. We are engaged in a
civilizational battle. If we fail to overcome it, we risk the
destruction of the world as we know it. Thank you very much.
[Prepared Statement of Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kean. Thank you, Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes. I want to thank each of you for your
extraordinarily powerful testimony here today. Mr. Carr, when
you served in the State Department under the Trump
administration, you had insight into the role that our Nation's
adversaries played in stoking antisemitism across the globe,
including in Europe. What can you tell us about Russia's
efforts to deepen antisemitic divides in Europe and what are
Russia's objectives in doing so?
Mr. Carr. Thank you for that question, Mr. Chairman.
Russia's efforts in these regards are extensive, deep and wide.
Russia primarily employs antisemitic agitation in its neighbors
not so much because President Putin himself has made
antisemitism a focus of his leadership within Russia but rather
as a form and weapon to destabilize neighboring countries and
to allow Russia then to claim that these neighboring countries
are fascist and, therefore, need to be denazified or somehow
cleaned of fascist and antisemitic tendencies.
During a particular uptick in antisemitism in Poland, as
measured on the social media, Ambassador Mosbacher at the time
and I met in Moscow about this, and it was determined by our
embassy that a substantial portion of antisemitic posts on
social media in Polish were done by bots and suspected to be of
Russian origin. There is no question with regard to Ukraine
that not only antisemitic posts on social media but actual
antisemitic attacks, vandalisms, various antisemitic agitation
and foment, even leading to physical violence, were performed
by Russian allies within Ukraine.
Now, this is not to say that there isn't antisemitism in
Poland and Ukraine. There certainly is. There's antisemitism
everywhere, as we know, sadly. But there is little doubt and
incontrovertible proof that Russia is engaged in an active
campaign of antisemitic agitation among its neighbors,
especially the neighbors that President Putin regards as
hostile to Russian interests.
Mr. Kean. Can you please describe Iran's efforts to promote
antisemitism----
Mr. Carr. Iran, as you correctly and powerfully pointed out
in your opening remarks, Mr. Chairman, is the world's chief
State sponsor of both terrorism and antisemitism. It is an
exporter of antisemitism throughout the world. It is funding
antisemitic movements and antisemitic agitation in multiple
countries. Through Hezbollah, its terrorist proxy in Lebanon,
Lebanese schools are awash with antisemitic sewage of the worst
kind, indoctrinating children to hate Jews and to devote
themselves to martyrdom, much as we've seen in the schools of
Hamas and in UNRA textbooks, as Rabbi Cooper correctly pointed
out. This now extends to Latin America where Iran and Hezbollah
both have substantial networks and are promoting
destabilization in those countries and actually terrorism in
those countries.
Iran is a leading source of antisemitic foment. And, by the
way, it is important to note that Iran's chief defense of its
malevolent conduct is that it is not antisemitic at all but
merely anti-Zionist, and this, by the way, should teach all of
us a lesson about this false distinction between anti-Zionism
and antisemitism. Hatred of the Jewish State is hatred of the
Jewish people. It's really quite simple. And to try to nuance
that is to do a deep disservice to the fight against
antisemitism, and Iran is an antisemitic country, the regime
should say, the Iranian rogue regime is an antisemitic regime.
And incidentally, when it took power, one of the first things
that Iran did is execute the leader of the Iranian Jewish
community. And it's antisemitism has continued unabashed,
unchecked, and unconstrained every year since its murder of the
leader of Iran's Jewish community, which is one of the many
reasons why Iranian mischief is a threat to global Jewry, to
peace and stability in the world, to the United States. And I
very much hope that the recent disasters that we have seen in
the world will lead the United States to reevaluate its Iran
policy and really bring people together around a strong policy
to contain the mischief of one of the world's most dangerous
regimes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Carr. Dr. Levitt, Iran and its
proxies in Lebanon, Gaza, and elsewhere, are leading exporters
of antisemitic hate and violence. Additionally, the IRGC has
helped plan attacks against Jewish communities in Europe. Do
Hamas and Hezbollah derive financing or support from Europe,
and what could be done, what more could be done by the European
governments to block this support and how can the U.S. help?
Mr. Levitt. Thank you for the question. Both Iran and
Hezbollah get a tremendous amount of money, plus weapons,
intelligence, and other support, directly from Iran. But they
both also fund raise in Europe. And just today, there is a
meeting in Europe, and the U.S. Government is represented
there, in an effort to build together a task force to more
productively and proactively target Hamas financing in Europe.
This is to complement an effort that has already been going for
a few weeks now post October 7th involving U.S. Treasury's
FinCEN, our financial intelligence unit, and the financial
intelligence unit in Israel and elsewhere, several in Europe,
to do this. It is incredibly important because, in the case of
Hamas in particular, Hamas' budget got more money from its
control over the Gaza Strip over the past few years than any
other source, even including the amount of money it got from
Iran. To the extent that the Israelis successfully end the
Hamas governance project in the Gaza Strip, they will lose
access to those hundreds of millions of dollars and they will,
therefore, be even more reliant on things like abuse of
charity, which is happening in Europe as we speak.
Hezbollah has a much bigger budget and is a much bigger
threat. It also engages in abuse of charity around the world,
including in Europe. But its criminal activities in Europe are
extremely important, and we have been having over at least the
past two administrations much more law enforcement cooperation
from the Europeans than we have had in the past. But as you
have heard from my colleagues, it is going to be exceptionally
important going forward to build on that, to get all of
Hezbollah, not just the, quote-unquote, terrorist wing
designated within the European Union, to get the IRGC
designated within the European Union and within the UK.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Dr. Levitt. And Rabbi Cooper, you and
Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen have both mentioned the fact that the EU
has no tolerance laws on the books, but we need to stand up
against hate crimes and on definitions, you know, the
monitoring of online hate speech and online antisemitism and
ensuring that law enforcement has the tools necessary. Can
either of you be a little bit more specific in some of the
things that we need to do in that regard?
Rabbi Cooper. Well, if you will allow me just to start, I
can tell you that I will be in Berlin again tomorrow and we are
going to be pursuing a relationship with the police, people who
trained the trainers. Our Museum of Tolerance in Los Angeles
has already trained over 200,000 law enforcement domestically
and overseas.
So we can add to that, but, really, the most important
element everywhere is a signal from the political establishment
that antisemitism is important. So, for example, as we know,
the challenges from terrorism and the targeting of Jews in
France goes back to Jo Goldenberg massacre in the 1980's. It is
not a new phenomenon. But in recent decades, I think we have to
give the police in France pretty good grades for doing their
job, but the judicial system in France refuses to even put the
murderers of elderly Jewish women permanently in jail, let
alone hold others culpable, if they come from the bottom of the
socioeconomic ring. A lot of politics and ideology seep into
the judicial system so that French Jews don't have a confidence
in the system.
In Germany, there are a lot of laws on the books, but, as
one example about Iran's kind of nefarious influence, they
created a holiday, a Muslim holiday, from whole cloth called
al-Quds Day, which is about taking back Jerusalem from the
Jewish people and having the Muslim world control. And the
demonstrations that took place on the streets of German cities
year after year, despite our protestations and other Jewish
organizations, that was the first time since the Hitler era in
which death to the Jews was chanted in Germany. That was a
seed, a poison seed that was planted by the Iranians, and it
has taken this long for Germany and other countries to wake up
to it.
I think, as long as we are talking about it, as well, let's
remember that Iran is the State that sponsors, that pushes, the
denial of the Shoah, Holocaust denial. It doesn't stop them
from using Holocaust imagery to demonize Jews and the Jewish
State and to mock the victims of the Holocaust. But when you
have the full power of the State behind a big lie, as we know,
tragically, from our Jewish history, terrible things can
happen.
We live in an era today in which everything local is global
and everything global is local. So whether it is Al Jazeera
from Qatar or Al-Manar from Hezbollah, using their substantial
reach into the Arab and Muslim world, they are the ones who are
getting that opportunity to spread that poison seed across
European societies and democracies. And I would just say, in
terms of Germany for example, the focus really needs to be on
the younger people, the children of the immigrants, to try to
reach them and explain to them in the 21st century why, as a
citizen of Germany, it is important for them to understand what
happened in the Nazi Holocaust and what steps, as good
citizens, they need to embrace in order to make sure it doesn't
happen again.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen.
Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. I mentioned earlier on the need for a
zero tolerance policy. There are indeed great laws in Europe,
across the European continent. And far more stringent laws than
here in the United States. But one of the big problems as was
just mentioned was they are not really always applied, and this
absolutely needs to change.
When you create a feeling of impunity, when people have the
impression that they can basically say or do whatever they
want, this only creates further antisemitic acts. And so it
absolutely starts with the social media. Under the DSA, so
under the Digital Services Act, that was voted last year by the
Europe Union, social media platforms have an obligation of
transparency and have an obligation to remove content when it
contravenes European laws. Despite the fact that there is such
a huge amount of antisemitic content online, the social media
companies are today not really obliged. So they will get a
letter from the European commissioner alerting them about the
situation, but there are no real consequences. There are no
real consequences in terms of financial consequences, and there
are no real consequences in terms of potentially being shut
down at some point.
So there needs to be a very clear message to social media
companies that they have a responsibility. We know that the
path between words and beliefs and actual acts exists. We know
it because we have experienced it in the past here in the
United States and even in New Zealand and, of course, in Europe
where we know that people have become radicalized online,
people have expressed their antisemitism, their racism, their
radicalization online, and then have actually acted upon it.
So there absolutely needs to be a very clear zero tolerance
strategy, especially because we have seen that when things are
being done, they bear results. I'll give you one example.
France was one of the only countries that, at the very
beginning after October 7th, because it had experienced times
where there were horrible antisemitic acts, in times whenever
Israel was facing Hamas, decided to shut down antisemitic pro-
Palestinian, pro-Hamas, anti-Israel demonstrations in the
streets of Paris, Marseille, and elsewhere. And it produced
results. When you look today at the world, including here in
the United States, France is probably one of the only countries
where you have very little antisemitic demonstrations in the
streets of France.
So whenever the country actually sends out a very clear
message that there are consequences when people behave in an
illegal way, it works. So my recommendation is and has been to
European governments to actually use the laws that they have
and just apply them.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. I now recognize Ranking Member Keating
for any questions he may have.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Listening to all our
witnesses, there was one common thread that came about that I
think really underscores an important point. Some of the
comments revolved around antisemitism is an early warning
system for breakdowns, that it is a sign of societal weakness
in countries, that it is being used in many ways. And I think
there is an important point here that how antisemitism is being
used, too, as a political weapon in these authoritarian versus
democratic fights that we find throughout Europe, of course it
is happening globally but particularly in Europe, since this is
our subject matter.
I was wondering just what your comments are on this because
we have seen time and time again, even in a parliamentary
system, it has, I think, even more leverage because as there
are attempts to constitute a government after elections and put
coalitions together, many times the more extreme coalitions are
necessary to tip the scales and there's an embracement of some
of these more extreme coalitions. And in those coalitions, I
have observed myself and I think many of you have referenced
that that antisemitism finds its way threading through in
sometimes overt ways, sometimes in more subtle ways, but it is
there.
Could you take a moment to comment on how antisemitism is
being used as a political weapon, as well? And something not
just on domestic countries' political systems but also how it
is being used by countries like Iran and like Russia, often
through social media and other ways, sparking violence and
other discord as a weapon from the outside politically to
influence political realities in countries and how this ties
into democratic backsliding. Because I do believe in my
observations, and I think it is probably clearly the truth,
that in authoritarian type of coalitions that are put together,
it is more prevalent, and the result is attacking democracies.
Since we have seen some democratic backsliding in Europe, can
you comment on, No. 1, how this can be used and how you have
observed it being used to influence political outcomes,
elections, and how it is used by authoritarian types of
coalitions versus democracies.
Rabbi Cooper. Ranking Member Keating, let me be the--I will
jump in. I will be the canary in the coal mine on this one for
starters, if you will.
Our namesake, Simon Wiesenthal, of blessed memory, he was a
victim of the Nazis. He lost, together with his wife, 89
members of their family, and he spent the rest of his life
fighting to rehabilitate the basic concepts of justice. And I
was honored to know and work together with him and Rabbi Marvin
Hier for 29 years until he passed. He said a very important
thing. He said where democracy is strong, it is good for Jews;
and where it is weak, it is bad for Jews. And he didn't learn
that lesson at university. He learned it from real life.
I think your point about the coalitions is very well taken,
especially if we look, for example, at Germany, which right now
has a coalition that includes the greens in the right wing and
it is right now fairly stable. But every German member of the
Bundestag I have spoken to and every member of the media, the
AFD comes up in every conversation. That is a political party
in which, let's just say, the far right feels very, very
comfortable with. And it would seem that, in the coming years
when there will be further elections, if they gain traction and
even get a small number of seats, you can wake up one morning
and find an AFD in a coalition government in Germany. That is
not going to be good for the Jews of Germany. It is not going
to be good for democracy.
I think it is also worth noting just to understand that we
are dealing with, you know, fairly sophisticated racists and
bigots. Do you remember that the first protests against the
COVID vaccines took place in the streets of Germany. And at
those what seemed to be ad hoc with thousands and thousands of
people who felt, you know, so worried, so betrayed, not knowing
enough information, in the midst of those protests were neo-
Nazis and their visual aids and flags and symbols were right
there in the middle. Even though the basic core questions that
people had, not just in Germany, were legitimate, you see a
tried-and-true effort of always trying to infiltrate the
mainstream.
So what has changed between Simon Wiesenthal, a young
person in the 1930's, and today? Social media. Social media
gives the opportunity for the most extreme groups and views to
present themselves in a mainstream context when, in fact, you
might say it is the wolf in sheep's clothing.
Just one last thing that also Mr. Wiesenthal taught us. I
remember a university student asked him, he said, Mr.
Wiesenthal, this is 1980, can the Holocaust happen again, and
his answer was amazing. He said if you have a situation where
you have an organized group of haters, a social crisis, plus
technology, anything is possible. Of course, he was talking
about the technology that he experienced in the 30's and 40's,
didn't know anything about an internet. And what he said was if
the technology of his day had been available in 1492, no Jew
would have survived in Spain, no Catholic would have survived
in England, and no Protestant would have survived in France.
Mr. Keating. Ms. Benzaquen, you referenced some of the
things I mentioned in your testimony. Could you expand on that,
please?
Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. So, first of all, I agree that, as I
mentioned earlier on, that antisemitism is always the canary in
the coal mine. It is when we see it that we know that a society
is falling apart, which, by the way, is also the reason why,
since 2015, I started to recognize that antisemitism was
starting to come here to the United States and publicly warned
about it.
The way that politicians, in particular in Europe, have
used antisemitism as a political tool is very important. When
you look at, for example, the far left in France, there is a
clear political objective to appeal to certain populations
actually by stigmatizing them to some extent because the far
left politicians, like Jean-Luc Melenchon, believe that all
Muslims are basically antisemites. So what he is trying to do
is basically to have a discourse that he believes will appeal
to them. It appeals to each to the radical part of it. It
doesn't appeal, thankfully, to all of them. But that is a clear
political strategy. That is the first part.
The second part of his strategy and the strategy of the far
left in France is to create, basically, constantly a conflict
in society, and he uses Jews, Israel, and Zionism to create
that conflict constantly. And he actually creates a situation
where the far right is becoming more important and bigger and
bigger because his objective and the objective of the far left
is not necessarily to win the next Presidential elections but
to make sure that the far left is the only opposition part to
the far right and that the far right will actually be winning
the elections so that we find ourselves in a situation where
you only have the far right and you only have the far left and
the moderates in the center are falling apart. So that is the
way he has been using it.
There are also, of course, examples where, in particular in
central and eastern Europe, where antisemitism is also used as
a political tool. And you mentioned early on Hungary, for
example, where historical revisionism is to used to create a
sense of national pride where the idea is to say we have not
really been so wrong, we are, in the end, a country that can
ultimately be entirely proud of itself. In order to do so, they
are revising the history and the roles by, some individuals
during the Second World War are revising their role. That has
been the case, of course, in Hungary but also in Poland where,
for example, any criticism of Poland and the Polish past would
have been criminalized. So in particular, in central and
eastern Europe, again, the role of Jews has become central in
the way the political game is played.
But the third point I would like to mention, and I
mentioned it early on in my introductory remarks because I
think they are absolutely key, is there is a real danger in
making antisemitism a political game. There is such a tendency,
in particular in the Europe continent, to see politicians
always cry out when antisemitism is happening on the other side
but never on their own. There is never any introspection to
say, you know what, maybe we have a problem on our political
side. And that makes the issue of antisemitism, not only does
it not solve it but it really exacerbates the problem, and it
places Jews and the Jewish communities in an extremely fragile
position because they are basically the ball that is being
played with by both sides of the political spectrum.
Mr. Keating. Great. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. It is just
great to listen to that testimony and hear what Rabbi Cooper
and Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen said and I'm sure the other witnesses
if we would have had time, but maybe you will with other
members. But to see that amplified not only by social media but
by outside forces, particularly Russia who is interfering in
elections not only in this country but all through Europe and
to see how they are using this hatred to try and cause
disruption to their own political advantage. And I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Ranking Member Keating. I now
recognize Mr. Lawler from New York for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Chairman. Tomorrow, the House
Foreign Affairs Committee is planning to mark up my bill, the
IGO Anti-Boycott Act. While existing laws already
disincentivizes other countries from boycotting Israel, this
bill would disincentivize IGOs, like the U.N. and EU, from
supporting BDS efforts. This is long overdue, and I look
forward to moving this critical legislation through the
committee.
What does the BDS movement look like today in Europe and
across other allied countries and IGOs around the world?
Mr. Levitt. First of all, thank you for your efforts and
for your bill. It is very important. As the person here today
to kind of make the connection between what is happening and
the antisemitic rise in terrorism, I just want to point out
that an overwhelming number of entities in Europe that are the
engines for BDS are fronts for terrorist organizations. If you
look just, for example, at Samidoun, which I mentioned earlier,
affiliated with the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine, if you look at some of the Hamas front
organizations, what BDS has become is the public legitimate
face of anti-Israel activity. This is the way that you can
engage in anti-Israel behavior and pretend that what you're
doing is within the law. It is typically the public-facing side
of what these entities and individuals are doing, and then
there's other things that they are doing behind closed doors.
But it is not simple and well intentioned in just trying to get
Israel to change certain behaviors. It ultimately is about
trying to end Israel.
Rabbi Cooper. If I can add, first of all, Congressman,
thank you for all your efforts, not just within the committee.
But on BDS and how it links up to the issue here of
antisemitism, our researchers at the Wiesenthal Center, I
think, came up with--when you think about it, it becomes
obvious but it is worth just stating it. Remember SodaStream?
That was the first major global blowout. And when you heard the
BDS proponents saying no, no, no, this is not about Israel,
this is about the occupied territories and the fact that
SodaStream has its factory in the occupied areas and, if they
just move it that will be the end of the problem. When it was
explained that there would be 50 or 60 Palestinian families
that no longer have a bread winner, that Jews and Arabs had
exactly the same monetary compensation, couldn't care less.
Rule No. 1 about BDS: they don't care about individual
Palestinians.
Second, the next step, not advertised, was now not about a
particular spot in the Holy Land but attaching all of Israel.
There you can, I think, go to a certain ice cream brand that
was utilized, but there were many other, you might say, more
serious examples in which suddenly the State of Israel was
demonized, trying to sort of put it into that 20th century
South African slot of being a colonizer, an occupier. We know
all of the lies.
The third step is then extended outside of Israel to Jews
who supported Israel, to Zionists. And now we have landed in
the fourth and final level in which you have just last Friday
night down the Wilshire Boulevard corridor demonstrations,
protests, following pretty much the narrative of Hamas with
spray paintings in an area that has synagogues and many Jews,
especially Persian Jews, living there.
So you have seen the evolution between starting out just
about occupied territories to where we are today, which is
saying that BDS is a legitimizer of antisemitism on both sides
of the Atlantic. And I commend you again for your efforts.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you. In the short time I have left, Mr.
Carr, I recently introduced the Antisemitism Awareness Act,
which requires the Department of Education to use the IHRA
working definition of antisemitism and its contemporary
examples. Can you speak about the importance of the IHRA
working definition and the importance of having governments
adopt it in combating antisemitism, especially not just here in
the United States but in Europe and abroad?
Mr. Carr. Certainly. And, actually, I thanked you in my
opening remarks, as well, for your leadership on the IHRA
issue. Let me just very briefly say first about BDS that BDS is
nothing other than the modern use of one of the oldest tactics
in the book of antisemitism, which is denying economic
intercourse to the Jewish community, the kind of economic
activity that it needs to survive. It is war against Jews by
other means, and BDS is the modern iteration of that. It is
nothing other than, nothing different than brown shirts
standing in front of Jewish shops saying don't buy from the
Jews, kauft nicht bei Juden. That's what BDS is, and it is very
important to recognize for what it is.
With regard to IHRA, step one in confronting a threat is
understanding a threat. And that means defining what
antisemitism is. It is not enough to say, you know, I know it
when I see it, although we often know it when we see it. But
sometimes we don't, and having a definition that is a global
standard and an authoritative reference point is deeply
important because it allows all of us to discuss Jew hatred
from the same playbook.
The real power of the IHRA definition is in the 11 examples
that are included with it. And those examples not only capture
traditional, you know, we might call it medieval antisemitism,
you know, Jews responsible for all maladies of the world, Jews
exhibiting malevolent control over social institutions, but it
also captures the so-called new antisemitism. And so one of the
examples is denying the Jewish people the right to self
determination, for example, by saying that the existence of a
State of Israel is an antisemitism endeavor or a racist
endeavor. That's an example. Equating Israel to Nazi Germany is
an example. Subjecting Israel to a double standard to which no
other democracy is held is an example.
Now, what does all this mean? It doesn't mean that we are
censoring these things. That is very important. You know, those
who don't want antisemitism defined will say, well, hold on a
minute, there is free speech. Well, of course, there is free
speech to call for all kinds of Jew hatred. We are not talking
about censorship. The IHRA definition is a tool of education,
it is a tool of understanding. It is not a tool of censorship.
How can IHRA be used? Well, it can be used in training so
that, let's say, law enforcement officials understand how to
recognize the antisemitic motivations underlying hate crimes.
Very important. Even we failed in that. There is an example
where an FBI leader, after the Colleyville, Texas attack, said,
well, we're not sure this is an antisemitic attack. They later
walked that back. Why? He meant well. It wasn't an effort to
sweep antisemitism under the rug. It was that this didn't
neatly fit into one of the categories that they understood. The
IHRA definition would have been deeply important in immediately
drawing and understanding that the Colleyville attack of a
synagogue was an antisemitic attack.
IHRA is also a deeply important tool in education. Many of
our states, as you know, require Holocaust education as a part
of the annual curriculum. And we have now the Never Again
Education Act that places Federal priority on Holocaust
education. Well, how can you teach about the Holocaust without
talking about Jew hatred and the antisemitism that led to the
Holocaust. And if you are going to teach about antisemitism,
what are you going to teach? What are you going to say? How
does it look like? How does it manifest? Well, guess what? We
have a global definition that has now been accepted and adopted
by over 1,200 entities in the world, including national
governments, provincial and State governments, municipal
governments, universities, sports teams, NGO's across the world
that provides that reference point. So we have it. Let's employ
it. Let's use it. Let's adopt it.
I will also point out, by the way, that the IHRA definition
is bipartisan in terms of our domestic use. It was used in the
Obama administration. It was used in the Trump administration.
It is being used in the Biden administration. And so it is
global, it is bipartisan, and we should be using it because it
can make a measurable difference in recognizing this evil that
is Jew hatred.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Carr. I now recognize Mr. Costa
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for
this important subcommittee hearing. Clearly, it is timely and
we have a lot of challenges, and I think part of the challenge
is to figure out how we deal with the strategy that involves
not only antisemitism that has existed for centuries but also
the politics of hate, the politics of division, that, as we
know, have been successful. I mean, when President Putin, and
it is the contradictions and it is the play of words justifies
his attack in Ukraine to denazify Ukraine, I mean, with a
Jewish president of the country is hard to understand, except
when you understand propaganda and when you understand how you
manipulate and use people through the divisions of hatred, the
divisions of insecurity.
Two weeks ago, I am a part of the Transatlantic Legislators
Dialogue, which is a group of members of the European
Parliament and Members of Congress, and we meet twice a year.
One of our colleagues here on this committee is the chair,
Congressman Moran. But when we signed the document concluding
our meetings, we stated that it would be to condemn the sharp
rise of antisemitism following the October 7th attacks by
Hamas, called on statements by the European Union to designated
Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and Hezbollah in their
entirety as terrorist entities. And we went on to do a number
of other efforts.
Ms. Rodan, when you discussed in your testimony, since
October 7th, the experience of politicians that have used terms
like genocide and ethnic cleansing to describe Israel's
military operations against Hamas and Gaza, how is the use of
these terms problematic in this context? And could you offer
further examples of antisemitism disguised as politically
critical? Could you explain? Quickly because I have a limited
time.
Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. Sure, sure, I go quickly. There have
been numerous and, in particular, in Spain, governing minister
and politicians who have basically criminalized Israel. It is
the demonization of Israel. It is the demonization of Zionism.
And it feeds into the whole idea that the Zionist project, that
Zionism in itself, that Jews are inherently evil.
Mr. Costa. I know. It goes back to the Inquisition.
Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. It goes back to the Inquisition. It is
the essence of antisemitism. And so, of course, when you have
the highest-level politicians, including governing ministers,
who hold that kind of speech----
Mr. Costa. What countries should the United States attempt
to place its attention with our foreign ministries to push
their governments to do more to combat antisemitism? I know
this is a sensitive and delicate subject to name countries.
Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. It is indeed sensitive. In this
particular aspect of what I just mentioned, Spain seems
important. Other than that, there are a few countries who have
not yet adopted the national strategy of antisemitism,
including, for example, a founding member which starts with B,
that's Belgium. So there are a number of countries who have not
been doing enough.
Again, in particular, look at those. The European
Commission has recommended for countries to establish national
strategies and special envoys on antisemitism. There are a
number of countries who have not done so.
Mr. Costa. One of the other problems that we have, I think
we have, is that, you know, in this country, and I think in
lots of Europe, we don't teach history anymore, at least in my
view. I mean, Wall Street, I don't know how they did the poll,
but they determined that about 75 percent of those supporting
the Palestinian individuals, and I think it is horrific what is
happening in Palestine and what Hamas is doing, but, that
aside, they did not know what the river to the sea meant. They
didn't know which river and which sea. It just sounded like a
good thing that everybody was saying. I mean, when you don't
have an education level of what these things mean, you know, it
plays on people's fears, it plays on people's hates, and the
way the media constructs this whole effort, I think, is really
cause for us to figure out how we can come together.
My time has expired, but this is, Mr. Chairman, an effort
that we are going to have to continue. And while we can talk a
lot about it, I think what is lacking is trying to come up with
a coherent strategy that we can embrace in some fashion that is
bipartisan and that really reflects not only our country but
our allies in Europe because we are in this together.
I have expended the rest of my time. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Costa. I now recognize Ms. Dean
from Pennsylvania.
Ms. Dean. Thank you, Chairman Kean, thank you, Ranking
Member Keating, for holding this important hearing, and I thank
all of our witnesses for giving us your expertise and your
experience with what is an incredibly troubling issue here in
the United States and letting us know more closely what is
going on in Europe.
I represent suburban Philadelphia. These issues are
extremely important to me and to my constituents. I care deeply
about doing everything we can to call out antisemitism, as you
so eloquently pointed out, because it is a horror in and of
itself, but what it does as a precursor to other acts of
bigotry and violence is so very troubling.
I was wondering if maybe, Rabbi Cooper, you could take a
look at pre October 7th, post October 7th, and do a comparison
contrast United States--Europe, if that's a possibility.
Rabbi Cooper. Well, the statistics pre October 7th were
pretty dismal on both sides of the Atlantic----
Ms. Dean. Correct.
Rabbi Cooper.--and nothing slowed down the violent
antisemitism on our shores, not even COVID, not even when
synagogues and churches were shuttered. That didn't stop the
bigots and the haters and the antisemites from those kinds of
assaults and attacks.
When Christopher Wray talks about 63 percent of the hate
crimes targeting 2.4 percent of the population, he is actually
referring to pre October 7th. What really changed on October
7th, which I don't think anyone anticipated and we are still
trying to come to grips with the horror, is two words: yes but.
We have been hearing yes but on both sides of the Atlantic
shockingly because, as the extent of the brutality, the depth
of the brutality of October 7th played out--remember the Nazis
worked very hard to cover their crimes. Hamas was live
streaming their crime. To this day, we, I think, I can't speak
for everyone, but I would assume, we assume that people would
say, you know what, the Palestinians have to reconfigure what
it is they want and what commitment they are going to make to a
peaceful future because what we saw is outside the bounds of
humanity. Instead, we heard yes but.
Reference was made to Spain, to France, where you had, I
think, 90 percent of Jewish students in French universities
before October 7th having experienced antisemitism. But the
change in terms of on the ground in Europe, it has unleashed, I
think, pent-up hatred against the Jews. And in this country,
led by those who are pushing the Hamas narrative, it is taking
antisemitism to levels and to depths that we never anticipated.
Ms. Dean. Such dangerous depths. Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. How
do I pronounce your name?
Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. Perfectly.
Ms. Dean. That was OK? I am a former professor. I taught at
LaSalle University in Philadelphia for 10 years, and I was a
teacher of writing, rhetoric, argument. But mostly I was
teacher of get your education, get your facts, know what you
are talking about. I am also about to give a commencement
address, and I have been stewing over what to say to these
graduates at a local university. I think every one of you spoke
about education. What would you say in terms of the importance
of education around these issues in order to free us from the
ignorance, the veil of ignorance, that is so much in the face
of this antisemitic growth?
Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. Thank you very much. So you are
absolutely right. Education is key. And we have known in Europe
for a very long time that we have a problem. Back in the very
early years of 2000, for example, there was a book that was
called The Lost Territories of the Republic. And in that book,
it was described that, in certain schools, the Holocaust could
not be taught anymore because students would rebel, students
didn't want to talk about it. In France, Holocaust education is
compulsory. They didn't feel that they had anything related to
that. So, you know, 20 years later, of course this problem has
only become bigger.
So one of the things I think that is key is to explain and
show and demonstrate that what happened then is relevant today
and how hate has changed and what it means for young students
to actually experience it. It is often seen as something that
was in the past. It is often seen as something that is
irrelevant to them. But when young people understand that what
they are currently seeing, experiencing, is not so different
than what happened in the 30's, this is relevant. I think the
way we are teaching right now history, the way we are teaching
right now Holocaust education, is not doing that sufficiently
in Europe.
Ms. Dean. I very much appreciate that, and I think we have
an obligation as educators to make sure our young people and
not so young people know our past, know the world's past. But I
think we also have an obligation to call out political leaders
who stoke that ignorance, who stoke the language of bigotry of
antisemitism. We could talk all day, but I do thank you for all
of your work. I yield back.
Mr. Carr. May I add something briefly, Mr. Chairman, or is
that not permitted?
Mr. Kean. No. Thank you, Representative Dean. The Chair now
recognizes Ms. Titus.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Carr, you said that
some states have programs in their school curriculum about the
Holocaust and that is required by legislature. That is true for
Nevada. In fact, I lived that effort at the State legislature
some 30 years ago. In addition to the Jewish groups that
supported it, most of the support came from the Nevada
Endowment for the Humanities, and it is ironic to me that some
people who claim now to be so concerned about antisemitism want
to defund the Endowment for the Humanities. We need to realize
perhaps that ties into the whole education issue of learning
about culture and history and people who may not be just like
us. I just want to put that on the record as we look at that
kind of budgeting.
But, Rabbi Cooper, I wanted to ask you, you said when
democracy is strong it is good Jews, and when democracy is weak
it is bad for Jews. I serve on the House Democracy Partnership,
which finds new kind of burgeoning democracies and tries to
help to shore them up. Could you give us some suggestions for
how we might incorporate this fight against antisemitism in our
efforts to shore up democracies?
Rabbi Cooper. Well, the questions today, Mr. Chairman and
ranking representative, have been unbelievable. I think each
question could be a full session. But I think it was stated
before by the people here that, when you have antisemitism,
that is an early warning system that democracy could be under
assault. And I mentioned before about Germany. When the first
protest against COVID vaccines came, you had extremists in
Germany rushing to the fore to make sure they were in that
visual snapshot of the protest, even if it was legitimate.
Look, speaking on behalf of the Wiesenthal Center and our
education on Museum Of Tolerance, we are deep investors in the
concept of democracy. And for us, the concept of democracy is
based on personal responsibility and critical thinking. Think
about Tik Tok. It is the exact opposite. It has nothing to do.
It is just a matter of playing on your feelings, not on facts.
I think what we have to do, collectively working with the
younger generations, is we have to figure out a way how to
reach the young people who are only on Tik Tok and begin to,
you might say, begin to spoonfeed some of those basics and say,
if you go down this road, this is what happened, we have heard
it many times before, it starts with the Jews and never ends
with the Jews.
Democracy is messy, but, paraphrasing Churchill, it is the
worst form of government, except every other form of
government. We need to begin to convince young people that they
have a stake in democratic process, and it is long, difficult,
and messy, but all the other alternatives are dead ends.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Rabbi. I will yield the rest of my
time to Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Ms. Titus. Well, I want to thank
Chairman Kean and Ranking Member Keating for allowing me to
join this hearing and also for holding this very important
hearing. I want to thank all of our witnesses for your
extraordinary testimony today.
I have to say, for so many years, we, American Jews,
watched what was happening in Europe and we felt like how safe
we were here and what a shame it was that European Jews had to
live with guards outside of their synagogues. I remember going
to visit the synagogue in Florence wondering what is wrong with
this country that they have to have guards outside of their
synagogue. Of course, over the past 10 years, that has all
changed, and I now have to have guards outside of my synagogue
in Greensboro, North Carolina and have to experience horribly
antisemitic leaflets being thrown into my driveway. We have
seen over the past 10 years not just antisemitic rhetoric, but
we have seen violence, synagogue murders, things we never
expected to see in this country. It is frightening, and it
makes American Jews all wonder what the future will bring for
us in this country.
Of course, we thought that October 7th would shed light on
how terrible it is when antisemitism and Jew hatred and hatred
of Israelis spreads because what we saw on October 7th was
beyond description in its savagery and brutality, and the facts
are still coming out. And, yet, as the facts come out, there is
a hesitancy of people, and I'm going to use it, as an example,
the U.N. women, to actually call out violent sexual atrocities
that were committed on Israeli women because they are Jews. So
I could go on and on about the unfortunate experience that we
are having and the fear that has spread among the American
Jewish community, as well as a feeling of isolation.
I want to get to questions because it is so valuable for us
to have all of you expert witnesses here. Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen--
Okay.
Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. Rodan is fine.
Ms. Manning. Close enough. I want to ask you about an issue
that you touched on but I think requires more conversation. We
know antisemitism is spread online within our country and
around the globe, and we know that there's no borders to the
way online antisemitism is spread and inspires individuals and
groups to commit acts of hatred against Jews.
In the U.S., we seem to be stymied in determining how to
stop the spread of the antisemitism. We seem to be stymied by
the First Amendment and in our unwillingness to hold social
media platforms accountable, even though private companies
actually aren't bound by the First Amendment. But we seem
unwilling to hold social media companies accountable. So it
appears that the European countries are more willing to crack
down on social media platforms, so what can we learn from them
and what best practices can we learn from how European
countries are cracking down on spreading of antisemitism
online?
Ms. Rodan-Benzaquen. Thank you very much for your question.
I would also like just to say personally how deeply touched I
am to hear your remarks because, for us, European Jews, when
antisemitism started two decades ago, the United States was
always a safe place. When we thought about, you know, if things
go really sour, where we could go, there was obviously Israel,
and then there was the United States. And so to see the
antisemitism becoming unleashed really here in the United
States in such a short amount of time and to such a huge extent
is really unsettling, and it makes European Jews even more,
feel even more insecure and even more unsafe.
Regarding the issue of antisemitism online, as I mentioned
earlier on, there are important laws that have been voted in
the European Union, in particular the Digital Services Act but
also on national level in several countries. Germany is one
example, France is another one, where social media companies
have the obligation to remove illicit content when it is being
reported, to react in a swift way. Germany is an example where
they have 24 hours to remove that content and to have much more
transparency.
One of the problems that we have had in the past is that,
for example, in terms of content moderation, we had no idea
what actually, how many people there were, how many moderators
there were, where they were based, how they were trained, what
was the basis that they were removing content. Now we know a
little bit more. I have to say it's not particularly
reassuring. I can tell you that, for example, X, in the French-
speaking space, has a few dozen of moderators only to remove
content.
So, unfortunately, I can't share best practices because we
have the laws but we don't apply you----
Ms. Manning. I hate to interrupt you, but my time is long
expired, but I would love to continue this conversation in
another setting. I yield back. Thank you for allowing me to
join this hearing.
Mr. Kean. I have not wanted to interrupt either the
questions or the compelling testimony of the panel before us.
There are many members who still want to ask some questions,
and I am going to ask them to put them in writing because there
is a menorah lighting at 4:30 on the Capitol steps, as well as
votes shortly thereafter. Therefore, I want to thank our
witnesses for the valuable testimony and thank the members for
their questions.
Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
written questions for the witnesses. We ask you to respond to
these promptly and in writing. Pursuant to committee rules, all
members have 5 days to submit statements, questions, and
extraneous material for the record subject to length
limitations.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned. Thank
you.
[Whereupon, the above-entitled matter went off the record
at 4:29 p.m.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
