- COLOMBIA'S DESCENT TO SOCIALISM: ASSESSING GUSTAVO PETRO'S PRESIDENCY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COLOMBIA'S DESCENT TO SOCIALISM: ASSESSING
GUSTAVO PETRO'S PRESIDENCY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WESTERN HEMISPHERE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

July 27, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-43

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-768 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. MCCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey      GREGORY MEEKS, New Yok, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina                Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania   BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
KEN BUCK, Colorado AMI BERA, California
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANDY BARR, Kentucky TED LIEU, California
RONNY JACKSON, Texas SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
YOUNG KIM, California DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida COLIN ALLRED, Texas
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan ANDY KIM, New Jersey
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN-RADEWAGEN,    SARA JACOBS, California
American Samoa KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio   Florida
JIM BAIRD, Indiana GREG STANTON, Arizona
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York JONATHAN JACOBS, Illinois
CORY MILLS, Florida SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
RICH MCCORMICK, Georgia JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas JASON CROW, Colorado
JOHN JAMES, Michigan BRAD SCHNEIDER. Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Staff Director
Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere

MARIA SALAZAR, Florida, Chair
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas, Ranking
MARK GREEN, Tennessee                    Member
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      GREG STANTON, Arizona
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio      JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
KEITH SELF, Texas      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California

Ana Quintana,  Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
WITNESSES

Wells, Mark, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Western
Hemisphere Affairs, U.S. Department of State...................     7
Natiello, Peter, Senior Deputy Assistant Administrator, Bureau
for Latin America and the Caribbean, U.S. Agency for
International Development......................................    15

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    33
Hearing Minutes..................................................    35
Hearing Attendance...............................................    36

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM RANKING MEMBER MEEKS

Statement for the record from Ranking Member Meeks...............    37

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM CONGRESSMAN MCGOVERN

Statement for the record from Congressman McGovern...............    40

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    43

COLOMBIA'S DESCENT TO SOCIALISM: ASSESSING GUSTAVO PETRO'S PRESIDENCY

Thursday, July 27, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:20 p.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Maria Elvira Salazar
(chair of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Salazar. The Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere
will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the current
Administration in Colombia and the impacts of its policies on
the bilateral relationship.
Now I recognize myself for an opening statement, and thank
you to the witnesses for being here and taking time to present
your statements.
Socialism is the creed of evil and has descended on
Colombia, one of the crown jewels of Latin America. The White
House should fear this corrupt ideology spreading into our
hemisphere and protect Latin America's oldest democracy,
Colombia.
It's our duty as Americans to rescue other countries from
this nefarious path. But instead, unfortunately, the president
of the country, Presidente Gustavo Petro, got a congratulatory
call from President Biden 36 hours into his presidency, an
honor that Ecuador's conservative president, Guillermo Lasso,
had to wait 13 months to receive from the White House.
On top of that, President Petro was invited to come to the
Oval Office, a gesture extended to very few other Latin
American presidents, and is still receiving abundant political
favors. For example, the United States at this hour is not
going to be monitoring Colombian coca crops anymore.
I'm going to repeat it. The United States is not going to
be monitoring Colombian coca crops anymore. For me, that's
outrageous. The coca harvest has already grown to over 300,000
hectares, up from 200,000 a few years ago.
At this hour Colombia is the source of 97 percent of
cocaine in the United States and its production capacity has
now passed 1,000 metric tons. On top of that, President Petro
has adopted a laissez-faire approach in the war against this
lethal drug inside Colombia.
He is hoping that Colombia farmers will destroy their crops
voluntarily, reinstating a policy that failed 5 years ago.
Petro himself used the world stage of the United Nations to
argue that oil is more dangerous than cocaine. Maybe that's why
he is hitting the Colombian oil industry harder than he is
hitting the drug cartels.
But, unfortunately, the United States is applauding his
behavior because when Secretary of State Blinken met with
President Petro he said he strongly supports the approach Petro
is taking to counter narcotics.
My understanding was that the United States is in the
business of fighting drug trafficking nor abiding it. Once
again at this hour Colombia is sinking into the dark days of
the 1980's when it was infamous for drugs and violence to the
chagrin of respectable Colombians, many of them living in my
district, Florida 27.
On the political front, President Petro displayed his poor
judgment in Belgium when he said that he did not see a
difference between siding with the United States or siding with
Russia. Between the United States or Russia.
Well, I do not think there is any doubt that Russia at this
hour is a global pariah whose brutal war against Ukraine has
killed hundreds of thousands of people and has caused levels of
destruction not seen in Europe since the Nazis. Closer to home
Petro has embraced one of Russia's most important allies in the
Western Hemisphere, Venezuela.
When Petro--President Petro reopened their shared border
dictator Nicolas Maduro and thief in chief Freddy Bernal were
there to greet him. You may know Maduro but if you do not
remember who Bernal is he was a close confidant to Hugo Chavez
and the leader of the repressive apparatus against the
Venezuelans. On top of that, Bernal is on the United States
black list.
Now, let's go to the environment. President Biden is
aligned with Petro on a very dirty climate agenda and the
question is where are the environmentalists. United States and
Colombia produce some of the world's cleanest energy but both
countries have halted their domestic production.
We in the United States are buying oil from Venezuela whose
refineries break all environmental regulations, resulting in
the dirtiest oil produced on Earth, and I have not heard one
single Biden official or supporter protesting this pro-
pollution policy.
On the crime front, President Petro is negotiating with the
two largest drug traffickers in Colombia. First, Clan del
Golfo. Presence in 28 countries, has 4,000 members. They
traffic 200 tons of cocaine a year and they're the number-one
trafficker of men, women, and children through the jungles of
Central America to the American border.
No. 2, he's negotiating with a group called ELN, the
Marxist guerrilla National Liberation Army. Five days ago the
ELN sprayed
[speaks in Spanish] Death to Maria Corina all over her
offices in Venezuela. If you do not know who Maria Corina is,
Maria Corina Machado is the top Presidential candidate against
Maduro and the best hope for democracy in Venezuela.
So when looking at Colombia a major course of correction is
needed. Over the last 30 years Colombia has made incredible
progress. The scourge of Pablo Escobar was removed. Plan
Colombia, with our help, triumphed.
Alvaro Uribe defeated the guerrillas and brought security
back to the Colombians. A new era of prosperity, democracy,
security swept over this critical country. But now it looks
like that will be all erased and there's one man to blame,
Presidente Gustavo Francisco Petro Urrego.
For the sake of my Colombian brothers and sisters, this
must not happen and we, the United States and the U.S.
Congress, should help the good people of Colombia.
So I just want to say a few words for those who may be
watching in Colombia.
[Speaks in Spanish.]
Ms. Salazar. I yield back. The chair now recognizes the
ranking member, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Castro, for his
opening statements.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairwoman, and good afternoon to
everybody. Thank you to our witnesses for your testimony and
for being here today. I want to specifically thank Mr. Wells
and Mr. Natiello for joining us. It's good to see you both
again.
I appreciate the opportunity to hear from our distinguished
witnesses and to discuss the challenges and opportunities
facing our two countries.
I deeply value the relationship between the United States
and Colombia and between the people of our two nations. For
years our deep ties with Colombia have enjoyed strong
bipartisan support in the U.S. Congress and I hope that we can
continue that tradition in pursuit of a relationship that is
based on mutual respect for democracy, human rights, economic
prosperity, and regional security.
Colombia is in the midst of change. That much is
undeniable. A year ago Colombia inaugurated President Gustavo
Petro and Vice President Francia Marquez, Colombia's first
Afro-Colombian executive, who were both elected on a platform
of change and departure from the status quo.
As allies and friends of the Colombian people, the United
States needs to be responsive to what the Colombian people have
clearly called for through the exercise of their democratic
rights. It's not the role of the United States to handpick any
nation's leaders and the Colombian people have spoken.
To those who are concerned about change I would say this.
The ties between the United States and Colombia run deep and I
have faith in the democratic institutions of Colombia. Our
relationship remains beneficial for both countries and our
financial and security support is essential to address key
regional issues.
I'm going to lay out a few of the priorities as I see it
for U.S.-Colombia ties and I hope to hear from the witnesses on
these issues.
The first is on the issue of peace and security. The
Colombian people had great courage in negotiating the 2016
Peace Accords with the FARC. The agreement was a significant
step forward for peace after decades of conflict but much of
the agreement remains unimplemented, particularly the ethnic
chapter.
I'm glad that President Petro has committed to fully
implementing this agreement and the United States as Colombia's
ally should support these efforts.
Yet, it's also important to recognize that Colombia still
faces conflict including from the ELN and other armed groups
that impedes economic inclusion and security. The Colombian
government has elevated efforts to negotiate a peace agreement
with the ELN. I urge the Biden Administration to be open minded
and provide technical support if requested.
The second policy priority for the U.S.-Colombia
relationship is cooperation to address shared challenges with
forced migration. I want to start off by commending Colombia's
decision to provide temporary protected status to almost 2
million Venezuelans fleeing the economic collapse and political
crisis in neighboring Venezuela.
We need to remind ourselves it is countries like Colombia
and Peru, Panama, Costa Rica, Mexico, and so many others that
face the immediate and most direct impacts of forced migration.
After the Los Angeles declaration on migration protection
recognized that migration is a hemispheric challenge.
As partners we need to support Colombia and its efforts to
fully integrate those who have fled Venezuela and I'm glad that
President Biden's budget request for Fiscal Year 2024 includes
$33.7 million to assist Colombia with these efforts.
Colombia is a country of 50 million people that has taken
in nearly 3 million Venezuelans with open hearts. To underscore
the scale of this, that would be like the United States taking
in almost 20 million people, a number far beyond the half a
million we have currently living in our country.
As we recognize Colombia's actions I reiterate my call for
the Biden Administration to pair their welcome efforts to
support countries like Venezuela with open hearts of our own. I
was incredibly disappointed by the Biden Administration's
failure to redesignate temporary protected status for Honduras,
El Salvador, and Nicaragua, efforts that would have brought
relief to those who have been in the United States for decades.
I continue to believe in the need for redesignations for
these countries and for Guatemala and call on the
Administration to revisit their decision.
The last thing I want to mention is the opportunities for
the United States and Colombia to work together to combat
climate change and promote economic--inclusive economic
prosperity.
That includes collaborating on renewable energy, especially
within the framework of the Inflation Reduction Act and
expanding regional integration through the America's
Partnership for Economic Prosperity. I had the opportunity to
meet President Petro and his cabinet in May and I know that
these issues are a priority for him in that they value
Colombia's relationship with the United States.
With that, Chairwoman, I yield back.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you. Other members of the committee are
reminded that opening statements may be submitted for the
record and we are pleased to have a distinguished panel of
witnesses from the State Department and the United States
Agency for International Development, who lead on the United
States effort toward Colombia, starting with Mr. Mark Wells is
the deputy assistant secretary for the Bureau of Western
Hemisphere Affairs at the Department of State. Welcome, sir.
And we have Mr. Peter Natiello, who is the senior deputy
assistant administrator for the Bureau for Latin America and
the Caribbean at the United States Agency for International
Development. Thank you for being here.
Your full statements will be made part of the record and
I'll ask each of you to keep your spoken remarks to 5 minutes
in order to allow time for member questions.
I now recognize Mr. Wells for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MARK WELLS, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU OF
WESTERN HEMISPHERE AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Wells. Chairwoman Salazar, Ranking Member Castro,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss our current approach to Colombia, a
historic ally in the region.
As one of the oldest democracies and market-driven
economies in Latin America, Colombia works closely with us to
advance shared priorities in trade, security, migration,
democracy, and climate as well as the full implementation of
Colombia's 2016 Peace Accord.
During their April 20 meeting at the White House President
Biden and President Petro reaffirmed the strategic importance
of the U.S.-Colombia partnership based on principles of
friendship, mutual respect, cultural ties, and a shared
commitment to democracy and human rights.
The United States has proudly supported security, good
governance, and rule of law for many years, which has
contributed to Colombia's long-standing commitment to
democracy.
Our investments have paid dividends over the course of our
partnership, enabling close cooperation under successive
Colombian governments with differing political perspectives.
The U.S. and Colombian people enjoy the benefits of a
successful economic relationship built on the solid foundation
of the U.S.-Colombia trade promotion agreement.
Since the agreement took effect U.S. trade with Colombia is
near an all-time high. We engage closely with the Colombian
government in the context of the agreement to improve labor and
environmental standards.
The United States has been the strongest and most
consistent contributor to the implementation of the 2016 Peace
Accord, providing more than $1.5 billion in assistance since
2017.
We work closely with civil society, the private sector, and
the Colombian government to prioritize the advancement of and
equity of women, girls, Afro-Colombians, and indigenous people,
all of whom have been disproportionately victimized by the
conflict.
The United States and Colombia coordinate closely to
address irregular migration, to promote safe and humane
migration management, and to support long-term migrant
socioeconomic integration in Colombia.
In April, President Biden and President Petro underscored
our joint commitment to counter human smuggling in the Darien
region on Colombia's border with Panama. Colombia hosts some
2.5 million Venezuelans, the largest number of displaced
Venezuelans in the region.
In 2022, the United States programmed $104 million to
Venezuelan migrants in Colombia. President Biden and President
Petro committed to a comprehensive counter narcotics approach
that includes interdiction, anti-money laundering, and rural
economic development.
We commend Colombia's efforts to expand land titling, which
allows individuals in rural communities to own their own land,
and pursue economic alternatives to illegal drug cultivation.
At the same time, we remain concerned about record levels
of coca and cocaine production as well as alarming trends in
homicide and violence that serve to undermine democracy.
We are expanding and intensifying bilateral cooperation in
intelligence and interdiction to dismantle transnational
criminal networks and to counter illicit activities that
displace rural communities.
Investing in Colombian institutions that fight corruption
and improve security and justice like the attorney general's
office, the court system, the Peace Accord transitional justice
mechanisms, and the national police force is a strategic
priority that will protect both our peoples' health, safety,
the environment, the economy, and rule of law.
As the second most biodiverse country in the world Colombia
plays a vital role in addressing the climate crisis. The United
States supports programs that advance environmental protection
by countering the drivers of deforestation, supporting
conservation of the Amazon, and promoting climate smart
agricultural practices.
In addition to our bilateral work, the United States and
other democratic nations have a responsibility to stand up for
democratic principles and protect the rules-based international
order.
Colombia and the United States share a vision for a
peaceful return to democracy in Venezuela and work closely to
strengthen inter-American institutions.
In conclusion, the Biden-Harris Administration is committed
to ensuring that the U.S.-Colombia relationship remains strong
and productive for the benefit of U.S. citizens, the Colombian
people, hemispheric stability, and the wider world.
We have overcome many historic challenges together and we
are confident that our partnership will continue to thrive for
many generations to come.
Once again, thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today. I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wells follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Mr. Wells.
And I recognize Mr. Natiello for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PETER NATIELLO, SENIOR DEPUTY ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU FOR LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN, U.S.
AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Natiello. Chairwoman Salazar, Ranking Member Castro,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify today on USAID's long-standing
partnership with Colombia.
USAID' work in Colombia spans several decades, five U.S.
Administrations and five Colombian presidencies. We partner
with a broad range of Colombian stakeholders, democratically
elected government certainly, Colombia's independent control
organizations, its vibrant private sector, its active civil
society, and marginalized communities.
USAID supports Colombia's own efforts to invest in its
historically marginalized and violence prone territories in the
following ways: first, to strengthen State presence in those
territories; second, to advance sustainable licit economic
development in those regions; and third, to create a culture of
citizen rights and responsibilities associated with democratic
governance.
We support implementation of the 2016 Peace Accord because
it creates the conditions to achieve those objectives. USAID
has been a long-standing partner in bringing greater State
presence to Colombia's conflict prone regions home to illicit
economic activities including narco trafficking, land grabbing,
illegal mining, and illegal logging.
With the U.S. Interagency we've supported successive
Colombian governments to increase public investment in these
regions, helping to improve schools, roads, health care,
justice services, and protection of social leaders.
The Peace Accord strengthens the conditions for developing
the agricultural bounty of the Colombian countryside while
conserving Colombia's rich biodiversity and expansive tropical
forests.
USAID's long-term commitment to these regions has enabled
thousands of farmers to abandon coca production in favor of
licit agricultural products like the country's renowned
specialty coffees which Colombians are so rightfully proud of,
and cacao, an important and growing sector thanks in part to
USAID's long-term commitment to that sector.
The private sector has been a key partner in these efforts.
USAID has accomplished pioneering climate change mitigation and
adaptation work with Colombia.
Our work has helped generate $27 million to date in carbon
credit sales for Afro-Colombian and indigenous communities
along the impoverished and isolated Pacific coasts.
USAID has been at Colombia's side for many years to ensure
that conflict victims can be afforded the truth, justice,
restitution, and commitments of non-repetition enshrined in the
2016 Peace Accord.
With the Truth Commission USAID has worked to compile and
publicize testimoneys that have helped tens of thousands of
victims understand what happened to them and to their loved
ones. With that truth they can begin the long and arduous
healing process.
Additionally, we've helped the victims organizations to
bring cases before the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the
Transitional Justice Court charged with holding all parties to
the conflict accountable.
Advancing the full social and economic inclusion of Afro-
Colombian and Indigenious Peoples is key to a stable and
lasting peace and a steady focus of the United States' work in
Colombia.
USAID advocated for the participation of these groups and
other historically marginalized Colombians in the peace process
and advocated for inclusion of the Chapter on Ethnic
Perspectives in the Peace Accord.
I note Representative Meeks' presence here today and thank
him for spearheading so many efforts on that front.
We recognize that despite the signing of the Accord and the
important advances in human rights over the past decade,
attacks against Colombia's human rights and environmental
defenders have risen in the years since the Accord's signing in
2016.
For this reason USAID continues working with Colombian
partners to protect human rights leaders and environmental
defenders, prevent violent attacks against them, and reduce
impunity for these crimes. More must be done to address this
violence and we're committed to ensuring it remains a top
priority of our foreign assistance.
In addition to the challenges of building peace in the
country's marginalized regions, Colombia and the broader region
are confronted with unprecedented migration challenges.
Colombia is creating a model for effective migrant
integration that holds lessons for this hemisphere and beyond.
USAID has partnered with the government of Colombia as it
implements generous Temporary Protective Status and
regularization policies, which help Venezuelans fleeing the
disastrous Maduro regime, and helping integrate Venezuelans
into Colombian society deters them from having to make the
dangerous journey through the Darien Gap.
With the generous support from Congress USAID continues to
assist Colombia in its efforts to register Venezuelan migrants
and help them to integrate into Colombian communities.
After more than five decades of war Colombia has taken
important steps toward lasting peace, security, stability, and
prosperity. The Colombian people still have much work to do and
USAID is committed to accompanying them in pursuit of our
common interests.
And we're grateful for Congress' unwavering bipartisan
support for the U.S.-Colombia relationship over the past two
decades, which has made USAID's work to build an enduring
partnership with the people of Colombia possible.
I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Natiello follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Mr. Wells. I'm sorry. Thank you,
Mr. Natiello, for your statement and I recognize myself now for
5 minutes of questioning.
I see that both of you did not mention some of the topics
that we consider highly important vis-a-vis their relationship
with Colombia and I'm going to start with you, Mr. Wells.
You know, Colombia supplies 97 percent of cocaine to the
United States and the question is why did we stop monitoring
the coca crops in Colombia?
Mr. Wells. Thank you for the question. As I understand it,
the decision not to have a coca estimate this year was made a
couple of years ago before the election of Gustavo Petro as
president.
We are the recipient agency of that----
Ms. Salazar. Was made by whom?
Mr. Wells. I believe it was made in the year 2020 and it is
by other agencies. You would have to--I would have to refer you
to the DNDCP for----
Ms. Salazar. Let me ask you something. Do you think that
that is a--that that--is that a good idea? I mean, maybe
someone else negotiated it but the Biden Administration could
say that's not a really very good idea and not really knowing
how many new crops of coca are being planted in Colombia. What
do you think about it?
Mr. Wells. The--there are----
Ms. Salazar. Don't you think it's outrageous that we do not
know?
Mr. Wells. There are various counts that are taken. So one
is overseen by the ONDCP, which is the Office of National Drug
Control Policy. There's also one by the U.N. Office of Drug----
Ms. Salazar. Yes, but the U.N. does not--do not you think
that the United Nations will know how--well, have the resources
and the technology that we have in our intelligence agencies to
really know?
I mean, you personally what do you think about that, you
being the assistant secretary for the Bureau of Western
Hemisphere?
You know, you're in charge of Colombia. What do you think
about the fact that the United States will not know how many
more coca crops the Colombians are going to be harvesting? What
do you think about that.
Mr. Wells. So, as I said, we have access to other types of
measurement. We have the UNODC count which----
Ms. Salazar. The U.N. is not the United States.
Mr. Wells. It is not, but there have been parallel counts
for many years. So we know the differences. The two teams
discuss. We understand their methodologies and there isn't a
resolution yet as to what the next steps are on the coca
estimates.
Ms. Salazar. I understand that the United States has left
the game. I mean, we left the game and we're leaving it up to
somebody else.
Mr. Wells. Let me explain how also we're engaged, though.
At the tactical level and operational level in Colombia we
assist the Colombian military and the police in doing their own
tactical level count. So they're looking for coca all the time.
They use a system called SIIMA, and as someone who has been
in the field implementing these programs, that's a very good
tool for us to use. It helps us find the coca that we're going
after.
Ms. Salazar. But you know that it sends a very bad message
that the United States is just not looking anymore.
Now, let me move to another question. You know that
President Petro is trying to negotiate peace or something with
the Clan del Golfo. Clan del Golfo, as I said in my opening
statement, is in two ignominious activities, drug trafficking
and human trafficking.
So my question is what is there to negotiate? From the
United States point of view what is there to negotiate with the
Clan del Golfo? I mean, simple. Give it to me simple. What is
there to negotiate with this, one of the most important
criminal organizations in the world?
Mr. Wells. So we share your skepticism toward any----
Ms. Salazar. Good.
Mr. Wells [continuing]. Any dialog with the Clan del Golfo.
I can tell you the intent is to not only negotiate with the
ELN, but also with other politically motivated armed groups,
but as well the Colombian government--the Petro government has
conceived of negotiating with criminal groups. We are----
Ms. Salazar. But what has the State Department said to
Petro since the Biden Administration has closed the--closed to
this--to the Petro Administration? Have you expressed your
concerns to the President?
Mr. Wells. I'm expressing them now that we are concerned
about anything that results in impunity for narco-traffickers,
and we would be very skeptical of any processes that give
impunity to anyone ororganizations trafficking drugs.
Ms. Salazar. Good. You are sending a message to President
Petro as we speak so maybe he will change his mind. Now, what
about the statement and you--and neither one of you said
anything in your opening statements about what I'm going to
pronounce right now.
You know that President Petro said in Belgium that he sees
no difference between the United States and Russia. I mean,
that's a pretty unfortunate statement at this hour when we have
the war with Ukraine. Do you agree with me?
Mr. Wells. I agree that the war against Ukraine is unjust
and brutal and it's all Russia's fault.
Ms. Salazar. And what do you think about Petro saying that
he does not know the difference between us and them? What do
you--what do you think about that?
Mr. Wells. What I can say is that three times the
government of Colombia has supported votes against Russia's
invasion of Ukraine at the U.N. We are not going to agree with
every tweet that Gustavo Petro does and in this case we do not
agree with that.
But we've been pretty consistent and the Colombians have
been supportive in international fora with regard to----
Ms. Salazar. So he says one thing but he does another.
Well, that's good. Words are not--sometimes they're not like
actions. But it's all right.
So besides the difference between the United States and
Russia, President Petro also said that oil is more dangerous
than cocaine. Oil more dangerous than cocaine. So what do you
think about that? What does the State Department think about
that?
Mr. Wells. Well, with regard to coca, I mean, I think I
said we are concerned about the rising levels of coca and
cocaine production in Colombia. With regard to his positions on
oil I can talk about that. You know, he said when he was
elected that he was going to stop all further exploration or
any new contracts in oil production. That's been his practice
so far. We have not seen him actually cancel any existing ones.
The United States--United States companies are fairly well
invested in that area. Petro has expressed a desire to move and
transition toward renewable energy and that's something that we
support, and I think there's a lot of opportunities for U.S.
companies to profit in that space. But I agree there is an
uncertainty when it comes to the hydrocarbons industry about
what's next.
Ms. Salazar. So basically what you're telling me is that he
may be saying something but doing something different because
the State Department is sending the message to--that we do not
agree with----
Mr. Wells. I'm saying he's doing exactly what he said he
would do, not to have any new oil contracts and we have not
seen that yet.
Ms. Salazar. Yes, but the fact that he's comparing oil to
cocaine and saying that cocaine is better than oil it's--for
me, it's--I think it's outrageous as well.
And I'm just going to ask one more question. I do not want
to abuse my time. But your colleague Todd Robinson said that
Colombia is a net exporter of security, right. But we just
learned that he wants to negotiate with the ELN and with the
Clan del Golfo. So what--how can we interpret a net exporter of
security?
Mr. Wells. I believe the reference was to that Colombians
provide security assistance to some of their neighbors north,
especially up in Central America. They've done so for decades.
We've partnered with them through SOUTHCOM and through
Assistant Secretary Robinson's bureau, INL, and so they have
provided some assistance. It's been useful in the past. I do
not know about the reference to the ELN.
Ms. Salazar. But do you consider that Colombia, since you
study it every single day, that Colombia at this hour under
Petro is a net exporter of security, being an ally of
Venezuela--that Venezuela has the largest refugee migration on
Earth.
Mr. Wells. What I can say about that is that they have a
relationship with Venezuela. We do not tell countries with whom
they can have relations. He decided to do that when he came
into office.
I can say he definitely shares the goal of having a
democratic solution in Venezuela. He hosted a conference in
April with some 20 countries and there those countries affirmed
the need to--for Venezuela to return to the path of democracy
and affirm that the process that the international community is
undertaking----
Ms. Salazar. I thank you. Sorry, I'm interrupting. I have
to--my time has expired. I now recognize Ranking Member Castro
for 5 minutes. Thank you.
Mr. Castro. Chairwoman, I'd like to yield my time to the
ranking member of the full committee, Gregory Meeks from New
York.
Ms. Salazar. OK.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Rep. Castro. I'm tempted to, you
know, talk about our former president, who impeached twice, now
indicted twice, may be indicted again for resurrection in
January 6 and the guy that's friends with Kim Jong-un. I would
hope our allies do not look at that or think that is what
America is.
We still have strong government institutions. So I'm not
going to talk about that. Let me start by just saying this.
Democracy in Colombia is not in peril.
The people of Colombia have embraced free and fair
elections for decades, even during some of the most challenging
years of internal conflict, and I've been involved in Colombia
since I've been here.
I've been involved with one, two, three, four, five
presidents from Pastrana, Uribe, Santos, Duque, and now Petro,
and that's our job is to deal with who the people decide they
want to be their president. That's democracy. Elections. Count
the votes. Don't deny him after they're counted. Count the
votes and the people decides who their president is.
What would imperil Colombia and, indeed, the region are the
Republican proposed cuts, roughly, 30 percent for our entire
State foreign operations and related programs budgets. These
steep cuts would deeply impede our ability to provide
humanitarian and development assistance at this pivotal time in
Colombia.
And I might add that last year we just celebrated our 200-
year-long bilateral relationship, applauded free and fair
elections, witnessed a peaceful transfer--transition of power
and supported the ushering in of a diverse, inclusive, and
progressive Administration under President Petro and Vice
President Marquez.
The narrative that Colombia has, quote, ``big problems with
democracy'' with its institutions, with the economy, and with
President Petro's total peace policy is divisive and
counterproductive, particularly when that narrative is used
against his interest in negotiating with the ELN to extend
peace beyond the 2016 Peace Accord.
Colombia is a democratic country with a democratically
elected government and democratic institutions and process in
place. One change in policy that we may disagree with does not
change our shared common values and histories. As we strive to
reach common goals we should do so in partnership.
Additionally, I'm deeply concerned that withholding funding
in Colombia runs contrary to the United States drug policy,
security, and commercial interests. The shared challenges we
have can only be addressed if we support Colombia's efforts
toward lasting peace and strengthening institutions and access
to justice.
We must help Colombia buildup civic participation and
civilian services in the most rural areas, those areas where
oftentimes indigenous and African Colombians live and which
Petro says he is focused on.
I was there at his inauguration and for the first time I
heard those communities talk about extensively--I heard it
under President Uribe and I heard it under President Santos
also.
The assistance that we provided for decades in a bipartisan
fashion does just that. It competes with the drivers of illicit
economies and violence to renew belief in democracy and ushers
in much needed change.
What's confusing and shocking to me is watching my
colleagues across the aisle complain about the influence of
China and other adversaries while simultaneously proposing to
no longer support our strongest allies in the region.
We do not advance United States interests if we withdraw
from the table nor do we address these challenges if we shut
out and deny regional stakeholders from being at the table.
A peaceful future for Colombia may require dialog with a
Cuba or a Venezuela, particularly when it concerns negotiation
with the ELN or addressing the migration challenge head on.
Colombia is not sliding into a socialist State. I've worked
closely, as I said, with every Colombian president since I was
elected to Congress because I believe in the potential of the
Colombian people. I've fallen in love with the Colombian people
and their strife in moving for democracy.
I've seen them at each one of these elections stand in line
and make sure that their voices are heard with their vote. I
saw it in this last election that elected Petro.
That's democracy, not someone coming from someplace else
and saying that you should not be. I know the constructive that
constructive dialog and cooperation between our countries will
reap benefits on both sides of our bilateral relationship.
And, again, I want to thank the witnesses that are here. I
do not want to take up any more time from this distinguished
panel. But let me just say that we've got to listen and work
with our allies in the region, not just be above them and tell
them you do what we tell you to do.
But let's promote those democracies and look at those
things that we have in common, and as what took place when
President Petro came here to visit President Biden and Members
of Congress he's indicated that he's willing to continue to do
just that.
And I yield back.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Chairman Meeks. And I just want to
add that we are also in love with the Colombian people and I
represent hundreds of thousands of them, and reality is that we
want to keep it that way for 200 years, like you said.
We want to keep free and fair elections for the Colombians.
Our concern is that Petro may stop that for the next 200 years.
But thank you.
Now I recognize Congressman Self for 5 minutes.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Madam Chair.
We just heard the term decades. Here in our own country we
realize that the past decades really do not matter because of
the open border policy under this current president. So my
point is that current presidents make a difference. Witness our
own open border policy. Words, not actions.
So my question is we've heard a lot about this 2016
agreement with the FARC. Does the FARC EP and Segundo
Marquetalia represent a threat to Colombia?
Mr. Wells. Thank you for the question, Congressman. Yes,
both of those are foreign terrorist organizations under our
law. Both the FARC EP and the Segundo Marquetalia are
derivatives of the old FARC that signed the 2016 peace
agreement.
Mr. Self. So what is your assessment of their future?
Because the FARC was years and years in Colombia. What is
their--what is your assessment of their future in Colombia?
Mr. Wells. So these are people who either did not agree
with the original Peace Accord or they never--or they signed it
and then later defected from that.
In the Segundo Marquetalia case, many of them have taken up
residence in Venezuela. In the case of the FARC EP--and I'm
speaking very generally here--they function inside the
Colombian borders.
They are politically motivated but I would say
predominantly they are narco-trafficking organizations solely
dedicated to trafficking.
Mr. Self. OK. Do you believe your words on page two, long-
standing commitment to democracy? I think Mr. Meeks just
addressed that. Counter smuggling in the Darien region--you
talked about we now see Darien peaking at, like, 400,000.
You--intensifying bilateral cooperation in intelligence and
interdiction to dismantle transnational criminal networks and
counter illicit activities--do you believe those words? Then
fight corruption and improve security and justice with the
Colombian institutions--is that--that is that going to happen
or is that cooperation possible under this president?
Mr. Wells. So earlier this summer, Congressman--and thank
you for that question--we worked with the Colombians and the
Panamanians to undertake law enforcement activities and border
control enforcement on both sides of that border in the Darien
region.
They did that with some technical assistance from SOUTHCOM.
The idea was to go after human smuggling rings in that area and
try to at least counter over the summer the effect of those.
When it comes to the institutions I'll refer you to the
attorney general's office, which has a long-standing tradition
of independence. It is, in fact, investigating some of the
allegations made against President Petro.
We have invested maybe hundreds of millions of dollars in
that organization over the years. It's the organization that
took down Pablo Escobar and does prosecutions against any--all
manner of drug traffickers.
Mr. Self. Why your focus on Venezuela in your testimony?
Mr. Wells. Well, Venezuela and Colombia are sister
republics. They have a shared population. When the FARC was
attacking the Colombian people so violently in the 1990's many
Colombians fled into Venezuela, and now you're seeing a reverse
of Venezuelans fleeing the misery and poverty brought on by the
Maduro regime into Colombia.
Mr. Self. Exactly. Thank you. So that's why I think we have
got to focus on what is happening there, not the rosy
perspectives that you gave us. And one more point about the
Darien Gap and my time will be up.
It is so dangerous, and you probably know this, that your
government, the United States government--it is so dangerous
that we issue prerape kits to the females transiting the Darien
Gap.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you. Now we're going to recognize
Congresswoman Kamlager-Dove for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
want to thank you witnesses for being here today. I want to
first State that I do not support the premise of this hearing,
which is that we should be attacking a partner because the
elected government's priorities do not align with our domestic
views.
It is patronizing and paternalistic and anti-democratic to
weaponize our relationship in order to wield veto power over
the domestic political process of our democratic partners and
it brazenly resurrects a destructive cold war approach that
caused deep instability and dangerous mistrust and ruptured
relations in ways we are still trying to repair.
And as I just have been listening, I--you know, talking
about, well, you have a president who's saying something, do
you agree with what they've said. You know, I do not want to
follow our ranking member but we did have a former president
who said a whole bunch of things, who said that he could shoot
somebody in the face walking down Fifth Avenue and nothing
would happen to him, who said he could grab someone--a woman by
her genitalia, who said we should have a complete and total
shutdown of Muslims entering the United States, who said that
laziness is a trait in Blacks, who said about Mexican-Americans
they're rapists even though some of them, I assume, are good
people. I could go on and on.
I would hope that no one on this committee supports those
kinds of statements. It's about allowing people to have free
and fair elections in their own country. I hear things on the
floor that I do not agree with. It's not about attacking that
individual person.
I also want to say before I mess up my notes that the
United States remains Colombia's main trading partner. Colombia
is a top destination for United States agricultural exports
valued at more than $4.2 billion.
Over 500 American companies have arrived in Colombia over
the past decade with investments worth $26 billion. We're
talking about GE, Amazon, Cisco, IBM. Colombia and the United
States share one of Latin America's most comprehensive defense
cooperation frameworks.
Since Petro has been sworn in over eight multinational
operations have been conducted between the Colombian navy and
the United States.
Colombian national police have conducted over 104 joint
operations with U.S. law enforcement agencies, operational
results against drug trafficking, and do not get me started on
our drug policy in the United States because we only seem to
want to go after certain people and maybe if people stopped
using drugs we'd have to stop having drug policies that
disproportionately impact Black and brown people. I digress.
Operational results against drug trafficking since
President Petro took office show figures on interdiction,
seizures, and the destruction of criminal infrastructure,
609,000 tons of cocaine seized, 887,000 tons of coca leaf
seized, 61,000 tons of coca base seized.
It sounds to me like we have a good partner. Last I checked
in any kind of relationship, you know, an effective partnership
isn't you agree 100 percent of the time on 100 percent of
things. I do not know a partnership like that. I do not know a
marriage like that.
So I do not know why we're trying to be very discriminatory
when it comes to Colombia. So none of those were questions. I
apologize. But I'm irritated.
But I will ask you both a question. Help me, Jesus. Can you
speak in just--maybe not--maybe in 30 seconds or less, very
interested in the ways that your programs and your engaging of
the Colombians and the Colombian government are addressing
issues like illegal mining and discrimination against Afro-
Colombians and human rights issues because those are also
important things as well as reminding people how important it
is to tell the truth. You only have 18 seconds. I'm so sorry.
Mr. Natiello. Yes. Thank you so--thank you so much for the
questions, Representative. I'll just say in the short time that
I have that USAID is actively involved in working with the
Colombian government-successive Colombian governments-and
communities in mining areas to help formalize informal miners
so that they can protect workers rights, so they can pay taxes,
they can sell their gold through legal markets, et cetera.
We've been doing that for many years and we've had some
important successes with it, pilots that Colombia can then use
to scale to reach this issue on a broader scale with more
people and more miners and more communities.
And just in terms of our work with Afro-Colombians and
indigenous, thanks to the generosity of this Congress and
really----
Ms. Salazar. Your time is up.
Mr. Natiello. Yes. Thank you very much.
Ms. Salazar. Thanks to you. Thank you, Congresswoman
Kamlager-Dove.
And then a vote has been called on the House floor, as you
know. Therefore, the subcommittee will have to recess and we
will reconvene following the vote. There's only one vote. So
the subcommittee stands in recess.
[Recess.]
Ms. Salazar. So the subcommittee will reconvene and I will
now recognize Congressman Stanton for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much, Chair--thank you very
much, Chairwoman. Thank you, both of our witnesses, for being
here today and your patience with the votes in the middle of
our hearing.
I represent Arizona, which is no stranger to the challenges
and opportunities of migration, the harms of drug trafficking,
or the competition posed by China.
These are complex issues that require multilateral
solutions and strong bilateral ties and Colombia has been a
reliable partner on these fronts, recently working with our
State Department have set up a regional processing center for
migrants journeying through Latin America.
These centers prescreen individuals to see if they are
eligible to enter the United States legally and are intended to
slow the flow of migration after the end of Title 42.
Colombia is one of only three Latin American countries
working with the United States on this important project.
Colombia also hosts more than two and a half million Venezuelan
migrants and refugees who have fled the autocratic Maduro
regime.
These migrants need help settling in Colombia and the
United States Agency for International Development provides
funding for just that purpose.
Last year USAID granted around $30 million to support food
security, health care, job training so that Venezuelan migrants
could find a home in Colombia rather than making the dangerous
trek north to the United States.
Our country has also worked with Colombia on counter
narcotics efforts. 2021 U.S.-Colombia Counter Narcotics
Strategy set about holistically reducing coca supplies by
targeting laboratories and traffickers, investing in the
security and economic development of the rural areas, and
restoring tropical rainforests that have been turned into coca
fields.
Finally, while I hope that Colombia establishes diplomatic
ties with Taiwan I also recognize that Colombia is one of only
12 Latin American or Caribbean countries that is not a member
of China's Belt and Road Initiative.
Instead, it maintains close ties with the United States,
which is its largest trade and investment partner. With this
strong relationship as a backdrop, I have a few questions for
Deputy Assistant Secretary Wells.
Recently, the State and Foreign Operations Appropriations
Subcommittee voted to defer funding to Colombia, potentially
leaving the State Department and USAID with no designated
funding system to work on projects with Colombia.
Does this undermine the progress we've made to make America
safer?
Mr. Wells. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
Let me just say that the shared goals that we have in
Colombia include countering transnational crime and drug
trafficking, promoting peace and security, protecting the
Amazon, preventing and responding to human rights violations,
reducing irregular migration influx, and supporting the
government of Colombia to integrate the Venezuelan communities.
We use the funds we get to do some of these things. It's to
increase the operational capacity of the Colombian national
police and their military, which serve as staunch allies for us
in the region in all kinds of operations.
We support the attorney general's office and Colombia's
justice sector, which are critical components in maintaining
Colombia's constitutional checks and balances. We also do Peace
Accord implementation.
We protect human rights and social and environmental
defenders who face increased risk of attack and we support, as
I mentioned, the programs that allow us to help Venezuelans.
Instead of going north they settle down in Colombia and
integrate into Colombian society, and we protect the Amazon
including support to programs to counter deforestation and
promote agriculture that does not harm the environment. Those
are all things that we can do when we have a consistent flow of
assistance.
Mr. Stanton. If we were to defer this funding, as the
Subcommittee on--in Appropriations recently voted on how would
such a deferral encourage Colombia to create closer ties with
China?
Mr. Wells. So their relationship with China, as you
mentioned, you know, we are still the number-one investor. We
are the number-one trading partner with them. As you mentioned,
they have not signed the Belt and Road Initiative. I know that
President Petro has talked about that or has considered that.
But the U.S. companies are still quite vibrant there and we
have a robust--we have a trade agreement. They do not have one
with China. Were we to back out of this decades-long investment
in security and social ties we would be surrendering a vital
strategic ally in the region and a partner that can work with
us on an array of issues.
Mr. Stanton. Final question. Same thing. If we were to
defer funding how would it impact Colombia's ability work with
the U.S. on migration and counter narcotics?
Mr. Wells. So in the same way, we depend on the Colombian
military and police to effect all kinds of seizures, detection,
and monitoring.
They're fully integrated with the U.S. military when it
comes to detecting and monitoring cocaine shipments through the
region. We would--that would--suffer if we did not have that
funding.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Congressman. And now I'm going to
recognize myself for 5 minutes. I just have few more questions
that I would like to share with you and, specifically, Mr.
Wells, you said during your testimony that President Petro
works very well with the rest of Central American countries
that are exporting people to the United States.
But I just want to share with you the fact that the
Panamanian foreign minister and some people at the highest
level of the Panamanian government came to my office and told
me specifically that they have a problem with Colombia because
more than 400,000 people have arrived through the Darien jungle
and Colombia really does not stop them.
On the contrary, Colombia and under the Petro
Administration lets them come through and the Panamanians find
themselves having a major problem because they cannot absorb so
many people trying to go through Central America to get to the
Mexican border.
So could you please explain to me what is the difference
between your statements and what the Panamanians are living,
are experiencing on the ground?
Mr. Wells. Thank you for the question. As I mentioned,
there are 2.5 million Venezuelans who have stayed in Colombia
so the Colombians are playing host to that group. That's a
group that is not going north.
There are a lot going north and the United States engages
in a multi-country and multi-agency effort to basically take
three lines of action. One is enforcement. One is diplomacy----
Ms. Salazar. But I do not think that's what I asked you. I
asked you the relationship between Colombia and Panama.
Specifically, the Panamanians do not think that the Colombians
are helping them stop the traffic.
Mr. Wells. I think it is a regular problem. I mentioned
earlier we help them forwarding----
Ms. Salazar. But are you aware what the Panamanians--but
are you aware what the Panamanians are saying? I'm sure the
Panamanians have come to the State Department and explained
their concerns. They need Colombia's help in order to stop the
flow of people through the Darien jungle.
Mr. Wells. And when I served in Bogota from 2019 to 2021, I
got the same complaint that the Colombians do not do enough to
stop the trafficking or the free movement of Venezuela mostly
through the----
Ms. Salazar. But do not you think that now things have
gotten worse and that Colombia is helping less?
Mr. Wells. I think there is an uptick in trafficking as the
situation in Venezuela worsens. There are greater outflows of
migrants and we do continue to work with both sides of the
Darien.
Ms. Salazar. But you have not helped--you have not heard
from the Colombians that concern that I just explained to you?
You have not heard that from the--from the Panamanians?
Mr. Wells. I have heard that in the past, yes.
Ms. Salazar. But no--now in the present?
Mr. Wells. And I hate to apologize but I actually do not
cover Panama. So, but I know that it is a complaint and I know
that we work with them. It's why I mentioned the joint
operations in the Darien that we worked on earlier this summer.
Ms. Salazar. OK. Now, what about the ELN? You know, as I
explained during my opening remarks, that the Petro government
is negotiating with the ELN, which is one of the two guerrilla
movements in Colombia. The ELN right now is on the terrorist
list.
By any chance is the State Department is thinking or
considering the possibility of removing the ELN from the
terrorist list due to the fact that the Petro Administration is
wanting to negotiate peace with them?
Mr. Wells. No, we are not considering removing the ELN from
the foreign terrorist organization list.
Ms. Salazar. Good.
Mr. Wells. The ELN process is something that we are
watching, we're monitoring, and we are in constant
communication with the Colombian government about it. I think,
as I mentioned earlier, we want to maintain some healthy
skepticism about it because the ELN is a terrorist
organization.
They have started peace processes in the past and they have
not fulfilled it. Next week there is a 6-month cease-fire
that's supposed to go into effect, and we call on the ELN to
protect civilians and any victims of their terrorist
activities. They need to be accountable for holding up that
cease-fire.
Ms. Salazar. And what do you think about the fact that the
ELN sprayed graffiti on Maria Corina Machado's office? The
Biden Administration has been working with the Maduro
government and my question is do not you think that maybe we
should be sending a message to President Petro and President
Maduro that Maria Corina should be protected and should be
guarded against any type of threats?
Mr. Wells. We, obviously, condemn that act and we----
Ms. Salazar. Did you know about it?
Mr. Wells. Yes, and we were pleased to see that President
Petro also condemned it and he called on the suspension of
Maria Corina Machado's disqualification to be lifted because--
--
Ms. Salazar. Good.
Mr. Wells [continuing]. He himself experienced a similar
treatment years ago.
Ms. Salazar. Of course. Of course. We all want democracy in
both countries. Now, based--finally, you also know the--some of
the comments that President Petro has made against the
Colombian press. He called them specifically racist, enemy of
the people, and that they have incited genocide.
What do you think about the Colombian press? You have many
of those members among you here in this hearing. In my
understanding the Colombian press is pretty impartial and they
do a good job.
Do you agree with what President Petro is saying, that they
are racist, the enemy of the people, specifically the enemy of
the people?
Mr. Wells. No. Independent press is not the enemy of the
people anywhere. I believe that Colombian journalism is
excellent.
They have a lot of investigative journalism and, in fact,
they're the ones that have investigated a lot of the corruption
allegations that President Petro is facing now. And so----
Ms. Salazar. Good.
Mr. Wells [continuing]. They will continue to do that
because----
Ms. Salazar. This is a very important message that you're
saying, Mr. Wells, and I'm very happy that you're doing--that
you're saying it because the Colombians have a very
independent, rigorous news media and we need to preserve them
regardless of how they are covering the news.
That's up to them, which is the same case in the United
States. So I'm glad that the State Department is sending that
message to the Petro Administration do not touch the press. Do
you agree with me?
Mr. Wells. Yes. In fact, the existence really shows the
strength and vitality of Colombian democracy today.
Ms. Salazar. Indeed, and that's why we need to preserve
that vibrancy in the Colombian democracy. You agree with me?
Mr. Wells. I agree.
Ms. Salazar. And do you feel by any chance that Mr. Petro--
President Petro may be one of those hindrances or the forces
against the continuation of that democracy?
Mr. Wells. As I said earlier, we have relationships with
the institutions. I do not want to comment on every single
tweet he puts out.
I think he issues more than a dozen tweets a day. He is one
of the most prolific tweeters. I will say we support Colombian
institutions. We believe that Colombian democracy remains
strong today.
Ms. Salazar. And do you have any fear that those Colombian
institutions may be under threat?
Mr. Wells. I do not.
Ms. Salazar. Good. Well, let's keep it that way. Thank you,
sir.
And now I recognize the ranking member, Mr. Castro.
Mr. Castro. Thank you.
Mr. Wells, you made a comment and there was some discussion
about the migration--the migration situation of Venezuelans to
Colombia, and can you describe how Venezuelans have been
treated in Colombia who are arriving from Venezuela there?
Or either one of you and whoever is best suited to answer
that. For example, have they been provided work permits, food,
shelter, so forth?
Mr. Natiello. Yes, I'll take that, Representative Castro.
Thank you for that.
So it's noteworthy that Colombia has pre-registered for
temporary protective status to two and a half million
Venezuelans. Colombia has advanced rapidly to register close to
2 million of those folks.
By being registered those Venezuelans have access to health
care in Colombia. They can enter the job market in Colombia.
They would pay taxes, I believe, in Colombia. They could put
their children in school.
And so USAID has been an important partner to Colombia in
helping them do that. Colombia has established dozens of
integration centers around the country to help that process.
USAID is supporting Colombia in 11 of the centers that receive
the biggest flow through of Venezuelan migrants.
And, again, our support has helped that registration
process. It's helped them get connected to health care, to help
their kids get in school and we also work with microfinance
banks to provide credits to Venezuelan migrants so they can
start businesses and we provided business training as well to
thousands----
Mr. Castro. And let me--well, first, I want to say thank
you to USAID, to the State Department. Thank you for your work
there. And is it safe to say, fair to say, that if Venezuela
was not--I'm sorry, if Colombia was not so receiving of
Venezuelans that many of those Venezuelans might try to make it
up north including to the United States?
Mr. Natiello. So, I would say that Colombia's efforts to
register and integrate Venezuelans is deterring them from going
through the Darien Gap and from going north and that's one of
the reasons why USAID works closely with Colombia to just to
help them to support their Venezuelan brothers and sisters.
Mr. Castro. And, you know, I know because we've been
discussing political leaders and so forth and the actions of
nations with respect to migration, and then you compare that to
the barbaric actions of Texas Governor Greg Abbott, who put
death traps at the U.S.-Mexico border and the Rio Grande, laid
razor wire including in areas of the river that rise such that
razor wire becomes invisible to people who make their way and
get caught in it, and also installed barrel traps with netting
so that people get caught in those barrel traps.
So if those folks had not stayed in Colombia it's likely
that some of those Venezuelans would have encountered these
death traps on the Rio Grande. It's gotten so bad that there
was a 4-year-old girl who was passing out in the water and was
instructed by Texas State trooper leadership to be pushed back
into the water toward Mexico. Very barbaric inhumane policies
that you might expect to see come out of a place like North
Korea or somewhere like that.
So I want to say thank you to Colombia, to both its
conservative and liberal presidents who have maintained that
policy of treating folks humanely in both conservative and more
progressive governments, and thank you all for your work in
supporting them.
I also want to ask you just one more question. President
Petro represents change in Colombian politics but I believe
there's still substantial continuity in U.S.-Colombian
relations.
Can you both speak or either one of you speak, because I'm
short on time, to whether you've seen a significant change in
our relationship with Colombia, particularly cooperation on
such areas of national and regional interests since President
Petro was elected? Has something significantly changed in the
U.S.-Colombia relationship, in your estimation?
Mr. Wells. Thank you for the question. No, in the regional
context we still have great cooperation with the Colombians.
As I mentioned, they held a conference on Venezuela and
convened 20 countries to talk about the international
community's response for Venezuela and encouraging a democratic
return to democracy.
I'd also say as was previously mentioned--just that there
is a continuation of extraditions. There's a continuation of
military exercises. There has been no interruption that we can
see in joint police operations to confiscate drugs.
So institutionally all of those pieces we see as having no
change, and we continue to have good cooperation even though
there is a change in political perspective in the presidency.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, gentlemen, for your testimony. I
yield back, Chair.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Ranking Member, Mr. Castro, and I
want to thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony.
Mr. Natiello, sorry that I did not get to talk to you too
much but I'm sure there will be a next time. And to Mr. Wells
for being here and the rest of the members of this committee--
subcommittee for their questions.
The members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses. We will ask you to respond to them
in writing.
So pursuant to committee rules, all members may have 5 days
to submit statements, questions, and extraneous material for
the record, subject to the length limitations.
Without objection, the committee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:53 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM RANKING MEMBER MEEKS
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM CONGRESSMAN MCGOVERN
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
