- ANALYZING THE FISCAL YEAR 2025 STATE AND FOREIGN OPERATIONS BUDGET REQUEST FOR EUROPE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ANALYZING THE FISCAL YEAR 2025
STATE AND FOREIGN OPERATIONS
BUDGET REQUEST FOR EUROPE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

June 26, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-112

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-651 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey      GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida AMI BERA, California
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANDY BARR, Kentucky TED LIEU, California
RONNY JACKSON, Texas SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
YOUNG KIM, California DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida COLIN ALLRED, Texas
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan ANDY KIM, New Jersey
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,  SARA JACOBS, California
American Samoa KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
J. FRENCH HILL, Arkansas SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio Florida
JIM BAIRD, Indiana GREG STANTON, Arizona
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
CORY MILLS, Florida SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas JASON CROW, Colorado
JOHN JAMES, Michigan GABE AMO, Rhode Island
KEITH SELF, Texas KWEISI MFUME, Maryland
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana  BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam

Brendan Shields, Staff Director
Sophia LaFargue, Staff Director

Subcommittee on Europe

THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey, Chairman

JOE WILSON, North Carolina           WILLIAM KEATING,
DARRELL ISSA, California                 Massachusetts,Ranking Member
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      DINA TITUS, Nevada
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
KEITH SELF, Texas      GABE AMO, Rhode Island

Michael Callessen, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

O'Brien, The Honorable James, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
European and Eurasian Affairs, U.S. Department of State........     7
McKee, The Honorable Erin Elizabeth, Assistant Administrator,
Bureau for Europe and Eurasia, U.S. Agency for International
Development....................................................    13

INFORMATION SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Article submitted for the record by Representative Keating: The
Guardian Dealing with Orban's Government Increasing Efforts to
Crack Down on Independent Voices...............................    19

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    37
Hearing Minutes..................................................    39
Hearing Attendance...............................................    40

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    41

ANALYZING THE FISCAL YEAR 2025 STATE
AND FOREIGN OPERATIONS BUDGET REQUEST FOR EUROPE

Wednesday, June 26, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Europe
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:02 p.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Thomas Kean, Jr.
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Kean. The Subcommittee on Europe of the House Foreign
Affairs Committee will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the President's
State Department and foreign operations budget request for
Europe and Eurasia for Fiscal Year 2025.
I'd also like to welcome the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Schneider, who is joining us today. He will participate
following all other members in today's hearing.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
We are here to consider the President's Fiscal Year 2025
budget request for the State Department and USAID's operations
in Europe.
Ultimately, Congress has the power of the purse as the
House will determine this week by voting on the State and
Foreign Operations Appropriations Act on the House floor.
However, we appreciate the opportunity to consider the
Administration's budget request for Europe because it indicates
what resources the Administration believes it needs to address
pressing national security challenges on our continent--on the
continent.
Money is policy and where the Administration intends to
allocate its funding is indicative of its policies and its
priorities.
I'll start by highlighting the importance of congressional
engagement in our Nation's foreign policy. While the Congress
appropriates money we also have the duty to the American people
to ensure that their hard-earned taxpayer dollars are being
spent responsibly and with the necessary amount of oversight to
prevent waste, fraud, and abuse.
During today's hearing I hope that our witnesses are
prepared to address whatever concerns that members raise in the
interests of transparency. A constructive policy in Europe and
in Eurasia is crucial to U.S. national security.
As a bloc the European Union is the U.S.' single largest
trading partner with an estimated $1.3 trillion in trade in
goods and services in 2022.
As of 2022 U.S. foreign direct investment in the EU was
$2.7 trillion with European foreign direct investment in the
U.S. totaling $2.4 trillion. Moreover, Europe is home to our
closest and longest standing allies and security partners.
The vast majority of the NATO alliance is located in Europe
and I am glad that for the first time in many years a majority
of the alliance will hit the minimum 2 percent of GDP defense
spending threshold.
This is due to transformative investments in defense on the
part of our European allies. That said, there are still
numerous allies who will not yet hit this important defense
spending target this year and I strongly urge them to meet this
target immediately or have a credible plan to do so as soon as
possible.
I look forward to welcoming our fellow NATO members to
Washington during next month's summit to hear a direct update
on status of alliance spending.
The United States cannot go it alone in the face of the
unholy alliance of dictators assembling around the world.
Simply put, we need allies. Throughout Russia's unprovoked
and illegal war of aggression against Ukraine our European
allies have made sure that the U.S. is not standing alone with
Ukraine against the greatest threat to Europe in decades.
While the Biden Administration dithered European nations
moved first on providing Ukraine with Stinger and Javelin
missile systems in February 2022 to stymie the initial Russian
assault.
European nations also led on providing modern main battle
tanks, long-range missiles, and advance fighter jets to
Ukraine. Europe has even outspent the U.S. on nonsecurity
assistance commitments to Ukraine by a difference of $50
billion.
I applaud this leadership from our European allies. That is
what burden sharing does, indeed, look like. Additionally, I
encourage our partners in Europe to continue waking up to the
dangers posed by the Chinese Communist Party as well.
Democracies of the world have a sacred duty to defend the
values that we preach and which the CCP openly opposes. Given
the avenues for the CCP to exert influence over our free
societies throughout coercive economic practices is
unacceptable.
We must be clear eyed about the threat that China poses to
peace and prosperity in Europe and around the world. I look
forward to our conversation today to discuss the
Administration's policy in Europe.
With Putin's war continuing to rage in Ukraine, democratic
backsliding in Georgia, high tensions in the Western Balkans,
and many other pressing challenges to peace and stability on
the continent, this is truly a critical period for the future
of Europe and for the United States.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member, the gentleman
from Massachusetts, Mr. Keating, for any statement that he may
have.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Chairman Kean, for holding this
important hearing today, and to our witnesses for their
testimony in the Fiscal Year 1925 European budget request.
The European continent has long been a region critical to
U.S. national security interests. Our transatlantic bonds with
some of our oldest allies like the United Kingdom and France as
well as Germany, the Baltics, and Poland are based in our
shared beliefs in democracy, rule of law, and freedom of
speech.
Beyond our shared values, robust and active U.S. foreign
policy in the past year has brought a landmark nuclear energy
partnership to Poland, a surge in humanitarian and economic
support for displaced Armenians from Nagorno-Karabakh, and
increased multilateral cooperation through the Ukraine Defense
Contact Group.
At the same time, the reconstitution of the Northern
Ireland Assembly, accession of Finland and Sweden into NATO,
and democracy support for partners in Belarusian opposition and
in Central Europe are representative of the importance of U.S.
engagement across the continent.
Yet, remaining challenges in Europe continue to demand U.S.
engagement. Nowhere is this more important than in Ukraine.
In April, the chairman and I met with President Zelenskyy
in Kyiv for over an hour to discuss the state of the conflict,
the desire to transfer Russian sovereign assets, and the
battlefield needs of air defense and long-range missiles.
The U.S. continues to approach these challenges with
creativity and tenacity, devising mechanisms like a $50 billion
loan to Ukraine by using the interest of Russian sovereign
assets as collateral and adapting policies to reflect the
evolving needs of the Ukrainian military such as allowing
strikes into Russian territory with U.S. origin weapons.
These actions saved Ukraine lives and I urge the
Administration to continue to adapt and innovate policies that
ensure Ukraine's victory over Russia.
I also commend allies and partners including Romania,
Denmark, and others who have provided air defense systems to
Ukraine. The chairman and I led a letter in April following our
trip to Kyiv calling for allies and partners to provide
additional air defense and long-range missile stocks to Europe.
It's reassuring to see our allies step up to the plate in
Ukraine's time of need. While Ukraine fights to preserve its
democracy leaders across Europe have sought to undermine
democratic principles, the rule of law, and the values that
underpin our transatlantic alliance.
Most recently in Georgia the Georgian Dream Party forced
through a Kremlin-inspired foreign agent law and signed a
strategic partnership agreement with China, a country actively
supporting Russia's war in Ukraine, even as the Kremlin
continues to occupy 20 percent of Georgia's territory.
Meanwhile, in Hungary Prime Minister Orban has clamped down
on dissent and escalated persecution of the LGBTQ+ people and
other minorities, all the while embracing Russian malign
influence and Chinese investment in Budapest. The actions of
Orban as well as the Georgian Dream are an extreme concern and
they undermine the long-term interest of the Georgian and
Hungarian people.
Meanwhile, elections across Europe this year have given
rise to far-right parties who promote an isolationist anti-
immigrant world view which has no place in our vibrant and
diverse societies.
As we await upcoming elections in France and the United
Kingdom and our own elections later this year we must stand
ready to reject those extremist ideas that contradict our
sacred democratic values of inclusion and acceptance.
Finally, as we approach the NATO summit in Washington
marking the 75th anniversary of this alliance we must redouble
our commitment to Article 5 and again make clear that any
attack on any NATO member will result in a full and undeniable
response.
The unity of our alliance is our strength and we must use
this opportunity to deepen our cooperation with Ukraine, ensure
adequate defense spending on our allies, and strengthen
partnerships in the Indo-Pacific.
Unfortunately, just as the threats we face are most acute
and the desire for U.S. engagement, particularly in Europe, is
the most warranted, House Republicans have proposed a 12
percent cut to the State and foreign operations budgets.
These cuts will undoubtedly undermine the State Department
and USAID's ability to carry out their mission. As Russia
continues to commit to war crimes in Ukraine, deepens
partnerships with North Korea, China, and Iran, and acts
brazenly on the world stage, we should be expanding our
diplomatic engagements around the world.
Anything less will send a message to the autocratic world
and particularly to China that our actions will go undeterred.
I look forward to questioning our witnesses on this
important issue of adequately funding the State Department and
USAID for Fiscal Year 1925 to ensure they can carry out their
missions and continue to do the hard but enduring work of
expanding our national security.
Thank you, Chairman Kean. I yield back.
Mr. Self [presiding]. Thank you, Ranking Member. Other
members of the subcommittee are reminded that opening
statements might be submitted for the record.
We are pleased to have a panel of distinguished witnesses
before us today on this important topic. Ambassador James
O'Brien is Assistant Secretary in the Bureau of European and
Eurasian Affairs at the Department of State. Ambassador Erin
McKee is the Assistant Administrator for the Bureau of Europe
and Eurasia at the U.S. Agency for International Development.
Thank you for being here, both of you. Your full statements
will be made part of the record and I ask you to keep your
verbal remarks to 5 minutes.
I now recognize Ambassador O'Brien for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JAMES O'BRIEN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU OF
EUROPEAN AND EURASIAN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. O'Brien. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking
Member. I'm really heartened that I can agree with nearly every
sentence in both opening statements.
I'm reminded that we sit in the building named after Sam
Rayburn, who led the charge to prepare America to enter World
War II, and I think we're at a stage where we have to prepare
ourselves for the long term and turn away from the call of
isolationism that I think would endanger our allies and
ourselves.
So what we're discussing is a budget request from the
Administration. I understand there are other proposals around.
What we are suggesting is it's $1.26 billion.
Of that about $722 million is for the assistance accounts
and there's about $583 million that is for the operating
capacity of the Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, which
I lead.
These are about 3 to 6 percent increases. They're also
meant to normalize our spending because we have been greatly
dependent on supplemental expenditures to deal with the
extraordinary threats posed by Russia's further invasion of
Ukraine.
As just one example, if we're not able to maintain these
levels we could end up losing 70 percent of the staff that
manages the sanctions programs against Russia and Iran.
I realize that's nothing that this committee wants but
that's the consequence of some of the cuts that are proposed.
Now, how do we propose to spend that money? In rough
proportion, 38 percent of the funding will be spent on Ukraine.
About 26 percent will be spent on Euro-Atlantic integration--
that is that bucket of, say, 11 countries that run along the
southern part of Europe from the Adriatic to the Caspian Sea--
and about 26 percent of what I'll call global governance
challenges, the ability of us to compete and defeat China
economically, the ability of us to work with our European
partners.
As Chairman Kean's opening remarks noted, these are our
largest trading partners and when we cooperate we are able to
succeed because we're the most powerful, prosperous economic
bloc in the world.
Now, how exactly will we propose to spend the money? And we
can go into this more in questions but I'll look at each one of
those three buckets in order, first on Ukraine.
So the goal of our strategy is pretty simple. We want
Ukraine to win. We want it to thrive while it's fighting on its
way to victory.
How does it do that? It does it by holding Russia in the
east, destabilizing Russia's firing positions and the places
from which it threatens Ukrainian territory in Crimea and right
up against Ukrainian lines, and restoring its economic life.
That means having adequate air defense and the ability to
export through the southern ports. When that happens we know
that Ukraine's economy recovers, its tax base improves, and
it's able to begin paying much more of its own way.
We saw that over the last winter when Ukraine's grain
exports began to reach prewar levels and economic life in its
core industries, especially its iron and steel industries,
began to recover from essentially single-digit utilization
rates.
So that's where we're putting our money to work, and
Ambassador McKee and I can describe specific programs we're
using there.
The second bucket--again, about a quarter of the spending
we're proposing is for Euro-Atlantic integration. Over the last
2 years we have had a historic movement of consolidation that
the EU has offered nine of the countries along that graph some
future as part of the EU and NATO is having discussions about
either admitting or bringing closer many of the countries.
We're now also seeing a bit of a reaction. Elites in some
of those countries--the ranking member mentioned Georgia and--
well, Hungary is a current member but also within Bosnia and
some other countries some elites are bucking against having to
make the hard reforms that are needed to join the EU and NATO.
We have to work together to see that that does not
continue. We're also seeing Russia trying to be very active in
that area and we are having some success in countering Russia's
malign influence.
For example, with Canada, the U.K., and support from the EU
we uncovered a Russian disinformation plot to destabilize the
democratically elected European-oriented government in Moldova.
The third bucket, again, about a quarter of what we're
discussing is on global governance issues and this is
especially important with regard to China, and I'm happy to
describe more what we are doing with our European allies in
that regard.
Thank you for your time and for having us here today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Brien follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Wagner [presiding]. We thank you. We thank you,
Assistant Secretary O'Brien.
I'd now like to recognize Ambassador McKee for 5 minutes of
your opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF ERIN ELIZABETH MCKEE, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
BUREAU FOR EUROPE AND EURASIA, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT

Ms. McKee. Thank you, Chairman, Ranking Member,
distinguished members of the Subcommittee on Europe, and I
really appreciate the invitation to speak to you today on
USAID's assistance and, of course, the budget for Fiscal Year
2025.
I welcome the opportunity to discuss the agency's
priorities to advance and support, obviously, our foreign
policy and national security goals in Europe and Eurasia, and
to that end the President's request for Fiscal Year 2025
includes $722.3 million for Europe and Eurasia through the
AEECA account and this will directly support U.S. leadership in
international development with the aims of achieving a durable
peace and a dignified peace in the region.
Starting with Ukraine, we are very grateful for the
overwhelming bipartisan support shown for desperately needed
funding this past April. Our highest priority remains--has been
and remains ensuring Ukraine's victory.
As Ambassador O'Brien already indicated, that is
fundamental to peace and an enduring peace throughout Europe
and Eurasia.
In the face of Russia's recent attacks on civilian energy
infrastructure USAID, together with our other interagency
colleagues, are rapidly deploying assistance to bring back
significant electric power, heat generation, by this winter
through repairs and delivering materials that will protect
families that have been repeatedly targeted--families and
facilities.
We will continue to lay the groundwork for private
investment in new power generation, support reforms in the
energy sector, and increase regional energy security through
investments in diversified generation and decentralized
distribution.
We cannot talk about the region without starting with
Ukraine. The Fiscal Year 1925 request is driven by recognition
that economic and security assistance to Ukraine go hand in
hand.
Putin knows how critical Ukraine's economy is in this fight
and that's why he's actively targeting Ukraine's grain exports,
energy infrastructure, civilians, to derail this strategy, to
erode confidence and undermine morale.
It is our hope now that U.S. resources will help Ukraine
eventually build the economy it must have to generate greater
revenue, sustain livelihoods, and decrease reliance on support
from us and other donors.
One way that we're doing this is support to small and
medium enterprises. In May 2024, just last month, USAID had
supported over 26,000 small and medium enterprises in the
agriculture, IT, and manufacturing sectors.
What does this mean? We helped create or sustain over
156,000 jobs. Those are taxpayers. Those are folks that are in
it for the long haul to help Ukraine not just win the fight but
win the future.
In Moldova right next door we have enabled the energy
sector to break away from Russia's 30-year coercive grip by
diversifying energy sources and increasing their integration
with the European energy market.
Compared to a near total dependence on Gazprom in 2021 the
government of Moldova met 100 percent of its gas needs with
non-Russian supplies in 2023. That is a big success.
In the Caucasus, as both the chairman and ranking member
mentioned, we are responding to new challenges but we also see
new opportunities.
In Georgia we are focused on ensuring that Georgia remains
on its democratic path and runs a free and fair election in
October and, hopefully, regains momentum toward EU accession.
The ruling party's passage of the foreign influence law and
anti-Western rhetoric gravely threatens civil society,
independent media, and demonstrate the importance of USAID's
assistance to bolster the democratic forces there.
In Armenia we are seizing an important opportunity to help
this reforming democracy strengthen its economy and build its
overall resilience against external pressure.
Additionally, we are increasing our work on the Middle
Corridor as a major gateway connecting Central Asia to Europe,
which diversifies movement of goods, services, and reduces
dependence on routes through Russia, the PRC, and Iran.
We continue to watch the Western Balkans closely to ensure
stability is maintained and build on gains made in democracy,
anti-corruption, and economic growth.
So thanks to the ongoing and essential support from
Congress, USAID has demonstrated tangible results and clear
progress.
We have and will deploy congressionally allocated funds to
demonstrate U.S. leadership, counter Putin's influence, and
fortify democratic institutions.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss our work today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. McKee follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Wagner. I thank you very much, Ambassador McKee. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes for questioning.
I want to start by thanking both of our witnesses for their
time today and certainly for their service to our country.
The integrity of the Dayton Accords and the sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina itself are constantly under attack by
Milorad Dodik, the president of Republika Srpska.
The State Department has rightly sanctioned Dodik and many
of his accomplices and enablers, and I have repeatedly called
for these sanctions which would be codified under the Upholding
the Dayton Peace Agreement Through Sanctions Act, my
legislation that recently passed the House with overwhelming
bipartisan support. Yet, Dodik's dangerous provocations
continue.
Ambassador O'Brien, what further actions are being
considered to tighten the screws on Dodik and his corrupt
cronies?
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for your
support on this issue. I think you've been a very strong voice
in favor of what is one of the longest lasting peace
arrangements in the world, and I was pleased to play some part
in it in 1995 and to try to make sure that it is fit so that
Bosnia and Herzegovina can move toward a future as part of the
European Union. So that provides a few additional tools.
The first item is that there is no support for what
President Dodik discusses whether it's dissociation,
dissolution of Bosnia, independence of the Republika Srpska.
Prime Minister Plenkovic in Croatia has said publicly that he
opposes it and we have seen no sign of support from Serbia
either.
Serbia knows that its path toward any kind of European
future depends on respecting the international borders of the
region and that includes Bosnia.
So when Mr. Dodik talks this way it's an attempt to rile up
his base and one that we should not take as a sign of anything
that's possible.
Now, how do we then begin to enforce this and encourage him
to work only within the legal procedures of the Dayton
agreement? Here there are a couple of things.
One is sanctions are important. I will not preview any
specific sanctions. We just announced some additional
sanctions----
Mrs. Wagner. Yes, and I am grateful for those sanctions
against Dodik.
Mr. O'Brien. And those are intended to make the case that
public entities like Republika Srpska should operate on public
budgets, not on the capture of state-owned enterprises or on
nontransparent loans from unknown foreign sources.
So that's what the sanctions are intended to get at. We'll
add to that close cooperation with our European colleagues.
They have both through these accession----
Mrs. Wagner. And to that point, Ambassador, if I could
interrupt.
Mr. O'Brien. Please.
Mrs. Wagner. The EU has not imposed its own sanctions on
Dodik and how important is it for the Europeans to follow suit
and to--and how are we using our U.S. pressure on our partners
to join the U.S. in holding Dodik accountable through sanctions
or other means?
Mr. O'Brien. Yes, I think it's the other means in this
case. I think we have the tool of sanctions readily available.
The EU, because it needs to get consensus among all the
members, finds it sometimes difficult.
Mrs. Wagner. Do you have some perspective on the other
means?
Mr. O'Brien. Yes. So what it can do is withhold funding as
it did to Republika Srpska over the past year, deny benefits,
in particular the benefits of joining a regional common market
unless the Republika Srpska is fully compliant with the Dayton
agreement, and we're working very closely with our EU
colleagues on the roadmap necessary for that to happen.
And if I may just--sorry for going on so long. I just want
to call out the spectacular work of our Ambassador in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Michael Murphy.
Mrs. Wagner. He was with us last night for the incredible
film ``Kiss the Future'' and the president of Bosnia is here
also.
Mr. O'Brien. I'm seeing him in 2 hours.
Mrs. Wagner. Wonderful, and we have had a tremendous back
and forth. And I agree with you he's been a wonderful envoy and
representative.
Mr. O'Brien. And I just think it's a mark of how well he's
done that President Dodik singles him out for special insult
and recognition at every opportunity.
Mrs. Wagner. Me, too.
In its 2024 annual threat assessment the U.S. intelligence
community warned of a heightened risk of localized inter-ethnic
violence in the western Balkans including in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and you both--I'm going to run out of time so I'd
ask you both to respond in writing if you could, how are State
and USAID working to lower the risk of ethnic conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina?
I wish I had time to have you answer orally but if you
could get back to us in writing I would be greatly
appreciative.
And now it is my honor to represent the ranking member for
questions for 5 minutes.
Mr. Keating. Well, thank you, Madam Chair. Mic--there it
goes. Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank our witnesses again.
Yesterday, Transparency International Hungary as well as
one of the country's best known investigative outlets received
notifications they're being investigated by Hungary's new
sovereign protection office which seeks to target independent
voices and organizations in Hungary.
If I may, I'd ask unanimous consent for the record to
submit this article from the Guardian dealing with Orban's
government increasing efforts to crack down on independent
voices.
Mrs. Wagner. So ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Keating. I'd like to ask our witnesses how does Orban's
crackdown on opposition influences and its use of Russian style
laws undermine democracy in Hungary?
Ms. McKee. Thank you for your question, Congressman.
So it's unfortunate--extraordinarily unfortunate democratic
backsliding and we deeply appreciate Congress' recognition of
this back in 1921 where we reengaged in Central and Eastern
Europe with a focus on Hungary and Poland, although I will say
Poland has shifted both its posture and its approach somewhat.
So in Hungary with the resources and our reengagement we
are strengthening civic engagement in public life to be able to
withstand and build greater resilience to these draconian laws
that try and shut down vital voices.
In 2023 we trained 22 municipal offices in Hungary on
citizen engagement practices that involve citizens in dialog
and decisionmaking, and so in response to the sovereignty law
recently passed we have offered through this network and
through these folks that have greater capacity now to respond
to threats from the national or central level government to
help them understand the new legislation, how it may impact
them, and then utilizing access to legal resources should they
become threatened or even worse.
And so we recognize it and, luckily, we were able to get a
bit out ahead of the curve and have a network of support in
place.
Mr. O'Brien. Hungary is isolating itself and I think here
working with our European colleagues has been important. They
are withholding close to $50 billion euro in European money for
Hungary over Hungary's violation of rule of law requirements.
We are reinforcing that as best we can and we see the
effect in NATO and other diplomatic arenas where Hungary,
increasingly, is isolated. I think Orban's relatively poor
performance in the elections earlier this month is an indicator
that his inability to bring home either the money or to show
the kind of leadership that he wants is a real--is doing real
damage to his ability to affect democracy everywhere.
But that's something we have to watch, particularly as
Hungary takes over the rotating chair of the European Union. We
have to make sure that he's seen as a leader who uses
illegitimate tactics, not as a full partner.
Mr. Keating. I agree. I think that it's not surprising to
see that after a poor performance this greater crackdown on the
media itself, which is really a crackdown on the people of
Hungary themselves.
I do not know if we have time but if we could go a little
further on Georgia's Dream and their support for Kremlin-
inspired foreign agent laws and their touting the relationships
with China and how this affects their position on the Euro-
Atlantic community.
We have touched upon it but in the minute that remains I'd
like to give you the chance to have greater detail on what we
can do to help shape this sad turnaround and backsliding that's
occurring.
Mr. O'Brien. In broad terms, in Georgia's constitution, put
there by a Georgian Dream-led government, it says they want to
join the EU and NATO.
The EU this week, and we repeatedly have delivered publicly
and privately the message that this violence against the
opposition, the foreign agent law, the awarding of the--a port
contract to a Chinese company, all of these things jeopardize
the path toward the EU and NATO which more than 80 percent of
Georgia's citizens support.
Mr. Keating. Yes. I was at a dinner last night with many
Ambassadors from Europe as well as the EU Ambassador and we
talked about the Russian disinformation and the effect it's
having on democratic process and elections.
We have free elections. They do not. Russia does not, so
they feel they were at liberty to use this tactic. It's
something they're concerned about in Europe. It's something we
should be concerned about here in the United States.
With that, I yield back.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina,
Mr. Joe Wilson, for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And, Ambassador O'Brien, I realize and the world continues
to watch in horror as war criminal Putin leveled cities. He
began with Aleppo, Syria. That shouldn't be forgotten, the mass
murder conducted there, and then it was continued in Mariupol
in Ukraine.
Again, unnecessary total destruction of a city, and now to
go after Kharkiv, a city in Ukraine of 1.4 million people,
targeting civilians in the war of murderous aggression.
The entire world is in a global battle of dictators with
rule of gun invading democracies with rule of law. War criminal
Putin invaded Ukraine on February 24, 2022, and the Hamas
puppets of the regime in Tehran invaded Israel on October 7,
2023.
Last year I visited Bucha, Ukraine, where Putin troops
murdered innocent families, tying their hands behind their
back. Last week I visited Kibbutz Nahal Oz where, again,
Iranian puppets murdered innocent families, fulfilling the
Hamas covenant Article 7 which provides for killing of all
Jews.
Sadly, today it seems the Administration is not committed
to Ukrainian victory of territorial integrity as we would
support for every American State and territory. War criminal
Putin and his forces have determined the exact range to strike
Ukraine from within Russia and such that Ukraine cannot strike
back.
While some restrictions on Ukrainian counter attacks
against these attacks have been lifted it's clearly not enough,
and I appreciate that in fact Ranking Member Greg Meeks has
been promoting the ability to strike back.
Assistant Secretary, Ukraine must win this war and they are
motivated for their existence. But only if we let them. Putin's
false escalation threats have been proven time and time again
to be false.
Will this Administration commit to victory by allowing
Ukraine to strike all legitimate military targets in Russia?
And I want to make it clear that it's bipartisan support for
the ability of Ukraine to defend itself.
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you, and thank you for your outspoken
leadership on this issue.
As I said in my opening statement, our goal is that Ukraine
win and that it thrive while it's preparing to win, and I know
we have a strategy that's due to be provided to the House and
that's--we're working to get it here as quickly as we can.
Ukraine has the right to strike Russia where it can with
its weapons. The discussion we have is about how best to use
the weapons we provide to them.
Since those weapons arrived and for too many months--and I
know many on this committee were very strong supporters of the
supplemental bill--for too many months Ukraine could not fight
back and so Russia was able to launch tactical air strikes
using horrific weapons from very close in.
Now Ukraine can strike back and we're seeing it reclaim
territory, push Russia back, and destabilize Russia's ability
and also prevent Russia from reequipping itself in the way that
it wanted.
This is the right path for Ukraine to win and we're happy,
maybe in another forum, to talk about the tactics of that. But
thank you, Mr. Congressman.
Mr. Wilson. But, hey, again, this is bipartisan. This
should not be a partisan situation and already the
Administration understands the international law provides that
you can strike back as was done against the Houthis as they are
attacking by rocket the Red Sea shipping lanes.
And then as I mentioned, Mr. Secretary, last week I was
grateful to be in Israel where I discovered the famine that
wasn't as correctly editorialized on June 21st by the New York
Post.
Quote, ``Gaza's supposed famine never happened. It was
never more than Hamas propaganda equally consumed by the left.
The chief U.N. food insecurity agency announced this month that
it finds the analysis suggesting a famine wasn't plausible and
lacks supporting evidence.''
It's really sad to me that this turns out from the Famine
Early Warning System, a USAID project, and that the--this
particular project, and I'm a strong supporter of USAID. I just
cannot imagine the incorrect analysis, and we do not have time
to answer except this needs to be looked into.
To come up with a famine that did not occur and then we
find out that it was actually a study paid for by American
taxpayers. This is not right, and we know a famine did not
occur and we know that if there is a problem with famine it's
called Hamas.
I yield back.
Mr. Kean [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Wilson.
I now recognize Mr. Amo from Rhode Island for 5 minutes.
Mr. Amo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Assistant
Secretary O'Brien and Ms. McKee, for being here today and all
of the work that you do. You conduct work that is essential to
projecting American strength, influence, and partnership in
Europe.
However, instead of projecting strength the current
Republican State and foreign operations budget proposes massive
cuts that would decimate your work.
We're talking about using a meat cleaver to hack 13 percent
off the Department of State's budget and 28 percent off of the
USAID operational budget.
This side of the dais knows that the State Department and
USAID are essential to safeguarding our national security and
believes in making sure that you have the resources to carry
out that work. Budgets reflect our values and these proposed
Republican cuts reflect a dangerous political agenda that wants
to retreat from America's global leadership.
One area of concern to me is the harmful and partisan cuts
to LGBTQ programs during a time of rising violence and hate
speech against that community. Countries like Hungary have
passed laws that restrict the essential freedom to love.
So, Assistant Secretary O'Brien, if enacted how would
poison pill provisions in the Republican budget including a
funding ban for the special envoy to advance the human rights
of LGBTQI persons, harm your work in Europe to protect the
rights of LGBTQ people?
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you, and thank you for your outspoken
leadership on this issue. I'll offer a few general thoughts and
maybe Ambassador McKee will have something to add.
I'm proud to advocate U.S. law and U.S. values,
particularly when it comes to the protection and inclusion of
LGBTQ people. The special envoy is a very good partner in
working particularly with many of our European allies and their
populations who want to see more protection.
So we have seen over this last year same-sex marriage in
Greece, legalized marriage equality this year in Liechtenstein,
and continued work by governments across Europe and they are
good partners for us as well and along with the special envoy.
I note another issue. Often the groups who organize around
these issues are extraordinarily effective examples of freedom
of association, one of the prized American values, and I'd hate
to be put in the position of having to say that I can support
some freedom of association but not others based on the content
of what people are advocating.
That would put our diplomats in a really terrible position.
So I think the best way to support U.S. values and to support
the populations who often need our protection is to continue
these programs and particularly the work of the special envoy.
I'd note the Administration has issued a statement that it
would veto the bill that you described. So I hope that we can
move toward a discussion of where we agree on supporting U.S.
law and U.S. values rather than the early approaches that will
not be enacted.
Mr. Amo. Thank you.
Ms. McKee?
Ms. McKee. And if I could just briefly add----
Mr. Amo. Yes, please.
Ms. McKee [continuing]. That with an eye toward this and as
we have seen in democratic backsliding in closing spaces
whether in Central and Eastern Europe and elsewhere, we have
increased our support to civil society and other activist
groups as well as legal aid for those who are persecuted for
their beliefs or their preference for who they love, and so
with those tools in our toolkit to make sure that there's
greater protection.
That said, countries that claim to be a democracy but deny
voice, access to services, or participation by parts of their
citizenry are not democracies and we know that, and so we're
going to hold them to account consistently and with this body
we appreciate your support.
Mr. Amo. Well, I stand in concurrence on that point that
those democratic values have to be lived. And you brought up
the vested interest that the United States has in preventing
democratic backsliding in Europe and I'm going to highlight
quickly some of the work that you're doing at USAID with the
Democracy Delivers initiative.
This initiative, you know, helps fledgling democracies
demonstrate that economic empowerment goes hand in hand with
democratic reforms and I know that it's currently working in
Armenia and Moldova to support their continued democratic
development.
We know that when citizens experience the benefits that
democracy delivers they have an incentive to stand firm against
democratic backsliding.
So if you could in writing submit--would love to hear how
this initiative is working and how it combats the People's
Republic of China's Belt and Road Initiative and where we need
to continue to support the Democracy Delivers initiative, going
forward.
So thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Amo. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes.
It is well known that China has provided enormous support
to Russia's defense industrial base. The Administration has
taken limited steps to try to sever this malign relationship
between Russia and China.
However, numerous experts and even senior officials of this
Administration have publicly admitted that Russia's defense
industrial base is improving and that China's support has been
indispensable to this development.
Assistant Secretary O'Brien, this Administration's attempts
to curtail China's support of Russia's illegal war in Ukraine
are failing.
Why is this Administration not taking greater action to
sever this malign relationship?
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It's true Russia stays on the battlefield because of
Chinese support. The greatest threat to European security now
is being bankrolled by China.
What we have done in particular over the last 6 months as
other sanctions have limited Russians' options for markets is
highlight this role China is playing. I see a marked difference
in the way our European allies discuss their relationships with
China as a result.
China is being put to a test of whether it believes it has
a future of economic relationships in Europe or it wants to
support Russia in this war that we will not allow it to
succeed, and that choice is one that will, frankly, take a
little time to work through.
We are attempting to focus their minds with a whole set of
export controls and sanctions that--including a package
recently released. We were joined by the European Union in its
fourteenth package of Russia sanctions including several
Chinese companies as a part of that.
So the coalition that has been successful in supporting
Ukraine and taking away more than $400 billion from Russia--
that's 4 years of its military budget--is very much focused on
China's role and that is putting China into quite a difficult
position.
Mr. Kean. Assistant Secretary O'Brien, the State Department
has announced today that you will be visiting Azerbaijan later
this week and that you will meet with President Aliyev.
What message will you deliver to President Aliyev and will
you make clear that there will be consequences for any future
threats or aggression against Armenia?
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you for that.
Yes, I will be there on--tomorrow night.
We are very clear with President Aliyev that this is a time
to make peace and it's a matter of not just Azerbaijan, which
is hoping to be respected as a global leader when it hosts the
Conference of Parties on climate change, but it's a matter for
that entire region and for Central Asia.
All of those countries now export to the world only through
China or Russia. For them to have a path out they need to work
through Azerbaijan.
One road goes through Georgia to the Black Sea but another
potentially much larger road would go through Azerbaijan,
Armenia, and Turkey, and in that regard we need a peace
agreement between Azerbaijan and Armenia to put an end to the
war and the horrible conflict that has existed since the
1990's.
And our message is it's time to make peace and it's only in
that context that we can resolve many of the issues of the war.
We also talked to him about the importance of respecting
human rights--that's a regular topic of conversation--including
Secretary Blinken with him in just recent days, and I look
forward to taking up that conversation with him as well.
Mr. Kean. And then a third question to you, sir, if I may.
The Administration's policy regarding Ukraine's ability to
use U.S.-provided weapons against targets inside Russia can
best be characterized as with other decisions in this regard to
Zelenskyy's ability to use weapons and get weapons from
America, sometimes characterized as too little too late.
The initial policy change to allow Ukraine to hit targets
in Russian territory did not occur until after Russian troops
opened up a new front near Kharkiv and even then the
Administration's initial change was only a half step.
Policy has been revised but it's still unclear to Congress
what exactly the policy is. Recent reporting indicates that the
Administration is restricting the use of U.S.-sourced weapons
on Russian--you know, on Russian territory to within 62 miles
of the border of Ukraine, well short of the full 190-mile range
of the ATACMS.
How many air bases are within range of the ATACMS is the
Administration preventing Ukraine from hitting?
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you. So as you know from our visit to
Ukraine together, the greatest gap in Ukraine's ability to
obtain weapons was when the supplemental was not made available
for five or 6 months, and as General Cavoli said the side that
cannot shoot tends to lose wars.
So thank you for your leadership and your outspoken
assistance in getting that supplemental passed, and as you
heard from President Zelenskyy that changed the situation. What
we saw was President Putin attempt to rush an offensive into
the field before the weapons that were provided for in the
supplemental could reach Ukraine.
What we have been trying to do is provide the weapons and
focus them in areas that were of most immediate need. So first
that was where Russia was pursuing the initial offensive in
that box right near Kharkiv and now, as Jake Sullivan said last
week, if Russia attempts to widen the front Ukraine can reach
out more.
In terms of specific numbers, I think we should get a
military briefer to talk to you. We are seeing dramatic shifts
in Russia's ability to sustain its campaign against Ukraine
because of the loss of facilities in the targeted area.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. I will work with you to arrange that.
I now yield 5 minutes to Congresswoman Titus.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have heard a lot about democratic backsliding and in
Europe you think of Hungary, you think of Belarus. But it's not
limited there. We have seen anti--democratic parties elected in
France, Germany, Italy. You've seen leaders coming out of the
Netherlands and Slovakia.
I wonder how the U.S. is going to try to deal with these
new partners and how it's going to kind of affect the whole EU
relationship, and kind of related to that we're going to be
hosting a NATO summit here in--75th anniversary in just a
couple of weeks in Washington and how do we think that the
rhetoric that we see coming from the other side or coming from
the former president is going to impact our relationship with
some of these same actors through NATO?
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you. I think there are two main themes
in the way we approach the elections in Europe and they're
somewhat similar to how we approach ours here.
One of them is that it's very important for responsible
parties to work together and to demonstrate that we can deliver
on what people care about.
So we see agreements to manage migration and then we see
the vote for extremist parties go down. We see agreements to
provide adequate security and NATO is now stronger than ever.
European states have increased spending by more than 18 percent
in the last 2 years.
We're now at 23 states meeting their commitments to pay for
NATO. When this Administration entered office the number was
nine. That's responsible parties doing what the citizens want
to see and that has a direct effect on when others come in.
I'm encouraged that in the European Union now it is a set
of very strong pro-European parties who will have the primary
positions, going forward, and that will be confirmed over the
next week.
The second thing is we have to address the very real
threat, particularly from Russia and some of its friends in and
around Europe, to our democratic processes.
So we have really stepped up our efforts to counter
disinformation, cyber attacks, sabotage, other efforts that are
attempting to skew our politics, and I think, though I only do
foreign policy, I'd really like to make sure that we're mindful
of that here as well.
In terms of the NATO summit, I think what will emerge is
that NATO is stronger and better prepared for the future than
ever. Not only is spending up but will announce that we have
all of our regional defense plans now in executable form.
That means we're spending the money in smart ways to keep
our people safer and I think that's the best answer to those
who say that the only way forward is isolationism or to cut
deals with dictators.
We can stand up for ourselves and that's what people want
us to do.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. Speaking of NATO, we just talked
about a big anniversary for the Turkish occupation of Cyprus,
and Turkey has not proven to be a very reliable ally. It's kind
of an outlier in NATO in terms of Azerbaijan, in terms of
Hamas, not to mention the Cyprus issue.
Are you going to talk to Turkey in any way or make any
suggestions to them at the NATO summit?
Mr. O'Brien. So we have a very robust and wide-ranging
relationship with Turkey. We have managed, I think, in recent
months to focus on the issues where we often disagree and we're
beginning to find some ways forward.
I mean, particularly with Cyprus and the 50th anniversary
is something I think many of the citizens on both sides of the
Green Zone would like to see resolved, that one of the most
important things is that the U.N. Special Representative Ms.
Holguin is reappointed.
She has a set of very practical ideas that I think could
make life better for all the citizens on the island and we'd
like to see that process continue, and that's something we are
very direct and have really open discussions with our Turkish
allies about.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Moran from Texas
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, unfortunately, China's influence, as you
know, in the Western Balkans is very strong and in cases
growing.
How exactly would this budget request help counter China's
efforts to expand its influence in the Western Balkans?
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you, sir. It's great to see you again
after the train ride to Ukraine.
This is a really important top, China and Russia's efforts
to disrupt the region. I see that region having its future
being in Europe.
So the first thing we need to do is make clear that Chinese
involvement either in critical infrastructure or in debt
arrangements across the region is unacceptable, that it
jeopardizes the path forward.
That's a message that many states in the region have
undertaken. When I was recently in Belgrade, Serbia, a Serbian
government official was careful to point out to me that there's
a Huawei office building but they've been removed from the
telecom infrastructure, and he pointed out that that office
building remains two stories tall when the Microsoft building
next to it has grown to more than six stories.
So that's the path that they are choosing and I think those
are the kinds of choices we need to confront them with. This
budget allows us--and maybe Ambassador McKee can talk about
specific programs--but it lets us help instigate the European
integration of these economies so that they're buying trusted
technology, not Chinese.
Mr. Moran. Yes, and, Ambassador, I wanted to give you a
chance to weigh in on that. I'm sorry I did not provide you a
greeting actually when I started my questioning.
I'm normally saying hello and thank you for being here and
I would like to extend that courtesy to you. Thank you for
being here.
Ambassador McKee, from the USAID perspective what do you
think?
Ms. McKee. So we are working very hard to reduce the space
for the PRC to operate--in other words, to give them choice to
mobilize, as Ambassador O'Brien mentioned, create better
conditions for U.S. companies to come in.
When there's a vacuum, you know, less than desirable
options if there are even options will fill that void. And so
we're working, for example, in Kosovo on bolstering their
energy sector and diversifying their energy supply with
indigenous solar panels on the renewable end versus having to
purchase them from the PRC.
We are working closely in Serbia to mobilize greater U.S.
investment in the IT space and we're working on advancing
private sector engagement, particularly business to business
exchange in Bosnia and amongst the other Western Balkan
countries.
That opportunity and that growth--that economic
prosperity--reduces the opportunity for the PRC to get its
hooks in in an economic manner.
Mr. Moran. So let's talk a little bit about the PRC's
influence in Moldova. So we know that this budget request $55
million in funding for assistance to Europe, Eurasia, and
Central Asia, funding specifically from Moldova through that
funding program.
What does the State Department and USAID intend to do with
this funding if it is appropriated?
Ms. McKee. So I'll start quickly.
Right now we are laser focused on the Presidential election
and referendum--EU referendum in October. The Kremlin has
increased on a horrific level the disinformation and disruption
and attempts at vote and other capture and so we are working
hand in glove with the interagency and with the government of
Moldova to try and thwart some of those efforts and ensure that
the both the referendum and the election are free, fair,
transparent, and not disrupted by Putin and others.
In terms of the economic space, particularly energy, as I
mentioned in my opening remarks, last year signaled Moldova's
full independence from Gazprom and the Kremlin in terms of
access to energy supply.
We want to keep that up and so we're investing in their
energy sector to build a new transmission line with Romania as
well as working on stabilizing the grid and other factors that
are very necessary, back to what our colleague raised, as
showing that democracy can deliver and that partnership with
the West is the true future for the Moldovan people.
Mr. Moran. Thank you.
Secretary, I want to come to you for the final question and
comment based on this energy issue exactly because Moldova and
China this past month actually looked like they announced some
closer ties in the area of energy.
The deputy prime minister for Moldova and the foreign
minister from China announced China's new energy and
infrastructure investments in the country and that's curious to
me and also concerning to me, especially because Moldova is
such a center point for munitions, as you know, in the region,
and Russia's already got a little hand in there.
So, Secretary, what can we do to get in front of that
building tie between China and Moldova?
Mr. O'Brien. So why do not we come back to you with some
more detail on the status of that announcement? What we just
did--Secretary Blinken visited a transformers station which is
helping Moldova bring in power from Romania. We're looking at
an additional line from Romania.
We're under discussions to either repair an old thermal
power plant or otherwise to provide additional power so that
Moldova is both off Russian power but isn't dependent upon
unreliable technology as well.
That's very much the direction the prime minister and
President told us they want to go.
Mr. Moran. Thank you both. I yield my time. Thank you.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Congressman Moran.
I now yield 5 minutes to the Congresswoman from
Pennsylvania, Madeleine Dean.
Ms. Dean. I thank you, Chairman Kean and Ranking Member
Keating, and I thank the two witnesses for being in front of us
again. More importantly, I thank you for your work on behalf of
our country and the world.
It's an honor to have traveled to Ukraine just following
our vote on the supplemental to increase, obviously, the
support that was so long awaited.
As the chairman just said to me, we're putting the band
back together. So it's Kean, Keating, Moran, and Dean back in
front of you today.
So but it was an absolute honor to travel and be able to be
there at that time, to visit with the president there, to visit
with the military generals and support teams.
And then I had the chance to go to Normandy and again visit
with President Zelenskyy there, of course, on the extraordinary
commemoration of the 80th anniversary of D-Day, all very
powerful to me.
I want to hearken back or really talk about frozen Russian
assets and what we can look forward to there. In his testimony
before the committee in May Secretary Blinken spoke to the
efforts being undertaken to start making Russia pay for the
damage caused by its full-scale invasion of Ukraine and the
funds that could be leveraged to aid Ukraine's reconstruction.
He spoke of the work to leverage frozen Russian assets in
Europe and how we are seeing some of the results of those
efforts.
The G-7 recently announced plans to use frozen Russian
assets as collateral for a $50 billion loan to, among other
things, begin rebuilding damaged infrastructure in Ukraine.
Assistant Secretary, maybe I'll start with you, if you do
not mind. What signal and, more importantly, what substance
does this prospective G-7 loan send to Russia and what are the
next steps in this plan?
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you for the support of the supplemental
and for the visit. It was a great honor to be on the train with
you guys and to----
Ms. Dean. My honor.
Mr. O'Brien [continuing]. Exchange notes after we finished
our meetings and--our respective meetings in Kyiv. This is a
matter of real vital importance.
We have made clear that the supplemental is something that
we do not expect to be repeated. What Ukraine needs to say to
Putin is we can beat you on the battlefield. We are holding in
the East.
We're destabilizing your firing positions and we're
restoring our economy with air defense and by keeping our
export routes open.
For that to continue they need to be able to make and buy
the weapons they need going forward and to keep the economy
alive. That means finding sources of money and Russian money is
the best money for this.
So this $50 billion in essence gives Ukraine the
opportunity to say in 2025 we can continue beating you on the
battlefield, or if you want to discuss a responsible,
reasonable peace we may be open to that.
That's Ukraine's choice. But this is fundamental to the
broader choice that's in front of us, the ability of Ukraine to
continue the fight past the end of this year.
Ms. Dean. I thank you for that.
Ambassador?
Ms. McKee. I was just going to add to respond to your query
on sort of where we are in the process.
As you can imagine, with multiple jurisdictions of the
immobilized assets it's complicated, but we are working
tirelessly, probably more hours than exist in a day, to work
with the G-7 partners, obviously, greater legal minds than ours
to sort out how that can happen.
But we are dedicated and committed to making sure that the
loan takes place and that the reflows from the mobilized assets
are used to pay off the loan, and as we work through that we
will report to Congress on our progress.
Ms. Dean. I appreciate it.
And, Ambassador, if I could stay with you. You know, we're
looking this week at top line proposals that Republicans have
put forward for the State and foreign operations appropriations
bill with cuts of 11 to 12 percent in total from Fiscal Year
1924 and 19 percent below the President's budget request.
Could you tell me--could you identify for us what those
kinds of deep cuts would mean at this time of incredible
challenge globally not only to State Department--and,
Secretary, you can help us here too--but also USAID?
Ms. McKee. So those cuts would, indeed, be devastating when
we see the uptick in humanitarian crises and conflict around
the world only increasing, and so what that means for us were
the cuts to hold is that we'd have to make even harder
tradeoffs and prioritization.
We're here for Europe and Eurasia so I fight as hard as I
can within the interagency to make sure that we can do all we
can at this historical moment for, you know, the future of
democracy in the free world, as I see it or as we see it.
But I will say that that's what we're going to face is
having to make really hard choices between what seems
impossible to choose between and that's saving lives and
stemming off crises and conflict around the world as we see it
just growing even further.
We will not be able to--if the cuts do stick we will not be
able to provide the sustained support and leverage which has
been the power of the resources that we brought to the table
with both the supplementals as well as what we hope to do in
terms of normalizing the budget.
So it would be, frankly, devastating.
Ms. Dean. I know my time has expired but maybe if you do
not mind we could continue the conversation offline but--or if
maybe somebody else wants to ask and give you the opportunity
I'd love to hear from you also.
Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Kean. Thank you for yielding back your time.
I now recognize Mr. Self from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. O'Brien, I would love to--I had to step out--I would
love to have a debate with you 1 day about what is worse,
isolation, which you mentioned in your opening statement, or
weakness, and we would--I would appreciate that debate.
But at the time when we are facing a new axis of evil
around the world I think that we are also showing weakness
around the world and I would point back to President Reagan
that projected peace through strength.
So my first question to you is how do we expect our
European allies to wean themselves off of Russian oil and gas
when we at the same time are limiting our exports to our
European allies and, yet, we are not enforcing our sanctions
against Russian oil and gas.
And I was actually pleasantly surprised to see that the
Wall Street Journal had an article just today about how we are
pulling our punches on sanctions against Iran and Russia.
So the question is how do we expect our European allies--
are we not driving them back into the Russian oil and gas
family?
Mr. O'Brien. Thank you, Congressman. I'm happy to have a
debate but I do not think the choices are isolation or
weakness. I think the choice is strength through a very robust
coalition.
We have now got a stronger NATO set of allies who are
spending more on defense than ever.
Mr. Self. Well, we can have that debate later.
Mr. O'Brien. We have over 50 countries that are supporting
Ukraine.
Mr. Self. What about our--the question is our European
allies----
Mr. O'Brien. Yes.
Mr. Self [continuing]. Russian oil and gas.
Mr. O'Brien. So I think a couple things here. So one point
is we seen Russian dependence on gas--European dependence on
Russian gas has plummeted over the last several years.
Ambassador McKee mentioned just one country, Moldova, which has
gone from 100 percent dependence to zero.
We have seen all of our European allies reduce their
dependence on Russian gas, and part of the reason for that are
sanctions. So the European Union just this week adopted a
sanctions package against Russian exports of LNG and so we
expect to see Russian LNG exports drop down.
So that's an example of them working with us and following
our lead on accomplishing just what you say we want.
Part of the reason for that is that U.S. has more than
doubled our exports of LNG to Europe and I appreciate the point
you're making that the pause has been controversial for some.
I think just factually the pause was intended to study--
Secretary Granholm has said it will be in a few months that
we'll be in a position to evaluate it--and in the meantime we
have more than enough space under existing permits to further
double our exports of LNG to Europe.
So I do not think this is relevant to the choices our
European allies will make.
Mr. Self. OK. Very good. So now let's move to our sanctions
on Iranian airline. You probably know that simply landing on an
airport is material support.
Our European allies, several of them, are not supporting
our sanctions on Iranian airlines which are transporting
military equipment to Russia for their fight in Ukraine.
So what are you doing to make sure that our European allies
are not allowing Iranian airlines to use their airports for
material support?
Mr. O'Brien. Congressman, we are working with our European
allies to enforce sanctions against Iran and we have taken a
number of steps against Iranian firms who are either
manufacturing or helping to transport goods from Iran to
Europe, and our European allies are joining us in that.
I actually--the link you're drawing I, frankly, have to
research and come back to you. I do not believe the airlines
who are flying into our European allies are the same companies
who are transporting but I'm happy to research that and come
back to you with an answer.
Mr. Self. Yes. I have letters from our European allies that
I'd be happy to share with you.
In the limited time I have left I would ask you what you
are doing on the association of Serbian majority municipalities
signature. This is vital.
You are not going to pull Serbia out of the Russian orbit.
So when are you going to support the ASM signature?
Mr. O'Brien. By the government of Kosovo?
Mr. Self. By both sides.
Mr. O'Brien. Yes. So it's a condition of the EU-led dialog
that the two sides continue to cooperate and that Kosovo in the
initial phase has to submit the statute to its constitutional
court.
Mr. Self. Kosovo tells me it does not violate their
constitution, and I'm about out of time so I'd just ask you--I
would like for you to come back to me when you're going to
support it, OK.
Mr. O'Brien. Well, we're actively supporting it. We work on
it all the time. I'm happy to give you more detail on where we
are.
Mr. Self. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. Mr. Self yields back his time. I now
recognize Congressman Huizenga from Michigan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'm actually going to pick up where my colleague was. I too
am concerned about the LNG export throttling, and while it's a
study we know it has also paused actions here in the United
States for developing that in our capacity.
We have a vital interest in weaning our allies--all of our
allies--off of Russian energy, also Iranian energy. I happen to
sit on the Financial Services Committee where most of those
sanctions run through and, sir, there is a lax of enforcement
with sanctions both in Russia and in Iran.
We know it. There is $12 billion sitting in a Qatari bank
and $10 billion sitting in an Omani bank right now, based on
what has been coming out of Iran. We're not here to talk about
Iran. We're here to talk about Europe.
But last night myself and a group had dinner with the
Ambassador from Sweden and Denmark and a group of Swedish
legislators. The Swedish legislators brought up what they
called the shadow fleet, the shadow fleet of Russian off the
books energy transportation that's happening in the Baltic Sea,
and they're very concerned about that.
They're either unregistered, unflagged, or they're changing
flags midstream or they are turning off their transponders.
This is exactly what's happening with Iran as well.
So that has to be part of the discussion when it comes to
sanctions, how we are working with our allies to make sure, as
Colonel Self was saying, we are not weakening our allies on
that.
I want to turn a little bit, though, as well to nuclear
energy, and given China's dominance in renewable energy
technologies and growing nuclear power industries the
dependence from our adversaries that many of our allies have
needs to change.
And I'm curious what presence does China already have in
the European energy market and has its nuclear power industry
made any headway in the European market?
Mr. O'Brien. So our position on China's investment in any
kind of critical infrastructure including energy infrastructure
is that it's incompatible with having trusted vendors.
What we are working on with a number of our European allies
is to see American companies, along with our trusted partners,
provide nuclear power.
Mr. Huizenga. OK. So that's going to actually get--leads
into my next thing is how are you promoting and how is this
Administration promoting the, quote/unquote, ``all of above''
kind of approach supporting energy security in Europe,
including nuclear?
Mr. O'Brien. So one step is we're very active advocates.
I've been with the President when he spoke with the president
and prime minister of Poland about the importance of us moving
forward with an additional U.S.-provided nuclear reactor in
Poland on top of the one we are doing.
I was just with the Secretary in Prague when we talked to
the Czechs about bringing in this. Same with the Romanians last
week, as well $97 million so basically, about----
Mr. Huizenga. So you're all in on nuclear?
Mr. O'Brien. We are all in in providing, yes, trusted
nuclear power, both small modular reactors and the larger----
Mr. Huizenga. And I know that there's a lot of work being
done on the SMRs right now and have yet to come online.
But I want to talk about--because, Ambassador McKee, you
were saying cuts would be devastating, as was proposed or
discussed by my Democrat colleague about the budget. I want to
talk about debt.
We're sitting at $36 trillion in debt. This is the first
year that interest on that debt has surpassed our defense
spending. It has become the largest line item--I'm sorry,
second largest line item in the Federal budget, not just
surpassing defense but also Medicare, and the increase is
clearly linked to greater debt and higher interest rates.
So what I would like to know is is our fiscal situation
leaving us vulnerable as well to being unable to respond to
emergencies as they arise and does our national debt propose a
threat to our national security, much as you were and my
colleague were arguing that any cut to a line item would?
Ms. McKee. I'll have to get back to you on the specifics of
our national debt and how it relates to our foreign assistance
budget because that's sort of my narrow scope. But----
Mr. Huizenga. Sure, but the point is is that as we have
squeezed out other things--I mean, we have a finite amount of
money----
Ms. McKee. Right.
Mr. Huizenga [continuing]. In tax revenue. We have been
borrowing. As we borrow we're having to do more and more
interest payments on that. I guess what I'm concerned about,
and I'd love to have this conversation, is are we worried about
rising interest rates limiting your department's ability to
respond to these emergencies that are going on around the world
and I think that is a legitimate conversation that we have to
have as well.
I know my time has expired, Mr. Chairman, but I'd love to
continue the conversation.
Ms. McKee. I look forward to the conversation.
Mr. Huizenga. I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. With no further questions from our
members, I want to thank our witnesses, Ambassador McKee and
Assistant Secretary O'Brien, for their valuable testimony as
well as the members for their questions.
Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
written questions for the witnesses and we ask that you respond
to these promptly and in writing.
Pursuant to committee rules, all members may have 5 days to
submit statements, questions, and extraneous materials for the
record subject to the length limitations.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:19 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
