- THE FUTURE OF NAGORNO-KARABAKH

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FUTURE OF NAGORNO-KARABAKH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 15, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-62

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-429 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS #3

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania      BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California      GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida      AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee      TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas      DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa      SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas           Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio      GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida              JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida      JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan      GABE AMO, Rhode Island
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Staff Director
Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

Subcommittee on Europe

THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey, Chairman

JOE WILSON, North Carolina           WILLIAM KEATING,
DARRELL ISSA, California                 Massachusetts,Ranking Member
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      DINA TITUS, Nevada
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
KEITH SELF, Texas      GABE AMO, Rhode Island

Katie Earle, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

O'Brien, Honorable James, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of European
and Eurasian Affairs, U.S. Department of State.................     7
Sokolowski, Alexander, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Bureau for
Europe and Eurasia, U.S. Agency for International Development..    16

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    37
Hearing Minutes..................................................    39
Hearing Attendance...............................................    40

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

Statement for the record from Representative Connolly............    41

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM ARMENIAN ASSEMBLY OF AMERICA

Statement for the record from Armenian Assembly of America.......    42

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    46

THE FUTURE OF NAGORNO-KARABAKH

Wednesday, November 15, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Europe
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:41 a.m., in
room 210 House Visitor Center, Hon. Thomas Kean, Jr. (chairman
of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. The Subcommittee on Europe of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee will come to order.
The chair would like to remind our guests today that
demonstrations in the audience, including the use of signs and
placards, as well as verbal outbursts, are a violation of the
rules of the House.
The purpose of this hearing is to discuss the situation for
ethnic Armenians who remain in Nagorno-Karabakh and those who
have fled as refugees, as well as hear from the Administration
on the status of peace negotiations between Armenia and
Azerbaijan.
I would also like to welcome the gentleman from Virginia,
Mr. Connolly, and the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Schneider,
who are joining us today. They will participate following all
other members in today's hearing.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
In recent history, Nagorno-Karabakh has seen the first
Nagorno-Karabakh war in the 1990's and the second Nagorno-
Karabakh war in 2020. These wars collectively killed thousands
of soldiers and displaced upwards of a million people.
Ahead of Azerbaijan's September assault on Nagorno-
Karabakh, impeded access of humanitarian assistance through the
Lachin corridor ushered in a devastating crisis for ethnic
Armenians. Following Azerbaijan's decision to retake Nagorno-
Karabakh by deadly force, mass exodus of over 100,000 ethnic
Armenians fled into Armenia. These people are now destitute and
are wholly dependent on international humanitarian aid. Despite
Azerbaijan's assurance to reintegrate the ethnic Armenians in a
way that fully respects their rights, the lack of trust on both
sides will make this exceedingly difficult.
I want to say publicly here that the U.S. Congress will be
watching Azerbaijan closely to ensure that it upholds its
obligations to respect the human rights and the fundamental
freedoms of the residents of Nagorno-Karabakh.
What matters most now is where we go from here. We need to
appeal for a lasting peace, which will afford the people of
Armenia and Azerbaijan a better life. I want to understand how
this Administration is working with the international community
to bring Armenia and Azerbaijan to the negotiating table.
I also hope that our witnesses will address how the
Administration is working to ensure such a comprehensive peace
will deal a blow to Russian malign influence and the growing
Russia and Iran nexus that seeks to exploit South Caucasus.
Over 100,000 ethnic Armenians from Nagorno-Karabakh are now
living as refugees in Armenia. We cannot afford to look away
from the region or be distracted by other conflicts
proliferating across the globe.
I was encouraged to hear Administrator Power's announcement
of 11.5 million in assistance following the September 19
escalation, and I will ask the witnesses to detail how this aid
is being put to use to address urgent humanitarian needs of the
ethnic Armenians that fled to Armenia as well as those few that
remain in and around Nagorno-Karabakh.
Most importantly, I also want to understand what message
the Biden Administration is sending to President Aliyev about
refraining from any further use of deadly force. I was
extremely disappointed that Baku amended the active diplomatic
efforts to settle the Nagorno-Karabakh issue and instead chose
to retake the region by force. This only exacerbated the lack
of trust between both sides.
I hope our witnesses today will explain how they are
communicating to President Aliyev that the use of force against
sovereign Armenian territory, including in the Syunik Province,
would be completely and totally unacceptable. It is my hope
that 1 day the region will seek true, lasting peace, free from
Russian and Iranian malign influence. That is what the people
of these two countries deserve.
I thank our witnesses for being here today, and we look
forward to your testimony.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts,
Mr. Keating, who is the ranking member of this committee. Mr.
Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to
ask unanimous consent that Representative Dean be allowed 1
minute because she helped facilitate the change of time here
this morning.
Mr. Kean. Certainly.
Mr. Keating. Thank you so much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for holding today's important hearing on the future of Nagorno-
Karabakh, a region ripe with history and culture.
Today the Caucasus region is a vibrant, geopolitically
strategic region of the world, representing the crossroads of
Europe and Asia, yet, for decades, the conflict between Armenia
and Azerbaijan over ethnic Armenian enclave Nagorno-Karabakh
has left thousands of people dead, missing, and displaced.
In September 2020, renewed fighting between Armenia and
Azerbaijan left 6,900 killed or missing in action, including
4,000 from Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh. By the end of 2021,
40,000 had remained displaced in Armenia. A cease-fire in
November 2020 left the status of Nagorno-Karabakh unresolved
but importantly paused for 44 days of conflict between the two
countries.
In the time since the 2020 cease-fire, and amid repeated
escalations, senior officials from Armenia and Azerbaijan have
met repeatedly, including multiple times in Washington, hosted
by the State Department, to talk in specificity about the
prospects for peace, the challenges facing the countries, and
the sensitivity of the issues which remain unresolved.
Through these meetings and similar rounds of talks hosted
by the European Union and bilateral initiatives regularly were
undertaken by both countries, steady progress was made on such
issues as deciding the border issues, missing persons, and
mutual recognition of sovereignty and territorial integrity.
While aspects of a comprehensive peace agreement are
sensitive for both sides, I believe issues like the protection
of the rights of ethnic Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh, as well
as the passage of all goods and services through the Lachin
corridor, remain necessary components of a comprehensive peace
deal that will ensure a safe and dignified return for Armenians
to Nagorno-Karabakh should they seek it.
While months of diplomatic talks had led to significant
progress in the face of immense personal and political risks
undertaken by, in particular, Armenian Prime Minister
Pashinyan, in September 2023, Azerbaijan President Aliyev
decided to break with the internationally accepted and lawful
diplomatic path, instead opting for the use of military force
in Nagorno-Karabakh.
As a result of Azerbaijan's unacceptable military action,
over 100,000 ethnic Armenian's have fled Nagorno-Karabakh,
resettling in Armenia and leaving their personal belongings and
their livelihoods behind them.
I strongly believe we must provide humanitarian and
economic assistance to displaced people in Armenia and ensure
accountability for any potential crimes committed against those
fleeing Nagorno-Karabakh or those who are choosing to remain
there.
I also know our State Department colleagues understandably
are actively reviewing the waiver provided by Section 907 of
the Freedom Support Act, and I look forward to a determination
on this issue. While these issues should be resolved first, it
is not too early to look at the future and a potential
comprehensive peace settlement.
Importantly, any resolution to this issue must be made
diplomatically and peacefully. Military action is simply
unacceptable.
It has been encouraging that just recently both sides have
expressed a willingness to continue negotiations, something I
strongly support, as long as they are undertaken in good faith
and good conscience.
While Armenia and Azerbaijan need to be getting back to the
table, Russia and other outside actors who seek to undermine
and influence negotiations must be put at bay. It is vital that
the U.S. and Europe lead these negotiations to ensure the
values we espouse as democracies are represented, and the
people impacted by these conflicts, as well as those who would
benefit from a dignified peace agreement.
At the same time, with transatlantic alliances united in
support of Ukraine, there is no better opportunity for the
people of the region to reap the economic benefits of a peace
deal than there is today. This includes respect for human and
civil rights for all people, including those who choose to
remain in Nagorno-Karabakh.
This also includes Azerbaijani citizens, such as Dr. Gubad
Ibadoghlu, a renowned economist and academic who must remain--
who remains in an Azerbaijan prison cell. Dr. Ibadoghlu's
rights must be respected, and I will continue to call to ensure
he receives a fair trial, food, and medicine.
We sit here today at an inflection point in this decades-
long conflict, and I strongly believe a comprehensive,
diplomatic peace agreement will benefit the people of the
region and in the region as a whole.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Keating.
We now yield to the gentlewoman from Pennsylvania,
Representative Dean.
Ms. Dean. I thank you, Chairman Kean, Ranking Member Meeks,
for holding this important and timely hearing, and for allowing
me just brief remarks. I was happy to be any small part of
putting this meeting together.
I commend the Administration for its consistent engagement
in Azerbaijan and Armenia on the issue of Nagorno-Karabakh. As
we all know, the conflict ultimately has--unfortunately has
escalated. What started as a blockade of Nagorno-Karabakh
culminated in the Azerbaijani offensive on September 19 and 20
to regain control of the region. Within 10 days, approximately
100,000 residents of Nagorno-Karabakh--about 80 percent of the
population--fled to Armenia.
Armenia, the U.S., EU, and international organizations have
stepped in to provide humanitarian assistance for the refugees,
but many questions remain as to their future, as well as the
future of Nagorno-Karabakh.
I want to just briefly say thank you to our witnesses.
Thank you for your expertise and your service. Ambassador
O'Brien and Dr. Sokolowski, thank you for being with us today.
I look forward to hearing your testimony and this discussion
about how we can work together to secure a stable, prosperous
future for the region.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Other members of the subcommittee are reminded
that opening statements may be submitted for the record.
We are pleased to have a distinguished panel of witnesses
before us today on this important topic. Ambassador James
O'Brien is Assistant Secretary in the Bureau of European and
Eurasian Affairs at the Department of State, and Dr. Alexander
Sokolowski is a Deputy Assistant Administrator in the Bureau
for Europe and Eurasia in the U.S. Agency for International
Development.
Thank you both for being here today. Your full statements
will be made part of theand I will ask each of you to keep your
verbal remarks to 5 minutes in order to allow time for member
questions.
I now recognize Ambassador O'Brien for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES O'BRIEN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU OF
EUROPEAN AND EURASIAN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ambassador O'Brien. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Keating, Representative Dean. I think your opening statements
have set the context very well, so I will try to focus my
remarks on three elements: How we are caring for the people who
were uprooted in September, how we are supporting Armenia, and
how we are working toward a peace. And I know Dr. Sokolowski
will have much to say on the specifics of our assistance toward
all three goals.
This is the legacy of Soviet and Russian involvement in the
region, and we have to deal with the consequences of their
meddling and role over, really, centuries, but particularly the
last 3 decades.
So let me talk first about the people who were uprooted,
the 100,000 or so as you all eloquently noted, and the culture
that has moved out of Nagorno-Karabakh, at least temporarily.
So we insist on the people having complete access to the
territory on the protection of the property--the protection of
the culture, and that the people receive adequate information,
so that they can make a real choice about their future and know
that they have the viable opportunity to return and live well
in Nagorno-Karabakh, if that is what they choose.
I am encouraged that the U.N. and ICRC report that they
have unimpeded, unrestricted access to Nagorno-Karabakh to
verify conditions on the ground, and we are working to be sure
that they are able to speak with the refugees inside Armenia,
so that they are clear--there is clear and reliable information
available to them.
So there are two things we are doing. One is we want them
to have a viable choice, to have the information and the rights
they need to make decisions for themselves. As you have
mentioned, we have already committed substantial money since
September 19 to make this possible.
I met on Friday with Prime Minister Pashinyan to discuss
other steps that we might take to support the refugees and
assist the government of Armenia with helping them in their
current situation and with whatever choices they might make.
And I know Dr. Sokolowski will have more to say about this.
I also want to assure the committee that we are developing,
at the Secretary's order, a comprehensive, thorough, and
transparent record of what happened, not just on those days but
for the months before. We have commissioned independent
investigators. We have our own investigators working in the
field. There is information available from international NGO's
and other investigators. And as we develop the record of what
happened, we will be completely open about what we are finding.
I cannot put a timeline on this investigation, but we will
keep you informed as we go forward. I am happy to say more
about this.
The second thing we are working on is support for Armenia.
I have been fortunate to work on issues in Armenia over the
last couple of years in my role as the sanctions coordinator at
the State Department. I am very impressed by the government's
commitment to reform and to diversifying the relationships that
it has--economic, political, energy, and security--particularly
in the transatlantic community.
And I think we owe it to the people of Armenia to help them
through this difficult situation, so that those choices they
have made very bravely are able to help them have a more
secure, stable, and prosperous future.
So we are working closely with the European Union on
providing an offer of support for Armenia over the next months.
When I met with the prime minister on Friday, this was the main
topic of our conversation. And I think it is critical to a
secure, free, and prosperous region that we be supportive of
the Armenian people and of the government and the choices that
they have made.
Third, we are working--we are pursuing a peace agreement.
The sides have met multiple times. I saw the European Union
mediators just this week, spoke with others this morning. They
are hosting one of the parties today. The next few weeks will
be critical in testing the parties' willingness to go from good
intentions to saying yes. Because as we all know, yes is the
hardest word to get in a negotiation.
So how are we doing that? Well, we are deeply engaged. I
think there have been 13 senior-level visits to the capitals,
Yerevan and Baku, since September, as well as--and meeting
among the parties as well. We are also deeply engaged with our
Turkish colleagues as we go forward.
We have made clear that nothing will be normal with
Azerbaijan after the events of September 19 until we see
progress on the peace track. So we have canceled a number of
high-level visits, condemned the actions. And, you know, you
mentioned, Representative Keating, the 907 waiver. We do not
anticipate submitting a waiver until such time as we see a real
improvement in the situation.
All of this is to say we continue to urge peace. Now, why
would they make peace now and not before? I think you each
pointed to a couple of key elements. One of them is the
economic benefit of peace. Central Asian countries are looking
for new routes to get their goods to market. Those routes can
run through Azerbaijan on to Georgia or down through Armenia to
Turkey. We have said no use of force is acceptable.
A transit corridor built with the involvement, the consent
of Armenia, can be a tremendous boon to states across the
region and to global markets who will receive access to these
goods. A transit corridor created some other way, by force or
with involvement of Iran, will, I think, be met with a very
strong reaction and will not be a success. That is a simple
choice.
The other piece I think you have all touched on as well, it
is the choice of what political relationships these states want
to have in the future. A future that is built around an access
of Russia and Iran as the main participants in security in the
region, I think, is unstable and undesirable, including for
both the governments of Azerbaijan and Armenia.
They have the opportunity to make a different decision now,
and we are clarifying that. And I anticipate we will have more
senior-level involvement over the weeks to come.
With that----
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Ambassador O'Brien.
Ambassador O'Brien [continuing]. I appreciate the time.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador O'Brien follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kean. I now recognize Dr. Sokolowski for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF ALEXANDER SOKOLOWSKI, DEPUTY ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU FOR EUROPE AND EURASIA, U.S. AGENCY FOR
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Sokolowski. Thank you. Chairman Kean, Ranking Member
Keating, distinguished members of the Subcommittee on Europe,
thank you for your invitation to speak today----
Mr. Kean. Can you bring your microphone a little closer,
please?
Mr. Sokolowski. Oh, sure. Can you hear me better now? OK.
Great. Thank you for your invitation to speak today on USAID's
work in the South Caucasus and your support, particularly
concerning the humanitarian situation surrounding the crisis in
Nagorno-Karabakh and Armenia.
I welcome the opportunity both to talk about our work in
the region and to hear your perspectives. USAID and our
interagency partners have been working diligently to respond to
the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh. For months, humanitarian
conditions in the territory steadily deteriorated due to the
blockage of the Lachin corridor, resulting in critical
shortages of food, energy supplies, medical commodities, and
other essential goods.
Humanitarian conditions in Nagorno-Karabakh further
worsened after armed clashes erupted on September 19. This
prompted more than 100,000 people, nearly all of the ethnic
Armenians in the territory, to flee Nagorno-Karabakh in less
than 2 weeks. Many of these displaced people exhibited symptoms
of sustained emotional distress and chronic illness as a result
of Azerbaijan's blockage of the Lachin corridor.
Four days after Azerbaijan's military action, USAID
Administrator Samantha Power traveled to Armenia to express
USAID's support for Armenia and for the people of Nagorno-
Karabakh and to oversee U.S. efforts to respond to the
immediate needs of the ethnic Armenians fleeing the territory.
Administrator Power met with Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan
and underscored USAID's commitment to support the Armenian
government in assisting displaced persons arriving in Armenia.
The Administrator traveled to Armenia's border with Azerbaijan
to speak firsthand to ethnic Armenians fleeing Nagorno-Karabakh
and with humanitarian organizations working to support the tens
of thousands of people arriving each day.
Administrator Power also announced the activation of a
disaster assistance response team to identify priority response
needs and to work with humanitarian partners to provide
urgently needed aid.
Administrator Power then traveled to Azerbaijan, where she
met with President Ilham Aliyev, to express the United States'
deep concerns with Azerbaijan's use of force in Nagorno-
Karabakh and to press the Azerbaijani government to allow
humanitarian access to the territory, to protect Armenian
religious and cultural sites, and to take clear steps to give
ethnic Armenians the confidence to return safely.
Assistant Secretary O'Brien already noted the $11.5 million
in assistance announced on September 26. And, additionally,
USAID has focused nearly $6 million in funding from existing
programming at USAID Armenia to respond to the humanitarian
crisis. This assistance provides immediate food, hygiene,
shelter, shelter materials, child protection, and support to
local governments and communities where the new arrivals have
come to.
Last month, USAID's Assistant Administrator for Europe and
Eurasia, Ambassador Erin McKee, traveled to the Caucasus to
receive updates on the situation and to communicate our ongoing
commitment to the displaced people of Nagorno-Karabakh.
In early October, I also traveled to Armenia to meet with
those who had left Nagorno-Karabakh to consult with Armenian
government officials on how we could cooperate further and to
assess USAID's ongoing response efforts.
One key takeaway from my trip was the sincere appreciation
that displaced persons had for the government of Armenia and
the positive assessments of its response so far. As one woman
put it to me, we felt alone during the blockage of the Lachin
road, but now we feel that Armenia has welcomed us.
In addition to our response to the crisis, USAID has been
increasing longer term development support to Armenia to
strengthen Armenia's economic resilience, improve public
service provision, and consolidate democratic reforms. In
recent weeks, we have deployed teams to Yerevan to explore ways
of helping Armenia become more resilient over the longer term,
particularly in the governance and in the energy spheres.
Thanks to generous support from Congress, USAID has
increased its assistance to Armenia by more than 50 percent
since Fiscal Year 2018. This funding has allowed us to work
with the government of Armenia, civil society organizations,
and help Armenia foster economic growth, strengthen civic
engagement, help diversify its energy supply, and support a
more pluralistic, reliable information environment.
USAID is also helping Armenia to build economic and trade
linkages with Western partners and to increase economic
opportunities for women and young people.
Last, USAID remains committed to promoting peace,
stability, and prosperity across the South Caucasus. To that
end, we have recently launched regional programs focusing on
goals common to all three countries in the region, specifically
rural development and natural resources management. Through
these cross-border programs, USAID seeks to build partnerships
that create the basis for shared prosperity, improved
livelihoods, and peace.
Thank you again for the opportunity to discuss USAID's
priorities and efforts. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sokolowski follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kean. Thank you, Dr. Sokolowski.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
As I mentioned in my opening remarks, the U.S. must send a
clear message to President Aliyev that the use of force against
sovereign Armenian territory, including the Province of Syunik,
would be completely unacceptable.
Ambassador O'Brien, what measures is the Administration
prepared to use to deter such move by Baku? Is the decision to
forego, as you have alluded to in your opening comments, a
Section 907 waiver for Azerbaijan part of that effort? And what
else--what other measures are you taking?
Ambassador O'Brien. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So we have
signaled repeatedly Ambassador Power communications from the
Secretary every level contact we have had that the use of force
inside Armenia is completely unacceptable. The authorities in
Baku have assured us they have no such intention, and we are
monitoring very closely the movement of troops and any
indication that they might have plans otherwise.
As I indicated, we have told them that there is no chance
of business as usual as long as the peace agreement goes
unconcluded. So what steps do we take with that? It is two
things. One is we have canceled a number of senior-level
engagements. We do not anticipate submitting a waiver, a 907,
which enables us to provide some assistance to Azerbaijan, and
it is assistance that is meaningful, both to them and to us, so
this has some effect.
And we are noting that the possibility of building a
transit corridor hinges on the conclusion of a peace agreement
that--an agreement with Armenia on working consensually to
develop that. So we are putting forth all the elements that we
see as important in the relationship in order to see whether we
can get a peace agreement concluded now. Thank you.
Mr. Kean. Ambassador O'Brien, in your written testimony,
you said that the State Department is supporting efforts to
interview those who fled Nagorno-Karabakh to learn more about
what they experienced. What has the State Department learned
from these interviews about the living conditions of ethnic
Armenians and their treatment during Azerbaijan's offensive?
Ambassador O'Brien. So I do not want to get in front of the
conclusions, and I want to maybe offer a little context. My
background, I began as a young State Department lawyer where I
was one of the informal group at the time to investigate the
activities in Bosnia where the phrase ethnic cleansing first
came to international attention.
This takes some time because we are dealing with a
population that have been under enormous stress in the months
leading up to the events of September 19 and has been through
an extraordinarily difficult time. So we are just beginning to
speak with the residents, and it is not just us. We are also--
there are other groups that are actively involved. We want to
be sure that we are not reinterviewing the same people in a way
that it causes them further trauma, so this coordinating effort
has taken some time.
What we are learning is there was a period of--a condition
of fear due to the closure of the Lachin corridor in the runup.
That is no surprise to anyone. And so when Azeri authorities
came in forcibly on September 19, it caused the residents to
want to leave.
Now, exactly what activities took place where, under what
command and control, and how that was conveyed to the
residents, these are all subjects we are seeking to learn. And,
again, it is not just government officials doing this. We know
there has been a report published by Human Rights Watch. The
International Crisis Group is publishing results of its
interviews.
We also anticipate that the Helsinki Committees from Norway
and Poland will have their own independent reviews. All of
those things will coordinate--or we will bring together in a
report that we think will give us a true picture. But it does
take some time as we deal with a population that is still
itself analyzing what has happened to it.
Mr. Kean. And, Dr. Sokolowski, what more does the
international community need to be doing to address the urgent
needs of ethnic Armenian refugees now in Armenia?
Mr. Sokolowski. Sure. Thank you very much, Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, for that question. If I could start--partly respond a
little bit to the previous question, because USAID has sent the
Bureau for Europe and Eurasia's leading expert on human rights
for the region to Armenia to work with our mission on
developing an additional programmatic effort that would seek to
gather testimony from those who have come from Nagorno-Karabakh
to Armenia. And we are, of course, coordinating closely with
many of the groups that my colleague had mentioned, including
the State Department and non-government organizations.
I would just concur with what he said with regard to this
takes time, and we want to make sure that we do it right. But
we are definitely focusing on that issue.
With regard to the second question in terms of
understanding the need, and if we are meeting the need, I would
start with two things. First, we are engaged in a broad and
deep conversation with the government of Armenia, particularly
with the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, which is the
lead agency for responding to the new arrivals from Nagorno-
Karabakh, to make sure that the needs are being met. And we are
helping them and working with them to see what their needs are
and responding appropriately.
Of course, they are signaling to us areas where they see
additional areas for need, and we are in that conversation with
them right now.
Second, I would emphasize the point I made in my testimony
that they are receiving strong marks so far. I think many had
thought that we were not going to receive this many displaced
persons this quickly, but the government of Armenia, I think,
showed itself to have shown some foresight and preparation and
has been handling it well.
However, yes, especially as we go from the medium to the
longer term, there is going to have to be some effort made to
help integrate these folks into Armenian life.
And from my conversations with them, I will end with this:
Many of them dream of going back to Nagorno-Karabakh, but for
right now, they are oriented toward making a life in Armenia.
And the government of Armenia is poised to help them do that.
Mr. Kean. Thank you.
And I now recognize Ranking Member Keating for any
questions that you have.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador O'Brien, you mentioned, you know, the interest--
mutual interest in economic prosperity and stability in the
region, and you mentioned U.S. interest and European interest
as well. One of those areas there was reports that have
indicated that Russia has been using its influence with the
post-Soviet states in the region to circumvent U.S. and
European sanctions in aid of their war effort in Ukraine.
How is the U.S. working with, you know, the countries
affected, including Armenia, to try and deal with this issue?
Ambassador O'Brien. It is a great question, Representative.
So just to focus on Armenia, the government itself has
undertaken some very interesting reforms that allow it to track
trade with Russia. So in almost real time, they can see which
firms are involved in the circumvention trade, and then we are
able to take measures to stop that trade.
It works remarkably well. We just hosted a technical group
here in my old office about 2 weeks ago, and the recent
statistics are very encouraging. We can verify these through
our own sources.
The one hole is that as a result of the 2020 cease-fire,
so--that was signed under the previous Administration, the
Russian troops actually control two key border crossings from
Armenia to Russia. One is at the airport, and another land
crossing into Azerbaijan.
So the government has no control over the goods that flow
through those items. It just makes even more urgent the point
you made in your statement that we need to find a more stable
way for Armenia to govern itself and to have the Russian
peacekeepers leave when their 5-year term is up in another year
and a half. We can do that only if we are deeply engaged in the
terms of the peace agreement that emerge. If we stay out, then
Russia continues to control the border.
Mr. Keating. Thank you for that. My involvement--and I want
to really congratulate our State Department. With everything
going on in the world, their efforts to focus on this are
critical.
You know, I think we were at the cusp of a historic peace
agreement, something that people never thought could happen. I
looked at Northern Ireland and Ireland years ago when people
said the divisions are so deep there can be no peace. And the
Good Friday Agreement proved that there can be.
I viewed this in the same light, and at times of critical
historic achievement in terms of peace, leaders have to step
forward. I think that, you know, Prime Minister Pashinyan has
taken a great deal of criticism but has stepped forward. I
think he deserves enormous credit for realizing long-term
benefits to his country. And I look to President Aliyev,
because you referenced him in your discussions initially.
How would you categorize their role, their importance, and
where we are with those leaders? Because historic change
happens through courageous leadership of people in those
countries willing to take internal criticism to do the benefit,
the most beneficial outcomes, for their own country.
So could you take a few minutes and talk about how you
characterize their roles in the importance of their moving
forward on this?
Ambassador O'Brien. Thank you for this, and I think it is
the right focus. And also, thank you for the kind words to the
State Department. I am the new guy on this beat.
But the team from the Secretaries has had three meetings
with the parties to Lou Bono, the special representative, who
has had, you know, multiple meetings, Ambassador Yuri Kim, who
traveled out, Ambassador Power, the team has been I think very
creative and diligent in pursuing this. But it all ultimately
turns on what the two governments decide and whether the
leaders are willing to say yes. And that is by far the most
difficult thing to say.
Prime Minister Pashinyan has made clear that he wants
Armenia to have a transatlantic opportunity, and he is
diversifying the relationships that Armenia depends upon so
that the people there are able to choose a future that fits
their visions of freedom. He seems willing to take chances for
peace.
The question, really, is whether President Aliyev is
willing to do that, and he has said he is. So now is the
moment, because the challenge always for a power that feels
stronger--and I think it is fair to say Azerbaijan feels that
it has the oil and gas revenues, the relationships, the ability
to have some options. The challenge is always when it is time
to cash the options in and commit to one path for the future.
So how do we do that? We are talking a lot with Turkey,
which has very close relations with the government in
Azerbaijan. And we are trying to lay out a path that makes
clear the benefits that come from peace and the costs that come
with choosing to wait further. And, really, the decision will
be his on whether he says yes or not, and we want that to
happen in the next few weeks.
All signs are they are willing to consider it, but getting
to yes is always, you know, a difficult matter, as you know
from your work in the Congress.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Keating.
I now recognize the vice chair of the Europe subcommittee,
Mr. Self from Texas.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A couple of comments on
your testimoneys, both written and verbal. The cannot-be-
business-as-usual, in our bilateral relationship, I will tell
you we hear the same language out of the State Department when
it comes to Qatar hosting the Hamas leadership. And yet I see
no difference in the behavior toward Qatar.
I think that this is another attempt to pull a nation out
of the Russian orbit, Armenia specifically, in its--I wish you
success, but, Serbia, you are having less success, so I will
just make that comment. And also, the recent pipeline--you
talked about a route across Armenia. The recent pipeline from
Azerbaijan to Turkey bypassed Armenia completely. So it will
take a change in approach by both Azerbaijan and Armenia in
order to make any route across Armenia.
So now, getting to the question, you have not had a Section
907 waiver for the first time in 20 years or so. First of all--
two questions for you, Ambassador. The first one is, what is
the impact on our national security goals? Obviously,
countering Iranian smuggling operations, this is a very
dangerous part of the world. That is the first one.
And, second, I would like your opinion on the--I would like
your opinion on the prospective question of, as the weak
Administration policy in this part of the world, did Azerbaijan
see this as necessary, to take this action, in order to get the
U.S. to focus on this because this--because your lack of a
waiver happened before the September action.
So do you think that Azerbaijan took this action in order
to force you to focus on this issue? Because, obviously, the
waiver is important to them. And I will leave it at that. Thank
you, sir.
Ambassador O'Brien. Thank you. I would say no. The
Azerbaijanis have never indicated as much to us. There is no
sign in any contextual information that suggests so. What they
have said is that this is a 30-year conflict, and they saw an
opportunity to end it on terms they thought were favorable to
them.
We have said that there was a peaceful process to do so,
and they told us they were committed to it, and then ultimately
were not. And that is why we have taken steps----
Mr. Self. That is my question, Ambassador. Why the change?
They were committed to it, and just seeing an opportunity in a
30-year conflict seems to belie the statement.
Ambassador O'Brien. No. I think that suggests that this was
simply unrelated to any other events. I do not think that is
the case. I think what they saw was the continued violence and
risk of violence in the area, and now they had the edge to be
able to do something about it. That is independent of their
signaling to us.
And I just have to say, as important as this issue has been
to Azerbaijani politics for 30 years, the idea that a waiver,
which isn't an important--and I will address the other
question--the waiver is important for addressing sort of very
narrow, specific issues. We feel comfortable that there is no
damage to our natural security right now, but the idea that
they would decide an issue that is of fundamental importance to
them based upon this slightly different marginal issue just to
get our attention when they had our attention, I do not quite
see that that narrative hangs together.
Mr. Self. OK. But then in my limited time, then what was
the trigger? Simply the continued violence? Because I do not
see that as a sufficient trigger to use military action when
they are so close----
Ambassador O'Brien. Yes. I----
Mr. Self [continuing]. To resolution.
Ambassador O'Brien. My guess is historians are going to
argue about why this week rather than another week for a long
time, and I do not think we will settle it in our limited time.
But I think what you are looking at more is a discussion about
what the future of the region is and how much it is oriented
toward the Black Sea and the transatlantic, and they saw this
as an issue that they now had the ability to do something
about, and so they did it. And now we are trying to deal with
the consequences of that in a way that, as you say, weans the
states away from the Russian orbit.
Mr. Self. Yes. Thank you.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman.
I now recognize Ms. Titus from Nevada for 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you both for being here. I would like to ask,
Secretary O'Brien, if you would talk some more about Turkey.
You mentioned it a couple of times, and that we are engaging
with Turkey more. But I would like to hear some more detail
about that. We are all familiar with the kind of fraught
history between Turkey and Armenia, and we have only just
recently, in 2021, recognized officially the genocide. And it
was at that time the Library of Congress actually started using
that term in relation to Turkey and Armenia.
In the meantime, Turkey and Azerbaijan have been pretty
cozy over the years. So what role will Turkey play in some
peace relations?
And also, what kind of damage are they causing now? Is
there in-use monitoring of weapons that we sell to Turkey or
that Turkey gets from us that they may then be using in helping
Azerbaijan?
Ambassador O'Brien. I think on the last question,
Representative, we do have careful end use requirements and
monitoring. I have never seen an indication of any illegitimate
transfer. I am happy to review that and get back to you, but
I--are you suggesting that you have seen indications of that?
Ms. Titus. No. I was just----
Ambassador O'Brien. OK.
Ms. Titus. It is just an open question.
Ambassador O'Brien. Yes. So that is, as a matter of
practice, we are very careful about, and particularly with
Turkey as a NATO ally. I think those relations are pretty
transparent.
Ms. Titus. I think we saw some use of F-16s in a previous
engagement, but I do not know about now.
Ambassador O'Brien. I am not familiar with that. Let me try
to confirm that. I think that--that I have never heard. I think
the piece with Turkey and its involvement, as you say, they
have a very close relationship.
And I think there are a few elements that are important
here. One is the relationship to Armenia. We are very hopeful
that we will see some opening, because Armenia is essentially
landlocked, right? Its routes out have to go--to the west have
to go through Georgia or Turkey.
And so for Turkey to begin opening those apertures, I
think, is critical for Armenia's future. So we spend a great
deal of time discussing that.
Now, the relationship with Azerbaijan, I think there are a
couple of elements, and I think the government of Turkey is
very well able to speak for itself, but I will say two things
that matter. One is this economic corridor that we are
discussing is a road, a rail route, that would run from--
really, from Central Asia through Azerbaijan and Armenia, and
then to Turkey.
So it is a clear Turkish economic interest to be the
endpoint for this route. That was an element that was not
present in previous peace talks, and so we just want to be sure
that it is kept central to everyone's calculations.
And then, finally, to the point that the ranking member and
I were discussing, one of the hardest issues for a leader is to
know when the moment is to strike a deal rather than to wait
for the deal to get better. And that is, to some extent, an
objective calculation, but it more often also depends on your
friends telling you when enough is enough.
And so having a clear communication with Turkey and a
constructive involvement by Turkey in these discussions is
incredibly helpful, because President Aliyev will want to know
that he is not alone making this decision, but that he is with
a long-time partner of his own. And I think that is a role that
Turkey can uniquely play.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Doctor?
Mr. Sokolowski. I would just add to that the point about
the value of including Armenia in this middle corridor route.
The Ambassador spoke about some of that. USAID has actually
worked with the government of Armenia on doing some analytical
work in studies of those routes. And if you may have seen
recently at the Silk Road Forum in Tbilisi, Prime Minister
Pashinyan went and put up a big map of all the different trade
routes that Armenia would like to see to deal with this issue
of being landlocked that was discussed earlier.
So we very much see, you know, opening up routes, opening
up economies, opening up energy cooperation, as a key dividend
of peace. And that is one of the things that we are trying to
help with from the USAID side to promote peace.
Thank you.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Issa [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from--the gentleman, Mr. Wilson, is
recognized.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Chairman Darrell Issa.
And, indeed, thank both of you for your service. It is so
important, more so than ever, in our country. And then,
Secretary O'Brien, I want this to be perceived as a compliment,
but you clearly are the winner of the Speaker Mike Johnson
contest, look-alike contest, OK? So as we proceed with this in
mind, the United States has acted in important partnerships----
Mr. Issa. Are you going to let the gentleman respond to
that?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wilson. Hey, it is all good. Hear, hear.
Ambassador O'Brien. I should be so lucky, Representative
Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. No, no, no. Hey, I--hey, those glasses give it
away right away, OK?
The United States has an active and important partnership
with both Armenia and Azerbaijan, very significant countries
for Caspian Sea and Black Sea prosperity and stability.
Armenian Americans and Azerbaijani Americans are very
successful, and they have been so appreciated in business, in
community activities, and leaders all across America. Every
part of America has people who we cherish, our Armenian and
Azerbaijani Americans.
What is the path forward in working with both countries
with the importance of maintaining our strong relationships
with both?
Ambassador O'Brien. I will let Dr. Sokolowski talk to many
of the ways we are trying to improve governmental capacity in
both countries. But I will just say you are right that we have
important relations with both countries, and that is why the
way we are managing this is that we want to see Armenia improve
the options it has to represent its people. And we want to work
with Azerbaijan as it makes its choices so that human rights
there improve, something we comment on regularly, but that our
relationship can get back to normal.
So it is just one example. Again, we talk about this
transit corridor. There is business to be done in this region.
It will add to the prosperity, and we think the reform efforts
across the region, so we would love to see this transit
corridor happen with the consented involvement of both states.
An attempt to do it unilaterally or with the help of Iran
would not be acceptable, and so we are painting a future of how
we can grow closer and work more together that way.
Mr. Wilson. We look forward to backing you up in every way.
Additionally, how would the withholding of Section 907 waiver
and stopping security assistance to Azerbaijan impact other
national security goals, such as countering the Iranian
smuggling operations?
Ambassador O'Brien. So we feel that where the program is in
place now, absorbing previous years, that our security is--
remains protected by where we are with the program. We want to
make clear it would be good to move to a new phase, but that we
cannot do until we see progress on the peace side.
Mr. Wilson. And it is so important to me that we counter
the axis of evil, being the regime in Tehran, the Chinese
Communist Party, war criminal Putin, and all of this fits
together. And it is to the benefit of the people of Azerbaijan
and Armenia that, indeed, the dictators with rule of gun do not
prevail over democracies with rule of law. And we need to be
sticking together.
Additional to that, Mr. Secretary, Putin has 3,000 soldiers
at a base--military base in Armenia, which is startling. And
they claim that they have a right to be there through 2044, but
that is not clear. And so what can be done to assist the people
of Armenia to request of Putin to take his troops home?
Ambassador O'Brien. I think--I agree with both the
statements you just made. I think the answer to both is the
same. Our involvement in concluding a peace agreement between
these countries is the way that each can find a way forward.
The Russian troops are present under--at the moment, it is a 5-
year initial term following the 2020 peace agreement.
If there is an alternative for the countries, then there
will be no role for these Russian peacekeepers. I mean, they
have already failed as peacekeepers. And so the best approach
is to give both these countries the alternative of working with
us and the West.
Mr. Wilson. And I know that we are here in regard to
Nagorno-Karabakh, but I was grateful for Congresswoman Titus
bringing up Turkey, our NATO ally. Somehow, we have got to have
them understand how important they are to world security, and
we need to have rapprochement in every way that we can.
So, hey, what I am just telling you, you need to be a
miracle worker.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Issa. The gentleman yields back.
We recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Costa.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
thank the chairman of the subcommittee and the ranking member
for holding this hearing. I think it is timely and important.
We had actually requested this over a month ago, and I am
glad we finally are here. We have also followed up with a
letter by--a bipartisan letter on a number of actions that I
would like to bring to the attention of the State Department
and followup. I do not think we have gotten answers to those
yet.
Let me begin, first of all, though--and I concur with the
earlier point that was made with Dr. Ibadoghlu who is being
held captive. I think we need to stay on top of that, and,
obviously, request his release. It is the humanitarian thing to
do.
But I want to also ask you, we are trying to deal with this
supplemental package, we hope after Thanksgiving, that would
provide funding not only for Ukraine, which is critical, but
also for Israel and the challenges in Gaza. And humanitarian
aid is a part of that component.
And I would hope that the State Department is looking when
we hopefully come together with a bipartisan package in
December, and a segment of that bipartisan--that supplemental
would provide humanitarian support for Armenia, given the over
100,000 refugees that they are dealing with, and some of the
other issues. Is that the intention at the State Department?
Mr. Sokolowski. I can take a first stab at it. Thank you
very much for the question, Representative Costa. What I can
reiterate is that in our conversations with the government of
Armenia, they continue to identify needs that they----
Mr. Costa. Yes, they have. And they have been providing----
Mr. Sokolowski. Yes. And they--yes.
Mr. Costa [continuing]. Members of Congress with those
needs. I assume they have been providing you with those needs
as well.
Mr. Sokolowski. Yes. Correct. And we are in conversations
with them on trying to meet those within existing resources
that we have. They are handling those to the extent that they
can, but, yes, I can confirm that they are asking for----
Mr. Costa. I mean, they have a 6-month commitment to these
refugees for housing, for medical assistance, and for economic
relocation.
Let me move on. I have been listening to this conversation,
and I am--maybe I am misinformed. I do not see the peace
process as going nearly as well as some of the description I
have just heard. The meeting in Granada, Spain, the last two
meetings, Azerbaijan has refused to go. I do not know how you
describe that as being positive.
And Armenia, I know, is very concerned that the mediators
would be Turkey and Russia. I mean, Russia did absolutely
nothing but allow the--Azerbaijan to do the ethnic cleaning. It
was ethnic cleansing that happened with the removal of these
Armenians from their historic homeland in Nagorno-Karabakh.
I mean, to call it something else, these folks did not want
to leave. And the corridor, I am not convinced that they have
access to go back to their homes. I am hearing something
entirely different. Do you care to comment?
Ambassador O'Brien. Yes. Sorry.
Mr. Costa. Don't just let my time run out, please.
Ambassador O'Brien. No, no, no, no.
Mr. Issa. Don't let bells and whistles bother you either.
We ignore them, too.
Ambassador O'Brien. I apologize. So I think you know the
situation well.
Mr. Costa. Yes.
Ambassador O'Brien. And I have talked about----
Mr. Costa. They represent a significant Armenian community,
land of William Saroyan.
Ambassador O'Brien. And so what I would say on the peace
process is what I have said throughout, is I think the parties
are engaging with each other directly. They do occasionally use
mediators. Sometimes they argue about which the mediators
should be, but they are in direct bilateral contact, assisted
by us, assisted by the Europeans.
Mr. Costa. So they certainly do not trust Turkey, and they
shouldn't. And Russia's track record now, when you include
Ukraine, is not one that I would rely on.
Ambassador O'Brien. I do not think they are relying on
those people. I think this comes down to whether they can look
each other in the eye and say, yes. And so it is--I wouldn't
worry about sort of the different mediation efforts. I think
this is fundamentally about whether the two leaders say we want
to be in partnership working on this together going forward.
And we are doing what we can to make clear the benefits of that
happening.
Mr. Costa. Well, my understanding is the Armenian leader is
showing courage. He is----
Ambassador O'Brien. Yes.
Mr. Costa [continuing]. In a tenuous situation, and we need
to do everything we can to provide support. And the corridor
that you talk about I think, from what I hear, Armenians are
concerned and feel threatened by that corridor and what it
might imply for another grabbing of land by Azerbaijan once it
is established and what kind of role they would play or any
benefits that they could--or whether or not they could hold
Azerbaijan to an agreement that would--that they would benefit
from that corridor that would be an--in portion on Armenian
land.
Ambassador O'Brien. But those are problems to be solved,
Representative. Currently, that land is controlled by Russian
peacekeepers. If we create an alternative that can be
negotiated with Armenia, we are in a fundamentally different
place. That is where the prime minister says he wants to be.
Mr. Costa. Well, my time has expired, Mr. Chairman. But I
think that Russian peacekeepers is a bit of an oxymoron.
Mr. Issa. On that note, the gentleman yields back.
I now recognize myself to agree with the gentleman that if
you shake hands with a Russian, you lose fingers.
Some years ago I was in Baku for the celebration of the
pipeline completion through there, and there were eight heads
of State. Weirdly enough, I was the highest-ranking American,
which is a little questionable that--how engaged we were. And
that tells me to a certain extent that it is not new that we
say we are engaged, but we then leave it to proxies, and
proxies like Turkey and Russia.
So following up on the gentleman from California's
statement, what are you prepared to do, Ambassador, to create
carrot-and-stick to move this agenda? Are you willing to add
sanctions for non-compliance? And are you willing to--you said
available resources. Would you delineate some of the resources
you believe you have that could help Armenia be in a position
to want to have a settlement and to trust in the settlement?
Ambassador O'Brien. It is a question we are working on. As
I said, we are looking at a matter of weeks to a few months, so
these are all questions we are developing answers to.
Mr. Issa. You are so close. Can't you give us a hint?
Ambassador O'Brien. Well, perhaps not always in this forum,
but I will say there are two serious questions also that we are
trying to sort through. One is the relationship with the
European Union. So President von der Leyen has said publicly
that she intends to have a meeting with the U.S. and with
Armenia on a way to bring Armenia closer to our communities. I
discussed this with the Prime Minister just a few days ago, and
we are developing what that would look like.
And, obviously, given the proximity, the offer the European
Union could make in terms of trade preferences, economic
alignment, and access to the single market is incredibly
important. We can assist in that, and that is just another
piece.
And Dr. Sokolowski can talk about that. The feasibility
studies on this transit corridor have actually been done--
funded by AID. So we are in the middle of seeing what kind of
economic future there may be. There may also be additional
items that we and the Europeans can bring to bear on security.
France has just announced some significant contributions to
Armenia's security, and, yes, we are looking at all the tools
we have. I am not going to preview any sanctions decisions, but
that is certainly a tool in our toolkit and----
Mr. Issa. Well, let me just followup on that. You are not
previewing them, but are you committing to a willingness to use
them if we do not--if other methods do not work?
Ambassador O'Brien. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Armenia is obviously eligible for a
lot of USAID support. You mentioned those studies that were
done under USAID. Has TDA, the Trade Development Agency, been
in there? And, if not, wouldn't they benefit by having the
feasibility that would include U.S. alternatives to Belt and
Road?
Mr. Sokolowski. So I will start with that, and I think this
keys into your--so thank you for the question, Representative
Issa. This keys into the conversation that you were just having
with the Ambassador with regard to broader support for Armenia.
We are engaged with the government of Armenia in a number
of different areas to help them increase their resilience and
give them options, so that they are not so dependent on
previous relationships with Russia that go back to the Soviet
period. And these are engagements on areas related to trade,
energy and critical infrastructure, information systems, a
whole range of things, even including agriculture. That is what
I wanted to get to.
So we worked with our colleagues at the Department of State
and with the USDA to bring in folks from the USDA to start to
work with the government of Armenia on what it can do on
lessening its dependence on Russian grain and flour.
And so that, per your point about TDA, we see this as a
moment where it really has to be a whole of government effort,
looking across all of our abilities, to see what we can bring
in in response to what the government of Armenia is signaling
its needs are. So I think that is a great point, and we are at
a moment where we are looking more broadly than we have in the
past about which is the best U.S. Government partner to respond
to government of Armenia needs.
Mr. Issa. In my remaining moments, I want to followup on
that, Doctor. The Armenian government, its ability to know what
it needs versus a willingness for us to lean into program
suggestions, if you were to balance the two of them without any
disrespect to the government, wouldn't you balance it in favor
of we need to lean in?
Mr. Sokolowski. Thank you for that question, because it is
a great question that goes to the core of what we do in our
development relationships with our partners. And it really is a
conversation. They will come into a conversation saying we need
these ten things. And in the midst of a conversation, we can
say, well, what about this eleventh thing or the thing that you
are suggesting? Have you thought about this experience from
this other country that might be useful?
So I think you are absolutely right that we shouldn't just
say, OK, here is what you are saying and that is exactly what
it is. It is a conversation in which we can say here is where
we think we can help you. Here is where other different parts
of the U.S. Government or even other donors or other
organizations could be of support.
Thank you.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
My time has expired. Pursuant to the committee rules, I now
recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Lawler.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Chairman.
Administrations here in the U.S. have long justified
sending military assistance to Azerbaijan on the basis of the
supposed utility in the containment of Russia and Iran, yet
Azerbaijan has extensive energy ties with both. Sanctioned
Russian and Iranian companies own significant shares in
Azerbaijan's gas fields, exporting energy to Europe, and
Azerbaijan has recently signed lucrative energy deals with both
countries.
Yes or no, is the Administration aware of Azerbaijan's
energy ties with Russia and Iran?
Ambassador O'Brien. Yes.
Mr. Lawler. And do you believe this behavior is consistent
with our regional interests?
Ambassador O'Brien. No. And we try to encourage
diversification of Azerbaijan's ties for that reason.
Mr. Lawler. So I recently introduced a sanctions bill on
Iranian petroleum, which passed through the House, the SHIP
Act. And the reason being that obviously the United States has
sanctions on Iranian petroleum, but, frankly, the
Administration was not enforcing secondary sanctions on the
purchasers.
You look at China. They are the largest purchaser of
Iranian petroleum. Iranian petroleum sales are up 59 percent
since this Administration took office.
So when you look at what is happening around the globe, and
the relationship between China, Russia, Iran, and what they are
doing to undermine the United States and our allies and our
interests around the globe, why would we not try to hold
Azerbaijan accountable for the arrangements that they have with
both Russia and Iran when it comes to energy?
Ambassador O'Brien. Well, at the risk of separating two
subjects you just merged, I think if our concern is with Iran,
we should take focus on Iran. And I had some involvement. I
mean, we sanctioned a number of Iranian companies that were
involved in military support to Russia and a number of
companies involved in the Iranian trade.
The difficult--oil trade--the difficulty we were
encountering with both Russia and Iran was the growth of this
ghost fleet and, say, ghost services industries. So the way in
which we traditionally restrict oil sales is to go after the
insurance crew providers, you know, all of those service
entities. And, ultimately, the ships that carried the oil
depended on those services, so they would tend to come into
compliance.
What we have seen in the last few years is the growth of
500 or more tankers that are carrying oil completely outside
the service----
Mr. Lawler. Right. Which is why I introduced the SHIP Act.
Ambassador O'Brien. Well, and so the--what we also are
doing, though, is trying to reregulate these ships, because it
is a great danger to navigation as well as to our sanctions
programs. So we have issued the first steps along that way.
I think you saw some initial sanctions come out in the last
package, as well as an advisory that is increasing the due
diligence requirements of those who would sell the ships or buy
them back, and then otherwise service them. And we are now
engaged with the ports to which these ships go, because--to
recognize the dangers and increase their regulation of them as
well.
So there are a couple of different ways of slicing the cake
here, but we are trying to get at the same problem with the
tools that we have available to us.
Mr. Lawler. President Biden recently noted that when
autocrats do not quote, pay a price for their aggression, end
quote, it only emboldens their behavior. What has the Biden
Administration done to ensure Azerbaijan pays a price for its
aggression?
Ambassador O'Brien. So, as I have mentioned, we have made
clear to them that there is no business as usual. We have
suspended high-level contacts on a variety of topics, and we
are not--we have not and do not anticipate submitting a waiver
on 907.
The real question is, so is that enough? And President
Aliyev has traditionally tried to balance his ties to the
regional players, Russia, Iran, particularly, Central Asia, as
well as to the West. And I think he is reaching a point--my
analysis--that if he makes peace, he has the opportunity to
become more prosperous and to be in a stable area where there
are counterweights to Russia and Iran.
If he fails to make peace, he is really saying that in the
future I want to be beholden to Russia and Iran at a time when
those two powers are getting much closer to one another than
they are to him. And that puts him in the position of being
very much the odd man out in a three-way game. And I think that
is not where he should want to head, so we are trying to
provide him with the alternative of a better future.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Issa. The gentleman yields back.
We now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Schneider.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
the witnesses.
From December of last year to September of this year,
Azerbaijan blockaded the Lachin corridor, the only connection
between Armenia proper and the ethnic enclave of Nagorno-
Karabakh or Artsakh. Many of us here in Congress sent letter
after letter after letter and supported resolution after
resolution to assert pressure and relieve the humanitarian
situation in Nagorno-Karabakh, which had been exacerbated since
the 2020 war.
It looks like we failed. During September 19 and 20,
Azerbaijan launched an offensive that led to the local Armenian
authorities agreeing to a cease-fire. Within 10 days of that
cease-fire, the ethnic Armenian population of the enclave went
from 120,000 to 100,000, with locals leaving in fear or
forcibly being expelled.
Approximately 300 people died, 220 of them in a fuel depot
explosion about which we do not yet know enough of the details.
Dozens remain missing.
I want the people who chant cease-fire now around the world
not to forget Nagorno-Karabakh. That cease-fire ended in an
ethnic cleansing, not a multi-ethnic harmony.
American relations with Azerbaijan are inherently
complicated. Azerbaijan shares our skepticism of Russia and
Iran, and the country supports our ally, Israel. We cannot
ignore the strategic opportunities and shared priorities with
Azerbaijan, but we must also be firm advocates for our values
and the principles of human rights.
The tightening of the stranglehold around Nagorno-Karabakh
over the years until the ethnic Armenian population was forced
to leave was not just about counterterrorism, and it was not
just about geopolitics. When we reflect on how this could have
possibly happened, I want to share a story that took place in
Hungary in 2004.
Gurgen Magaryan, a lieutenant in the Armenian army, was in
Budapest participating in a 3-month English course as part of
NATO's Partnership for Peace Program. He was sleeping in his
room around 5 a.m. when Gurgen was axed, hacked to death, by an
Azerbaijani lieutenant, Ramil Safarov, a fellow participant in
the very same program.
Gurgen received 16 blows to his face, and his head was
nearly separated from his body. Safarov was convicted of murder
and sentenced to life by a Hungarian court in 2006. Sadly, in
2012, 2 years into Viktor Orban's premiership, Safarov was
extradited to Azerbaijan. The killer was greeted as a hero and
pardoned by President Aliyev. The defense ministry promoted him
to the rank of major and furnished him with an apartment and
back pay.
So this story leads me to ask you, Ambassador O'Brien, what
should be our takeaway from what happened in 2004 through 2012?
How should we think of the possibilities of peace between
Armenia and Azerbaijan in this context?
Ambassador O'Brien. I think, Representative, that is a
reprehensible set of events. Peace is always made between
adversaries. And, to see any successful peace through to its
conclusion, there needs to be accountability for crimes. But
there also needs to be some measure of setting a new path going
forward.
And what lies before us now is whether that is possible in
this case, and that lies with the parties. We are creating a
path for them to take and incentives for them to go there. We
have to do this in a way that is consistent with our rights.
And if I may, just a tiny digression. Representative Costa,
you mentioned Dr. Ibadoghlu. We maintain constant vigilance on
this and insist on his fair treatment. We would like to see him
released. We will continue to urge that. And I think we will do
the same on any other human rights issue that comes across in
our relationship with Azerbaijan. So we do that in a way that
is consistent with our values.
And what we are looking for now is a peace agreement that
reflects the interests of the people of Armenia, and we believe
those of Azerbaijan, in developing stronger relationships with
the vibrant economies to their west rather than with the
autocracies to their north and south.
Mr. Schneider. Great. Thank you. My time is about expired.
Thank you for mentioning Dr. Ibadoghlu. And I will mention his
son Emin is here as well today.
Mr. Issa. The gentleman yields back.
And I want to take a moment to personally thank our
witnesses for their candor. It was a very effective dialog
because of your willingness to answer fully the questions of
the committee.
If there are no further questions from the members, again,
I thank our witnesses. And the subcommittee may have additional
written questions for the witnesses, and we would ask that you
respond in writing if you agree.
Thank you to the gentlemen.
Mr. Costa. I would just like to raise a point. One of the
other things that we mentioned in the letter that we sent, and
of course with the year approaching, it may have to be the
following year, but I think the subcommittee should consider
taking a CODEL to Armenia and to meet with the officials there.
I think it----
Mr. Issa. It is noted. Hopefully, the Ambassador will send
us the appropriate invitation.
Thank you.
Ambassador O'Brien. We would welcome it.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Ambassador O'Brien. Let us organize that, and we will look
for your letter, too.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. We look forward to that.
Pursuant to the committee rules, all members may have 5
days to submit statements, questions, and extraneous materials
for the record subject to length limitations.
Without objection, the subcommittee, as a result, is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:56 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM ARMENAN ASSEMBLY OF AMERICA
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
