- MEMBER DAY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEMBER DAY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMNBER 3, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-57

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-165PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   AMI BERA, California
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  TED LIEU, California
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
YOUNG KIM, California                DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        COLIN ALLRED, Texas
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDY KIM, New Jersey
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       SARA JACOBS, California
American Samoa                   KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                     Florida
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   GREG STANTON, Arizona
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida              MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey        JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York            JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
CORY MILLS, Florida                 SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia             JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas              JASON CROW, Colorado
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    16
Hearing Minutes..................................................    17
Hearing Attendance...............................................    18

STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Statements submitted for the record..............................    19

MEMBER DAY

Friday, November 3, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:43 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Michael McCaul (chairman
of the committee) presiding.
Chairman McCaul. The Committee on Foreign Affairs will come
to order. The purpose of this hearing is to hear from Members
of Congress on bills that have been referred to this Committee.
I'll recognize myself for a very brief opening statement.
During the first session of each Congress, the House Foreign
Affairs Committee holds a Member Day to provide our colleagues
an opportunity to present their legislative ideas on matters
under this Committee's jurisdiction.
I do not have to tell anybody in this room that the world
is on fire. We've witnessed Russia's war of aggression, the
largest land invasion in Europe since World War II, the
increasing rising tensions in the Indo-Pacific, intensified
hostilities and aggression from the CCP, as well as a full-
scale war in the Middle East that threatens to destabilize the
entire region. Not since my father's war have we seen such a
rise in malign nation States seeking to upend the global
balance of power.
This Committee deals with issues of war and peace.
Diplomacy should always be the first recourse. But, as history
has taught us, what's past is prologue, and weakness only
invites aggression.
This Committee has also held a long tradition of
bipartisanship. As former Chairman Ingle often stated, when it
comes to foreign policy, partisanship stops at the water's
edge.
I'm honored to work with my good friend, Ranking Member
Meeks and today Ms. Manning, to advance this bipartisan policy
agenda that not only protects our national security interests,
but those of our allies across the globe.
So, I want to thank all the Members for being here today to
testify on your respective bills. And, I now recognize the
Acting Ranking Member. Ms. Manning?
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I welcome our
colleagues to the Foreign Affairs Committee. The House Foreign
Affairs Committee works to oversee and strengthen America's
international presence and ensure our Nation's core interests
and values are represented in our foreign policy.
The jurisdiction of this Committee is crucial to our
national security. I know that all of us in this House, whether
on the Committee or off the Committee, have an interest in
sustaining America's global leadership.
Your engagement and perspective informs how we achieve that
goal. We are grateful to have this opportunity to hear from
every one of you.
We are living in a pivotal time. Our security, the security
of our allies and partners, the strength of global stability,
hinges on the leadership and the unity of nations that share
our values and commitments.
Israel is responding to Hamas's horrific October 7
terrorist attack. Ukraine continues to bravely fight back
against Putin's unprovoked invasion.
In the Indo-Pacific, our allies and partners are resisting
coercion by the People's Republic of China. In our own
hemisphere, we are deepening our partnerships to counter rising
levels of violence and the grip of gangs that terrorize
communities and weaken the rule of law.
And, we cannot forget that the climate crisis is an
existential threat to the entire planet. All are reminders that
our interests are global and interconnecting.
America is called to lead every region of the world and
fight back against terrorists. We can rise. We can best rise to
that call with broad, bipartisan support for diplomacy and
assistance whenever and wherever we can advance those
imperatives.
We must demonstrate how foreign policymakes a difference in
our constituent's daily lives and keeps America safe and
secure. The perspectives each of you bring from the communities
you represent or from the expertise you've developed in other
committees of the House, is critically important to our work.
Again, I thank you for sharing that with us today.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Ranking Member. I want to thank
the Members for appearing here today. Your full statements will
be made part of the record.
And, I'll go to each Member for 5 minutes to give your
remarks. I first recognize my dear friend from Texas, Austin
where I live as well, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Doggett,
for his opening statement.
Mr. Doggett. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member, and colleagues. And, thank you for your
leadership on so many critical issues that our country and the
world face right now.
I want to touch just briefly on two measures that have not
been introduced, but I believe do fall well within the
jurisdiction of this Committee. Mr. Wilson is one of the
bipartisan cosponsors, co-original authors when we introduced
the legislation. We've continued to work with your staff to try
to iron out some of the specifics and make them work as
effectively as possible.
You, Mr. Chairman, of course, are the author of the REPO
Act, of which I'm a cosponsor. I believe we need to do all we
can to push back against Russian aggression and to prepare for
a day when Ukrainians have an opportunity to engage in
reconstruction of the immense damage that Russian war crimes
have caused.
I have what I believe is a companion piece of legislation.
There are Russian government assets here in the United States
and scattered across the EU. There has been discussion in
recent weeks about how to handle those assets.
I believe that your proposal would allow the President to
seize some of the assets, which I fully support. My proposal is
aimed at the earnings from those assets.
Secretary Yellen recently visited in Europe with the
European Allies and seemed to endorse the concept of a, what I
call a War Crimes tax.
And, the legislation as I propose it, would have a 100
percent War Crimes tax on any earnings the Russian government
has had in the United States since the invasion. And then,
would give this Committee authority over a fund to help the
Ukrainians in their rehabilitation efforts.
So, that quite simply is the approach. I believe that it's
complementary. And, it would be mandatory that all of those,
all of that income would flow through this Committee,
eventually to the Ukrainians.
The second bill, Mr. Chairman, concerns legislation that I
was the sponsor of in the last Congress that established the
ban on the import of Russian oil and gas into this country.
That is the law today. There's an executive order as well.
However, there is a possibility that we did not really
consider at the time, of how the Russians can circumvent that.
And, they circumvent it by sending oil to third countries,
having it refined, and then the refined products can come into
the United States.
This bill would ban us importing oil or gas from countries
that are--refined products from refineries that are processing
Russian oil. It basically prevents the laundering of Russian
oil through a third country and to ensure that our ban is
complete.
And, I would invite the continued input from you and other
Members of the Committee on both these bills. We're hoping to
file them next week.
And, we will continue working with your Committee. I
recognize that the most important thing is to get the
Ukrainians all of the military support that they need to
prevail over Putin.
But, I think it's important to plan for the future and to
do all we can to continue to boycott and prevent the Russian
economy from fueling the Russian war machine.
And, I thank you very much.
Chairman McCaul. And, thank you, Mr. Doggett. These are
both excellent bills. Great ideas. I always think that Russia,
they should pay for their war crimes, not the American
taxpayer.
I think both of our bills were designed and targeted toward
that. And, when it comes to the--where we're seeing not only
Russia and we're seeing Iran evade sanctions as well on energy.
And, I think that second proposal is excellent as well.
And, I would like to--well, the Committee is going to need
some time to look at these bills. But, I would like to get them
on the December markup schedule. That would be the next
available markup.
But, these are both excellent ideas.
Mr. Doggett. Thank you very much. And, we'll appreciate the
continued advice from you and from your staff.
Chairman McCaul. Well, thank you so much. And, safe travel
back to Austin.
Mr. Doggett. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. OK.
Ms. Manning. Can I just add my thanks to my good friend,
Representative Doggett, for his very creative ideas. And, I
look forward to seeing those bills, because we all want to do
everything we can to support our democratic ally, Ukraine in
its fight against Putin and his country members.
Mr. Doggett. Thank you, very much.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Wilson?
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Indeed, Congressman
Doggett, thank you for the bipartisan leadership on these
issues. And, it just is really outrageous, war criminal Putin
to go around the legislation that we have to finance their
activities.
And, it should be noted that indeed, the invasion of
February 24, 2022, of Ukraine, the mass murder conducted at
that time. But, it should also be noted that indeed, on October
7, the second invasion by a dictator, with the invasion into
Israel that--by Hamas, it was clearly coordinated with war
criminal Putin.
We had Hamas representatives go to Moscow last March, or
this March. Can you imagine, there were Hamas delegations in
August to meet in Moscow with top leaders of the Putin regime.
And then, also just this week, if people cannot connect the
dots, they need to look and really understand that indeed, a
delegation of Hamas and simultaneously the Deputy Foreign
Minister of Iran were there to meet with the Putin regime and
with the Russian Federation.
And, in the meantime, the Iranian regime had been providing
drone capability to the Russian Federation to kill Ukrainian
citizens. And, this is all being done so clearly and with Hamas
that's to be real too.
What we're talking about, the terminology really is
somewhat disarming when people talk about Hamas, Hezbollah,
Houthis as Iranian proxies, they're puppets. The correct
terminology, I would hope, and Congressman Mike Gallagher was
on television earlier today, identifying that the proxies of
Iran are really puppets.
We are dealing with a regime that has every intent, despite
how people may look at it and it's provocative by them of death
to Israel and death to America. It just cannot be any clearer.
And hey, we have to give recognition that they actually
chant death to Israel, death to America in English for the
benefit of the American people and around the world.
I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. And, I would like to
also add to that, that in our briefings yesterday, we were told
that Hamas actually visited Mr. Putin at the Kremlin.
And, that he's actively working with not only Iran, but
Hamas and Hezbollah, who have perpetrated these other war
crimes in my judgment.
So, with that, Mr. Doggett, thanks so much. And, I'll see
you back in Texas.
Mr. Doggett. For sure. Thank you for your hospitality.
Chairman McCaul. And, we now recognize the gentlelady from
Florida, a woman that I came into Congress with almost 20 years
ago, Ms.--it's hard to believe that, isn't it? Ms. Debbie
Wasserman-Schultz.
Ms. Wasserman-Schultz. Mr. Chairman, I think we're getting
a little long in the tooth here. Maybe we do not want to talk
about how long that we've served together.
And, it's really an honor to join you and to see your
ascendency as one of our classmates and appreciate the work
that you do every single day. You and the Ranking Member, Mr.
Meeks.
I've seen the bipartisan work of this Committee and it's
really, it's really so hopeful to strengthen the United States'
position around the world. And, I appreciate the opportunity to
join you for this Member Day.
I want to thank you and the Ranking Member and the standing
in Ranking Member, my dear friend, Ms. Manning, for the
opportunity to testify today and amplify the voices of my
Venezuelan-American constituents.
As Co-Chair of the Venezuelan Democracy Caucus, I urge my
colleagues to join me in support of the AFFECT Human Rights in
Venezuela Act and the VOICE Act. Venezuela has suffered a lost
decade under the dictatorial rule of Nicolas Maduro.
Nearly eight million Venezuelans have fled their homes, a
third of the Nation's 2014 population. Countless others have
been displaced internally by State backed collectivos, illegal
mining and violent drug cartels.
Maduro's autocratic regime has systematically destroyed
traditional and electoral independence, hijacked State
institutions, and drained the country's wealth for personal
gain. Once he's succeeded in stealing everything his people
had, including their boats, he sold access and allegiance to
the world's leading despots, Russia, China, Iran, Cuba, who now
provide him valuable resources to prop up his corrupt regime.
The international fact-finding mission on Venezuela has
documented Maduro's flagrant violation of human rights,
torture, political imprisonment, surveillance, extrajudicial
murder and countless other charges. I'm grateful for
President's Biden's moral clarity and resolve in his efforts to
promote a peaceful and democratic transfer of power in
Venezuela.
But, considering these unforgivable abuses of power by the
Maduro regime, we must start to plan for the day after. That
starts with ensuring the fact-finding mission and other
international mechanisms put in place have unceasing support
from the United States.
I was proud to sponsor the AFFECT Human Rights in Venezuela
Act for this very purpose alongside three Members of the
Committee, Joaquin Castro, Maria Salazar, and Mike Waltz. This
bipartisan bill which this Committee passed unanimously last
Congress also provides for enhanced cooperation between the
U.S., global institutions, and NGO's to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches those in need, including
Venezuelan refugees and migrants.
The bill opens new pathways for promoting free media,
protecting human rights, and securing the release of political
prisoners, including wrongfully detained Americans. I urge the
Chairman and Ranking Member to report this bill to the House
floor. I'm confident it will receive bipartisan support.
Despite the ruthless efforts of the Maduro regime,
Venezuela's democratic opposition has found new purpose and
unity with the support of the Biden Administration. In addition
to securing an agreement that allowed Maduro's sanctioned
assets to be distributed as humanitarian aid to Venezuelans,
President Biden has been clear that sanctions on Venezuela's
captors will only be lifted if the regime allows free
elections, releases prisoners, and respects human rights.
The opposition overcame significant obstacles to organize
an independent Presidential primary election, mobilizing more
than 2.3 million voters, a landmark accomplishment.
This resulted in the nomination of Maria Corina Machado, a
fierce champion for human rights, who has unified and
galvanized Venezuela's democratic movement. This week I spoke
with Ms. Machado to congratulate her on this achievement and
promised that Congress would do everything possible to support
a free and fair election.
However, in a clear breach of their agreement with the
opposition, the Maduro regime has decided that Ms. Machado
should not be allowed to run. The will of the people be damned
and the votes cast would be negated.
Worse yet, following her overwhelming victory of 92 percent
in the primary, the regime's kangaroo court double-downed on
her baseless disqualification and suspended the election
results. The criminalization of this legitimate political
process reflects a well-established pattern of disdain for
genuine electoral independence and repression of political
opponents.
The most terrifying demand is the regime's order to turn
over documents identifying Venezuelan voters, considering the
regime's history of retaliating against dissent through
intimidation and denial of social services.
As a representative of a vibrant Venezuelan community, I'm
horrified by the prospect that my constituents could become
targets for the simple act of voting. Because of our complete
and warranted distrust of the Maduro regime, I foresaw this
outcome when I introduced the VOICE Act with Congresswoman
Salazar.
This legislation draws a red line when it comes to Maduro's
desperate attempts to cling to power. The VOICE Act expresses
the consensus view that Venezuelans deserve support in their
efforts to advance democracy.
It takes direct aim at those who are enabling Maduro's
tyranny by punishing individuals who are complicit in excluding
Ms. Machado from the election and delegitimizing the
opposition.
Our bill lays out clear conditions for what a resolution of
the crisis looks like, along with clear actions to achieve
them. It also prescribes a broader U.S. role in ending this
crisis, including a new special envoy tasked with preserving
humanitarian access, managing political negotiations, and
returning American hostages like Evan Hernandez.
The situation in Venezuela is dire. But, Venezuelans are
strong. Two weeks ago, I stood alongside tens of thousands,
including many of my constituents who lined up to participate
in the primary.
From Austin, to Manhattan, to Broward County, Venezuelans
stood in solidarity, some in joyful tears to cast their
ballots. They told the dictator, you may have our homes, our
livelihoods, and our freedoms, but you will not take away our
voice.
So, I ask you to join me in support of the VOICE Act, Mr.
Chairman and the AFFECT Human Rights in Venezuela Act so we can
put an end to Venezuela's current State of criminality and
corruption and initiate a new era of prosperity, democracy, and
hope.
Thank you for the opportunity. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. I thank the gentlelady. This is an
excellent bill. I, you know, I've been down to the border of
Colombia and Venezuela to see all the refugees coming out.
It's very sad, the human suffering imposed by the dictator,
Maduro, in Venezuela. And, we need to do everything we can to
help these innocent victims who are--many of whom have fled to
Colombia and many of whom are on their way up to here.
And, I would be right, I see you have both Mr. Castro,
Salazar, and Mike Waltz as cosponsors.
Ms. Wasserman-Schultz. Right.
Chairman McCaul. And, I would recommend that our urge Mr.
Castro, and I would urge yourself, to appeal to Mr. Meeks to
put it on the next markup.
Ms. Wasserman-Schultz. Happy to.
Chairman McCaul. We get to balance the Republican and
Democrat bills and I think this would be a great Democrat bill
to put on the markup.
Ms. Wasserman-Schultz. Thank you very much. I'll do that.
Chairman McCaul. I'd like to recognize the Ranking Member.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank my
dear friend, Representative Wasserman-Schultz and
Representative Castro for staying steadfast in your leadership
on the AFFECT Human Rights in Venezuela Act.
As we all know, the Venezuelan people have been confronting
an historic crisis since 2014 that includes failures in
governance, economic access, security, and a worsening human
rights emergency.
I commend regional leaders that continue to seek ways to
provide humanitarian assistance for Venezuelans. The
international community must never lose hope that the
Venezuelan--in the Venezuelan people and in the notion that
there can be a democratic resolution to this crisis.
I remain hopeful that the talks in Barbados between Maduro
and the opposition and the Administration support for rolling
back global sanctions in Venezuela are steps that can support
reaching free and fair elections in 2024 and 2025.
At the heart of the matter, these restrictions only hurt
the people of Venezuela, adding pressure and desperation to an
increasingly difficult situation. I support the AFFECT Bill
because we aim to keep our focus and priority on the plight of
the people of Venezuela during these challenging times.
The independent international fact-finding mission on
Venezuela, it was initiated by the U.N. Human Rights Council,
has played a key role in uncovering the truth and keeping the
international community informed.
When we supported the renewal of its mandate in 2022, we
were able to show support for the much needed U.N. mechanisms
and multilateral cooperation that developed responses to
challenges we face in the region and around the world.
And, I thank you again for your testimony. And, I yield
back.
Ms. Wasserman-Schultz. Thank you so much.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Wilson?
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you, Ranking
Member. And, Congresswoman Wasserman-Schultz, thank you and
Congresswoman Salazar for working together, it's bipartisan.
And, it particularly is important to me in that as I was
growing up and we would celebrate Pan-American Day at Memminger
Elementary School in Charleston, South Carolina and every year
we would have a parade where you could take the flag of the
country of your choice and I always had the flag of Venezuela
as we had the parade, because my family had hosted people from
Venezuela with Creole Petroleum Company to come and visit in
Charleston, South Carolina with the refining capability we had.
And then, I'm grateful too, how significant this can be for
the people of Colombia. My wife and I have been the co-chairs
to the Partners of the Americas Program with Southwest
Colombia. We've hosted students from Colombia. Two of my sons
actually were exchange students to Colegio Bennett in Cali.
And so, the northern part of South America is just so
critical. And, it's particularly gruesome that Venezuela was
one of the wealthiest countries in the world with great
opportunity for people to succeed. And so, this is particularly
sad.
I also want to commend you, I join with you and
Congresswoman Schneider--Congressman Schneider on Saturday, a
joint letter urging the funding of the war, which we did not
choose, the dictators with a gun opposing democracy's rule of
law, to support the people of Israel, to support the people of
Ukraine, Taiwan, and the southern border.
And, it's just so critical that we indeed address all four.
And, I am really hopeful that we can continue that. And, it's
become particularly sad that over 110 times I have warned on
the House floor that the global war on terrorism is not over.
With the safe haven of Afghanistan, the war is coming to
America. And, this week, of course, we have seen Presidential
candidates announce that we could have an attack in our country
imminent with the open borders that President Biden is
allowing.
And then, sadly, the Director of the FBI has said indeed
that our country is at risk. So, we all need to be working
together, Republican and Democrat. And, I want to commend you
on your efforts. Thank you.
Ms. Wasserman-Schultz. Thank you very much.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. If the gentleman
would be, honor us by bringing in one of the photographs of you
as a child with the Venezuelan flag, I would be happy to enter
that into the record.
And, with that----
Mr. Wilson. I'll have to see if I can try to find it.
Chairman McCaul. OK. With that, Ms. Wasserman-Schultz,
thank you so much.
Ms. Wasserman-Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. All right. I now recognize the gentleman
from Hawaii, Mr. Case, for his opening statement.
Mr. Case. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Ranking Member, colleagues.
We of course, face so many critical issues around the world
today.
But, today I'd like to focus with you on the enduring
significance of the Indo-Pacific and particularly the Pacific
Islands region of the Indo-Pacific. A region where if we do not
get it right, there will be very severe consequences down the
road. Even more severe than what we face today.
This region is not only, of course, the roots of much of
our country, including my own Hawaii. But, we have been a
Pacific power now for over two centuries. People tend to forget
that.
Countless service members, of course, lost their lives in
World War II, defending freedom and security and the post-war
order, which has been beneficial to the Indo-Pacific. And, our
country itself administered in the post-war period the trust
territory of the Pacific Islands, which included the three
freely associated States of Palau, the Federated States of
Micronesia, and the Marshall Islands.
But, unfortunately our engagement waned over time and
suffered from decades of insufficient attention, a situation
that the pacing challenge of China Pacific power, Russia, and
others have been only too willing to exploit.
In 2019 I co-founded the bipartisan Pacific Islands Caucus
with many members of this Committee and others to lend specific
focus in Congress to the Pacific Islands. We have worked to
include the Pacific Islands in our overall approach to the
Indo-Pacific across all efforts.
And, we have produced legislation such as our Blue Pacific
Act to integrate the region in our overall strategy for Indo-
Pacific engagement. Through these and other efforts, we have
made promising strides toward bolstering our presence in the
region and reestablishing our relationships with our island
nations.
This Administration, following constructive initiatives by
its predecessor, has now hosted two U.S./Pacific Islands
Foreign Summits in Washington, DC. And, begun efforts to open
embassies in Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu, and Kiribati in
addition to diplomatic presence elsewhere.
However, we have a limited window of time in which to make
a new impression and again, prove ourselves to be steadfast
partners. To this end, I'd like to focus on three particular
areas.
No. 1, renewing the compacts of free association. No. 2,
bolstering our diplomatic presence in the region. And No. 3,
passing measures such as the Blue Pacific Act.
First, on the compacts of free association, which are our
treaties, our agreements with the compact countries of Palau,
Federated States of Micronesia, and the Marshall Islands. These
have been referred to as the bedrock of our role in the Pacific
by the 2020 Indo-Pacific Strategy.
The State Department and the Department of the Interior
under the able direction of Special Envoy Joseph Yun, worked
tirelessly to negotiate these agreements to extend the compacts
for another 20 years.
The Administration has submitted those agreements in
Congress. And, it is essential that we act swiftly to pass them
into law.
Chair, you and other Members of your Committee, as well as
the Committee on Natural Resources last night, introduced the
renewal, which we really appreciate. We need to move on these
immediately. A delay in passage of these new compacts will be
seen as a failure to deliver for our closest partners in the
Pacific and will undermine our efforts to prove that we are, in
fact, a steadfast partner.
No. 2, we must also ensure that our new diplomatic posts
and other presence and outreach in the Pacific Islands are
adequately resourced. The efforts to open new embassies are
welcomed steps in a region where just showing up is central to
building trust.
While it is, of course, up to the Senate to ensure that
Ambassadors to these new posts are confirmed in a timely
manner, this Committee has an important role to play in
overseeing the State Department and ensuring that the embassies
are, in fact, established posthaste. And, are fully functioning
consular service wise and otherwise.
Finally, we must pass legislation like the Blue Pacific Act
which would establish a whole of government strategy for
engagement in the region. Our bill outlines areas of
cooperation between our governments and the Pacific Island
nations, allying our activities with the Pacific Island forums
own 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent.
It also codifies our Pacific partnership strategy and
requires that it be updated every 4 years, assuring Pacific
Island nations that we do offer a long term partnership. By
passing the Blue Pacific Act, we can demonstrate that our
commitment to the region is long term and sustainable.
We have made great progress in the Pacific Islands along
with the Indo-Pacific in recent years. However, now is the time
that we must follow through on our commitments and ensure that
our legislative efforts reflect the importance of our ties, not
only just to the broader Indo-Pacific, but to the Pacific
Islands themselves.
I look forward to working with you on all of these efforts
and thank you for your time and effort.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Congressman Case. And, I agree
with you. When I talked to the Asian Pacific Islands and the
Asian Islands, it seems like after World War II, we almost
forgot about them.
And, I think China has become very aggressive in the South
China Sea and certainly with Taiwan. And, we need to renew our
commitment to those islands. It's in our national security best
interest and in theirs as well.
And, we just hosted, all of the Ambassadors came in, and I
believe you were there as well, to host a reception with them
to renew our support and our commitment to them. And, if you
will allow my staff to have some time to look at the details of
your legislation, we would be happy to consider that for markup
as well.
And, Ms. Manning?
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Representative Case,
I want to thank you for your testimony today as well as your
leadership on the Pacific Island issues.
The Pacific Island Caucus, which you co-lead with Delegate
Radewagen, a Member of this Committee, my good friends,
Chairwoman Kim and Ranking Member Bera of the Indo-Pacific
Subcommittee, as well as Representative Wagner and
Representative Sherman, has played a critical role in restoring
the Pacific Islands to their deserved place at the forefront of
our discussions about foreign policy here in the House.
I share your views about the importance of the Pacific
Islands. Under President Biden's leadership, the United States
has held multiple summits with the Pacific Islands, released
the landmark Pacific Partnership Strategy, and as you
mentioned, we are enlarging our diplomatic footprint in the
region.
It's important that we in Congress follow through with the
support needed to realize that ambitious strategy. Some of the
specific initiatives you mentioned are excellent ways to do
that.
I agree, COFA is critical. Yesterday, legislation was filed
in the House and the Senate to implement the COFA agreements
that were negotiated with the Federated States of Micronesia,
Palau, and the Republic of Marshall Islands.
Chairman McCaul and Ranking Member Meeks are both original
co-sponsors and were deeply involved in the bipartisan,
bicameral talks which produced the legislation. Their staffs
have been in close touch throughout that process and we were
all very glad that we were able to retain your bill with Mr.
Womack, the Compact Impact Fairness Act in the introduced
product.
And, Mr. Case, Ranking Member Meeks was proud to include
much of your Blue Pacific Act in his bill, the Eagle Act, last
Congress to anchor the U.S. presence and leadership in the
Pacific Islands.
When Mr. Meeks visited Palau and Papua New Guinea last
year, it became clear to him that we need to up our development
investment, diplomatic engagement, and strategic presence in
the Pacific Islands, to remain the partner of choice there in
the face of the PRC's expansive campaign for influence.
A significant part of your bill passed the House last
Congress. And, we are all looking forward to working with you
to move the bill this Congress.
We look forward to our continued work together. We are very
grateful for your testimony today. And, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you. Mr. Wilson, do you have any
comments?
Mr. Wilson. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And indeed,
Congressman Case, thank you. And again, an example of
bipartisanship.
You cannot do any better than being with Congresswoman
Amata Radewagen and Congressman of the American Samoa and
Congressman Jim Moylan of beautiful Guam. And so, we look--I
look forward to working with you in any way.
But, I also want to let you know too, it was so impressive
to me, in a sad way, on October 7, I was in Copenhagen, Denmark
and the only television station that I could get in English was
France24. And, as they were reporting the massacre in Israel,
it was startling to me that it was Israel's Pearl Harbor is
what they began with.
And then, it was amazing too, the next day the Prime
Minister of Denmark spoke to the NATO Parliamentary Assembly
that I was attending, and he began his speech by pointing out
that what occurred in Israel was Israel's Pearl Harbor and 9/
11.
But, it was just so impressive to me that people around the
world recognize how significant December 7, 1941, and how it
must not be repeated. And, the way to do that, was we have
dictators invading democracies, is truly through peace through
strength.
And so, with the Ronald Reagan provisions, we need to be
again, working together to stop the invasion of Ukraine, stop
the invasion of Israel, and deter an invasion of Taiwan.
With this, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. And, if I could
followupon that. I've visited both of your, the Territory of
Guam and Hawaii, beautiful, beautiful islands. And, it is
historic. Just going to the U.S.S. Arizona to see, it's like a
graveyard, a memorial site.
And then, to see the U.S.S. Missouri, to see where World
War II started and then where it ended, very historic. And then
I got to do refueling in Guam with our base there, our B-52s,
and just both, I'm envious.
I live in a pretty nice town, Austin. But, you guys live in
paradise. So, Mr. Case?
Mr. Case. Thank you, Mr. Chair. We do, but we have to fly a
long way there and back. So, you've got us on that.
I thank you for your comments, all of your comments. I
would be remiss if I did not thank you directly for including
the Compact Impact Fairness Act that the Ranking Member
mentioned in the Compact legislation.
That's really, really critical to those jurisdictions in
this country who bear the brunt of the compact residents in
their communities without to date, Federal assistance for those
communities.
We essentially are hosting the residents as part of our
country's international engagement, as part of our country's
foreign policy, including what you noted, as security concerns.
And, it is fair that the Federal Government undertake those
undertakings.
And, this bill would do that. It's a critical part of the
compact. And so, I thank you for including that and for your
efforts to hold it in throughout.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you. And, that compact is just
critically important right now, especially right now in this
important time in history as we look at a more aggressive
China.
So, thank you so much, Mr. Case. We'll take a look at the
bill and report back. And now, I recognize the gentleman from
Guam, Mr. Moylan for his opening statement.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member
Manning, and Members of the Committee. I thank you for allowing
me to testify before you today to speak about the importance of
our maintaining close relations between the United States and
the Philippines.
As the Representative of the Island of Guam, I understand
just how crucial it is for us to ensure our regional allies are
confident that the United States will not abandon them or leave
them to deal with the PRC alone.
Guam relies heavily on international trade and diplomacy to
succeed. With 90 percent of our feed on the island being
imported within a three thousand mile radius from Guam, there
are no States but plenty of poor nations whose bilateral
relations are of critical importance to our Pacific strategy.
I have come today to testify on House Resolution 837,
reaffirming the ties between the United States and the
Philippines. I introduced this Resolution yesterday with my
colleague and fellow co-chair of the U.S. Philippine Friendship
Caucus, Congressman Bobby Scott.
The Chinese Communist Party has for decades attempted to
bend countries bordering the South China Sea to their will by
enforcing first their nine dash line, and now, most recently
have unveiled their new ten dash line of lands that they claim
as their own.
This new map boldly claims multiple provinces in India.
And, the islands are as far as one thousand miles away from
China's mainland. All of us in the region have had enough with
the CCP.
And, as self-proclaimed protector of freedom, democracy,
and liberty across the world, the United States must live up to
our billing and play a role in helping our allies combat
China's gray zone warfare. We must aid our allies in the
Philippines in defending their sovereign territory and for that
reason, this Resolution calls in the U.S. and the Philippines
to begin joint patrols in the South China Sea.
The Philippine Coast Guard and Navy have been victims of
Chinese bullying. That ends now. This Resolution shows the
world that the United States stands firmly with the Philippines
and makes clear that we plan to adhere to our commitments to
the Philippine people and to foster a free and open Indo-
Pacific for all.
Let me be clear, aggression against the Philippines is
aggression against the United States of America. I encourage my
colleagues to support this Resolution and work for its swift
adoption.
While my Resolution does not call specifically for
supporting the Philippines and the resupply efforts at the
Second Thomas Shoal, I believe it is imperative that our Navy
assets in the region assist their Philippine counterparts in
escorting future supply runs in the Sierra Madre.
This will project a clear message to anyone who would
challenge the laws of the sea, the United States will not
tolerate those who impede on freedom of navigation or abide by
rogue nations claiming land that does not belong to them.
I would like to thank the Committee again for allowing me
to come here today and speak about my work on this issue. I
hope to have the chance to work further with you all to combat
Chinese aggression throughout the Indo-Pacific.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. And, I thank you, Representative Moylan.
And, I just recently, the B-52s, one of them from Guam, a
Chinese fighter jet came within ten feet in a very aggressive
posture.
And, I know also, when it comes to the Philippines that a
Chinese Coast Guard vessel rammed into a Philippine boat and
almost sank it. And again, a very aggressive posture.
I really like the idea of this bill. We need to reaffirm
our ties with the Philippines. They have been generous to allow
us to utilize the Philippines for purposes of force protection.
And, I'd like to see maybe a basing opportunity as well in
the future there. And, I think this would be a great step
forward in achieving that.
I know this was introduced November 1. So, we could
consider this as December, in our December markup bill.
And last, when I was in Taiwan, we were greeted by ten
battleships and an aircraft carrier and seven fighter jets to
show you how aggressive Communist China has become. And then, I
personally was sanctioned the day I departed Taiwan.
And so, I've been to your part of the world and I totally
understand where you're coming from. And, I'd really be--I'd
very much like to look at marking this up in December. And,
thank you for bringing this to our attention.
Ms. Manning?
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Representative
Moylan, thank you so much for your testimony today and for
raising issues that are so important to Guam, the people you
represent, and to our national security as we see increasingly
aggressive behavior from the CCP.
Thank you again. And, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Wilson?
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, indeed it's such
an honor to have Congressman Jim Moylan here. He's serving in
the tradition of Congresswoman Madeleine Bordallo.
And so that, well, I cannot give a higher compliment. And,
I also want our colleagues to know how much we appreciate where
America's day begins, and that's Guam, U.S.A.
We're also so grateful too, that if we look at the people
of Guam having the highest percentage of participation in the
military of any State or territory. And so, the patriotism of
the people of Guam is to be always appreciated.
And then, I was hoping that Congressman Case would stick
around, because I wanted to point out that the beautiful hotels
of paradise that the Chairman has identified, somehow Hawaii
has copied Guam. And so, the beautiful hotels and beaches of
Guam clearly have been copied by the people of Hawaii.
And then, I want to point out too, how important that
Anderson Air Force Base is for the security of the people of
the Pacific, working with our new ally, Vietnam. But then,
again, thank you for your recognition of the Philippines and to
see a restoration of the warmest relationships that we've had
for 125 years with the people of the Philippines.
I know of it very personally, because in the midlands of
South Carolina, an extraordinary Filipino-American community is
there, who are so valued and so important as we all try to work
for peace through strength.
And, with that, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back. Let me just
also conclude by saying that despite one Member of Congress'
testimony, there is no threat that the Island of Guam will tip
over.
So, do you have any further words, sir?
Mr. Moylan. I do appreciate the opportunity once again.
And, I look forward to continually working with this Committee.
And, I please welcome you all to the beautiful Island of
Guam. Thank you so much.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you, sir. Thanks for being here
today. And, I think that that concludes our testimony. I want
to thank all of the Members for their valuable testimony.
Pursuant to the Committee rules, all Members may have 5
days to submit questions and any extraneous materials for the
record. Without objection, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:28 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
