- FRIEND AND ALLY: U.S. SUPPORT FOR ISRAEL AFTER HAMAS' BARBARIC ATTACK

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FRIEND AND ALLY: U.S. SUPPORT FOR ISRAEL
AFTER HAMAS' BARBARIC ATTACK

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

November 8, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-114

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/docs.house.gov,
or www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-744 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania      BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California      GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida      AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee      TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas      DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa      SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas           Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio      GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florid                JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida      JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director
Sophia Lafargue, Minority Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

REPRESENTATIVES

Opening Statement of Chairman Michael McCaul.....................     1
Opening Statement of Ranking Member Gregory Meeks................     2

WITNESSES

The Honorable Barbara A. Leaf, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
Near Eastern Affairs, U.S. Department of State.................     4
Prepared Statement...............................................     7
Ms. Dana Stroul, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for the
Middle East, U.S. Department of Defense........................    12
Prepared Statement...............................................    14

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    74
Hearing Minutes..................................................    75
Hearing Attendance...............................................    76

Material For The Record

Statement for the record submitted by Representative Connolly....    77
Material for the Record Submitted by Representative Waltz........    79

Responses To Questions For The Record

Responses to questions for the record for The Honorable Barbara
A. Leaf from Representative Waltz..............................    85
Responses to questions for the record for The Honorable Barbara
A. Leaf from Representative Mills..............................    91
Responses to questions for the record for The Honorable Barbara
A. Leaf from Representative Castro.............................    95
Responses to questions for the record for The Honorable Barbara
A. Leaf from Representative Crow...............................   120
Responses to questions for the record for Ms. Dana Stroul from
Representative Castro..........................................   121
Responses to questions for the record for Ms. Dana Stroul from
Representative from Representative Mills.......................   123
Responses to questions for the record for Ms. Dana Stroul from
Representative from Representative Waltz.......................   124

FRIEND AND ALLY: U.S. SUPPORT FOR ISRAEL AFTER HAMAS' BARBARIC ATTACK

----------

Wednesday, November 8, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:29 p.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Michael McCaul (chairman
of the committee) presiding.
Chairman McCaul. The Committee on Foreign Affairs will come
to order. The purpose of this hearing is to discuss Hamas'
unprovoked and brutal attack on Israel and Israel's response to
the attack.
The witnesses will discuss the circumstances surrounding
this brutal attack and Israel's response--the U.S. supports
Israel--and the potential for broader regional conflict and
terrorist attacks against the U.S. interest.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MICHAEL MCCAUL

On Saturday, October 7, Israelis woke to rockets raining
down on them from Gaza and Hamas terrorists breaking down their
doors. They were invaded in their homes, brutally murdering
over 1400 people, including over 30 Americans.
Hamas terrorists killed babies and toddlers. They killed
grandmothers and grandfathers, moms and dads, teenage kids in
their home. No one was spared, innocent civilians slaughtered
because of their ancestry and their faith. At least 241 people
were taken hostage by Hamas' terrorists and are still being
held in Gaza.
In one of the most horrific stories to emerge, a pregnant
woman had her baby cut out of her and murdered in front of her
before they shot her in the head.
October 7 was the deadliest day for the Jewish people since
the Holocaust.
I was in one of the kibbutzes right on the border of Gaza
last year, meeting with members of the community. I saw their
daycare center and the children. That very same Kibbutz was
overrun by 70 Hamas terrorists.
Many of the residents I met were slaughtered. But most
viciously the babies and children I visited in the daycare
center were slaughtered, shot to death, beheaded, and even
burned alive.
Just yesterday, this committee unanimously passed a
resolution demanding that Hamas release the hostages. The House
also held a bipartisan vigil on the Capitol steps marking 1
month since October 7 massacre. What the world is seeing at the
bloody hands of Hamas is simply unfathomable. The depravity of
these terrorists knows no bounds.
But let me be clear about one thing: all roads lead to
Iran. Their fingerprints are all over this attack. They have
consistently funded Hamas and other Palestinian terrorist
groups, to the tune of $100 million per year.
We are witnessing in real time Hamas carry out their
covenant from 1988, which states, ``Israel will exist and will
continue to exist until Islam will obliterate it, just as it
obliterated others before it.''
Now it is not just Hamas. Hezbollah is launching near-daily
attacks on northern Israel. The Houthis have launched multiple
attacks against Israel. Iran's proxies in Iraq and Syria have
launched at least 41 attacks on U.S. troops since October 7.
Simply put, the Middle East is on fire. I am grateful to
the Assistant Secretary Leaf and Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense Stroul for appearing before us today. It is critical
that we discuss this dangerous, urgent situation and the
administration's response.
I have often spoke about the importance of deterrence. The
administration is positioning major defense assets in the
Middle East. They include two carrier strike groups, an Ohio-
class nuclear submarine, air defense batteries, U.S. Air Force
fighter jets, and additional U.S. Service men and women.
We are also expediting significant arms transfers to Israel
so they can defend themselves in every front that is needed.
However, deterrence is not only a show a strength, is not the
only show of strength, but the will to use it. Weakness only
invites aggression.
It is imperative that we continue to project strength and
stand united with Israel. Now more than ever, the world is in
need of American leadership, and we need it now.
I would like to thank the witnesses for being here today.
With that, I would like to recognize my dear friend, the
ranking member, Mr. Meeks.

OPENING STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER GREGORY MEEKS

Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me begin by thanking both of you personally, Ambassador
Leaf and Assistant Secretary Stroul, as well as your teams at
the State and Defense Departments.
We not only recognize the excellent work you are doing, but
we also know how hard it is at the human level to deal with
such a crisis. As we hold this hearing, Israel is at war with
Hamas, a designated terrorist organization, following the worst
attack on the Jewish people since the Holocaust.
What we have seen unfold on our TVs and in our newspapers
over the last 4 weeks has been an extraordinarily painful, it
has been extraordinarily painful to watch. Hamas terrorists
killed more than 1400 innocent civilians, women, men, children,
elderly, and babies in cold blood.
Following this, Hamas has used thousands of Palestinians,
including far too many children, as human shields. These images
of death and destruction in Gaza, if you are human, they have
to haunt you. I know it haunts me. I will never shake them.
Hamas has made it clear to all of us watching that they do
not exist to serve the Palestinian people. Hamas does not want
peace. Hamas doesn't want a Palestinian State living side by
side with a Jewish State.
There was a cease-fire on October 6, and it was Hamas who
broke it in the most terrible way possible. It is Hamas who is
holding some of the Palestinian people from getting to the
south and other safe places.
I applaud the Biden administration for working to address
the humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza brought on by Hamas and
their war. You know, Hamas can end this today, just surrender
and nobody else gets killed. Just surrender.
The United States has provided an initial contribution of
$100 million and will be providing more upon passage of a
comprehensive supplemental bill.
We are calling for humanitarian pauses, which would allow
humanitarian goods to enter, and for civilians to get out of
harm's way. We continue to support the establishment of safe
zones where Gazans can seek shelter. We have helped facilitate
the movement of lifesaving supplies into Gaza through Egypt and
are working to increase these deliveries.
Ambassador Leaf, I hope you can share with us some
additional details about the administration's work to support
Gaza's civilians despite the extraordinary challenging
conditions.
I had hoped also that our body would have taken the matter
of funding for Israel and the humanitarian crises unfolding
around the world, in Gaza, with the same seriousness as the
administration has, quite frankly, but unfortunately I don't
believe we have.
Instead, with the new speaker, Speaker Johnson, and his
leadership, seems to me that last week we played some politics
with our national security. Support for funding for Israel time
and again has been a bipartisan matter that Congress has kept
out of politics.
We have given Israel aid without any conditions. It is
unfortunate that at this critical time, that has changed.
Speaker Johnson brought an Israel-only supplemental to the
floor. This supplemental is unprecedented. It conditions aid to
Israel on domestic policy objective and stands no chance of
passing through the U.S. Senate.
The United States has an indispensable role to play in the
world, and I hope for Israel and our own sake that we don't
play politics and don't play political games. We must pass a
comprehensive supplemental for Israel.
It is also interconnected with what we have to do in
Ukraine, interconnected with what we have to do for Taiwan. I
would also include our southern border as soon as possible.
These issues are connected and should be free of politics.
They are about our national security and America's leadership
globally.
I want to conclude by raising an issue that the United
States, Israel, and other regional partners must address: what
does a successful ground operation in Gaza look like, and who
will administer the Gaza Strip if Israel's efforts to remove
Hamas is successful? So I am going to be raising those
questions.
In the days, weeks, and months ahead, I know the United
States will continue to stand steadfastly with Israel to assure
its long-term security. We will also, as President Biden has
outlined, remain committed to ensuring that civilians in Gaza
have access to safe areas and continue to have access to food,
water, medical care, and other assistance without diversions by
Hamas.
We must also stay keenly focused on working to get U.S.
citizens and their immediate family members to exit Gaza safely
and bring all of our hostages home.
Let me end by just saying thank you once again to our
witnesses for being here, and I look forward to hearing from
you in a short while.
I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Let me just say, I,
too, agree we need to move swiftly on a national security aid
package that both addresses the threat from Russia to Ukraine
and Europe, the threat from communist China to Taiwan and the
Pacific, and the threat from the Ayatollah in Iran to Israel by
its proxies in the southwest border, which is the last line of
defense to stop these threats from coming in.
You know, I find it amazing the extent to which Russia and
Iran have lined up against Israel in this epic struggle.
We are pleased to have a distinguished panel of witnesses
before us here today on this important topic. The Honorable
Barbara Leaf, Assistant Secretary for the Bureau of Near
Eastern Affairs at the Department of State, and Ms. Dana
Stroul, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for the
Middle East at the Department of Defense.
This committee recognizes the importance of the issues
before us, and we are very grateful to both State and DoD here
at the same time to speak with us here today. Your full
statements will be made part of the record, and I look forward
to your testimony.
I now recognize Assistant Secretary Leaf for her opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF MS. BARBARA A. LEAF, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU
OF NEAR EAST AFFAIRS, DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Leaf. Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Meeks, thank you
for inviting me to testify today on this important set of
issues.
While I am here about Gaza, I want to underscore the
urgency of the President's full supplemental assistance
request, including $3.5 billion in FMF for Israel, $200 million
in State Department operational funds to meet the needs of
embassy security and U.S. citizen services in this crisis, and
$10 billion in global humanitarian assistance.
I returned Monday from the region from 2 weeks in the
region. I joined Secretary Blinken for meetings with our
Israeli and Arab partners aimed at demonstrating support for
Israel's self-defense, consistent with international
humanitarian law; preventing the conflict from spreading;
securing release of Hamas' hostages including American
citizens; and addressing the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
The Secretary urged Israeli leaders to work humanitarian
pauses into their campaign to allow more critical aid into
Gaza, to enable civilians to access aid and move to safer
locations, and to further the release of hostages.
He also underscored the U.S. commitment to a negotiated
two-State solution as the only way to achieve a just, durable
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We met regional partners who, like us, see Iran and its
proxies working to exploit this crisis. We made clear that we
will not stand by idly if others join or escalate the conflict.
The October 7 Hamas terrorist attack was the worst attack
on Israel since the 1973 Yom Kippur War, but no prior conflict
targeted Israeli civilians to this extent. Many said the
terrorist attack evoked the trauma of the Holocaust.
How Israel conducts this war matters deeply. The U.S.
stands unequivocally for the protection of civilian lives
during conflict. We mourn the thousands of Palestinian
civilians killed. Palestinians must not suffer the consequences
for Hamas' terrorist acts.
As the Secretary said in Israel, there will be no partners
for peace if they are consumed by humanitarian catastrophe and
alienated by any perceived indifference to their plight.
In support of U.S. citizens, the Department has had a task
force operating 24/7 to coordinate U.S. Government efforts
since October 7 to protect them and our diplomatic personnel
and facilities. Over 14,000 U.S. citizens and family members
have departed Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza since October 7.
Some 1500 departures were directly facilitated by the U.S.
Government.
Since November 1, more than 400 U.S. citizens, legal
permanent residents, and family members have exited Gaza via
the Rafah crossing. Nearly all of our locally employed staff
and their families have departed as well.
There are about 700 U.S. citizens, legal permanent
residents, and family members in Gaza requesting assistance to
depart, and we are making every effort to enable their
departure.
Securing the release of U.S. nationals taken hostage by
Hamas is an overriding priority, and we appreciate Qatar's and
Egypt's forthright and tireless assistance. The Secretary has
also instructed our Special Presidential Envoy for Hostage
Affairs, Roger Carstens, to do everything possible to support
these efforts. He has the full backing of our embassies in
Cairo, Jerusalem, and Doha.
To prevent a wider conflict, our message is clear: Iran and
its proxies should stay out of the conflict. Secretary Blinken
discussed with Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas
the critical role that Palestinian Authority security forces
play in preventing conflict in areas under their control in the
West Bank, and we have seen serious work in that direction.
We have also urged Israel to uphold the rule of law and
rein in extremist settler violence against Palestinians in the
West Bank. This violence inflames an already explosive security
environment.
President Biden appointed Ambassador David Satterfield, one
of our most seasoned career diplomats, to address the
humanitarian crisis in Gaza. As a result of U.S. leadership,
Rafah is open, and over 560 truckloads of lifesaving supplies
have entered Gaza. They are hardly sufficient, but it is a work
in progress.
We have urged Israel to restore access to electricity and
water and allow sufficient levels fuel for desalination,
distribution of humanitarian goods, wastewater treatment, and
basic activities for civilians.
Our partners are scrutinizing our response, as are our
strategic competitors. After years of false narratives claiming
the U.S. is abandoning the region, we are demonstrating that we
stand resolutely by our ally and our partners.
As others offer hollow statements, the U.S. conducts hard-
nosed diplomacy, finding solutions. But we must be clear-eyed
about what lies ahead. The Secretary heard from our regional
partners that their imperative is the immediate protection of
Palestinian civilians, thus the unstinting calls for a cease-
fire.
They fear the irreparable displacement of the Palestinian
people in this crisis. They want to know how much political
capital the U.S. is willing to invest toward a two-State
solution. They want U.S. leadership.
I close by thanking this committee for your continued
support. The Biden administration is poised to work with you to
hold Hamas accountable, to prevent the widening of the
conflict, to protect civilians. We cannot return to the
environment before October 7 for either Israel or the
Palestinians.
I look forward to your questions.

[The Prepared Statement of Ms. Leaf follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. I recognize Deputy Assistant Secretary
Stroul for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MS. DANA STROUL, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR THE MIDDLE EAST, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Ms. Stroul. Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Meeks,
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for inviting
me to testify today alongside Assistant Secretary Leaf.
The Department's commitment to Israel's right to defend
itself from terrorism is ironclad. We mourn the Israelis,
Americans, and citizens of countries around the world who were
murdered by Hamas on October 7. We also mourn the thousands of
Palestinian civilians who have died during this conflict.
The Department of Defense has organized our efforts along
the following lines. First, protecting American forces and
interests in the region. Second, supporting Israel's right to
defend itself, consistent with international humanitarian law.
Third, coordinating closely with Israel on hostage recovery
efforts. Fourth, containing the conflict to Gaza.
The volume of disinformation and misinformation
perpetuating false narratives about this conflict is deeply
troubling. The Department of State designated Hamas a foreign
terrorist organization in 1997.
Hamas is responsible for the abhorrent terrorist attack in
Israel, and Israel is executing military operations to ensure
that Hamas is never again able to perpetuate a terrorist attack
like it did in October.
Hamas is using civilians as human shields, blocking the
delivery of humanitarian aid. While having released four
hostages, continues to hold at least 200 civilians, including
Americans.
Palestinian civilians are not terrorists, must have
immediate access to lifesaving humanitarian aid, and deserve to
live in peace, security, and dignity in a State of their own.
As the Department of Defense works along the four lines of
effort I articulated, Iran-backed militia groups are attacking
U.S. forces. Since October 17, U.S. bases and facilities in
Iraq and Syria have been attacked 41 times.
On October 26, at President Biden's direction, U.S. forces
conducted precision self-defense strikes on facilities in
eastern Syria used and operated by Iran's Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps, IRGC, and its affiliates.
We will not hesitate to take further necessary measures to
protect our people. To underscore, in response to a pattern of
Iranian and Iran-backed attacks against U.S. personnel and
facilities in Iraq and Syria and the continuing threat of
future such attacks, the United States has taken, and as
necessary will continue to take, military action against the
IRGC and its affiliates.
This includes the use of force against IRGC and IRGC-
affiliated personnel and facilities in the U.S. Central Command
Area of Responsibility with the intention to convince the
Iranians to de-escalate threats against the United States, our
interests, and our people.
Current U.S. posture in the Middle East is significant, and
DoD had demonstrated its ability to rapidly project additional
power into the theater. Since October 7, we have deployed THAAD
and Patriot missile defense systems, additional fighter
squadrons, two carrier strike groups, and an Ohio-class
nuclear-powered guided missile submarine.
We also placed over 2,000 personnel and a range of units on
a heightened State of readiness, some of which subsequently
deployed. These deployments demonstrate our commitment to
Israel's security, to regional stability, and to deterring
those who seek to widen this conflict.
It also bolsters the Department's ability to respond
quickly to the evolving security environment.
With respect to supporting Israel, we are working around
the clock to determine which munitions and equipment from U.S.
inventory can quickly be made available. Air defense is a high
priority, as are medical supplies, artillery ammunition, and
precision-guided munitions. Deliveries are taking place on a
near-daily basis.
With respect to supporting the release of hostages held by
Hamas, the Department sent U.S. military personnel to Israel to
provide advice and intelligence support. We are also conducting
unarmed UAV flights over Gaza only to support hostage recovery.
Finally, the Department of Defense is acutely focused on
the importance of obligations related to civilian protection.
Under the law of war, all parties to armed conflict must comply
with rules for the protection of civilians.
In this war, protecting and supporting civilians is
difficult for a range of reasons, including the fact that it is
happening in a densely populated urban environment, that Hamas
is using civilians as human shields, and because Hamas placed
rockets and weapons in civilian areas while digging terror
tunnels underneath civilian infrastructure and protected sites
like schools and hospitals.
We make clear to Israel every day that efforts to mitigate
and respond to civilian harm are both a moral and strategic
imperative. As the Secretary's civilian harm mitigation and
response action plan states, ``Hard-earned tactical and
operational successes may ultimately end in strategic failure
is care is not taken to protect the civilian environment as
much as the situation allows.''
That is precisely what the Department of Defense is doing.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement of Ms. Stroul follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Secretary. I now recognize
myself. To start out, just so I have a situational awareness of
what is happening on the ground in Gaza, according to my
briefings, the IDF, that is the Israeli military forces are
beginning to circle Gaza City in a very slow and determined
effort to eventually bring Hamas out of the tunnels.
That a barrier or a blocking position is being built in the
center of Gaza, a very narrow strip, to then eventually turn
southern Gaza into a humanitarian zone. The Rafah Gate is open.
About 100 trucks are going in with food, water, and
medicine. Israel is providing the fuel because the fuel can be
used by Hamas to light up their tunnels. We don't want them to
do that, we want the fuel to be used for the hospitals.
Is that a fair and accurate assessment?
Ms. Stroul. Let me start with how the IDF has announced the
current status of its operations. It has announced that its
forces have circled Gaza City with the goal of eliminating
Hamas' military infrastructure in the city.
The IDF has also announced its intentions to create a
humanitarian corridor for the safe evacuation of Palestinian
civilians from northern Gaza to southern Gaza. There have also
been plenty of reports about Hamas blocking the safe evacuation
of civilians.
Ms. Leaf. Chairman McCaul, there are a couple of
refinements I will offer to your comments about Rafah Gate and
trucks and fuel.
I cannot stress how extraordinarily complex the operating
environment is in that area of Rafah Gate. There is what they
call the de facto authority, i.e., Hamas on the other side. It
has been a conflict zone at various points.
We have through Ambassador Satterfield and his team,
through the efforts of our mission in Cairo, Jerusalem, and the
of course people back here making calls, have been in a
strenuous effort to keep Rafah Gate open.
The Egyptians have had a recognizably high degree of
concern about insecurity there, given the parlous conditions on
the other side. It has been an open-and-closing sort of
situations.
Chairman McCaul. No, I know they have had quite a history,
Egypt and Gaza.
Ms. Leaf. Yes, yes.
Chairman McCaul. Let me turn, Secretary Stroul, to these
attacks on our soldiers and our troops in Syria and Iraq. I
applaud the administration's support for Israel, and also the
force posture with the carrier strike groups and the nuclear
submarine.
I am concerned that it took a while to respond, though.
There have been 19 attacks, there is only one response and it
was after 19 attacks, I should say. So it took us, we had to
wait until almost 20 attacks took place before we even came in
to respond to protect our troops there. Since that time, there
have been 20 more attacks.
What are we doing to protect our troops in the region?
Ms. Leaf. Thank you for that question, Mr. Chairman. First
of all, U.S. military strikes are not the only effort that the
U.S. Government is putting forward, both to deter further
attacks and address the current attacks against us. That is why
we increased posture and messaged very loudly about the
capabilities that the U.S. military has projected into the
region in less than 1 month.
No. 2, we are working in full partnership with the State
Department diplomatically through every possible channel to
pass messages about our desire not to see regional conflict, to
de-escalate. That we are focused on supporting Israel but do
not seek either State or non-State actors to widen this
conflict.
We have made it explicit to our partners who can pass
messages to State and non-State actors----
Chairman McCaul. Thank you, my time is running out. I
agree, deterrence is going to be the key here to prevent
escalation. You know, we do not want to see Hezbollah get any
more engaged than they already are with 100,000 rockets. We
don't want to see that light up.
Iran, you know, is, basically they are tentacles of Iran
essentially.
I want to turn to the human shield, because I don't think a
lot of people understand. They look at the TV and they see
these innocent civilians, and we all, it breaks our heart to
see human beings, you know, in such circumstances.
But if you could explain perhaps to me and the committee
and those behind you what Hamas does to endanger innocent
civilians by using them and our hostages as human shields.
For instance, there is the hospital known as Al-Shifa that
has gotten a lot of attention lately. However, as I understand
it, Hamas has a terrorist infrastructure located in the
hospital itself and underneath in the tunnels, putting innocent
civilians in jeopardy and at risk, and the hostages as well.
Would you comment on that?
Ms. Stroul. The rules of international humanitarian law are
clear. They apply to the Israel Defense Forces. They also apply
to Hamas.
One cannot deliberately target civilians or civilian
objects. One cannot use civilians as human shields. Attacks
cannot be indiscriminate. One cannot rape, torture, or
mutilate. One cannot take hostages. Attacks cannot cause
excessive loss of civilian life or damage to civilian objects
in relation to their military advantage are prohibited.
Hamas has--there is documented evidence, there is plenty of
images out there. Some of it Hamas has put out itself to praise
it use of terror tunnels, its obfuscation of weapons and
rockets inside civilian structures, including hospitals,
mosques, and schools.
Chairman McCaul. My question to the two of you last very
quickly, would you say that Hamas is then, according to your
testimony, in violation of international humanitarian law?
Ms. Stroul. Mr. Chairman, yes.
Chairman McCaul. Secretary?
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely.
Chairman McCaul. Would you say that Hamas is also guilty of
war crimes and genocide?
Ms. Stroul. Yes.
Ms. Leaf. Yes.
Chairman McCaul. I would caution those participating to not
shout out. We appreciate peaceful protest, but we want to keep
it peaceful.
With that, the chair recognizes the ranking member, Mr.
Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank you for
that last explanation, because I think that is something that
does need to be clear in regards to who Hamas is.
Chairman McCaul. The Committee will come to order. The
chair reminds our guest--the chair reminds our guest today that
demonstrations from the audience will not be tolerated,
including verbal outbursts.
We again appreciate your right to protest under the
Constitution, but we would ask that you do that peacefully and
in a style that does not disrupt the proceedings. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Meeks?
Mr. Meeks. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. Because we know
that what is going on, and the death started when it was Hamas
who violated a cease-fire. It was Hamas that committed these
heinous acts.
It is Hamas who have stated that these deaths, you know, it
is good for them, as far as martyrdom, because they will never
stop until they destroy Israel. So I think that that is
important for the record to be clear.
I think it is also important for the record to be clear,
because I think language, and I would ask Secretary Leaf, in
regards to the administration talking about a humanitarian
pause, which is for the Palestinian people, as opposed to a
cease-fire, which benefits Hamas.
I think that most people want to make sure that the
innocent Palestinians are given a safe space and moving
forward. That is why the administration has called for a
humanitarian pause.
But a cease-fire would only give Hamas, as they have
stated, the opportunity to re-arm themselves and do what they
did on October 7 again. Because they said it, they would do it
again and again.
Is that accurate?
Ms. Leaf. Ranking Member, that is accurate. If you would
permit, I will elaborate a bit. When the Secretary came out on
his visit to the region last week and met with Israeli leaders,
at the President's request he put on the table what we believe
is a timeliness for humanitarian pauses.
I do stress pauses, because these should be embedded into
current operations and they can be. Those will allow civilians
to move out of harm's way. They will allow us to open up the
aperture even wider to get a really robust flow of humanitarian
assistance into Gaza. Then for it to be delivered to those in
need.
It also would likely, this would also likely support the
efforts that we are undergoing to get the release of hostages
and get them to safety.
A cease-fire on the end at this moment would leave Hamas
still in a position with 200-plus hostages, a very large
military infrastructure, and the capacity to continue attacks.
By the way, a senior Hamas leader last week made it very
clear publicly that they would look to commit an October 7
style massacre again and again and again.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you for that. So let me move to a
different place, because I believe also there needs to be a
plan in place to ensure that once Israel's military operation
against Hamas has concluded, that there will be an entity in
place credible to the Gazans, who can administer Gaza and
provide basic security.
I know that Secretary Blinken has indicated that he thought
that the Palestinian Authority might be the appropriate entity.
So I want to ask you that question, you know, what is your view
on the Palestinian Authority as an appropriate entity to assume
control of Gaza in the future.
As well as that, I have talked to a number of others in the
region, Saudi Arabia, UAE, etc., what can our Arab states do to
assist in stabilizing and administering a Gaza in the immediate
period following Hamas' removal from power?
Ms. Leaf. So to your first question, Ranking Member, the
Palestinian Authority, as we all know, is the only Palestinian
government that has come out of the Oslo Accords. It is,
whatever its shortcomings, is the government for the
Palestinians in the West Bank.
We do believe that ultimately Palestinian voices and
aspirations have to be at the centerpiece of post-conflict
governance and security in Gaza. We are looking at all of these
questions right now. We would like to begin those discussions
sooner rather than later.
I would say our Arab partners on the one hand, as we heard
from them last weekend in Oman, are very focused on the here
and now. They are very focused on the issues of humanitarian--
the humanitarian crisis. They are focused on obtaining a cease-
fire.
We are doing both things. We are focused on the here and
now, but we are also looking over the hill, past the conflict
and what needs to come. I am quite confident that we will find
support in our common efforts. I want to stress that we do
think the PA is the appropriate place to look for governance
eventually.
Mr. Meeks. My time has expired, so I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. The chair recognizes
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me, Secretary Stroul, you had indicated or talked about
false narratives, and I think that is a very important subject
to speak about. Nowhere is that more in evidence than at the
United Nations, both in Geneva as well as in New York.
I chaired a hearing earlier today called United Nations'
Bigotry Toward Israel UNRWA Antisemitism Poisons Palestinian
Youth. We did put a focus on how young people are being trained
up to hate Jew, to hate Israel, and to hate us.
In those UNRWA camps, we have provided under the Biden
administration, about a billion dollars toward UNRWA and the
entire operation. So I am very, very concerned, as are the
members of my committee when we met earlier today.
The false narratives, we brought out one particular one, it
is one of many. Francesca Albanese, who is the High
Commissioner for Human Rights Special Rapporteur for
Palestinian Territories, said that Israel has no right to
defend itself. She makes a bogus legal argument that somehow
Article 51 does not apply, and that they can't defend
themselves.
That kind of narrative, and there are many others like it,
but she is the, one of the point people on this. Your thoughts
on that.
Second, if I could, is Gaza the harbinger of what a two-
State solution would look like? I was on the White House lawn
when Bill Clinton famously had both leaders of the PLO as well
as Israel on that lawn. We were all hopeful that Oslo would
lead to a positive, peaceful outcome.
Yet we see a de facto two-State in Gaza, and what are they
doing? I have read the Hamas charter of 1988 many times. It
calls for killing every Jew, and it also called for and calls
for the end of Israel, eviscerating the entire nation.
Your thoughts on that. Because I think while the two-State
solution seemed to have merit, we all hoped, it seems to be
something that has been profoundly discredited in modern times,
especially now by Gaza.
Ms. Leaf. Congressman, thank you for your question. You
know, if we go back in time to the events in Gaza, 2006, 2007,
Hamas essentially undertook a violent coup and took over. Has
run by brutal fiat ever since. So those two million-plus
Palestinians really had no vote in the matter, certainly not
since 2006.
That would hardly qualify as a State in anybody's--by
anybody's reckoning. I think the Palestinian legitimate
aspirations for statehood have been something that have been
recognized now for decades by successive administrations.
We all feel, I say the ``we'' in a collective sense having
consulted with key Arab partners this past several weeks, there
is a greater urgency than ever to take a negotiation forward
after the conflict toward a two--toward Palestinian statehood,
negotiating between the parties along the 1967 lines with
mutually agreed swaps.
But something that will give the Palestinian people the
governance, the self-governance that they deserve and give them
a chance to live next to Israel in a State of peace and mutual
recognition.
Ms. Stroul. With respect to both UNRWA and the two-State
solution, what--the position of the Department of Defense,
first of all, is to support our colleagues at the Department of
State.
There is a difference between Hamas, a U.S.-designated
foreign terrorist organization, and the Palestinian people, who
absolutely deserve a State of their own, which would enable
Israelis to live in a secure State, as well as for
Palestinians. It is an area that we are constantly engaged in
with our colleagues in the Israeli Ministry of Defense and the
Israel Defense Forces.
Mr. Smith. Could I just ask you with regards to Francesca
Albanese as one example? Again, she is the Special Rapporteur.
She should be fired.
Would you say there--I have gone over her other statements
that have been made for quite a long time, and there were many
others like her, particularly in the Human Rights Council
realm, who are just totally, unambiguously antisemitic.
Ms. Leaf. Well, I mean, the statements as you have
described, I mean certainly are unacceptable from the U.S.
perspective.
If I could go back to UNRWA, Congressman. Look, this has
been a years-long effort, and it is something that we continue
to apply ourselves to to clear out, to bring to the attention
of UNRWA, to clear out antisemitic or any other sort of
incitement language in education materials.
But I would also underline that right now, especially at
this moment of crisis, UNRWA is the backbone of the strong UN-
coordinated humanitarian response to the crisis in Gaza. In any
post-conflict setting, it will serve that purpose----
Mr. Smith. I am out of the time, but the textbooks and all
the rest is all done by the PA, it is not done by the U.N. or
us.
Ms. Leaf. Yes.
Mr. Smith. We are the major contributor.
Ms. Leaf. Yes.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. The chair recognizes
Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. The gentleman from New Jersey is correct as to
the Special Rapporteur, and we have sent a letter, and perhaps
we should send another one urging for her dismissal.
From the river to the sea, people should know what that
means. It means kill or expel every Jew between the Jordan
River and the Mediterranean Sea. A second Holocaust.
Now, we had a cease-fire on October 6. Hamas' forces
exploded out and killed 1400 people, took 240 roughly hostages.
Now, their fighters could have stayed in Israel and fought.
Instead, they quickly retreated behind their human shields.
Now we hear those calling for a cease-fire. Hamas has
declared that they want a cease-fire, has declared what they
would do with a cease-fire.
They would regroup, and these are the words of just a few
days ago of a senior member of their polit bureau, and then
they would do another October 7, and another after that. Two
and three and four times, until Israel is destroyed.
So those who delighted in the 1400 Israeli deaths and the
butchered babies, and the raped women of course join that call
for a regroup cease-fire and a chance to do October 7 two,
three, four, five times.
Now, in any war, a country has got to weigh achieving its
military objectives, avoiding casualties of its own forces, and
minimizing civilian casualties on the other side. Israel has
gone beyond the United States and any other country in every
way to sacrifice its own soldiers, to sacrifice or delay its
military objectives in order to avoid civilian casualties.
When in our bombing of North Vietnam or Germany or Japan
did we ever warn civilians or anyone else and give up the
possible surprise? When did we provide food shipments to Nazi
Germany or Japan or North Vietnam?
In fact, it was a British and American blockade of Germany
and Austro-Hungary that pretty much led to their defeat, a food
blockade. When did we ever provide fuel shipments to Japan or
Germany or North Vietnam? In fact, we bombed and destroyed
every fuel facility we could.
Yet Israel warns. Israel facilitates food, and America its
ally pays for that food. Israel is allowing fuel in, in spite
of the fact that Hamas stockpiles it. As I have the obscure
honor of being the only CPA on this committee, and so I focused
a little bit on casualty statistics.
Even if you accept Hamas casualty statistics as being
honest, if a Hamas fighter who happens to be 17 gets blown up
by his own rocket while trying to kill Israeli civilians with
it, they count that as a child casualty for which Israel should
be held responsible.
If a rocket falls, as one-third of them do, onto Gaza and
explodes, as it did at that famous hospital, they try to hold
Israel responsible. If Israel kills a Hamas commander, that
death is included along the deaths that we are now told are the
civilian casualties.
Ms. Assistant Secretary, we hear calls for a cease-fire. Is
there any proof that if a cease-fire were declared today, that
all the hostages would be released tomorrow, or immediately?
Ms. Leaf. No, Congressman, there is not. There is no
guarantee.
Mr. Sherman. Now, Israeli officials are doing a lot to
minimize civilian casualties. They provide the warnings. We
have seen several humanitarian pauses. Basically a permanent
pause around the Rafah Gate.
Can you describe in other ways how IDF has reduced civilian
casualties? Or perhaps the Deputy Assistant Secretary.
Ms. Stroul. Let me start by adding even more details to
your outline of what Israel does to prioritize protection of
civilians. They have dropped 1.5 million leaflets in Gaza
asking civilians to evacuate. They have sent over hundreds of
thousands of text messages and made phone calls to cellphones
warning of their----
Mr. Sherman. If I could interrupt. Did we ever provide
leaflets over Hanoi? To my knowledge, no. I'm older, I
remember.
Ms. Stroul. Not to my knowledge, sir.
Mr. Sherman. Go ahead.
Ms. Stroul. We know that Israel, in our conversations with
the Israel Defense Forces, they have made very clear that they
assess collateral damage estimates before they take strikes.
They have legal reviews through their chain of command. When
there are incidents of civilian harm, they investigate them
after.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Ms.
Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank the chairman, and I thank our
witnesses for their Service.
The United States, Israel, and our many partners in the
Middle East share a common enemy: Iran, Iran and the terrorist
puppets that do its bidding. We cannot waiver in our support
for Israel and our opposition to Iran, Hamas, and other
terrorist proxies. It is the only path to peace in the Middle
East.
Assistant Secretary Leaf, does Iran have the military
capacity and intent to escalate this war, including by
supporting Hezbollah or the Houthis in the opening--in opening
addition fronts, I will say? How is the U.S. communicating that
escalation would be unacceptably costly to--for Iran and its
terrorist proxies?
Ms. Leaf. Thank you, Congresswoman. Yes, I would say Iran
certainly has the capabilities in the sense of the architecture
of proxies that you have just described from Hamas, Hezbollah,
to the myriad Iraqi militias, the Houthi. It certainly has the
capacity to escalate.
I would say over the course of 4 weeks, we have been in a
very steady, relentless State of messaging. Of course use of
our force posture adjustments, increases, messaging directly,
and through other parties on a constant, relentless basis.
I think while there has been escalatory at times sort of
tit-for-tat, but escalatory on the part of Hezbollah and tit-
for-tat at the northern border of Israel. We have seen success
so far in keeping that escalation capped.
Mrs. Wagner. Deputy Assistant Secretary Stroul, last week,
a Wall Street Journal article reported that the Wagner Group,
Russia's paramilitary arm, plans to provide an air defense
system to Hezbollah, specifically the Russian SA-22.
With concerns that Hezbollah may open up a northern front
against Israel, knowing the capacity that they have and the
number of rockets that they have, what are the ramifications to
Israel's security if Russia--Russia--increases the transfer of
weapon systems to Hezbollah?
What is the likelihood that Russia will provide offensive
weapon systems to Hezbollah and other proxies of Iran, like
Hamas?
Ms. Stroul. Thank you for that question. I think Russia and
Putin would like nothing more than for the United States to be
bogged down in the Middle East, with a view that that would
shift our strategic focus from also ensuring that Russian
aggression cannot be victorious in Ukraine in that war against
civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Second, we have been warning for some time now about the
implications for regional security instability of deepening
Russian-Iranian military cooperation across the board. That
would certainly include whatever Russia might be contemplating
providing to----
Mrs. Wagner. I don't know if we need to move to a
classified setting at some point in time, but discussing
Russia's potential movement of an air defense system to
Hezbollah equal to the SA-22, I consider that a huge
escalation. I would like to perhaps in another setting have
more information on it.
Ms. Stroul. It would be a huge escalation. It would be
hugely jeopardizing to Israel's security, especially when we
have worked so hard to prevent the opening of a second front
and would be more than happy to provide you additional
information in a closed session.
Mrs. Wagner. I appreciate that. Assistant Secretary Leaf, I
am gravely concerned that Iran and Iranian proxies are using
the Israel-Hamas war to undermine the Abraham Accords.
How is the State Department communicating to the region
that peace with Israel serves the interest of Arab states who
face serious threats from Iran and terrorist proxies? How is
this message being received in the region? Thank you.
Ms. Leaf. So I mean, the good news is those countries that
have established relations with Israel have an ongoing
commitment to those relationship. Obviously they are strained
at this point. The channels of communication are strained.
They are very, these partners are very focused on and their
publics are very focused on, and enraged, frankly, by the
mounting toll of casualties among civilians, Palestinian
civilians in Gaza.
But that said, I have heard nothing that would sway me from
the belief that there is a day on the other side of this
conflict where people will work to repair those relations
because there is a common good to that.
Mrs. Wagner. Well, and I hope that we are pushing back
against the misinformation and propaganda that is being
disseminated----
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely.
Mrs. Wagner. By Iran and its proxies, especially in these
Abraham Accord countries. I would encourage that. My time is
expired, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields. The chair
recognizes Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to followup on the fact that just in the preceding
days just before October 7, the talks were extended between,
with the U.S. involvement, Israel and Saudi Arabia for
normalization with Israel.
How would you categorize first the status of those
negotiations at that juncture? How would you categorize them
after this? How would you categorize them in the future?
I think it is important for the United States to be clear
with our resolve to continue these talks. I think it would be
in everyone's interest for Saudi Arabia and the other countries
to do the same so that any thought that the success and
progress of these thoughts was benefited from this heinous
attack can be dispelled immediately.
Ms. Leaf. Thank you, Congressman. I was very much involved
in those discussions just prior to, in the months leading up to
October 7. Obviously they are on pause at this point, given the
crisis in the region.
But I think it is fair to say that Saudi leadership saw a
strategic benefit in pursuing this. They asked the U.S. to be
the midwife to this set of agreements. We were deep into
discussions on a number of fronts. Ironically, we were just on
the cusp of beginning the discussions about what we call the
Palestinian component to that normalization agreement.
It is something that I would expect to be able to resume on
the other side of this crisis. Because there is a larger good
here for all of the parties.
But I will say, you know, very candidly, this conflict,
this crisis has roiled up just a huge amount of public anger
toward Israel, toward us. This is something we are going to
have to work through. We are all I would say collectively
anxious to see this conflict over sooner rather than later.
Certainly the human suffering, the human toll that it is
taking.
There is a set of principles that underlie our engagements,
and one of them, the engagements now and the engagement post-
conflict, and that is very squarely focused on Palestinian
statehood and alongside that, a wider regional effort to add to
normalization.
Mr. Keating. In your opening statement, you made reference
to the fact that one of your primary objectives is to protect
U.S. troops in the region.
Now, I think the United States has shown enormous
restraint, given the attacks that have been public on U.S.
servicemen in that region, men and women that are risking their
lives, as well as the people serving in our embassies in those
areas.
Could you give us the status of what the current threat is
to our embassies and what it is to our Service people, our
Service members on the ground? As well as what steps we have
taken to upgrade our security of both our military and civilian
people on the ground in this region?
Ms. Leaf. So Congressman, we will split the question, if
you will allow us. In terms of our diplomatic mission, so look,
since the beginning hours of this crisis, we anticipated that
there could be public churns and there could be certainly an
escalation of terrorist attacks, both from known groups as well
as lone wolf attacks.
We have been in steady State with all of our mission
leadership of calibrating, looking every day at the security
situation and calibrating decisions about whether to, for
instance, send home non-essential personnel or allow family
members to depart in some cases.
We have done the necessary where we thought it was useful
for embassy staffing where for instance, in Iraq, our mission
consulate in Erbil is still open. Embassy Baghdad is still
open. But we have reduced non-essential personnel, given the
volatility of the situation and the possibilities of conflict.
Ms. Stroul. Thank you, Congressman. Cognizant that time is
short, I will be very succinct. There have been over 41 attacks
on U.S. forces in Iraq and Syria. U.S. forces in Iraq and Syria
are there only for the defeat Is mission in support of local
partners, for no other purpose.
Since October 17, we have flowed additional air defense
assets in to protect against the increasing pace and severity
of the attacks by Iran and Iran-backed groups against our
forces.
We have also demonstrated, as President Biden has said, he
has no higher priority than the protection of U.S. forces, that
we are prepared to use military force. Demonstrated that we
will use force in self-defense as needed----
Mr. Keating. If I could, I have got 5 seconds left. I just
want to emphasize the fact that this is, 13 days ago, as we sit
here, Hamas was in Moscow in talks that I think we will deal
with in classified session. But as our Service people, as our
embassies are threatened, it is important to remember Iran and
Russia and their role in this as well.
I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. The chair recognizes
Mr. Mast.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Chairman.
Do either of you monitor the Gaza Health Ministry?
Ms. Leaf. I do not.
Ms. Stroul. No.
Mr. Mast. No? So I think it is, you know, geez, to look at,
it is what the lady that got pulled out was parroting when she
said 10,000 civilians were killed. It is not just what they
were parroting in back there.
It is literally what UNRWA parrots. When UNRWA parrots it,
it is what Al Jazeera and New York Times and BBC and everybody
else--everybody else starts parroting.
I am going to read to you directly from them what they want
everybody to parrot. So accordingly, to the Gaza Health
Ministry, 9,770 people have been killed, this is in Gaza.
Seventy percent were women, children, older persons, 24,158
people injured, 22,060 reported missing. The, you know, at one
point 521 families, 3,109 citizens.
They give very specific information. Do you notice anything
glaringly missing from what I just mentioned to you from the
Gaza Health Ministry Report? Is there anything that strikes you
as glaringly missing?
Ms. Leaf. I am sorry, I don't know what you are referring
to.
Mr. Mast. Combatants. They didn't mention the word
combatants at all.
Ms. Leaf. No, because they mingle them.
Mr. Mast. Exactly, that is exactly the point. They expect
the world to believe that all these people, and these groups
that they are dividing up to families and older persons and
children, which they consider anybody under 18, and women, that
none of them are combatants.
That is what they want the world to believe, and that is
what the United Nations goes out there and parrots. That is
what the media goes out there and parrots.
So I want to get to a few of those points, because it leads
to a circle that is going on, and the circle is this. We all,
and this shouldn't be provocative to anybody, Hamas lies. Hamas
and Palestinians lie. It is their government.
You know, I have had a number of my colleagues that have
agreed with me on Twitter that it is their government, even
though they tried to censure me on this. But you know.
Then they say, they lie, but then they pretend everybody is
a victim. Then after they say everybody is a victim, there is
antisemitic riots and terrorism. Then after that happens, then
there is people, members and others, that call for cease-fires
and another country, and things like this.
So I want to ask a few questions on that. Are all
combatants men in this war?
Ms. Stroul. We're not on the ground and would not be in a
position to confirm.
Mr. Mast. Do you think they are all men? You are DoD. You
monitored Iraq and Afghanistan. Are all combatants men?
Ms. Stroul. Generally speaking all combatants are not men.
Mr. Mast. Thank you. Are they all over the age of 18?
Ms. Stroul. Broadly speaking there are plenty of designated
foreign terrorists organizations who use children in combat.
Mr. Mast. Are they all young adults, or some of them are
older adults?
Ms. Stroul. Congressman, I'm not a lawyer.
Mr. Mast. Okay. Are they all--in Gaza are all combatants
Hamas?
Ms. Stroul. No.
Mr. Mast. Are they only individuals that wear black hoods
and green headbands?
Ms. Stroul. Hamas, just like any terrorist organization----
Mr. Mast. Not just Hamas.
Ms. Stroul. Other organizations like Palestinian Islamic
Jihad also I'm sure don't only parade in the streets in
identifiable uniforms.
Mr. Mast. That is right. It is not just Hamas, like you
just mentioned. Now when I brought this up, which I think is
very important to bring up to identify who is innocent and not
innocent, which I absolutely acknowledge there are innocent
people there even though again that has stripped from me from
comments from my colleagues--when I brought that up, my
colleague up here, who is missing now, probably conveniently,
asked me if I was a member of the KKK. One of my colleagues
over here also tried to censure me for distinguishing between
innocent and non-civilian and trying to actually look at who is
and who isn't.
This is the big problem about that lie: That lie is
actually worse than the al-Ahli hospital bombing lie that was
told by Rashida Tlaib in the New York Times and the Associated
Press, because that is a much more persistent lie that Hamas is
begging--Palestinians are begging Members of Congress to make.
They are counting on the fact that people here won't try to
distinguish that it is not just Hamas terrorists. It is also
Palestinians, it is also women, it is also under 18, it is also
older people.
When they do that, they get that circle of lies where they
think everybody thinks over there they are a victim and then
they get the anti-Semitic riots and terrorism, and then they
get the people calling for cease-fires and for making them a
second State. That is why that lie--and these people unwilling
to question that and yelling at me for questioning that are
creating a much more persistent problem than even what Rashida
Tlaib put out there. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman's time has expired. Yields
back.
The chair recognizes Mr. Bera.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, ranking member.
The events of October 7 are tragic. Having spent some time
in Israel twice in the past few months prior to October 7,
having previously been to and had lunch with some of the
kibbutzim that were attacked, many of those individuals that I
met, many of the young people were the most pro-finding a two-
State solution.what is tragic about October 7 is that may be an
impossible dream for the foreseeable future.
We stand with Israel. We stand with Israel's right to
defend itself. We stand that Israel is the Jewish homeland. But
reading an article in the New York Times this morning where
they were quoting Hamas' leadership on what their intent was,
and their intent and their fear was that the Palestinian cause
was slipping away. It wasn't central to dialog. They were
watching our facilitated negotiations with Saudi Arabia and
Israel. They were watching the Abraham Accords. There is not a
tactical strategic benefit to be heading a baby or killing a
child in front of their parents or killing parents in front of
a child. That is to provoke terror. That is to provoke a
reaction.
Just quoting Hamas' leadership, they wanted this reaction.
They wanted and anticipated that Prime Minister Netanyahu, the
Israeli government, the IDF would have to respond to this
terror and heinous attack.Hamas, from my calculation,
understood that there would be a major civilian toll and they
would want to use that, the loss of innocent Palestinian
civilian life, to start to bring the Arab world back into a
focus on the Palestinian cause, that they will continue to do
this because it is their strategy to continue to provoke terror
to try to foment unrest in the streets.
I do worry that Prime Minister Netanyahu's response is
exactly what Hamas wants them to do, which is now also
isolating Israel and the world is creating anti-Semitic attacks
on our college campuses around the world. Again this is not
talking about a cease-fire. This is a war between Israel and
Hamas. We support Israel's right and actually will work with
them to decapitate Hamas, erode Hamas' ability to ever
perpetrate an attack like this again.
Maybe this is a question for Secretary Stroul. There are
other legitimate ways to prosecute this war against Hamas and
perhaps minimize innocent Palestinian casualties, and would
imagine that we are in conversation with the IDF, with the
Israeli government to think about what those are, special
operators, et cetera, while protecting the Israeli homeland.
Ms. Stroul. Absolutely we are. Consistently Israel is a
democracy with whom we share values. They have an obligation
both to take action to defend their people and their country
and ensure that Hamas can never again perpetrate a terrorist
act like it did on October 7. They also have an obligation to
distinguish between terrorists and militants and civilians who
deserve access to humanitarian aid and protections consistent
with the law--with international humanitarian law and the law
of armed conflict. The Israelis are absolutely aware and
cognizant of it and we have conversations with them ever day.
Mr. Bera. Perhaps for Secretary Leaf, none other than
Naftali Bennett and others in open sources have suggested a
different strategy, a strategy that says Israel is going to
occupy Gaza. I think our own Secretary of State has said an
occupation of Gaza is not possible, and I think would be a bad
strategy. Is that----
Ms. Leaf. Congressman, in fact I'd love to quote a few
things that Secretary Blinken said today in Tokyo at the G-7
Administerial because it gets to a number of points that you've
made. He said the only way to ensure that this crisis never
happens again is to begin setting the conditions for durable
peace and security and to frame our diplomatic efforts now with
that in mind. The United States believes key elements should
include no forcible displacement of Palestinians from Gaza, not
now, not after the war; no use of Gaza as a platform for
terrorism or other violent attacks; no reoccupation of Gaza
after the conflict ends; no attempt to blockade or besiege
Gaza; no reduction in the territory of Gaza.
I would add to that a few affirmative principles that I
know the secretary feels very strongly about and that inform
our approach now, and they will certainly inform our approach
after, which is that, as I said earlier, Palestinian people
have to be at the center of post-conflict governance. The West
Bank in Gaza must ultimately be treated as a common polity, if
you will. We have to look to rebuild a road that's long been
missing toward negotiations for the Palestinians because what
we have seen; and you touched on it in your opening remarks, is
a real weaponization of an unresolved issue, an unresolved
legitimate aspiration for statehood.
It's been weaponized by Hamas and Hamas has an ultimately
dark and nihilistic sort of savage kind of vision for that
cause. It is not one that frankly most Palestinians align with,
but Hamas and other members of Iran's so-called axis of
resistance are very much desirous of weaponizing that issue. So
we must take it away from them, frankly.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair recognizes Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Assistant secretaries, your Service of State and defense
has never been more important. It is really bipartisan. We want
you to be successful. We want the President to be successful.
It is critical for American families that you be successful. I
am very grateful with the leadership of Chairman Mike McCaul,
the Ranking Member Greg Meeks. It is bipartisan that we want
you to succeed. But it is so critical because indeed I believe
the Washington Post is correct last week when they cited that
American families are at greater risk today of another 9/11
mass murder than ever. So we have just got to be together and
get these issues addressed.
To me it is perfectly sadly clear that we are in a war we
did not choose of dictators with rule of gun invading
democracies with rule of law.it is an axis of evil. It began
with the war criminal Putin when he conducted mass murder on
February 24, 2022, invading Ukraine. It then on October 7. We
know the massacre by the Iranian puppets who came in to
massacre the people of Israel. Just so clear. So sad. We also
know the Chinese Communist Party has indicated that Taiwan, 24
million people, do not exist. We have just got to be working
together. I am just so concerned that all of this leads to
death to Israel, death to America, being American families.
Indeed, Madam Secretary, when you mentioned about Hamas and
their perverted view of the world, indeed American families and
also civilized civilization should know that the Hamas covenant
of August 18, 1988 in the midst of insane provisions is Article
7, quote, ``The day of judgment will not come about until
Muslims kill Jews, fight Jews and kill them. Then the Jews will
hide behind rocks and trees and the rocks and trees will cry
out, oh, Muslim, there's a Jew hiding behind me. Come and kill
him,'' end of quote. It should not be ignored. There were
people carrying signs here in Washington on Saturday and Sunday
about trees and rocks. This is what it is, killing Jews.
With that in mind, it is also again bipartisan Congressman
Keating; I appreciate what he stated, and that is that we have
had U.S. Forces come under fire in Iraq and Syria more than 40
times from the Iranian puppet forces. Dozens of Americans have
been reported injured in these attacks. Sadly to me it has been
concealed from the American people how serious this is. The
U.S. has responded militarily just one time, attacking
apparently an empty warehouse.
Wit the technology we have today, Secretary Stroul, we
should be able to identify the location of the launching sites
and they should be responded to immediately and not discussed
or whatever. We have got the technology. Why are we not acting
to protect the American people?
Ms. Stroul. Thank you, Congressman, for your question.
President Biden has been clear that he has directed self-
defense strikes in protection of our forces and will do so
again. There is no higher priority. It is quite clear that Iran
and its proxy groups are escalating against U.S. Forces in Iraq
and Syria and we have a range of options at our disposal to
defend ourselves.
Mr. Wilson. Indeed I have a staff person in the region. I
am so concerned. All of us have family members. My four sons
have served in Iraq, Egypt, and Afghanistan. It is good that we
are providing air defense capability, but we should be going
after the launch sites. They can be identified. With the
technology we have today, to me it is inexcusable. Why are we
not going after--identifying and going after the launch sites?
Ms. Stroul. Congressman, I can't speak to every specific
operational decision. I'd be happy to brief you more in a
closed session, but I will also say that Iran and its proxy
groups disguise many of its warehouses, depots, and launch
sites in areas that have civilians around. The U.S. military
takes precautions and assess how we're going to respond based
on proportionality, necessity, and distinction.
Mr. Wilson. Hey, for years any time there would be an
attack by Hezbollah, Hamas, or Houthis, the American media
covers the Iranian response--Israeli response, not the attack.
So let's get ready for that because you are going to be--we are
going to be accused of being the perpetrators when in fact
there should be self-defense. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields.
The chair recognizes Mr. Castro.
Mr. Castro. Well, thank you, chairman.
I think that all of us, or almost all of us were shocked
and enraged by the attack on October 7. I certainly expressed
that. I have been concerned since then about how the Netanyahu
administration has carried out its response. I don't have faith
or confidence that Prime Minister Netanyahu can protect
Israelis, will follow the humanitarian rules of war, or prevent
a larger regional conflict that will rope in the United States.
Do you know how many missiles have hit Gaza now, an area
that is 141 square miles? I ask that of either witness.
Ms. Stroul. Congressman, I don't have the specific number
of air strikes at my disposal.
Mr. Castro. The latest estimate that I saw was about
20,000, and as far as I can tell there have only been about 5
hostages that have been released. It seems to me that Prime
Minister Netanyahu is prioritizing collective punishment over
the release of hostages and I am very concerned about that.
Please?
Ms. Stroul. Thank you for that question. I'm not going to
characterize the prioritization of the Israel defense forces.
What they--what their operations in Gaza are intended to
dismantle the military infrastructure of Hamas that made it
possible to perpetrate an attack like the world saw on October
7.
Mr. Castro. I want to be clear: I think they should be able
to protect themselves against a similar attack. We have long
supported them in their ability to do that. But they also
directly struck an ambulance. They struck refugee shelters two
or three times. How do we explain that? As we take votes for
support, as we try to assess the situation. I think just as the
world is aghast at the barbarity of what happened October 7,
the world also looks at that and asks the question about why an
ambulance, why 30-something members of the press have been
killed, why 4,000 or 5,000 children have already been killed?
Ms. Stroul. They're extremely serious questions. We should
hold Israel and the Israel defense forces to the same standards
that the U.S. holds any ally or partner, and that is adherence
to the law around conflict and necessity, distinction, and
proportionality in its execution and implementation of its
military operations.
With respect to the ambulance convoy, this is a good
example of the misinformation and disinformation environment.
The Israel defense forces announced that they saw Hamas
terrorists using the ambulance to conceal militants and
weapons. It is also incumbent on the Israel defense forces and
the Israeli government to make that information known so the
world can understand how Hamas disguises itself and its tactics
in civilian structures.
Mr. Castro. I had read very disturbing reporting a few days
ago that has been fairly consistent that there has continued to
be a lack of substantial or necessary food and water that has
reached Gaza, that the water system for example is out. Can you
please tell us what the latest humanitarian situation is there?
Ms. Leaf. Yes, Congressman. The water system has been a
focus of our efforts. The water was initially shut off. We got
the Israelis to turn it back on. Some of the pipes, or several
major pipes, they've sustained damage at different times. The
Israelis have worked to repair the damage where they could.
The operating environment for getting humanitarian
assistance in is unbelievably complex. As I said, it's this
combination of the Egyptians having very legitimate concerns
about an influx of fighters disguised as----
Mr. Castro. I guess, because I am running out of time----
Ms. Leaf. Yes. Sorry.
Mr. Castro [continuing]. I want to ask one more question--
--
Ms. Leaf. Yes, please.
Mr. Castro [continuing]. perhaps for the record. But I
would ask that the State Department, that the Biden
Administration do everything it can to make sure that
humanitarian assistance, regardless of who is holding it up,
makes its way to the people there.
My final question; I will try to read it in time: On Monday
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu said that he intends for
Israel to have, quote, ``overall security responsibility over
Gaza for, quote, 'an indefinite period.' '' Israel's heritage
minister, who proposed using nuclear weapons on Gaza and was
not forced to resign for that statement because Benjamin
Netanyahu for his coalition is partly beholden to the far
right, has proposed establishing settlements in Gaza.
This week National Security Council spokesperson John Kirby
said that the President does not believe that a reoccupation by
Israeli forces is the right thing to do.
For the record what alternatives to an Israeli reoccupation
have you raised with the Netanyahu administration and does the
Biden Administration oppose establishment of settlements which
are illegal under international law in Gaza?
Ms. Leaf. Yes, we absolutely oppose them and we also oppose
the reoccupation of Gaza by Israel----
Mr. Castro. Thank you.
Ms. Leaf [continuing]. or any other country.
Mr. Castro. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields.
The chair recognizes Mr. Burchett.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate the
opportunity to be here, and thank you all for being here.
I am greatly concerned about the safety of Israel and for
the safety of Jewish Americans. The responses we have seen
around the country to the October 17--October 7 attacks, excuse
me, especially at some of our colleges and universities to me
is a problem, especially our public institutions.
I am a great supporter of exercising the First Amendment
and I believe it is critical for the American way of life.
People must be allowed to speak freely and assembly peacefully,
but when that speech is in favor of terrorists, we must look at
the underlying issues.
Why do you students rally in support for Hamas, a group
that viciously attacked innocent people, beheaded, and burned
children, and raped young girls? This is because our younger
generations are not taught everything that the Greatest
Generation learned through war. Evil is evil and it must be
stopped.
The fact that these rallies for Hamas are even allowed is
beyond troubling. Allowing these protests isn't educational
progress. This is progressivism at its worst. Students and
others that rallied in support of the actions on October 7 have
proven their lack of historical knowledge.
Eighty years ago this country went to war with the axis
powers that sought to destroy any way of life that they felt
was inferior to their own. My family knows these people well. I
lost an uncle to the Nazis and my daddy fought the Japanese in
the Pacific. He went onto China and fought the communists there
for a short while. This is the type of enemy we promised the
world we would never allow again. I support the efforts of
Israel to rid the world of a group that is hell-bent on
murdering Jews.
Our attention to this tragedy must be two-fold: We must
support Israel in this fight and we must educate our young
people that evil is evil and must be dealt with.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the remainder of my
time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields.
The chair recognizes Ms. Titus.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our witnesses.
As you have heard all of us say, but I will say it for the
record myself, on October 7 we all watched in horror as Hamas
terrorists murdered, tortured, raped, and kidnaped over 1,400
Israelis. Thirty-two Americans were also killed in that attack.
This grotesque assault on our closest ally in the region
deserves universal condemnation from every member in this body.
The U.S., the United Nations, and much of the international
community have designated Hamas as a foreign terrorist
organization. Their stated goal is the destruction and
decimation of all Israeli people. Their actions have also
demonstrated their indifference toward the safety of
Palestinian people. There is absolutely no room for sympathy or
equivocation when it comes to Hamas. About that we should be
absolutely clear.
I join my colleagues in applauding President Biden for his
stalwart support of Israel during this time and I commend
Secretary Blinken for his master class in shuttle diplomacy to
shore up the U.S. bilateral relationships with our regional
partners and to lay the groundwork for intensive diplomatic
efforts to achieve sustainable peace.
Words to matter. What we talk about in this committee and
in Congress also matters. That is why urging for adherence to
international law and the laws of war while ramping up
humanitarian aid is so important. This assertion is not anti-
Israeli. Prime Minister Netanyahu himself has agreed to this in
principle.
I echo President Biden's calls for temporary localized
pauses to allow for surges of humanitarian aid, but I remain
opposed to a long-term durable cease-fire until all hostages
are returned and certain commitments are made by Hamas. A
premature cease-fire would give Hamas a reprieve and allow them
to regroup, reorganize, and rearm.
I also urge at the same time though the IDF to reconsider
its tactics to ensure its counterterrorism campaign is
proportionate. Again, these remarks should not be misconstrued
as delegitimizing Israel's campaign to root out Hamas. We
cannot accept the false choice that Republicans have been
pushing on us when they say you either support Israel and its
war effort or you support Hamas. Bolstering Israel's defense
and urging the protection of innocent Palestinians are not
mutually exclusive ideas. We can and we must do both.
I would like to ask my question though more specifically
about Turkey. Ms. Stroul consistently tops the list of U.S.
arms importers and recipients of U.S. military aid because it
is considered a strategic NATO ally. I believe Turkey's
relationship with Hamas alone is enough to cease all arm
exports to Ankara as Erdogan continues to express his sympathy
for Hamas, not to mention the fact that Turkey has routinely
acted as a spoiler within the NATO alliance.
The Arms Export Control Act requires the U.S. Government to
conduct end-use monitoring of where these military exports go.
I wonder if there have been any indications that Turkey's
relationship with Hamas has resulted in the transfer of weapons
of U.S. origin to Hamas by Turkey and how is the U.S.
Government able to ascertain and deal with that?
Ms. Stroul. Thank you for your question, Congresswoman. As
part of any foreign military sale to any partner or ally there
is robust end-use monitoring for how those weapons are used. We
have no indication that anything provided to Turkey has fallen
into the hands of Hamas.
Ms. Titus. Well, that is reassuring. I would just ask you,
too, how you are balancing the relationship with Qatar and
Turkey in terms of their assistance with hopefully getting out
some of the hostages and their having Hamas leadership within
their boundaries visiting?
Ms. Leaf. Congresswoman, what I would say is the following:
Qatar and Egypt, but especially Qatar have been profoundly
involved in the relentless quest to secure the release of
hostages, foreign hostages, Israeli hostages, the whole lot.
They've also been engaged in a very intensive effort to help
with the--help Ambassador Satterfield in his efforts to get
humanitarian assistance in and foreign nationals out, something
that has been impeded repeatedly by Hamas.
Of course the military leadership is well-protected
underground, far from the conflict above. The political
leadership is the external piece through which the countries
are working, and the Egyptians as well----
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The chair recognizes Mr. Barr.
Ms. Leaf. Sorry.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In response to my colleague on the other side of the aisle
who is expressing this idea of proportionality with respect to
Gaza, I think it is important that in this moment in the face
of this barbarism from Hamas terrorists that we are careful not
to use nuance too much. What we need is more clarity and nuance
is not really apropos at the moment.
As you said in response to my colleague, there is a lot of
misinformation. Why an ambulance? Because it was full of Hamas
terrorists and weapons. That is why an ambulance. Moral clarity
requires that we call out terrorism for what it is. When there
are calls for a cease-fire that would only enable Hamas to
reconstitute another attack, that is not appropriate either.
So, Ms. Leaf, I do want to address Secretary Blinken's call
for Israel to provide a humanitarian pause. We all support
humanitarian assistance for the innocent, but those running
Gaza do not care about humanitarian needs, as you know and as
you have testified.
Did Hamas prevent innocent Palestinians from fleeing Gaza
City to safer locations further south in Gaza?
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely.
Mr. Barr. Does this make it harder for those people to
access aid?
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely.
Mr. Barr. Ms. Leaf, is Hamas actively hoarding resources to
pursue its Islamic Jihadist war against Israel instead of
providing water, fuel, and food to those affected by war?
Ms. Leaf. Yes, they are.
Mr. Barr. Ms. Leaf, do you feel Hamas would use any pause
in Israel's effort to root terrorist cells and uncover Hamas'
urban terrorist network to resupply its war fighters?
Ms. Leaf. They would certainly attempt to, but that is
something that I know that the Israeli government is actively
considering.
Mr. Barr. So I hope that the Secretary and the President
consider that when calling for a humanitarian pause. Did
President Biden condition any support for Israel on the IDF
engaging in a pause?
Ms. Leaf. No, he did not.
Mr. Barr. Well, that is good to hear. Let me followup on
the line of questioning regarding our partner in Qatar. Of
course the Qataris have been very helpful with Al Udeid Air
Base, and we appreciate that, but with respect to releasing
hostage, how helpful have they been? Are they using their
considerable leverage to seek the release of all hostages
immediately?
Ms. Leaf. They absolutely are. They've worked at it
relentlessly. The problem is who they're talking to at the
other end of the phone line. It's a real question as to whether
Yahya Sinwar is serious in any degree about releasing those
hostages.
Mr. Barr. Is the Hamas office in Qatar seeing any pressure
from the Qatari government?
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely.
Mr. Barr. It is good to hear. I do think the Qataris are
important partners for us, but we want to make sure that we
emphasize to them how helpful they can be in this moment. They
want to be kind of the Switzerland of the Middle East. They can
be very, very helpful in this moment and I appreciate us taking
advantage of that relationship.
The Taylor Force Act, real quick, Ms. Leaf, with the war
ongoing how are we ensuring that any U.S. support to NGO's
operating in Gaza are not violating the Taylor Force Act? Are
we seeing any support for the families of Hamas terrorists
killed during the invasion of Israel in exchange for their
participation?
Ms. Leaf. We are not seeing any of that and we have asked
the question and received the right assurances.
Mr. Barr. Is the administration reconsidering this idea of
providing assistance to NGO's, supposedly pro-Palestinian
NGO's, as a way of bypassing or circumventing the Taylor Force
Act?
Ms. Leaf. We do bypass or circumvent the letter or the
spirit of the Taylor Force Act.
Mr. Barr. I just think there ought to be some analysis of
aid that may not go to the Palestinian authority, but
nevertheless goes to NGO's that could serve as kind of a proxy
for martyr payments. I just want rigorous oversight from the
State Department so that both the spirit and the letter of
Taylor Force is complied with.
Ms. Leaf. I can assure you of that, Congressman.
Mr. Barr. Finally, this issue of sanctions relief. In the
Financial Services Committee we had very important testimony
about the $16 billion that was unfrozen, both in terms of the
South Korea deal, with the hostage deal, and also the $10
billion held in Iraq to pay off Baghdad's debts for its
purchase of Iranian natural gas. That is a lot of money that
has been basically effectively sanctions relief delivered to
Iran as a result of this administration's policies. Is the
Biden Administration reconsidering chasing sanctions relief
with Iran in light of the events of October 7?
Ms. Leaf. I'm sorry. I didn't understand the verb you used.
Is the Biden Administration changing?
Mr. Barr. Chasing sanctions relief with Iran. Has the
administration reconsidered that course--that policy given
October 7 and the events that have occurred?
Ms. Leaf. So the moneys you referred to from South Korea
that have been moved to different accounts, that will be put
through a rigorous metered process that will only be spent on
humanitarian goods, food, and medicine and so forth. That has
not altered. That was an arrangement set up by the previous
administration and we are rigorously applying the same
restrictions to it. The money has not moved. The moneys you
referred to for----
Chairman McCaul. I am sorry. In fairness to the witnesses
and to the other members I want to keep this on time.
Ms. Leaf. Okay.
Mr. Barr. My time is expired, but I think the line of
questioning illustrates the point that maximum pressure was
working and moving away was the wrong move. Thanks.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair recognizes Ms. Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
For both witnesses, are there any updates that either of
you can provide in this unclassified setting regarding the
status of the hostages?
Ms. Leaf. I could not. I'd be happy to talk to you in a
different setting.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. Same for you?
Ms. Stroul.
[No audible response.]
Ms. Wild. Okay. Let me ask you this: Is the administration
in continuous contact with the Israeli government about the
status of the hostages and can we be assured that the
administration will provide whatever assistance may be helpful
in that effort?
Ms. Leaf. 24/7. I can assure you. Yes, we are providing all
support.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. Moving on, ever since these horrible
attacks, which don't need to be further described because we
all know exactly what we are talking about happened on October
7, I personally have felt devastated. So many Americans have,
as well as people around the world--I felt that both as an
American and a Member of Congress, but also as a Jewish
American.
But the heartbreak has been amplified by horrific cases of
both Palestinians and Jewish Americans being targeted here in
the United States including the unthinkable murder of Wadea al-
Fayoume, the 6-year-old Palestinian America boy in Chicago, as
well as the death of a 69-year-old Jewish man, Paul Kessler,
after he was injured during an altercation at a rally, or
competing rallies, while he was peacefully waving an Israeli
flag. That obviously is of deep concern to all of us for the
safety of Americans generally, for the safety of people with
Palestinian or any kind of Arabic background, as well as people
who are Jews.
My concern is that in this climate rhetoric that equates
everyday Palestinians, civilians--let's just call them
civilians--to Hamas including at times in this body, Congress,
is not just morally unacceptable, but it is also tantamount to
actively endangering the lives of our fellow Americans. I will
say that as a representative of a district that includes a
vibrant Jewish community as well as a vibrant Palestinian
American community and other Arab American and Muslim
communities these issues are really personal to me and many of
my constituents.
So let me--well, first let me ask whether both of you agree
with the premise that Hamas is a terrorist organization.
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely.
Ms. Stroul. Yes.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. Would you agree that the rhetoric that
equates Palestinian civilians or Palestinian Americans with
Hamas is rhetoric that actually strengthens Hamas and
undermines Israel's security by feeding into their propaganda
that Hamas is a legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people?
Ms. Leaf. We absolutely make a distinction. Hamas as a
terrorist organization has perpetrated a brutal set of attacks.
The Palestinian people don't deserve to be lumped in in such a
way. We absolutely distinguish in our discussion of that topic.
Mr. Wild. Did you want to add anything to that?
Ms. Stroul. It is--I complete agree with Assistant
Secretary Leaf. The Palestinians in Gaza deserve much better
than Hamas and it is critical from a Department of Defense
perspective that military operations distinguish between
targeting Hamas and protecting innocent Palestinian civilians.
Mr. Wild. Thank you. I want to turn to something else just
because of the shortage of time. I am very, very concerned
about the humanitarian assistance to innocent civilians in
Gaza. We know that the only place where this is available is
through the Rafah crossing which seems to have alternating
access and the availability of passing through it. As of a
couple of hours ago, according to an article I just saw during
this hearing, the crossing has been shut down due to some sort
of security incident.
Can you speak about ongoing efforts to increase the amount
of aid and how to get it to the innocent civilians?
Ms. Leaf. Ambassador Satterfield and his team back-stopped
by here in Washington, back-stopped by our missions in Cairo
and Jerusalem is working relentlessly. The operating
environment is so phenomenally complex and the security
conditions on the other side in Gaza are parlous, that it has
been just an exhausting effort to keep that aperture open. But
that is what we are focused on and we are determined to
steadily increase the number of trucks over this next period.
It's now about anywhere from 70 to 100. We want to get it up to
300, 400, 500.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. I yield back.
The chair recognizes Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Jackson of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My first question is for you, Secretary Leaf. Professor
Alan Dershowitz recently talked about a Hamas strategy that he
referred to as the CNN strategy, or what others have labeled
the dead baby strategy. The basic concept is that Hamas attacks
Israel in a manner that it knows will draw military response.
Then in a strategy that can only be described as barbaric and
cowardly Hamas retreats into its strongholds, as we have been
discussing, and uses Palestinian civilians as human shields.
Not that Hamas has any regard for the law of war, or any other
rules for that matter, but engaging in disgusting acts such as
this is a complete and utter violation of the law of armed
conflict.
Israel does its best I think to avoid civilian casualties
and in this conflict gave civilians time to depart from
northern Gaza, an act with Hamas reportedly attempted to block.
I heard earlier today that there was also things that just--
millions of flyers were dropped all over northern Gaza. They
made thousands and thousands of phone calls to evacuate people
before anything happened. So I think they are doing their best
to avoid this. But eventually there are civilian casualties
with this set up.
Hamas then blames Israel as the guilty party claiming that
they are willingly killing innocent civilians. The success of
this CNN strategy depends on the mainstream media, and
unfortunately perhaps Members of Congress, as we recently heard
with the ambulance comment, which anyone who knew of the
ambulance story certainly knew that it was filled with Hamas
fighters because every story I saw on every channel they were
grouped together. So anyways, but it relies on them buying into
this narrative and allowing itself to be used as a tool of
Hamas.
So, Secretary Leaf, I was just wondering what efforts if
any is the administration undertaking to ensure that Hamas in
their CNN strategy is ineffective? Specifically, what is the
administration doing to push back on Hamas' false narrative and
to show American people and the world that Israel has an
inherent right to self-defense, that Israel's current operation
is on solid legal footing, and that Hamas is the one that is
violating the law of war in numerous ways? What are we doing to
stop the spread if this misinformation?
Ms. Leaf. Thank you, Congressman. You know, the point of
Hamas' operations is terror, full stop. They are masters of
propaganda, as you note. The good news is that most governments
around the region well recognize what kind of entity that we're
dealing with.
The publics are inflamed. There's no question the publics
are inflamed by mounting--by images of mounting casualties.
That's an issue across the region. We are in a constant tempo
of direct engagement, discussions, public affairs efforts to
really set the record straight, but it is quite a challenging
environment for just the reasons you cite.
Mr. Jackson of Texas. Thank you. I think you are probably
doing the best you can, but I think it is going to be more
important as time goes on to up that game a little bit because
as this war goes on that narrative is just going to grow and
grow.
Ms. Stroul, my next question is for you. The Biden
Administration recently presented testimony before this
committee explicitly asking that Congress not include Iranian-
backed proxies in a new authorized use of military force that
we are considering. As you noted in your opening statement,
Iran-backed proxies in Iraq and Syria have launched at least 41
attacks on U.S. Service members while Hamas and Hezbollah
continue to attack our friend and our ally Israel on a daily
basis. Given the increased threat posed by Iranian-backed
groups and proxies has this administration's position on
whether to include Iran-backed groups and proxies in a new AUMF
changed?
Ms. Stroul. Thank you for your question, Congressman. The
position of this administration has not changed. Our self-
defense strikes against Iran-backed militia groups have the
underpinning of the President's Article 2 authority under the
Constitution.
Mr. Jackson of Texas. Okay. I guess that is a question for
a later day. I would think if we are going to include other
groups that maybe this would be one of the ones that we want to
include as well despite what you have stated there since they
seem to be one of our biggest threats right now.
Secretary Stroul, given--this is my last question. Given
the chaos on the ground, the entrenchment of Hamas among the
Palestinian people and Hamas' history of misappropriating aid
intended for civilian populations, what realistic and
meaningful guardrails are being employed by the Biden
Administration to prevent Hamas from obtaining the food, the
water, the medicine, and the other humanitarian aid that is
intended for civilians?
Ms. Stroul. I'd be happy to take that one, Congressman. So
to date we have not seen evidence that they have diverted that
aid. It is something that is--that is something that we are
monitoring. There is obviously--it's quite a very--it's quite a
difficult security environment on the other side in Gaza where
aid goes in and where aid workers are working, but we are doing
our best.
Mr. Jackson of Texas. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields.
The chair recognizes Mr. Allred.
Mr. Allred. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
our witnesses for being here.
I want to begin by just reaffirming my support for Israel
and condemning in the strongest terms possible Hamas for this
unprecedented and barbaric attack on October 7. I too visited
the kibbutz in February that was later called by an Israeli
general a site of a massacre. It stays with me.
I also want to make clear this is a war with Hamas and not
all Palestinians or Muslims generally. Hamas started this war
and they have to be held accountable, but we must do everything
we can to limit innocent civilian casualties and provided
crucially needed humanitarian aid where we can.
I would like to connect some of the dots and paint a
broader picture for folks who might be watching about the
global battle that I see it emerging against autocracy and
terrorism that is emerging and that we will need to rise above
our own partisan politics here to effectively combat.
The President has requested slightly over $92 billion to
help us respond to the war between Israel and Hamas, to support
Ukraine, and to support Taiwan.
Ambassador Leaf, in this setting what can you share about
the growing connection between Hamas and Russia as well as
Russia's increased hostility to Israel?
Ms. Leaf. So some of that would probably be better in a
different setting, Congressman, but I think we're seeing clear
evidence of that growing defense relationship. It's pretty
appalling when you think about it. Russia's already clearly
developed an arms relationship with Iran, but now they're doing
so with a terrorist organization. So they're really on the
wrong side in every possible sense. But I'd be happy to get
back to you in a classified setting?
Mr. Allred. I have been in those settings. Can you briefly
just maybe ballpark the percentage of support that Hamas gets
from Iran in terms of their overall budget?
Ms. Leaf. I don't have those figures offhand. I think it's
grown over time, but it's--but you'd also have to count in just
lethal aid in training. There's a whole complex of support that
Iran has provided.
Mr. Allred. Yes, but the connection is pretty well
established obviously.
Ms. Leaf. Yes, it is.
Mr. Allred. Deputy Assistant Secretary Stroul, can you just
tell us about what Iran is providing to Russia in their war
against Ukraine?
Ms. Stroul. Our Defense Intelligence Agency has actually
declassified significant amounts of imagery demonstrating that
one-way attack unmanned aerial vehicles, UAVs, that Russia is
using to attack civilians and civilian infrastructure in
Ukraine is actually of Iranian origin. So Iran is providing
weapons, training, and technical know-how to Russia for its war
of choice in Ukraine.
Mr. Allred. Yes. Can either of you or both of you discuss
briefly how Russia and China are helping prop up the Iranian
economy?
Ms. Leaf. I would have to get back to you----
Mr. Allred. Sure. Okay.
Ms. Leaf [continuing]. with some figures on that. I have
drawn a blank on that.
Mr. Allred. Yes, Okay. That is fine. Well, as I see it,
what we are dealing with here is the need to respond to an
international axis of rogue states, terrorists, and
dictators.this can be seen of course as we have discussed
through Iran's support for Hamas and its proxies along with the
Kremlin's warming relations with terrorist organizations like
Hamas, Russia's reliance on Iran, as you mentioned, in their
war on Ukraine, and Iran's reliance on Russia and China. Even
North Korea is providing munitions to Russia. That is why we
need to pass this supplemental bill and that is what brings
together these overarching conflicts.
Deputy Secretary Stroul, you noted earlier in your
testimony the presence of our carrier fleets and the recent
arrival of an Ohio-class nuclear sub in the Mediterranean. My
understanding is that nine senior military positions in the
command responsible for the Middle East are caught up in the
current blockade by a senator of military positions. What
impact has that had on our ability to respond to this conflict?
Ms. Stroul. What it has done has erode the morale of our
military leadership who have been nominated for other
positions. We have--for example our senior defense official in
Israel is nominated to be promoted to a one-star representative
and has not. So when--at a precise moment in time we would want
our best and most senior leadership on the ground working with
the Israeli Defense Forces every day. His nomination and
promotion is held up by the hold in the Senate.
Mr. Allred. Yes. Well I would just note that we are I think
9 days away from a potential government shutdown. Our new
speaker has chosen to put forward a partisan bill that for the
first time conditioned aid to Israel. When this attack occurred
on Israel we did not have an ambassador in place to Israel,
Egypt, Kuwait, Lebanon, or Oman. Our partisan politics are
getting in the way of our ability to respond to this crisis and
support our allies.I will put forward that we should put that
aside to help us deal with this crisis. Thank you for your
presence today.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman Colin Allred.
We now proceed to Congresswoman Young Kim of California.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, chairman.
I am glad that we have you here to speak to us as we
continue to show our support for Israel, but I am concerned
that there is an increased attacked on U.S. troops by our--by
the Iran's proxies in Iraq and Syria. :Last week the number of
reported injuries Service members doubled. I want to ask you
was it because there were additional attacks or because initial
number of injuries were underreported?
Ms. Stroul. Thank you so much, Congresswoman, for that
question. What it indicates is that some of the injuries became
more apparent over time. So there was initial monitoring. Many
of the forces returned to duty and then reported symptoms
after. That is why you saw an increase in the number.
Mrs.Kim of California. Okay. What is your assessment of
Houthis involvement in the war against Iraq--I mean Israel, and
what is driving their attacks?
Ms. Leaf. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question. It
is a good one. Look, they are as a movement very ideologically
committed to a sort of death-to-America, death-to-the-Jews,
death-to-Israel sort of outlook on the world, shall we say.
They have thus tried to enter into the fray, largely
unsuccessfully thanks to the good efforts of our U.S. military.
Mrs. Kim of California. Can you talk about how that impacts
our U.S. national security interest in Red Sea, like freedom of
navigation?
Ms. Leaf. It's a direct threat.
Mrs. Kim of California. Do you have any thoughts?
Ms. Stroul. I agree it's a direct threat and I would note
it's specifically why one of the core U.S. interests in the
region is freedom of navigation. We have been very clear in the
last several days about sending the U.S.S. Carrier Strike Group
Eisenhower through the Suez and through the Red Sea as well as
our--the U.S.S. Florida, the nuclear-guided submarine.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. The Gaza Strip is a
notoriously difficult military operating environment given the
defense, urban terrain, and expensive tunnel network. Still,
the IDF has significant combat advantages over Hamas and they
have made substantive progress in the first days of what will
likely be a lengthy ground operation.
I want to ask you if the administration is prepared to
support Israel throughout the duration of its campaign to
defeat Hamas.
Ms. Stroul. From President Biden to Secretary Blinken to
Secretary Austin and on down the chain the commitment to
Israel's security and having it--ensuring that it has what it
needs to defend itself from terrorism is ironclad.
Mrs. Kim of California. Okay. There is a bipartisan
consensus in Congress that the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps be designated as a terrorist organization by the EU How
is the administration proactively working with our EU allies to
accomplish that bipartisan goal?
Ms. Leaf. It is a topic of discussion and we certainly
support that.
Mrs. Kim. of California. All right. Thank you. I would like
to yield the remaining time to my colleague, Mr. Mills.
Mr. Mills. Thank you so much for that.
I wanted to followup. We had a colleague of ours just
recently on the other side that was talking about how these
ambulances were being struck or these buildings were being
struck and I just wanted to put that in perspective. Of the
entire Gaza area there is about 260,000 structures, is that
correct?
Ms. Leaf. You've got me. I know the--sort of the general
dimensions of the Gaza Strip and the population and so forth. I
don't know the exact count on the buildings.
Mr. Mills. Well, my understanding is that of the 260,000
structures about 9,500 have had any structural damage or have
actually been targeted as a result of IDF utilizing it to go
after weapon caches or to focus on terror tunnels or to look at
areas where key Hamas leadership is. I just want to paint that
perspective. That is only about 3 percent of the entire area.
When you see mainstream media they try to paint it as if it is
an entire demolition of all of Gaza, and it is just a false
narrative.
The last thing I want to ask is are you aware of a
gentleman named Saleh Aljafarawi?
Ms. Leaf. No, I'm not.
Mr. Mills. He is a Pallywood actor. Are you aware of
Pallywood?
Ms. Leaf.
[No audible response.]
Mr. Mills. So Pallywood is essentially where certain crisis
actors--he is a very interesting gentleman because at 25 years
old he is a--apparently a radiologist, a singer, a Hamas
fighter, a doctor. He has actually been killed and was
resurrected. So quite an interesting individual.
The reason I mentioned this is because he is about as real
as the Ghost of Kyiv. He has legitimately gone forward and
utilizing this misinformation of propaganda warfare is
continuing to try and look as if the U.S., the Department of
Defense, and the IDF is in some way just indiscriminately
killing civilians, which we know is to be false.
Just out of the last second I have or so would you agree
that some of the misinformation and propaganda that is being
spun up at this time is in fact been proven inaccurate just
like the ambulances and others who are portraying things that
are untrue to try and gain unfavorable outcomes for our joint
forces?
Ms. Stroul. Yes, a good example is the accusation that the
IDF is responsible for the al-Ahli hospital strike.
Mr. Mills. Thank you so much. I appreciate my colleague
lending her time. With that I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congresswoman Kim and
Congressman Mills.
Mrs. Kim of California. All right. I yield.
Mr. Wilson. Just grateful. We now proceed to Congresswoman
Sara Jacobs.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here. I know we have
had many conversations in classified settings where we have
talked about the military operations on the ground. As someone
who is Jewish with family living in Israel this is deeply
personal to me and my heart breaks for every Palestinian child
is being killed in this conflict through no fault of their own.
I know one of the things that President Biden has
emphasized was the lessons that we learned in our own
experience after September 11. I was in middle school and we
are still dealing with the consequences that we, both this body
and the United States in general, made after that attack. One
of the things that I think was a key lesson learned was that
minimizing civilian harm is incredibly important in the fight
against violent extremism.
So I was wondering if you could share what some of the
specific lessons learned in our own fight against terrorism
that are useful in this situation now and that we have conveyed
to the Israeli government.
Ms. Stroul. Thank you, Congresswoman, for those questions.
Secretary Austin speaks about lessons learned from the past two
decades of the United States' military experience. A key lesson
is that there's a continuous and consistent need to attend to
the needs of the civilian population in order for military
gains to be sustainable.
Ms. Leaf. I would just add that the first trip that
Secretary Blinken and I and the rest of his team made to Israel
fell four or 5 days after the massacre. I can only say that
the--both the leadership--the country more broadly, but the
leadership was in a State of shock and deep trauma, and that
trauma is still there.
I think what we have seen our job to be, both on the
civilian side and the military side, is to be a strong shoulder
to lean on and help nation in trauma and shock and its
leadership move through that as they've made decisions about
the military campaign and so forth. So there's been a good
robust soldier-to-soldier discussion about this.of course our
own leadership is engaged in that.
But the President spoke from his heart when he said that
and he spoke as a friend that learned from us because we did
make some very grave decisions, grave mistakes rather early on
and through that continuous fight against the terrorists, a
scourge that come to our shores.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you. I know the Israelis themselves
have openly said that many of the provisions we have seen
around food and water and humanitarian assistance have been
directly because of the advocacy of the U.S. Government. So I
thank for all of your tireless work on that. And I know that
Prime Minister Netanyahu has said that he is not willing to do
a humanitarian pause and I appreciate all the work you all have
been doing to continue encouraging him to make sure that we are
able to get that assistance.
I want to move to our U.S. Forces in the region. Obviously
we have repositioned significant military resources to deter
this from expanding and especially from Hezbollah in Iran from
further intervening. Can you commit to us that you will come to
Congress before conducting combat operations or other
hostilities against belligerent in this unfolding conflict,
especially any hostilities that could escalate?
Ms. Stroul. If, Congresswoman, you are referencing anything
other than the self-defense strikes that President Biden has
ordered under his Article 2 authority, yes, we would consult
with Congress.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. I appreciate that. Last, I want to
ask, there has been public reporting about the U.S. approving
the sale of military-style weapons for the Israeli national
police. The Israeli national police obviously are under the
purview of Minister Ben-Gvir, one of the far right extremists.
We have also seen concerns that some of those weapons, in
addition to being used by the national police themselves in
ways that are probably not necessarily aligned with what we
would want policing to be, also have been given directly to
settlers who are engaging in settler violence. What assurances
can you give us about whether or not those weapons are actually
being approved and whether or not they will be used for things
that I think we all would agree we don't approve of? Thank you.
Ms. Leaf. Congresswoman, thank you for that. In all of
these cases we have been provided assurances and we have
rigorous oversight or end-use monitoring for all of this. There
were weapons that will be provided to what are called community
immediate response teams, CIRT, that report directly to
regional police or border patrol commanders. They will
supervise the use of those and those--and to the personnel who
are volunteers for these organizations. And it is only within
Green Line Israel. But we have an elaborate set of assurances
on that.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I would like to, if I may, just quickly followup on a point
that Ms. Jacobs made on the use of military force.
You know this committee is charged with that
responsibility, and we take that very seriously. I understand
you are using Article 2 self-defense when it comes to our
troops being under fire and attacked, and I get that. If the
administration were to respond either preemptively to the IRGC
or to Hezbollah or to Hamas, do you believe that you would have
to come before this committee for that authorization?
Ms. Stroul. If we were responding to an attack in self-
defense, then we would rely on the President's Article 2
authority. If we were taking action that would elevate to war
in the constitutional sense, we would consult with Congress and
seek authorization for the use of military force.
Chairman McCaul. If say hypothetically Hezbollah launched
100,000 rockets into Israel and we wanted to respond, I would
argue you do not have authorization to hit Hamas.
Ms. Stroul. I would agree with you, chairman.
Chairman McCaul. The same with--not Hamas, I mean
Hezbollah. And probably the same with Hamas in that situation.
Ms. Stroul. If the United States--if President Biden wanted
to work with Israel to respond should Hezbollah decide to
launch that amount of rockets in Israel, we would certainly
come consult with Congress.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you. I think we are all in agreement
on that, so thank you very much.
The chair now recognizes Ms. Salazar.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, chairman.
Thank you, Ms. Assistant Secretary Barbara Leaf, for your
Service and, Ms. Dana Stroul, for being here and answering our
questions. You know I represent the city of Miami, the chairman
of the Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere, and I have a few
questions to you about Columbia and Cuba.
This picture over here shows the Cuban ambassador to
Lebanon; his name is Jorge Leon Cruz, meeting with Ahmed Abd
al-Hadid, who is the Hamas representative in Lebanon, and with
Abdul Hamed, who is the head of political and media relations
for Hamas in Lebanon. So to cut right to the chase, what do you
think could be the purpose of this meeting? Why is the Cuban
ambassador meeting with a representative of such high standing
for Hamas in Lebanon?
Ms. Leaf. Congresswoman, it doesn't look good to me. I
can't imagine what legitimate purpose it would be in meeting
with a terrorist organization's representative.
Ms. Salazar. So I agree with you that I'm sure nothing good
is coming out of this meeting. The only thing we could think of
is that maybe the Cuban regime is inviting some Hamas
operatives to come to Havana which Havana is only 90 miles away
from my house, meaning my community, the city of Miami. Do you
have any info about that?
Ms. Leaf. I do not personally, but I'd be happy to look
into it and come back to you on it.
Ms. Salazar. Please do. Cuba is in the list of countries
that sponsor terrorism. We know that the Biden administration
has been thinking or some of the representatives of the Biden
administration has--they have been--within the State
Department, they have been talking about the possibility of
removing Cuba from that list of states that sponsor terrorism.
Could you send the message to your colleagues that maybe after
something like this, Cuba should remain on that list?
Ms. Leaf. I'd be happy to take that back.
Ms. Salazar. What do you think about that?
Ms. Leaf. Quite frankly, I have not been following this
issue in terms of Cuba. So I don't have an opinion. But I'd be
happy to take this back to my colleagues.
Ms. Salazar. All right. Now let's go to Colombia. Let me go
to the other one. Pedro, the President of Colombia, has been--
throughout his time in office, he has been talking about Hamas.
One of the comments, and I'm just being pretty rigorous, he
compared the Jews to the Nazis at one point. A few days ago,
President Pedro compared Gaza to Auschwitz. A few weeks ago, he
recalled the Columbian ambassador in Israel. So the question is
how does the State Department categorize, interprets these
comments, actions from the Colombian President?
Ms. Leaf. Well, I can speak to it here in the sense that
this is obviously an appalling set of comparisons. Misusing the
notion of the Holocaust to compare it to what is going on right
now is really beyond the pale.
Ms. Salazar. The State Department has treated the President
of Colombia with a lot of deference and so has the White House.
So I just want to hear your comments and your opinions. What
would you be sending back? What message would you be sending
back to the State Department--to the rest of the State
Department and to the White House about the actions and the
words of the actual President of Colombia?
Ms. Leaf. Well, this is the first I've been made aware of
this, Congresswoman. I am happy to take this back.
Ms. Salazar. You know I think that the State Department
should be--and someone in your position should be aware and
knowledgeable of what's happening in our backyard.
Ms. Leaf. Well, for better or worse, I have a remit in the
Middle East that keeps me busy 24/7. So it's been a little bit
difficult, especially these days, to look beyond to the kind of
dialog or the----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Ms. Salazar. I understand that your job is very big. But
I'm very happy that I have brought to your attention the fact
that these two countries that are very close to us in our
hemisphere are behaving or acting this way or speaking this
way. Now that's the last question. How concerning is it to the
State Department that these two governments, Cuba and Colombia,
in our backyard, 90 miles away from Miami, specifically the
Cuban government is inviting--I'm sure inviting Hamas
operatives to our hemisphere? How concerning?
Ms. Leaf. I would certainly be concerned if they were
inviting Hamas operatives to our hemisphere. That's certainly
something we'll look into.
Ms. Salazar. And I would like for you very much to get back
to us and tell us if you have any type of information. If any
Hamas personnel or combatants have crossed to this hemisphere,
meaning invited to Havana, or to more to Havana than probably
any other country, could I count on that?
Ms. Leaf. You can count on that.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, madam. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields. The chair
recognizes Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Meeks. Thank you to our witnesses today. On October 7th, we
woke in horror to Hamas' brutal and despicable terror attacks
as they fired rockets at innocent civilians, stormed the
border, and invaded Israel, going house to house, murdering
babies, executing parents in front of their children,
massacring 260 young people at a music festival, and murdering
more than 1,400 innocent people on one terrible day.
In addition, Hamas took more than 240 innocent civilians
hostage, including elderly women, young children, and babies. I
have beside me pictures of some of these men, women, and
children. I would like to ask everyone to look at their faces.
Each one of them is a precious individual who has family
members who love them and are desperate to know if they are
safe and desperate for their return. I have met with the
families of hostages for the past 3 weeks, people like the
Siegel family from North Carolina whose relatives Keith and
Aviva Siegel were kidnaped from Kibbutz Kfar Azza, people like
Gili Roman whose sister Yarden handed her 3-year-old daughter
Geffen to her husband Alon while they were trying to escape
because he could run faster while she sacrificed herself to
save her daughter. Abigail Moore Edan who became an orphan on
October 7th when her parents were killed in front of her before
she was taken hostage alone.
Just like the stories of the Holocaust survivors, the story
of every hostage is unique and heartbreaking. I have given
these families my word that I would continue to tell their
stories and push the administration to do everything they can
to secure their release. So I know Assistant Secretary Leaf and
Deputy Assistant Secretary Stroul, you can give them hope that
we will spare no effort to secure their release. I believe
you've said that before today. I just want to ask you that
question again.
Ms. Leaf. Of course, you absolutely have the commitment of
this administration to do everything in its power to see the
release of those hostages.
Ms. Stroul. It is one of the reasons why the Department of
Defense immediately sent advisors to support efforts to secure
the release of the hostages.
Ms. Manning. Thank you so much. Assistant Secretary Leaf,
we know that the International Committee of the Red Cross has
not been let in to see the hostages, to make sure that they are
alive, and to be able to give word to their families. What are
the barriers to allowing the Red Cross to get in to see the
hostages?
Ms. Leaf. One word, Hamas.
Ms. Manning. So Hamas is preventing the International Red
Cross from going in to see the hostages and give their families
some hope that those people are still alive. And in fact, the
only reason we know some of them are alive because of the
comments of the five hostages--four hostages who have been
released and one who has been saved by Israeli soldiers. Is
that correct?
Ms. Leaf. Well, there is also the really deplorable fact
that Hamas has put some of the hostages on video and televise
that. So yes, it is really a dreadful situation for the
families and for their loved ones. And by all rights, by the
laws, international humanitarian law, Hamas should allow the
ICRC to have access to those hostages.
Ms. Manning. Can you--what information can you share with
us in this setting about what the U.S. is doing to get our
partners and allies in the region to demand and put pressure on
Hamas to release the hostages?
Ms. Leaf. So as I indicated earlier, we have two stalwart
partners, Qatar and Egypt, who are working methodically,
relentlessly at this issue. The problem is who they're dealing
with. But they are exercising every bit of their influence and
their energy to try to break the impasse on the hostages.
Ms. Manning. Assistant Secretary Leaf, in your opinion, are
you satisfied with the actions that Turkey, a NATO ally, and
Qatar, a major non-NATO ally, have taken so far to get Hamas to
give up American citizens?
Ms. Leaf. I have not really seen Turkey engaged in this
effort. If they are, I'm just not witting to it. But I know
having talked just very regularly with the Prime Minister,
Foreign Minister that he has personally engaged--of Qatar. He's
personally engaged in the effort. He has a large team working
it 24/7.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. My time is expiring. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields. The chair
recognizes Mr. Huizenga.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And actually, I'm
going to take that as a jumping off point, both the ICRC as
well as Qatar and the situation there. First on the ICRC, is
the ICRC doing enough?
Some question its real commitment. All you have to do is
look at some of the previous years and decades. The ICRC seems
to have been pretty hard on Israel over the years. And some
have suggested that the ICRC is not doing enough to pursue this
because of that relationship or sort of bad blood with Israel.
Do you care to comment on that?
Ms. Leaf. Congressman, I have no reason to think the ICRC
is not doing enough on this. I would just add that in fact ICRC
staff have been in the direct line of fire in Gaza doing a
really critical piece of work which escorting ambulances with
wounded from Gaza to Rafah. This has been a condition that
Hamas' place on the exit of foreign nationals, including our
own American citizens. And ICRC stepped up to that task to
ensure that they got there and that our citizens could get out.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. We can explore that more potentially
later. Turning to Qatar and sort of the reports of Hamas
leaders living a pretty lavish lifestyle in the country.
Obviously, we have a very important relationship with Qatar,
and they host thousands of our troops, central command. Our
regional central command is there. What sort of conversations
has the administration had with Qatar to kick out Hamas
terrorist currently residing in the country and really making
sure that they are ensuring that they're not providing Hamas
with any of the means to fund this again?
Ms. Leaf. Yes, you make an interesting point. And it really
goes to this question of what Hamas thinks it's representing or
doing. Its leaders do live in the lap of luxury overseas, quite
in contrast to the Palestinians in Gaza over whom they rule. To
your question, at this point, Qatar at our request, at Israel's
request is working assiduously on the issue of hostage release.
But it's fair to say that we've been clear with all of our
partners and countries around the world that it will not be
back to business as usually going forward.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. I actually happen to also Service on
the Financial Services Committee and chair the Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee. Just last week, we had a hearing
on terrorism financing and what was going on. My colleague, Mr.
Hill, myself, Mr. Barr, have all had amendments today on some
of the appropriations bills looking at how we choke off that
terrorism funding.
I guess I want to make sure that it's not just Iran that
we're looking at, that there are other countries in that
neighborhood. Obviously, Qatar has--I've seen reports, provided
over a billion dollars in various aid over the last decade.
Lots of concern about fungibility that we have.
How is the administration ensuring that assistance entering
Gaza doesn't have sort of this dual use purpose, whether it
could be cash which is very, very fungible? But it could be
fuel. It could be medicine and supplies, that while the West
intends or the Red Cross or anybody else intends for that to be
going to civilians could be easily diverted.
Ms. Leaf. At this point, what is going into Gaza, the
humanitarian assistance is being very carefully vetted as it
goes through, through multiple sort of checks. This is part of
what has slowed down, frankly the stream of assistance going
in. I take your point on the larger question of financing.
Believe when I say that sort of a counter Hamas effort globally
will be a top priority----
Mr. Huizenga. Yes.
Ms. Leaf [continuing]. going forward.
Mr. Huizenga. I've got just a couple of seconds left. We
know about Iran's oil sales to the tune, some reports, of 80
billion dollars this past year. We also know that they are
purchasing--or I'm sorry, selling electricity to Iraq. I have
had a letter to Secretary Blinken with myself and Blaine
Luetkemeyer who heads up the Terrorism Finance Subcommittee for
financial services, asking some very specific questions. Are
you aware of this letter?
Ms. Leaf. I'm not. I'll certainly look for it.
Mr. Huizenga. We will send it to you because this is very
important that we look at this. This notion that Iraq has the
ability--and this administration changed policy on this without
coming to Congress. They are now converting those into euros.
Euros are far more fungible than Iraqi dinari. Nobody is
going to be buying and selling goods and services in that. They
are certainly in euros.
We're going to continue to push on this, Mr. Chairman. I
know my time is up. I appreciate the responsiveness, and we're
going to be following up with you on some of those issues. With
that, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman's time has expired. The
chair recognizes Ms. Dean.
Ms. Dean. Thank you, Chairman McCaul and Ranking Member
Meeks, for this important hearing. I thank both of you women
for testifying today. More important, I thank you for your
Service and your clarity of purpose at this extraordinarily
challenging time.
As all of us have said, it's been just a little more than a
month since the grotesque, brutal slaughter of more than 1,400
Israelis. As a mom and a grandmom, the worst, the children, the
babies. But men, women, and children butchered, slaughtered,
raped.
More than 200 hostages, 240-plus apparently. We all, I
think, I hope, unequivocally condemn the October 7th attack by
Hamas, a terrorist organization. I condemn Hamas.
I know Israel has the right, the responsibility to respond
and to dismantle Hamas terrorism. We have to ensure the safe
return of the hostages, and I was appreciative of
Representative Manning's line of questions. Do you have any at
all possible update on the hostages at this moment?
Ms. Leaf. I wouldn't want to jeopardize the efforts that
are underway by commenting on it publicly.
Ms. Dean. I appreciate that, and I just felt I had to ask.
But I understand that sensitivity. At the same time, we have to
do everything to make sure to protect innocent civilian lives
on both sides of the fence.
I decry the loss of life, the loss of innocent civilian
life in Gaza called on the administration to do everything in
their power. I'm very proud of the President as well as the
Secretary of State for the extraordinary work they're doing.
But we must seek--Israel must seek a humanitarian pause for all
kinds of reasons, to get the hostages out and to make sure that
folks are taken care of as best as possible in these
extraordinarily difficult situations.
There are moral choices in wars. It is not just you have a
right to be at war. There are moral choices. I want the
administration to continue to lift up innocent life. Dead
babies on either side of the fence are unacceptable to me at
least.
We've talked a lot about Gaza. I wonder if I could switch a
little bit to the West Bank. I've been to Israel. I've been to
the West Bank. I've been to Gaza. Ambassador Leaf, you
expressed concern about the stability of the West Bank. I'm
concerned too.
You know the urgency of reining in extremist settler
violence. I am concerned about that too which, I quote, which
has led to the displacement of eat least 828 Palestinians from
their homes and 15 different communities in the West Bank since
October 7th. You point out that even before the start of the
latest crisis, there were settler violence attacks day after
day, multiple attacks in a single day, 1,400 incidents from
January to October of this year.
Ambassador, how are you and Secretary Blinken and the
administration engaging with Israel, specifically the coalition
administration, to prevent further settler violence? When I was
on the ground there, this was prior to October 7th, the meeting
when we asked about settler violence was shut down. What are
you doing?
Ms. Leaf. This has been a topic of discussion between us
and the Israeli government for months literally. What has
really accelerated our efforts has been the phenomenal, really
terrible 500 percent increase in these attacks, sometimes
several dozen a day. They're also more violent, beatings and
destruction of property. Some Palestinians have been killed by
settlers. And----
Ms. Dean. Quite a few.
Ms. Leaf. Yes, yes. And destruction of property that is
aimed really at wholly damaging, destroying the economic, the
livelihoods of these communities. So we have been relentlessly
on this issue. And I would say there has been a belated but
welcome sort of awakening to the alarming trend lines,
awakening in the senior leaders of--among the senior leaders of
the coalition.
They have committed to us to pursue, to deter, to prevent
these activities and to bring to accountability those who
engage in them, whether they are members of the armed forces,
the IDF, or settlers themselves. And so as Secretary Blinken
said several days ago when he had this engagement with the
government, he heard the right thing. But we're going to follow
this in detail, and we want to see accountability.
Ms. Dean. Okay. I apologize. My time has expired. But I'm
going to offer in writing some questions for you as well. I
thank you both very much. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields. The chair now
recognizes Mr. Hill.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, ladies, for
being here and for your testimony. Thanks for hanging out for
this extended period of time.
Secretary Leaf, great to see you. I feel like we're ships
passing in the night. I go in an embassy you've just left or go
in a ministry you've just left. So thanks for the incredible
engagement you've had in the region this year.
I know it's paid off now that we're in a crisis mode. No,
but I mean, having been so deeply engaged all year, we're now
in a crisis mode. I think those hours pay off.
My office has been in contact with a constituent from
central Arkansas whose wife and two young kids, 6-month and 2
years in Gaza. They're in touch with the embassy. The State
Department has all their information.
The State Department has done a reasonable job staying in
touch with them. So I'm not on the complaint factor there. But
the situation at Rafah border crossing has been really tenuous.
What's your plan to get the Rafah border crossing open so
Americans who are stuck in Gaza can have more predictability
about getting out?
Ms. Leaf. So Congressman, this is an issue that we are just
working nonstop. Nobody is more dedicated to this task than
ambassador Satterfield and his whole team. The complexity of
the task has been that essentially Hamas has a condition flow,
outflow of foreign nationals on a steady stream of wounded
being taken through the Rafah crossing.
That has required a really meticulous scrubbing of those
lists to make sure there are no fighters who are among the
wounded. A very careful calibration between Israel and Egypt to
ensure that sometimes there is fighting in the vicinity.
Sometimes the comms are down. So we have compiled a list of, I
think, about 700 such constituents or American citizens and
their families. And we're working at metering them through day
after day.
Mr. Hill. Thanks. Well, I think it's tough. The woman who's
my constituent is a Palestinian passport. She's a U.S. green
card holder and her two kids. I mean, 6-month and 2 years, the
kids get on the list but the parent doesn't. I mean, that's
ridiculous.
Ms. Leaf. No. Actually, what is happening is sometimes
families will be on different lists. But we have----
Mr. Hill. Yes.
Ms. Leaf [continuing]. a consular team on the other side,
and we are putting people together----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Hill. Good. That's really important, I think. And it's
a daily drama for many members who are helping Americans
because they find their names are not on the list. We get the
call right after that. Thank you for your diligence.
This year, the House NDAA included amendments to report to
the USG on Iran's threats against the United States or allies
in the Middle East. Followup to your conversation with Chairman
McCaul, I mean, clearly Iran backs these proxies. But in
testimony here, the State Department said they would not
recommend that Shia militia, for example, be on a future
modification of the AUMF. Do you think State still stands by
that, DOD still stand by not including Shia militia or
Hezbollah on an AUMF?
Ms. Stroul. Yes, we still do not support including Iran
aligned militia groups on the 2001 AUMF which was specifically
geared toward non-State actors. Our objective is to de-escalate
in the region and prevent regional war.
Mr. Hill. Well, I'll ask you how that's working. No so
good. I think they've ramped up this effort. And everything
that we thought might come true over the years is absolutely
coming true between Houthis shooting cruise missiles over Saudi
Arabia at Israel.
This is why I think we have to take a much tougher stand
toward Iran and Iran-backed militia. Normalization, Secretary
Leaf, this is one you know my feelings about, the Assad regime.
And again, the Arab League went forward. You cautioned on that.
Secretary Blinken, much even more aggressive than you, in
public and in private, about absolutely not doing it. But
they've done it. So have you seen anything that's remotely on
track for Assad becoming suddenly such a good member of the
local community?
Ms. Leaf. No. But on the other hand, if he thought he was
going to reap great benefits, he has not done so.
Mr. Hill. True, true. But what do you make of the foreign
minister's group that is not going to report for a whole other
year on their recommendations on what the Assad regime might do
in order to earn such benefits?
Ms. Leaf. I think it speaks to the lack of results wholly
exclusively because of Syrian intransigence.
Mr. Hill. Yes.
Ms. Leaf. It's a dead end.
Mr. Hill. I think it is too. And I've made that--I've
certainly expressed that view, personal view, not on behalf of
anybody but myself, to Saudi Arabia and in Jordan and in Iraq.
There's a real mixed view on that. And I hope the United States
will speak with one voice that normalization was a bad idea and
that we're monitoring very closely how we can help get those
results now that they've done it. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back. Correct. I
think that may have been a trigger for this Hamas invasion of
Israel to be honest with you. In addition to being the 50 year
anniversary of Yom Kippur. Chair now recognizes Mr. Stanton.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much, Chairman McCaul and
Ranking Member Meeks, for convening this important hearing on
support for one of our Nation's strongest allies, Israel. And I
want to thank the witnesses for being here today for their long
testimony. Recently, I've had honest and emotional
conversations with my constituents in Arizona, people I have
known and respected and worked with for decades.
I've heard the deep divisions as well as the fear created
by the tragic rise in antisemitism and Islamophobia here in the
United States. As Americans, we can freely debate many
contentious issues. But we cannot allow that to turn into
hatred.
Since its founding 75 years ago, America's support for the
only democracy in the Middle East has been resolute and
unwavering and always, always bipartisan. That cannot and will
not change. But the reality is that Israel cannot be secure and
there can be not lasting peace for Israelis or Palestinians.
No two states side by side until Hamas is destroyed. Hamas
does not care about the Palestinian people. They care about one
thing, the complete destruction and elimination of Israel from
the river to the sea.
In pursuit of that goal, Hamas has preyed on innocent
Palestinians. Hamas doesn't hide it. Its leaders talk about
their willingness to make Palestinian civilians martyrs in
their wicked mission.
Right now, Hamas is holding 240 women, children,
grandparents, Holocaust survivors hostage in unknowable
conditions, hostages they have threatened to execute. There can
be no safe harbor for Hamas. And Congress must act
unequivocally in support of Israel in this fight.
Now I'm a proud supporter of Israel. I always will be. Yet
I am also a supporter of the Palestinian people. I support a
Palestinian State, and I believe that every Palestinian has a
God given right to a more prosperous future.
The United States has been one of the best humanitarian
partners for the Palestinian people for decades, sending
billions of dollars into the West Bank and Gaza. And I'm
grateful that President Biden restored U.S. assistance to the
Palestinian people after President Trump had ended it. Today we
should do everything we can to give aid to those in Gaza who
need it the most, including food and clean water, medical care,
fuel, and shelter.
History has reminded us time and time again of the
importance of a Jewish State. We must protect it. Not only
because it is the right thing to do, but because Israel
security is tied to America's national security.
Shared Israeli intelligence boosts our own government's
ability to anticipate and respond to threats in the Middle
East. And Israel's qualitative military edge provides a measure
of stability in this region. This Congress needs to quickly
pass a national security funding package that mirrors the
President's full request, one that includes humanitarian aid to
Gaza, additional aid to our ally, Ukraine, and funds to secure
our southern border.
I will work across the aisle to get this done. I have a
question for Assistant Secretary Leaf. Thank you for answering
Ranking Member Meeks earlier question about the future
administration of Gaza. It's something that I'm particularly
worried about as well. You said that, quote, the Palestinian
Authority is the appropriate place to look for governance,
unquote. In your opinion, what is the most realistic scenario
of what a Palestinian Authority governance would look like in
Gaza?
Ms. Leaf. So this is a profoundly difficult question to
answer at the moment, and we're doing a lot of analysis and
looking at the question holistically. The Palestinian Authority
as you know has only partial responsibilities in the West Bank.
It does not govern the entire space, and it doesn't have equal
measures of responsibilities in Areas A, B, and C.
What we'll see in terms of security conditions within Gaza,
if Israel is successful or depending on the degree of success
that Israel has in incapacitating the military capabilities of
Hamas will go directly to who and how manages that. So we're
just at the front end of looking at that. I can't really tell
you whether the PA is fit to purpose to go in immediately.
Probably not. And so we will consult thoroughly with both
Israel and the Palestinians as we think through this prospect.
Mr. Stanton. All right. I have additional questions that I
will submit in writing for the record, including how the
Department of Defense will accelerate delivery of security
assistance to Israel, including Iron Dome Interceptors and
other weaponry. But with that, I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wilson. [Presiding.] Thank you, Congressman Stanton. We
now proceed to Congressman Jim Baird of Indiana.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Meeks. And I appreciate the witnesses being here very much. And
so my question relates to this background, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for the Palestinian refugees in the
near east, and UNRWA for short as I'm sure you know, is a U.N.
agency tasked according to their mandate.
I quote, to carry out direct relief works programs for
Palestinian refugees and their descendants. The UNRWA General
Council James Lindsay candidly admits, quote, I am sure that
there are Hamas members on the UNRWA payroll, and I don't see
that as a crime. He also states and I quote, UNRWA has taken
very few steps to detect and eliminate terrorists from the
ranks of its staff or its beneficiaries and no steps at all to
prevent members of organizations such as Hamas from joining its
staff.
The largest contributor to UNRWA is the United States. In
times of crisis like the ongoing Israeli conflict, the UNRWA
can receive emergency funding for response projects. So my
first question is, has the U.N. released any emergency funding
to UNRWA since October 7th?
Ms. Leaf. Has the U.N. released funding to UNRWA since?
Yes. I don't have those exact figures, but there is an
emergency appeal underway.
Mr. Baird. So continuing with that thought, so how many
U.S. taxpayer dollars have been authorized to UNRWA? How much
of that money has been funneled to Hamas?
Ms. Leaf. We, I think, provided something on the order of
300 million this year. Those moneys go to provision of critical
services to Palestinians across the region, Syria, Lebanon,
Gaza, West Bank, and Jordan. Right now, much of UNRWA's
attention is focused on the really critical life saving support
that it provides in Gaza to the Palestinians there. I'm not
aware of any such moneys being diverted to Hamas. We have
rigorous oversight of these matters, as does UNRWA.
Mr. Baird. So in your opinion, should the United States
continue to fund UNRWA? And if so, why?
Ms. Leaf. UNRWA provides an irreplaceable role in Gaza,
especially at this time, Congressman. There's literally--they
have the infrastructure and the personnel on the ground to
reach Palestinians in need and distress in harm's way.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. Ms. Stroul, do you have any comments
in that regard in terms of----
Ms. Stroul. Broadly speaking, the Department of Defense
believes that delivery of humanitarian aid to civilians in need
in Gaza is both a moral, operational, and strategic imperative,
and we support the Department of State.
Mr. Baird. Let me change. In March of this year, the Middle
East Subcommittee held a hearing on the efforts to expand the
Abraham Accords. Talking about it then, it was more focused on
how we can work to expand the accords. Now the question seems
to be is it even feasible. So Assistant Secretary Leaf, can you
give us your opinion about how this war plays a role in the
Abraham Accords?
Ms. Leaf. Well, Congressman, I'll be very candid with you.
The atmosphere in the region is fraught at this point over the
conflict and the visuals, the daily toll of casualties among
Palestinians in the Gaza strip. As a number of Congress
representatives have noted, there's a great polarization
occurring, both in the region and even we see that in our own
streets.
All that said, there will be an end to this conflict, and
there will be a lot of work to do on the other side of this
conflict, of course, between--the work between the parties,
Israelis and Palestinians, but more broadly across the region.
It goes squarely to your interest which is the Abraham Accords
relationships, the older relationships, Egypt and Jordan, have
had with Israel and those still in the offing. We regard this
as one of the critical pieces of our diplomatic work in the
period ahead, post-conflict.
Mr. Baird. So I see I'm out of time, and I thank you. I
yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman Baird. We now
proceed to Congressman Jonathan Jackson of Illinois and South
Carolina.
Mr. Jackson of Illinois. Thank you very much. Thank you,
Undersecretary. Thank you, in his absence, Chairman McCaul.
Thank you, Ranking Member Meeks.
I've had the pleasure once again to go to Israel this past
September on a delegation with the congressional Black Caucus.
From there, we went to Rwanda, and they were showing the
connectivity of one culture that had experienced genocide and
the other that had experienced the Holocaust and the
commonality. I like many of my colleagues have condemned the
atrocious attacks, the terrorist attacks of Hamas and stand by
that.
I was one of the several of the people that stood for a
cease-fire. I want to be clear what cease-fire means to me is,
first of all, bringing back our hostages, reconciling human
beings, reconciling family members. As we speak, I got another
call today.
There's another constituent that has a sister that is stuck
at the Rafah border that needs to get out, an American citizen
that is stuck at the border as well. So one question I will ask
you is about following what Mr. French Hill had discussed on
what is the process. How can we make sure Americans are able to
evacuate and leave without their life being threatened?
Ms. Leaf. So we have exhaustive outreach to Americans in
Gaza. We have determined just over the last 24 hours that there
were an additional 100 Americans and their family members who
were seeking help in getting out. We have put American citizens
and their family members on lists that are shared with the
Egyptian government and Israel so that there is an ability to
get them in the queue as it were.
It is a difficult process from literally day to day to
confirm the number that will be permitted through and to reach
out to those who are not all queued up at Rafah. They're in
different places in Gaza. But I'd be happy to talk to you after
this hearing about your constituent.
Mr. Jackson of Illinois. I'd be glad to. Second part is one
of the things that I'd learned on this trip that was sponsored
by AIPAC, we went from Israel to Rwanda, is that Rwanda in 1993
had suffered a million lives lost in 100 days. Then they lost 5
million people there in the DRC in 2003.
They ended up arresting 30,000 people that went to jail for
the atrocities that happened. What cease-fire meant to me is
that we can acknowledge this was an intelligence failure by the
IDF that ended up creating so much of this. I'm strong for
defense. Israel needs its defense.
I'm also for diplomacy. When this bombing and retaliation
took place 30 days ago, it was taken without a confirmed
Ambassador to the United States or without a confirmed
Ambassador from the United States to Israel or to Egypt. I
didn't think we had all of our diplomacy in place.
What gives for a long lasting peace so that we can have
reconciliation amongst the people, that I'm seeing people
become hardened. I live in a district where the 6-year-old
child was stabbed to death. People are becoming radicalized.
We have seen this escalate over time. I am asking for a
cease-fire simply to get humanitarian aid in. If there's one
innocent person killed, to me that's too many. If it takes more
time to ultimate root out Hamas and so that we do not kill
innocent people, I am for that.
Ultimately, what happened is a lesson that we saw in
Afghanistan. If we've learned anything after 2 trillion dollars
bombing Afghanistan is that Osama bin Laden was in Pakistan
across from a military base watching Netflix or Hulu in a
compound with family. He wasn't even in the country. So I would
like to ask you what is the long-term path toward peace that we
are administering now in pursuit of Hamas and to reconcile
these people and not making the Palestinian people feel as if
they are our enemy?
Ms. Leaf. An excellent question, Congressman. Look, the
long-term effort is something that we are already beginning to
communicate and base our diplomacy on even now. There is the
urgent issues of humanitarian assistance, assisting civilians
to get out of harm's way, getting our own personnel, our own
citizens out of Gaza, the hostages released.
But even as we work on the urgent issues of today, we are
planning for the post-conflict period when it is clear, it
indisputably clear to us, to the administration, to all of our
partners in the region that the Palestinian quest for statehood
must be answered. We must contribute. We must lay out a pathway
for negotiated solution to that end.
They have a right to a State. That has been recognized by
multiple administrations over decades. And that quest must be
answered, less radicalization, really derail it once and for
all.
Hamas is determined to weaponize this cause. That is
something that we must work urgently to prevent. I take your
point on the cease-fire.
I would just say that we are working assiduously for
humanitarian pauses that will get at just the things that
You're talking about. A cease-fire when it comes or an end to
hostilities when it comes, we want to see really an end to
Hamas' ability to operate as it has in the past, ruling by
terror, by fiat. But also perpetrating attack that really we
must never let be repeated.
Mr. Jackson of Illinois. Thank you for your time. Thank
you. I yield back. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman Jackson. We now proceed
to Congressman Keith Self of Texas.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm trying to reconcile
some things that I've heard today and that Hamas leadership has
said. Wait a minute. Before I get to that, we just struck IRGC
affiliates again in Syria today, apparently within a couple of
hours.
Why does the Biden administration refuse to put Iran
surrogates on any AUMF? How can you continue to do that?
Because I've heard you use the word, de-escalate, here.
This region after Service in the military and Egypt,
Israel, Afghanistan, and Qatar, this region understands one
thing. It's power. If we're going to deter, we must have the
power in hitting empty or even storage sites that may not be
empty do not seem to me to be deterrents. Why does the
administration refuse to put Iranian surrogates on any AUMF?
How can you justify that given the way this is moving?
Ms. Stroul. Thank you for your question. I can confirm that
about an hour ago, the U.S. conducted self-defense strikes in
response to recent attacks against U.S. forces in Eastern
Syria. We look forward to providing further details to you
soon.
To be very clear, Iran is the origin and has the
fingerprints of the arming, training, equipping, and directing
of these militia groups. Putting Iran aligned militia groups is
declaring war on Iran. Our objective in the region is to
prevent war, to prevent escalation----
Mr. Self. Wait a minute.
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Self. Did you just say that putting them on an AUMF is
declaring war on Iran?
Ms. Stroul. It is requesting the authorization to use
military force against Iran-aligned militia groups. The
President has directed self-defense strikes under his Article
II authority. Our approach to deterring Iran is both the
significant increases in U.S. defense posture combined with the
demonstrated willingness to use force and self-defense as well
as robust diplomacy and other tools to compel the senior
leadership of Iran to direct its proxies to stop attacking U.S.
forces.
Mr. Self. Let me do a comparison. Under the last
administration, one contractor was killed. In turn, we deterred
successfully Iran by killing, I believe, the number 3 man in
the Iranian hierarchy. Is that correct, number 3, Soleimani,
about that?
Ms. Stroul. It is a fact that in the previous
administration there was a strike on Soleimani.
Mr. Self. Correct. Under this administration, we've had,
what, 40 attacks in the recent weeks, 40 attacks maybe in that
order--of that order. And so we've hit ammunition dumps, weapon
storage sites twice now, correct?
Ms. Stroul. President Biden directed self-defense strikes
against facilities in Eastern Syria affiliated with and known
to be used by the IRGC.
Mr. Self. Right. Okay. I want to go to my main line of
questioning. You've got a minute and a half. Do you know where
Ismail Haniyeh is in Qatar? Do you know where he lives? Does
Qatar know?
Ms. Leaf. Yes, yes, of course. They speak with him.
Mr. Self. Why does Qatar allow him movement to Iran and
back in the last few days? Also, why did they allow Iranian
hierarchy to come visit him in Qatar? Why is that?
Ms. Leaf. I can't--excuse me. I can't speak to the
discussions that the countries have had with Iranians other
than I think they're using--they are attempting to use every
channel they can to get at the issue of the hostages, including
via Iran.
Mr. Self. Well, Secretary Blinken said there can be no more
business as usual with Hamas. We are allowing Qatar to use him
and the infrastructure, and they're not having much success.
Frankly, I don't think they're going to.
So if we're going to have a new reality and then I go to--I
understand releasing the hostages. But when I hear Hamas
leadership say, we will do October 7 again and again. When we
hear them say--I believe it was today or yesterday. They are
seeking permanent war because they've said one of the reasons
they kicked this off is because the Palestinian issue had
disappeared.
Now I would like to ask you a question about Palestinians
because we're talking in this committee about Palestinians like
they're only in Gaza and the West Bank. They're not. I think
they're now on their fourth generation in the Jordanian refugee
camp. Is that correct? Probably the fourth generation. So just
talk to us about your--why are we equating Palestinians to Gaza
and the West Bank? No nation in the Middle East wants the
Palestinians, hence, the refugee camps.
Ms. Leaf. Well, I guess the way I would characterize the
general perspective of all the governments in the Middle East
to my knowledge, they all support the creation of the
Palestinian State and for the Palestinians to govern themselves
in that State.
Mr. Self. Well, no State is willing to give them land for
it. Here's another question for you. How many nations have
actually repudiated the Three Noes. What, about five?
Ms. Leaf. No, I'd have to think about that. But no, more
than five.
Mr. Self. More than five? Okay.
Ms. Leaf. Yes, because, I mean, you've got Morocco, UAE,
Bahrain, Jordan, Egypt.
Mr. Self. That's about----
Ms. Leaf. Five. And then de facto, you have several other
countries that work very closely with Israel openly on
different matters.
Chairman McCaul. [Presiding.] The gentleman's time has
expired.
Mr. Self. My time has expired.
Chairman McCaul. Chair now recognizes Mr. Schneider.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. I want to thank the witnesses for
your patience with us here today. A couple of real quick
questions. When did Israel pull out of Gaza?
Ms. Leaf. In----
Mr. Schneider. 1905.
Ms. Leaf [continuing]. 2005, yes.
Mr. Schneider. Who was in control after Israel left?
Ms. Leaf. Well, initially, the PA. Then there was a coup.
So it was Hamas after that.
Mr. Schneider. When did the coup happen?
Ms. Leaf. 2007.
Mr. Schneider. Since 2007 when Gaza violently threw out
Fatah and took over Gaza, how many escalatory conflicts have
there been between Israel and Hamas that have resulted in a
negotiated cease-fire?
Ms. Leaf. At least six.
Mr. Schneider. At least six.
Ms. Leaf. They have been very tenuous cease-fires. They
have been good for a couple days, good for a couple months, and
then they've collapsed.
Mr. Schneider. When was the last cease-fire negotiated
before this conflict?
Ms. Leaf. 2021.
Mr. Schneider. I think it was May 19, 2021, 870 days before
October 7th. What was the status of the cease-fire on October
6th? Was Israel observing it?
Ms. Leaf. Well, yes, of course. I would say that it was a
sort of on and off again affair because you occasionally had
rockets and so forth pop off. So yes.
Mr. Schneider. But Israel is observing it. I'm going to ask
an obvious question. We've touched on these over the course of
the day. And again, thank you for your time. Who violated the
cease-fire on October 7th?
Ms. Leaf. Very clearly Hamas.
Mr. Schneider. Who slaughter 260 young people at a music
festival on October 7th?
Ms. Leaf. That would be Hamas.
Mr. Schneider. Who murdered more than 130 people at Kibbutz
Be'eri on October 7th?
Ms. Leaf. Hamas.
Mr. Schneider. Who butchered children at a nursery in
Kibbutz Kfar Azza on October 7th?
Ms. Leaf. Hamas.
Mr. Schneider. Is it a war crime to intentionally target
civilians?
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely.
Mr. Schneider. War crime to use rape and torture as a
tactic?
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely.
Mr. Schneider. To burn people alive in their homes?
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely.
Mr. Schneider. To take more than 240 people hostage?
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely.
Mr. Schneider. To deny those people they took hostage
visits from the International Committee of the Red Cross or
necessary healthcare?
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely.
Mr. Schneider. Is it a war crime to use an ambulance to
transport fighters and weapons?
Ms. Leaf. Yes, it is.
Mr. Schneider. How about to launch rockets from civilian
neighborhoods from hospitals, mosques, and schools?
Ms. Leaf. Yes, it is.
Mr. Schneider. Using human shields, is that a war crime?
Ms. Leaf. It is.
Mr. Schneider. So let me ask a broader question because we
have talked about this war. We went through a rapid fire list
of questions. But let me be very clear. I see the suffering of
the civilians in this war. It's the civilians who always get
caught in the middle of the war. I've said that many times.
We need to bring this war to a rapid conclusion as is
humanly possible because the civilians in Gaza and in Israel
are suffering. Almost a million people have been displaced in
Gaza. Almost a quarter of a million people have been displaced
in Israel. But what would happen if Israel were to agree to a
cease-fire before dismantling Hamas' ability to fight or to
rule over Gaza?
Ms. Leaf. Congressman, you put your finger on the issue
right here. I would agree completely with you. The suffering in
Gaza among civilians is wrenching.
It's emotionally wrenching for all of us who are working on
this issue. It is wrenching for the governments and the public
in the Middle East who are watching this. On the other hand, to
call a cease-fire right now which might or might not be honored
by Hamas would be to leave Hamas in control of 240-some
hostages, including babies and children, and would also leave a
fairly well intact or much of the military infrastructure and
warfighting capacity and terrorism capacity of Hamas intact.
Mr. Schneider. Let me build on that for 1 second because
you used two terms I think are important to distinguish,
warfighting and terrorism. What is warfighting? Maybe, Ms.
Stroul, that's a question for the Department of Defense. What
does it mean to say warfighting?
Ms. Stroul. It means to use military force to achieve an
objective.
Mr. Schneider. Okay. Distinct from terrorism, though.
Terrorism is crossing a border, beheading babies, raping women,
killing concertgoers. Its intention is to cause trauma and
terror to an entire society. Isn't that correct?
Ms. Leaf. The point is terror. The warfighting is soldier
on soldier. But as we saw on October 7th, what Hamas did was in
no way a war. It was pure terrorism.
Mr. Schneider. And has it been United States, President
Biden--let me say this. Thank goodness for President Biden. His
moral clarity and political courage in this conflict has been
just extraordinary.
And I know it is appreciated by the people in Israel. And
it should be equally appreciated by the people in the United
States and around the world. But as he made it clear that
Israel has a right to defend itself. But when we talk about
that, is it in the context of warfighting?
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely. And it has an obligation to defend
its people from terrorism and from the kind of attacks that we
saw on October 7th.
Mr. Schneider. I'm out of time. Let me comment on two last
things. One is quote that you said at the very beginning of
your opening remarks.
The U.S. commitment to Israel is iron clad. We've said
that. The President has said that. Is it fair to also say that
the U.S. commitment as it has been in Camp David bringing peace
to Egypt and Israel, in the Oslo Accords in the negotiations
between Jordan and Israel for peace, in the leadership it
showed in the Abraham Accords? Is it also fair that the United
States is also committed to bringing peace to both Israel and
the Palestinians once Hamas is defeated?
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely. And it's the only way that we will
not see a terrible repetition of these events.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Chair recognizes Mr.
James.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ambassador Leaf, thank
you for your time and for your stamina. I have a quick question
for you followed by a couple others. How do we address the
antisemitism at the U.N.?
Ms. Leaf. That's an excellent question, and I'm not sure I
could give you a 5-minute or a 4-minute, 36-second answer to
that. It is really something that we've seen for years, and it
is a very casual kind of antisemitism that we see among some
member states.
Mr. James. Madam, I would respectfully correct. There's no
such thing as casual antisemitism. But let me try. Earlier this
year, I led 30 of my colleagues in sending a letter to the
State Department promoting the Abraham Accords in Africa. I
share this with you because I believe that the Trump
administration's vision of peace in the Middle East and abroad
is in jeopardy following the horrendous attack on October 7th.
This is an attack against not just Israelis but on humanity
broadly. There's a sense that advancements in Israeli
normalization might be on long pause that this bloodshed on
October 7th of innocent civilians on all sides might yield yet
another generation of dispute, terror, and meaningless death.
Is that also your assessment?
Ms. Leaf. Oh, there's a great risk of that, yes.
Mr. James. Okay. So Ms. Stroul, the Abraham Accords I
believe was our best diplomatic strategy to box out Iran and to
show the world that American leadership can truly lead to peace
which we've done so many times in our great nation's history.
Part of what we're seeing with United Nations in the
destabilization that is being fomented by Russia and China is
that they're trying to break the global south away from
alignment with United States that impedes our interests abroad
and threatens America and our allies.
The progress that was meant to be made instead of launching
bombs and firing bullets through extending the Abraham Accords
to Africa, we can exchange culture and forge partnerships.
Since the future is unknown on how the gaps will be bridged
between Israel and the Arab world, how best can we avoid
further entanglements with Iran and its proxies if we don't
take steps like the Abraham Accords that have already worked to
curb the growing spheres of Communist influence, emanating from
Beijing and Moscow through Tehran right now?
Ms. Stroul. Thank you for that question. What is clear is
that Iran, Russia, and China all view themselves as benefiting
from challenging the rules-based international order. And the
United States in our coalition of allies and partners benefits
from enforcing and standing up for the rules-based
international order. That includes standing up for Israel's
ability to defend itself from terrorism given what it just
experienced from Hamas on October 7.
And it also includes standing up and supporting Ukraine and
its war to defend itself from Russian aggression. The
Department of Defense was building on the progress of the
Abraham Accords through advancing regional security constructs
such as integrated air and missile defense, multilateral
cooperation at sea in the maritime domain. What we're actually
seeing now is that partners even today view that is beneficial
to be cooperating, sharing intelligence, sharing information,
and seeing the threats coming from Iran.
Mr. James. Totally agree. Forgive me for cutting you off.
But one of the big things I'm very concerned with is exactly
supporting that mission and boosting our capacity to satisfy
our obligations under FMS and getting our defense industrial
base in a position where it cannot only support our allies but
most especially help America to defend itself.
I'm working on that as well. But in the limited time that
we do have, I would like to turn back to Ambassador Leaf. Have
you vocalized to President Biden or to Secretary Blinken any
concerns for the lack of sanctions enforcement on Iran and the
consequences that would manifest itself through that like we
saw on October 7th?
Before you answer, last couple seconds. It was widely
reported this past August that there was a relaxing of
sanctions on Iran to increase the supply of oil into the world
so that we could have cheaper oil here in America. Are you
getting any indication that there are any relaxation of
sanctions on Iran due to this issue?
Ms. Leaf. No, absolutely not, Congressman.
Mr. James. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Chair recognizes Ms.
Kamlager-Dove.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for
being here today, witnesses. So I'll just say many of my Jewish
constituents have loved ones in Israel who were impacted by the
Hamas terrorist attacks on October 7th.
The trauma lives on with the missing hostages held in Gaza,
including my constituent's grandniece, 3-year-old Abigail,
whose parents were killed by Hamas before she was kidnaped.
Jewish and Israeli Americans have come together with Muslim and
Palestinian Americans to deplore the terror and violence that
innocent Palestinians are enduring in Gaza. We are seeing an
appalling rise in antisemitism and Islamophobia in my district
and beyond.
No one feels safe. I want peace. I think we all want peace.
I hope we all believe that all people have the right to live
with dignity, self-determination without fear of extinction.
What is abundantly clear to me is that after decades of
negligence, now is the time for the United States and the
international community to put our diplomatic might behind a
sustainable long-term political solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. Israel's security depends on it.
Palestinian's humanity depends on it.
The liberal international order may suffer a fatal blow
without it. I think one way to decapitate Hamas is to give the
Palestinians another option. So Secretary Leaf, how is the
administration signaling that a two-State solution is the only
kind of end that the United States will accept to this
conflict?
Ms. Leaf. So Congresswoman, you have really nicely summed
up exactly where the administration is, that there is urgency
to doing exactly that, pointing the way. But more than pointing
the way, building the pathway to a negotiated Palestinian
State. And Secretary Blinken has been signaling that privately
and publicly over this last period.
He was quite to the point on this with both the Palestinian
Authority, President Mahmoud Abbas, and with all of our Arab
partners and with our Israeli partners frankly because this is
sort of the missing element at the heart of the story, the
unresolved quest for statehood by the Palestinians. And another
thing that you put your finger on which I found very much
mirrored in Israel and the West Bank, Israeli Jews are afraid
of Israeli Arabs. Israeli Arabs are afraid of Israeli Jews.
Palestinians are afraid of Israelis. And Israelis are
certainly terrified of Palestinians. There's a heightened State
of fear and anxiety there among all the communities which as
you said is reflected here in our own country. And the way that
we begin to pull people back from that State of anxiety and
mistrust of the other is precisely by going to the heart of the
matter and helping the Palestinians in their quest for
statehood.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. So do you have any concern that this war
will grow more hardliners on both sides, folks that want to----
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely, absolutely.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Okay. And how do we prevent that?
Ms. Leaf. Getting the conflict to an end as rapidly as
possible and making sure that Hamas is driven out of business.
And I would just say that the Secretary has this sort of turn
of phrase about this. He said, you cannot completely--you can
destroy a miliary capability, a terrorist organization, but you
can't kill an idea except with a better idea. And that's
Palestinian statehood.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. So we talked about getting rid of the
Taliban from Afghanistan. That has not happened. So we talk
about, oh, we have to completely destroy Hamas. How does that
happen? Because like you said, you cannot destroy ideas.
Ms. Leaf. It's a political process. It's a political issue
at the heart of it which is the unresolved quest for statehood.
And that is something that we can lead on and will lead on.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Can you have success without diplomacy?
Ms. Leaf. No, it is absolutely critical to do it
diplomatically.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. How are we working given that Netanyahu
has stalled or rejected the U.S. call for humanitarian pause?
Does this remain a priority for us? And how do we move the
needle with Israel on this?
Ms. Leaf. We are working relentlessly on the issue of
humanitarian pause.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Last question. I know that the
Palestinians were told to evacuate to the south from the north.
And then they also have concerns about permanent displacement.
So how do we still move Palestinians to safety so that we can
minimize the casualties of innocent Palestinians?
Ms. Leaf. We've been crystal clear on the issue of
displacement that we will not--that we will oppose any
displacement, any population transfer of Palestinians outside
Gaza, full stop. The question of getting Palestinian
communities out of harm's way within Gaza is another question.
And that is something that we have really urged the Israelis
the idea to look to with care and attention. But we will not--
we will oppose any displacement of the Palestinians outside
their own territory.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you for your responses. I yield
back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields. Chair recognizes
Mr. Moran.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to Assistant
Secretary Leaf and to Assistant Secretary Stroul for your
testimony.
Chairman McCaul. I'll keep your time for you. I have to
leave unfortunately. But I just want to thank the two of you
for being so patient and staying with us for so long.
It's been very helpful having you here today. Thanks for
putting up with everything else. I yield back to the gentleman
from Texas.
Mr. Moran. Thank you to the other gentleman from Texas.
Ladies, I want to ask you about first of all the Gaza Ministry
of Health, the information we're getting from them and what
really appears to be some reliance on them for information I'm
not so sure is correct. I want to just go through a few things
because over a number of years, through several conflicts,
numerous bloody skirmishes between Israel and Hamas, U.N.
agencies as you know and others have cited the Gaza Health
Ministries death tolls in regular reports.
The International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Palestinian Red Crescent also use these numbers, rely on these
numbers, as does the United Nations. Several news publications
cite numbers from Hamas for their data. But frankly, I'm a
little skeptical about the data that's coming out.
Both President Biden and the National Security Council
spokesman, John Kirby, have been publicly skeptical of the Gaza
Health Ministries numbers and called them, quote, unreliable
due to its control by Hamas. And I agree with that. Tell me a
little bit about the types of propaganda. I'll start with
Assistant Secretary Leaf that Hamas or other Iranian-backed
proxies are spreading using either the Ministry of Health or
other organizations located in Palestine.
Ms. Leaf. So I would just say, Congressman, that Hamas is
very adroit at using social media in particular to circulate
this propaganda, to circulate disinformation, misinformation.
On the question you cite about statistics, I would just say
that in this period of conflict and conditions of war, it is
very difficult for any of us to assess what the rate of
casualties are. We think they're very high frankly.
It could be that they're even higher than are being cited.
We'll know only after the guns fall silent. So we take in
sourcing from a variety of folks who were on the ground. And so
I can't stipulate to one figure or another. But I think it's
very possible that they're even higher than is being reported.
Mr. Moran. I appreciate that answer because that kind of
goes to my next question. I was going to ask specifically about
the number 10,000. That's the number that as of November the
6th, it is being reported as the number of Palestinians in Gaza
who have been killed.
My question to you was going to be do we think that number
is higher? Do we think it's lower? Do we have any visibility?
Do we have any reliable information that would give us some
indication one way or the other on that number?
Ms. Leaf. I mean, as I say, we have a lot of different
sources from people that we know that are on the ground that
are NGO's and others who are operating there, UNRWA and so
forth. And I think we'll only have a faithful figure at the end
tragically. But I would just say as a point of comparison, Gaza
strip is about 25 miles in length and 7 to 12 miles in width.
You've got 2.2 million or thereabouts people compressed
into a piece of land that is--well, it's comparable to Rhode
Island, I guess. But I think Rhode Island is actually a bit
larger and is half the population. So in these extraordinarily
dense confines, it just stands to reason that there are very
high casualties.
Mr. Moran. In my last minute, I want to switch gears and
ask both of you about Iran's participation early on in the
assault. It appeared that there were advanced missiles and
drones targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure used by
Hamas. Information that's come to me indicates that it would be
Iran that really is provided that to them either as a proxy or
directly. So what is it that we need to be doing to push back
against Iran's participation and Hamas' terrorist attacks that
started October the 7th and continue to today?
Ms. Blake: So the question of direct Iranian involvement in
that operation is still a question that analysts are looking at
very closely. I heard a variety of opinions from intelligence
services when I was out in the region with some officials
saying that they found that even the political elements of
Hamas were clearly in a State of surprise on October 7th, that
this was a very siloed operation and that other elements of so-
called axis were in the dark. All that said, it's fair to say
that Iran set the table for this in the years of support it
gave to training and lethal aid and finances to Hamas and to
other elements of the proxies.
We need to strangle the financing. The weaponry, a lot of
that has apparently been manufactured onsite in Gaza
underground. So there's been an enormous amount of smuggling.
We're very dedicated to the proposition of helping Egypt do
what's necessary to really tighten its border controls and its
screening.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Assistant Secretary Leaf. Assistant
Secretary Stroul, you got left out. I'm so sorry about that.
But ma'am, I appreciate both of your time today. Mr. Chairman,
I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. [Presiding.] Thank you, Congressman Moran. We
now proceed to Congressman Tom Kean of New Jersey.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On the morning of
Saturday, October 7th, Hamas launched the most brutal and
expansive surprise attack on Israel, the Yom Kippur war 50
years ago. And while these attacks may have been perpetrated by
Hamas and Palestinian Islamic jihad, let's not forget that the
real architects and motivator behind these actions is Iran.
I like many in this committee support Israel's right to
self-defense and stand ready to ensure that it has whatever it
needs to ensure its survival. I like others on this committee
share the concern that any pause will only allow Hamas to
continue in its terrorist activities and would need to be
united in our efforts to ensure that we defeat the evil that is
Hamas. Can you walk us through a little bit now what are Hamas'
current sources of funding and what diplomatic conversation is
the administration having to try to limit funds to Hamas in
jurisdictions that previously allowed the fund to flow to this
terrorist group?
Ms. Leaf. So we are really constructing a wide ranging
diplomatic effort on this front. And I think that we'll go back
to the efforts that we had against IS, for instance, or al
Qaeda, another major terrorist organization. The effort to dry
up the funding, to cut it off from both governments. But also
private donations is a long sort of trench warfare. And that's
what we're going to be doing globally, going around to just
restrict and break up----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Kean. Are you already doing that? I'm sorry.
Ms. Leaf. We have started on that. Yes, we have.
Mr. Kean. Okay. And what is your assessment of Hezbollah's
current pace of attacks against Israel? And what is Hezbollah
hoping to achieve with these attacks?
Ms. Stroul. The current rate of attacks against Israel from
its northern border is escalating. What we know is that Hamas--
or Hizballah has an even larger missile arsenal than Hamas.
Mr. Kean. By orders of magnitude.
Ms. Stroul. By orders of magnitude. And it is seeking to
threaten the security of the State of Israel which is why
hundreds of thousands of Israeli citizens have evacuated from
the north.
Mr. Kean. What consequences will Iran face from the U.S.
for its support of Hamas?
Ms. Stroul. I would say first of all it's not just a
question of what consequences Iran will face from the United
States. Iran should face consequences from the international
community, from the region, and from everyone who shares an
interest in a rules-based international order in which a State
actor funds non-State actors arms, trains, equips, and directs
them. So it's not just only about what the United States is
doing which is demonstrating a willingness and readiness to use
military force multiple times in this administration and most
recently only an hour ago as well as the increases in force
posture, the robust sanctions of implementation, and the
diplomatic coordination. And we're urging all of our allies and
partners as well to impose consequences and costs on Iran for
its support for terrorism.
Mr. Kean. You anticipated my next question which is
regarding the EU. In fact, it had a divided response in
consequence of these attacks. How are you helping ensure that
the EU as well as going into the issue that Congressman James
talked about at the U.N.? How are we ensuring that any of these
broad organizations are standing up against evil and supporting
good?
Ms. Leaf. That's a labor intensive efforts of diplomatic
work. And that's something that we're very focused on. As my
colleague said, this--I would put it in the way that I did with
a number of our partners as I worked around the region this
past several weeks.
This crisis really illuminated starkly for all of them what
they all knew intellectually or they knew through their
intelligence which was Iran has this architecture of proxies.
But they all sort of came up on the net as it were with this
crisis. And you see the Houthis just really desperate to get
into the fight.
You see the Iraqi militia groups and the threat that they
pose in multiple directions, including the State of Iraq. So
this has really highlighted for everyone that they needed
highlighting how destructive this architecture is to everyone's
interest. So it is--we'll have some hard conversations with
those who are slow to the punch.
Mr. Kean. We need to have, with respect, successful
conversations, not hard conversations, successful.
Ms. Leaf. We don't get credit for trying. We get credit for
results. I agree with you, Congressman.
Mr. Kean. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman Tom Kean. And 8 weeks
ago today, I was meeting with Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu. And I gave him the Tom Kean presentation, the
American people will stand with Israel, whatever it takes for
their survival. It's appropriate that we conclude with an
outstanding freshman, Congressman Mike Lawyer of New York.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Chairman. Last month, President
Biden announced 100 million in humanitarian aid for the Gaza
strip. Obviously, no one wants to see innocent life lost or
impacted by the ongoing conflict.
However, I have great concern about this 100 million
dollars and the reality that Hamas as the governing body in
Gaza would intercept or use these funds to further fund
terrorism, to further fund the slaughtering of Jews. Who is
receiving these funds? And what accountability measures are
there to ensure that Hamas does not have access to it? And what
would be the response of the administration if they found that,
in fact, these funds were somehow being utilize to further
Hamas' terrorism?
Ms. Leaf. So at this moment, it's hardly possible to say
that Hamas is governing. It is down----
Mr. Lawler. You would agree they are the government of
Gaza?
Ms. Leaf. No, I understand that. I understand.
Mr. Lawler. Okay.
Ms. Leaf. I'm not disputing that. I'm just saying at this
moment in this conflict, nobody is governing.
Mr. Lawler. No, they're using their civilians as human
shields.
Ms. Leaf. Absolutely, absolutely. That's what I mean. But
this is coordinated fully with Israel. These moneys will have
oversight, rigorous oversight. It will be run through trusted
partners. It is really directed at critical humanitarian
assistance in the first order.
Mr. Lawler. So when you say in concern with Israel, are the
funds going to Israel to administer? Who is----
Ms. Leaf. No, Israel----
Mr. Lawler [continuing]. administering the funds?
Ms. Leaf. No, Israel has made it clear that it does not
want to be in the business of administering anything in Gaza.
Mr. Lawler. So who's administering it?
Ms. Leaf. We have the oversight. We go through trusted
partners, NGO's.
Mr. Lawler. Who are our trusted partners?
Ms. Leaf. I can get you list of those, sir.
Mr. Lawler. Please. In terms of Iran, it is clear to many
of us including from reporting by the Wall Street Journal that
Iran played some role in the lead up to these attacks that Iran
has continually backed and funded Hamas that the stated
intention ultimately is to wipe Israel off the face of the
earth. We all acknowledge that.
Do you believe that the administration is prepared to hold
Iran accountable and in what way? Because I just passed last
week the SHIP Act which would increase secondary sanctions on
countries that purchase Iranian petroleum. Since Joe Biden took
office, Iranian petroleum sales and the revenue thereof has
increased by 59 percent. What is the administration doing to
hold Iran accountable?
Ms. Stroul. Thank you for your question. We have made it
clear that Iranian fingerprints are all over the funding
arming, training, equipping, and directing of a variety of non-
State actors from Hamas to Lebanese Hezbollah to the Iran-
aligned militia groups in Iraq and Syria to the Houthis in
Yemen. And we do hold Iran responsible and accountable for the
acts of terrorism we see in the region as recently as this
evening when President Biden ordered precision strikes against
IRGC affiliated facilities in Eastern Syria.
Mr. Lawler. Does the administration deny or confirm the
Wall Street Journal's previous reporting about Iran's
involvement in the October 7 terrorist attack?
Ms. Stroul. The administration has been very clear that
Iran has had a role through its arming, training, equipping,
and funding of Hamas.
Mr. Lawler. Does the administration confirm or deny the
reports of the Wall Street Journal----
Ms. Stroul. I can't speak to the specific Wall----
Mr. Lawler [continuing]. with respect to the October 7----
Ms. Stroul [continuing]. Street Journal article. What
Assistant Secretary Leaf also said earlier is that there is not
a smoking gun piece of intelligence that confirms that Iran
directed the specific nature, scope, scale, and timing of the
October 7 attack. But there's no question that Iran is
responsible because of its arming, training, funding, and
equipping of Hamas.
Mr. Lawler. Given that and given your statement there,
should the 6 billion dollars in unfrozen funds be permanently
refrozen?
Ms. Leaf. That would be a decision for senior level of the
government. But at this point, that 6 billion dollars has not
been touched and it is--the use of it is for humanitarian
purposes only.
Mr. Lawler. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman Lawler. And
Secretary Leaf and Secretary Stroul, thank you so much for
being here. And I think you can see that you have bipartisan
support of Republicans, Democrats.
We want you to succeed. Additionally, lightning is going to
strike, but I agree with the Washington Post. We want the
President to succeed. This is going to be his legacy.
We have an existential situation developing with an axis of
evil with war criminal Putin, the Chinese Communist Party, and
indeed Iran and Iranian puppets. It must be addressed. And we
want you to succeed.
Just understand that it's just for our families and with
the potential--as the New York Post has reported of a potential
terrorist attack here in the United States is imminent. What
You're doing is so important, and we want you to succeed.
Additionally, as we conclude, I want to thank the staff.
It's amazing their persistence to be here 24 hours a day, 7
days a week. And with this, we shall adjourn.
[Whereupon, at 6:58 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
