- IRAN'S ESCALATING THREATS: ASSESSING U.S. POLICY TOWARD IRAN'S MALIGN ACTIVITIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IRAN'S ESCALATING THREATS: ASSESSING U.S. POLICY TOWARD IRAN'S MALIGN
ACTIVITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA, AND CENTRAL ASIA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

September 14, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-105

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-431PDF           WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa                   SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

The Subcommittee on the Middle East, North Africa, and Central Asia

JOE WILSON, Chair
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota, Ranking
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee                  Member
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 BRAD SHERMAN, California
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia

Gabriella Zach, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Roule, Norman, Former National Intelligence Manager for Iran.....
Ben Taleblu, Behnam, Senior Fellow, Foundation for Defense of
Democracies....................................................
Alinejad, Masih, Author and Activist.............................
Maloney, Suzanne, Vice President and Director of Foreign Policy,
Brookings Institution..........................................     4

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    XX
Hearing Minutes..................................................    XX
Hearing Attendance...............................................    xx

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................

IRAN'S ESCALATING THREATS: ASSESSING U.S. POLICY TOWARD IRAN'S MALIGN
ACTIVITIES

Thursday, September 14, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Middle East, North
Africa and Central Asia,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Joe Wilson (chairman of
the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Wilson. Ladies and gentlemen, welcome. The Subcommittee
on the Middle East, North Africa, and Central Asia will come to
order.
The purpose of the hearing is to discuss Iran's escalating
threats and assess the U.S. policy toward Iran's malign
activities. I want to recognize for myself an opening
statement.
We will then have a very positive opening statement from
our ranking member, Dean Phillips. And so--and, hey, even as we
begin this hearing I think continues a tradition of
bipartisanship substantially and because we are so hopeful to
work together, particularly to work together for peace and
stability in the Middle East, and truly hope for positive
change for the brave people of Iran.
With that in mind, ladies and gentlemen, the threats posed
by the Iranian regime have never been greater. Yet, the policy,
sadly, of the Administration have emboldened the regime.
By single mindedly pursuing revival of the disastrous
nuclear agreement, forgetting the IEDs that were used to kill
Americans and forgetting the drones that are currently being
used to kill Ukrainians while ignoring the regime's mass
exportation of missiles and drones, terrorism, and human rights
violations the Administration puts America and our allies in a
perilous position.
There is bipartisan concern with the direction of the Biden
Administration policy toward Iran. On September 16th, 2022, the
world was horrified by the murder of Mahsa Amini, a vibrant 22-
year-old woman who was arrested by the morality police of the
regime for the improper wearing of a hajib.
Every day brave Iranians young and old from all different
backgrounds have peacefully protested the draconian and brutal
regime under which they're forced to live.
Our message to them today is that you are seen, admired,
and freedom will one day be yours, and in particular the 4,000
protests in the last year. It should be recognized there have
been 20,000 arrests of persons in every corner of Iran. But
even worse, we know--we can identify that there have been 550
young Iranians murdered by the regime.
With that in mind, several factors contribute to the
regime's ability to continue its murderous agenda against the
people of Iran and its global agenda of death to America, death
to Israel.
Sanctions are only effective when enforced. President Biden
states that he stands with the people of Iran but actions speak
louder than words. Imposing weak sanctions on a few dozen
officials while turning a blind eye to the evasion of oil
sanctions is just symbolism.
Iranian oil exports have never been higher and the Chinese
Communist Party is the number-one client as it's now proceeding
to accelerate the largest peacetime military buildup in world
history.
The release of $6 billion to the regime, building on the
$10 billion available from Iraq, will fund the regime's mass
murder. Money is fungible and it is willfully negligent to
assert that the regime plans to use the money for humanitarian
purposes.
This reversal of long-standing American policy of not
paying for release of hostages puts a bounty on the heads of
Americans around the world.
President Trump secured the release of American citizens
taken hostages Xiyue Wang and Michael White from the notorious
Evin prison without paying ransom. We were grateful to have
Xiyue advising Congress, advising our strategic competition and
national security.
America has traditionally stood by the position of a strong
national defense but not a penny for tribute. The regime in
Tehran actively provides weapons and strategic support to war
criminal Putin and plans to build a drone factory in Moscow.
The ransom paid to the regime amounts to funding Putin's
murder of Ukrainians as Putin, equally sadly, oppresses the
people of Russia itself. Many of these drones have been
manufactured using commercially available components from the
United States and Europe.
The House must act to pass export control legislation to
prevent products of American ingenuity to be used by
terrorists. Our allies and strategic partners in the region,
sadly, are pursuing diplomatic relations with Iran largely due
to concerns about America's reliability as a partner for
regional security.
The Administration has insulted our Arab allies and has
held up critical requests for defense equipment to protect
against Iranian-backed terrorist attacks. Iran's missile and
drone programs are the cornerstone of the regime's leverage
against our partners in the region.
Iran has the largest missile arsenal in the region and was
completely unaddressed in the nuclear deal. These missiles are
supplied to Iran's terrorist proxies in Syria, Iraq, the
Houthis in Yemen, Hezbollah in Lebanon, and Hamas in Gaza.
The capabilities and quantity of missiles launched by the
regime's terrorist proxies multiply every year. The October
sunset of prohibitions on Iran's missile activities require
action to prevent the largest State sponsor of terrorism from
mainstreaming its testing and transfer of missiles.
Behnam Taleblu, one of our witnesses today, authored a
comprehensive monograph outlining the development and strategic
significance of Iran's ICBM program. The recommendations
outlined have been critical in modern--informing modern and
effective policy to counter this threat and I urge my
colleagues to review it. It's an excellent presentation that
the people of the world need to know.
Repeated failure to enforce visa sanctions have resulted in
Iranians living abroad being targeted by the regime henchmen.
We're told their families will be imprisoned, interrogated, and
tortured. One of our witnesses, Iranian-American journalist
Masih Alinejad, understands this threat too well.
Exiled from Iran for her human rights activities she has
been a target of attempted kidnappings and assassination plots
by Iran officials on American soil. Iranian president mass
murderer Ebrahim Raisi will once again attend the U.N. General
Assembly meeting in New York next week.
I urge the passage of our bipartisan bill the REGIME Act to
stop regime officials who hate and threaten America from
enjoying the luxuries they seek to destroy.
This Administration fails to see the big picture. The
Iranian regime, war criminal Putin, and the Chinese Communist
Party are working together to destroy America and our allies.
The regime's cooperative agreements with war criminal Putin and
the Chinese Communist Party we see routinely engage in joint
military drills and exercises harassing American ships and
jets.
America must act by implementing multi-pronged policies
targeting Iranian terrorism, missile and drone proliferation,
and maximizing support for the efforts of the Iranian people
seeking political change and survival.
Our adversaries are playing the long game and the existence
of America depends on doing the same, and I know it will be
bipartisan that we work together understanding and recognizing
that we are in a conflict we did not choose.
It actually began February the 24th, 2022, with the
invasion by war criminal Putin of Ukraine where we have a
situation of the dictatorships acting by rule of gun opposing
the democracies' rule of law.
And I thank our witnesses for their time and expertise and
I yield to Ranking Member Dean Phillips for his opening
statement.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Chair Wilson, and to our esteemed
witnesses today.
Some of you know that Chair Wilson and I just returned from
a trip to the Middle East visiting Israel, Turkey, and Saudi
Arabia. Rest assured the issues about which we will speak today
were front and center in every meeting at every moment during
our trip.
Now, I was not a Member of Congress when the JCPOA--the
Iran deal--came before Congress, and while it is clear that the
deal was not perfect and did not address all of Iran's
nefarious activities I do know that since President Trump's
unilateral withdrawal from the agreement in 2018 Iran has
significantly advanced its nuclear program, U.S. credibility
has been diminished in certain areas, and we have disappointed
a number of our allies.
But instead of litigating and discussing the merits of the
JCPOA and why that unilateral withdrawal harmed our interests
I'd rather focus on what we do now that we are here.
When dealing with Iran I believe it's clear that the regime
poses a present danger to the United States of America.
First, Iran is the world's leading State sponsor of terror.
Its regional proxy groups have attacked U.S. forces in the
region at least 83 times in just the past 2 years and continue
to threaten our dear friend and ally Israel, the only Jewish
nation in the entire world.
Second, the regime has embraced the war criminal Vladimir
Putin, transferring armed drones to Russia for use in the
country's illegal and unjust war in Ukraine, as the chairman
has already spoken about.
In return, Russia is now offering Iran an unprecedented
level of military and technological support that will make it
even more dangerous for the world.
Three, Iran's nuclear program is now more advanced than it
has ever been. According to the IAEA, in at least one instance
Iran has enriched a small batch of uranium to 84 percent, just
1 percentage point short of weapons-grade purity. They've also
amassed enough enriched fissile material for several bombs.
Four, finally, this Saturday will mark the 1-year
anniversary of the death of Mahsa Amini at the hands of Iran's
morality police. Her tragic death sparked mass protests across
Iran, as we all know, with women and girls at the helm
demanding dignity, respect, and change.
The regime responded with brutal repression, resulting in
more than 600 Iranians killed and nearly 22,000 arrests. Such
behavior and abuse of power is unjustifiable and the U.S. must
do everything in its power to combat these practices, ensure
U.S. national security, and support the oppressed Iranian
people.
I firmly believe that diplomacy--I'll say it again--
diplomacy must be at the core of any engagement, not only with
Iran but also with all of our allies and adversaries around the
world.
Without the ability to break bread, to see each other as
human beings, no progress, in my estimation, can ever be made.
The U.S. should never close the door to diplomacy if it helps
secure our national interests.
The Biden Administration's recent decision to negotiate
with Iran is an example of this. The Administration made a
tough decision, in my estimation, to allow Iran to receive $6
billion in frozen oil revenue for humanitarian purposes in
exchange for the release of five Americans wrongly held in
Iran, including Siamak Namazi, Morad Tahbaz, and Emad Shargi.
This understanding has also deescalated tension with Iran
on multiple fronts, and while we have not yet crossed that
finish line I am hopeful that this modest diplomatic effort
will lead to more understanding and, most importantly, less
instability.
I'll just say it again. On the surface, I understand the
questions about the $6 billion. It is my hope, it is my
expectation, that this is a baby step--a carrot, if you will--
to reduce this behavior, provide an incentive to modify
behavior, moving forward.
It's also clear that diplomacy alone will not achieve our
objectives. The U.S. must pair diplomatic engagement with very
tough sanctions enforcement, international accountability, and
very robust military deterrence.
That is why the Biden Administration maintains crippling
sanctions on Iran's economy, its nuclear weapons program, human
rights violators, and on the entities transferring money and
weapons to Iranian proxies.
The U.S. has aggressively pursued international
accountability for Iran including supporting the removal of
Iran from the U.N. Commission on the Status of Women and
establishing a fact-finding investigation into human rights
abuses in Iran at the U.N. Human Rights Council.
Finally, the Biden Administration has repeatedly stated
that all options remain on the table to prevent Iran from
acquiring a nuclear weapon, something on which all of us--and I
say it again--all of us agree.
They have deployed additional military assets to the Gulf
and actively engaged with regional partners to ensure that
military preparedness and deterrence are in the mix, including
standing up a maritime task force to deter Iran from seizing
commercial vessels or transporting illicit goods.
Let me be clear. The Iranian regime continues to pose a
significant threat to the United States of America and these
actions alone will not address all aspects of Iran's malign
behavior.
But by being clear eyed about the threat, by working with
our partners and allies to coordinate an international response
to Iran's actions, and by using a multi-pronged strategy to
include sanctions enforcement, international accountability,
military deterrence, and diplomacy I do believe we will
ultimately prevail in making the Middle East and the United
States safer and more prosperous for all.
With that, I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and yield back my
time, which is expired.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Ranking Member Dean
Phillips, and, indeed, our travel throughout the Middle East
last week to Jerusalem, to Ankara, Istanbul, to Riyadh it was a
bipartisan exercise of working together for the American
people.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from Michigan,
Mr. John Moolenaar, be allowed to sit at the dais and to
participate following all other members in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
We're pleased today to have distinguished witnesses with
us--Mr. Norman Roule, the former national intelligence manager
for Iran.
We also have Mr. Behnam Ben Taleblu, who--from the
Foundation of Defense of Democracies. Next we will hear from
the journalist and activist Masih Alinejad and, finally, we
have Suzanne Maloney from the Brookings Institution.
And thank you for being here today. Your full statements
will be made part of the record and we ask that each of you
keep your spoken remarks to 5 minutes, and it will be--we have
got an excellent timekeeper today and so we'll make sure this
is done properly to allow time for members' questions.
I want to recognize now Mr. Norman Roule for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF NORMAN ROULE, FORMER NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MANAGER
FOR IRAN

Mr. Roule. Chairman Wilson, Ranking Member Phillips, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear today as a member of this panel.
This is a consequential time for an Iran policy review.
September 16 will mark the first anniversary of the cruel death
of Mahsa Amini and the beginning of months of unrest in which
Iran's people, especially its women and girls, inspired the
world with their heroism.
Iran's nuclear enterprise now looks precisely like what a
country would build if it planned to weaponize. The scale of
Iran's terrorism exceeds any terrorist threat to the United
States and its partners since 9/11. Iran's militias
destabilized the Middle East and its drones have killed
countless Ukrainian civilians.
As you review policy options it might be helpful to
consider how Iran's leaders view their world today.
Unfortunately, events of the last 2 years give them reason for
some confidence.
Russia's invasion of Ukraine fractured great power unity
and reinforced Western unwillingness to risk another
international crisis.
China's efforts to undermine the international order found
an eager partner in the Islamic Republic. Rhetoric and minor
sanctions dominated the international community's response to
the alarming expansion of Iran's nuclear program and
stonewalling of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
IAEA.
A similar response followed the torture and execution of
peaceful protesters, hostage taking, piracy in international
waters, and repeated attempts to murder or kidnap U.S. persons
in the homeland and journalists in the United Kingdom.
The West stood, largely, silent as Iran and its proxies
used Iranian missiles and drones against civilian targets in
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
Nonetheless, Iran's leaders must view their future with
deep concern. Much like the final years of the Soviet Union,
the Islamic Republic is sustained by coercion and a stale
ideology that masks rigged elections, corruption, incompetence,
and violence against a brave people.
The social and economic successes of the United Arab
Emirates, Saudi Arabia, and Bahrain pose a direct threat to the
Islamic Republic, much as the progress of the United States and
Europe sapped the foundations of the Soviet Union.
We should ask next what Iran's goals will be in coming
years. First, the Islamic Republic requires sufficient
stability to enable post revolutionary hardliners to retain
power upon the death of Supreme Leader Khamenei.
Next, the Raisi Administration will likely maintain an
assertive, even confrontational foreign policy to splinter
adversary coalitions and erode the entire international
sanctions regime.
Tehran likely believes that a policy of calibrated and low
accost aggression will achieve strategic concessions from a
West convinced that confrontation with Iran could ignite a
conventional conflict.
In the long term Iran aspires to be a, if not the, regional
hegemon able to pressure the global economy through violence at
the Strait of Hormuz and Bab al-Mandab maritime checkpoints.
Finally, Iran is unlikely to agree to long-term limits on
its nuclear program or even significant reversal of nuclear
achievements but it will likely use the prospect of progress in
nuclear talks as a shield against international pressure
responding to its nonnuclear aggression.
The decision to weaponize will remain dependent on its
assessment of whether or not it can do so without discovery.
Iran will likely continue to improve its missile program,
including missile technology, to threaten the United States.
I believe three issues are likely to dominate the Iran
challenge in coming months.
First, Iran will seek to prevent a repeat of the 2022
protest. Even as we speak Iran's security forces are stifling
commemoration of last year's protest using every available tool
of State coercion. Another major outbreak of country wide
unrest, however, is inevitable.
Second, Iran may temporarily restrain its nuclear expansion
but further testing of Western nuclear red lines is likely.
Tehran has used the last 2 years of negotiations to achieve
progress that in the past would have seen sufficient to justify
Western military action.
Iran has failed to follow through on multiple agreements
with the IAEA and blocked IAEA verification. The IAEA will
increasingly question its own ability to assess that Iran's
nuclear program remains peaceful.
Third, Iran's hostage industry will continue. The ongoing
hostage deal is welcome news to U.S. hostages and their long-
suffering families and hostage diplomacy is difficult and we
should thank those involved.
But the deal is flawed and carries dark consequences. The
deal does nothing to halt further hostage taking but confirms
that doing so brings financial and political benefits.
This deal leaves people behind. Dozens of hostages
remaining in Iran including U.S. green card holder Shahab
Dalili, longtime U.S. resident Jamshid Sharmahd, and many
Europeans.
The deal's financial relief allows Iran to divert resources
previously intended for humanitarian purchases to its security
forces, missile programs, proxy groups, and terrorism. The
relief also weakens existing sanctions, and, last, future
sanctions will now take longer to achieve their effects.
I would like to close with several brief suggestions for
improving the execution of Iran policy.
First, I urge you to develop a bipartisan approach to Iran
similar to our actions on China. The designation of a
bipartisan Select Committee on China provides a valuable
template for a structure to address Iran. Bipartisan unity will
strengthen our credibility with our partners and the message of
deterrence we send to Iran.
Next, Congress should seek unclassified annual reports on
Iran's support for terrorism, its global militia and military
footprint, and the financial impact of sanctions to include
sanctions relief.
The comprehensive security integration and prosperity
agreement signed with Bahrain yesterday is an important step.
It appropriately recognizes the value of U.S. partnership with
Bahrain and also provides a template for use with other
regional partners.
We should expand our security relations with Saudi Arabia,
the UAE, and other Gulf allies as doing so will increase
regional deterrence against Iran.
Finally, the time has come to restrict travel by U.S.
persons and residents to Iran. Although we should encourage
travel by Iranians to the United States, we should restrict
travel saving the most compelling humanitarian instances.
Thank you for your attention, and I look forward to your
comments and questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Roule follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.043

Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Mr. Roule.
And I now recognize Mr. Taleblu for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BEHNAM BEN TALEBLU, SENIOR FELLOW, FOUNDATION FOR
DEFENSE OF DEMOCRACIES

Mr. Taleblu. Chairman Wilson, Ranking Member Phillips,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of the
Foundation for Defense of Democracies think tank thank you for
inviting me to testify.
It is an honor to present my analysis alongside Norman
Roule, Masih Alinejad, and Suzanne Maloney, all distinguished
individuals who have greatly informed our national conversation
on Iran policy.
A hearing on the Iran challenge could not be timelier. This
month marks the 1-year anniversary of nationwide protests
against the Islamic Republic, protests touched off by the
killing of Mahsa Amini, a 22-year-old Iranian Kurdish woman, by
Iran's morality police.
Since Mahsa's murder Iran saw the largest ever protests
since the 1979 Islamic Revolution, touching all 30 provinces in
over 150 different cities, towns, and villages at its height.
These protests do not only seek an end to discriminatory
female dress codes. They are part and parcel of a larger
sustained nationwide uprising since at least 2017 seeking an
end to the Islamist and authoritarian regime in Tehran. More
protests will continue.
The main question at this juncture for U.S. policy 1 year
later then is is it ready to stand with the Iranian people in
practice and not just principle and is it prepared to develop a
more coherent Iran policy that merges strategies, values, and
interests.
To date the Biden Administration's Iran policy has largely
focused on nuclear diplomacy for what was initially a better
than identical and now significantly more circumscribed nuclear
accord than the 2015 nuclear deal called the JCPOA.
Recent ransom payments may be paving the way for what is
fast emerging as a lesser and unwritten understanding that
circumvents Congress. Also, as reported, it would lock in
rather than roll back Iran's illicit nuclear capabilities and
infrastructure.
Paying ransom to the world's foremost State sponsor of
terrorism also will not foster an end to hostage taking, which
the Islamic Republic has engaged in since its inception.
Worse, at least three U.S. nationals--Shahab Dalili, Afshin
Vatini, and Jamshid Sharmahd as defined by the Levinson Act
were excluded from the current deal and remain hostage in Iran.
The Sharmahd case is particularly worrisome as he was
kidnapped abroad in 2020. Since then, IRGC-affiliated media
have attempted to use his foreign capture and domestic death
sentence to silence critics.
Calls for kidnapping and punishments were even extended to
American think tankers such as myself and my current and former
Iranian-American colleagues at FDD Saeed Ghasseminejad and
Alireza Nader.
Elsewhere, U.N. prohibitions on Iran's ballistic missile
activities as well as European sanctions against the Iranian
nuclear missile and military entities are set to lapse on
October 18th.
While the EU and U.K. are expected based on reports to
defend most of their sovereign nonproliferation sanctions,
absent a full snap back at the U.N. Security Council U.N.-based
penalties will still sunset. This will leave Tehran politically
unconstrained when it comes to ballistic missile testing and
transfers and as if already testing the waters, in a historic
first last month at an arms exhibition in Moscow Iran displayed
a close-range ballistic missile.
As a reminder, Iran is home to the largest ballistic
missile arsenal in the Middle East. Over the past decade it has
made significant improvements to survivability, mobility, and
the precision of this force.
Iran's newfound capabilities coupled with America's
nonexistent or insufficient response to past ballistic missile,
cruise missile, and drone operations by itself and its proxies
will drive more, not fewer, tests, transfers and military
operations.
Last September, for example, in another historic first an
Iranian ballistic missile strike on northern Iraq killed a U.S.
citizen. America did not respond.
Faced with these and other challenges outlined in my
written testimony, Congress can better shape U.S. policy toward
Iran in accordance with four basic tenets.
First, do no harm. Washington cannot afford to offer Tehran
another financial and political lifeline that sets back
American policy.
Second, connect the dots. In an era of great power
competition and a rising tide of domestic isolationism the
American public deserves to know exactly how and why the Iran
threat matters.
Policymakers should continue to highlight Iran's drone
transfers to Russia for use against Ukraine and China's role in
bolstering Iran's military, nuclear, and missile capabilities
through continued illicit oil imports.
Three, bridge the gap. A web of multilateral sanctions
against the same target can help impede Iranian illicit
activity and send a strong deterrent message. For example,
following Europe, the U.S. could sanction Iran's Press TV, an
English language propaganda outlet. Similarly, Washington
should help Europe bolster its drone and missile sanctions
against Iranian defense industry subsidiaries.
And four, last but certainly not least, support brave
Iranians. Standing with the Iranian people means making sure
they can always access the internet whenever blocked off by the
regime and can benefit from a strike fund whenever labor
strikes are married or merged with domestic street protests.
In addition to offering specific military, economic, and
diplomatic policy recommendations in my written testimony I
have also aggregated 10 bills in various stages of the
legislative process that can bolster the U.S. position on Iran
and highlight the leadership of the 118th Congress.
Among them are the MAHSA Act, the Fight Crime Act, the
REGIME Act, the SHIP Act and SISA. These bills contain strong
missile technology procurement and proliferation sanctions,
sanctions on entities refining or storing Iranian crude oil,
and sanctions against regime elites for rights violations,
among many other helpful measures.
Thank you for your time and attention today and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Taleblu follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.037

Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Mr. Taleblu.
And we now recognize Ms. Alinejad for her opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF MASIH ALINEJAD, AUTHOR AND ACTIVIST

Ms. Alinejad. Thank you so much, and I want to--Chairman
Wilson, Ranking Member Phillips, and members of the committee,
I want to start by thanking you, especially these days that we
see the news of Iran being fade out from mainstream media
because as we sit here today the Islamic Republic of Iran
doubled its efforts to crack down on protesters, especially on
women and the family members of more than 70 people who got
killed last year.
They got arrested and right now they are in prison,
especially the parents of those who got executed for the crime
of crying for justice.
A year ago when Mahsa Jina Amini, a 20-year-old woman from
Kurdistan was killed in the hands of morality police in Iran,
it has sparked a revolution in Iran. She was beaten to death
while she was in the custody.
Thousands of Iranian women actually take off their hijab in
solidarity with Mahsa and her family. Shoulder to shoulder with
men they took to the streets across Iran. More than 700
innocent protesters got killed. Dozen are in the death row
right now that I'm talking to you.
Iranian woman knew that any of them could be Mahsa Amini.
The Iranian people by their actions showed how much they detest
the gender apartheid regime and its Sharia laws. But their
demands were not limited just to calling for an end to
compulsory hijab. The demand was clear--an end for Islamic
Republic.
I have often compared compulsory hijab to the Berlin Wall
and I still believe that if we tear this wall down the Islamic
Republic won't exist. The regime cracked down hard, not only
arresting people--22,000 people--but actually targeting school
girls with chemical attacks. This is exactly what Boko Haram
did to its own girls and Taliban did the same.
The regime even conducted terrorism against its own
population by deliberately using not only chemical attack,
raping girls in prison, raping teenagers--teenage boys and
girls in prison. The Islamic Republic of Iran is not only one
of the most brutal regimes in the world but also one of the
greatest threats to the region, to Europe, and to the national
security of the United States of America.
Since its inception in 1979 the Islamic Republic has
constantly targeted individuals who voice dissent against the
government's policies both domestically and abroad. More than
500 innocent dissidents were the target of kidnapping plot and
assassination plot on European soil.
I still get goosebumps myself that these are happening not
inside Iran, abroad on European soil, and still the European
government legitimized the murderous regime of Iran.
After more than four decades in power without any
meaningful reform the character of the Islamic Republic is
unlikely to change, the persecution of women, ethnic group in
Iran, and religious minorities, LGBT people, form the core
ideology of the regime. Recently, the regime has grown bolder,
threatening Americans on U.S. soil in operations that I believe
are nothing short of a declaration of war.
I would like to illustrate this by sharing just a bit about
my own experience. I'm a survivor of kidnapping plot and
assassination plot. I could have been Jamshid Sharmahd right
now on the death row in Iran.
In July last year, a man armed with AK-47 came in front of
my house to kill me. Got arrested by the FBI. He was not alone.
There were three men from criminal gangs from Eastern Europe
hired by the Islamic Republic trying to kill me.
But what bothers me and millions of Iranian people that was
not the first time. First time they attempt to kidnap me on
U.S. soil and because of the weakness of the American--the
Biden Administration the Islamic Republic got encouraged to
hire criminals.
The Biden Administration's weak responses is not putting me
at risk. It's putting the lives of all Americans at risk and
signal to the Islamic Republic that actually you can come and
target more American dissidents. Imagine if the killer opened
fire in front of my house. How many of Americans, my neighbors,
would have been killed on U.S. soil?
Don't get me wrong. I want to say that I do not have fear
for my own life but I want to be alive and to see Iranian
people freed from religious dictatorship. But I also care
deeply about the national security of my beloved adopted
country, the United States of America.
The Administration has only taken token measure to punish
the Islamic Republic, always careful not to antagonize the
ayatollahs. Their condemnation of the kidnapping attempt was
vaguely worded and showed weakness. That is why the Islamic
Republic hired criminals.
I met with National Security Adviser Jake Sullivan last
year. He promised that the United States of America will
protect and defend its citizens. Today I am here, that when
Biden--President Biden says that we stand with the people of
Iran we the people of Iran really do not want him and his
Administration to stand with us. Please sit down with your own
allies and make concrete decision to isolate kidnappers and the
killers of the Islamic Republic.
I am here to actually share a secret with you. The White
House warned me earlier this year that there have been more
than 31 threats against my life on U.S. soil, and in an email
the Administration strongly advised me to go into witness
protection.
If none of you knows what witness protection means, it
means that I have to change my identity. I have to change my
Social Security number. I have to change my name and get
disappear. This is what exactly the Islamic Republic of Iran
wants me and many of my colleagues who actually give voice to
Iranian voiceless people in America and Europe to get
disappear.
So, clearly, I refuse to be disappear. As you hear me I
have loud voice because I see my people inside Iran they have
no protections. They are facing guns and bullets and they are--
they want me to send a message to the U.S. Administration.
Americans should not be left alone to face dangerous State
actors and Iranian people inside should not be left alone
because the people of Iran are not just fighting against
Islamic Republic for themselves. They're trying to protect the
U.S. citizens from one of the most dangerous regime which is
called Islamic Republic of Iran.
The smart way to proceed this it's not sending billions of
dollars to release any innocent dual national citizens. It is
to isolate the kidnappers, not sending signals that you can
take more Americans hostage.
I want to end this to ask you, the Congressmen and
Congresswomen, to help us, to ask the Biden Administration to
criminalize transnational repression and help Iranian people
because they have simple demand.
Whether you like the word or not, they want regime change
and they believe that this has--the time has come for us
Iranians to get rid of gender apartheid regime.
Thank you so much, and I'm here to answer any question from
you. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Alinejad follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.028

Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Ms. Alinejad, for your
courage.
I now recognize Ms. Maloney for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SUZANNE MALONEY, VICE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR OF
FOREIGN POLICY, BROOKINGS INSTITUTION

Ms. Maloney. Thank you, Chairman Wilson, Ranking Member
Phillips, and distinguished members for inviting me to testify
here today. It's an honor to address this committee. While I'm
vice president and director of foreign policy at the Brookings
Institution my testimony today represents only my own views.
The Islamic Republic remains a disruptive and dangerous
power. The Biden Administration revived diplomacy to constrain
Tehran's nuclear advances and has sought to deter Iran's
regional threats.
But progress has been limited and Iran's challenges to its
own people, its neighbors, anti-U.S. interests around the world
have only intensified as a result of Tehran's unchecked nuclear
program, its long track record of terrorism, hostage taking,
and violent subversion, its deepening involvement in Russia's
barbaric and illegal war in Ukraine, and its brutality toward
its own citizens.
Twenty years after the disclosure of Tehran's clandestine
nuclear program in violation of its commitments under the
nuclear nonproliferation treaty the regime has made exponential
advances in its nuclear infrastructure and know how, despite
years of intense diplomacy and covert efforts to set back the
program.
Tehran is now enriching at military grade levels and has
stockpiled sufficient enriched uranium for multiple weapons.
Breakout time is negligible, meaning the international
community would have little to no time to respond should Tehran
choose to race for a bomb.
Tehran continues to actively engage in extraterritorial
aggression through its adaptive and complex network of regional
militias, its development and deployment of ballistic missiles
and drones, its threats to shipping in the Persian Gulf.
Tehran's troublemaking is not limited to its own
neighborhood. This is a regime that has orchestrated terror
attacks from Buenos Aires to Bulgaria, and in recent years
Iranian leaders have demonstrated much higher degree of risk
tolerance in planning attacks on individuals and entities
around the world, including former senior U.S. Government
officials and dissidents such as my fellow witness.
Since the 1979 seizure of the U.S. embassy when the regime
held 52 American public servants against their will for 444
days the Islamic Republic has made hostage taking an instrument
of State policy.
Tehran unjustly detains Americans and other dual and
foreign nationals and seeks economic or other concessions for
their release. One year ago this week, as we have discussed, a
young Iranian woman was murdered in regime custody after her
arrest for wearing her head scarf improperly.
The Mahsa Amini tragedy prompted months of protests
demanding not merely an end to the Islamic Republic's hijab
mandate but an end to the regime itself. Tehran's brutal
crackdown killed more than 500 and imprisoned 22,000 but has
not quashed the aspirations of the Iranian people for a
democratic future.
Finally, the Islamic Republic has become a key player in an
emerging authoritarian alignment among the great powers,
providing crucial technology, energy, economic and diplomatic
support to Russia and China.
For more than 44 years the formula for U.S. policy toward
Tehran that was put in place in the days after the 1979 embassy
seizure, balancing coercion and engagement--carrots and
sticks--has remained largely unchanged. Each Administration,
Republican as well as Democrat, has deployed economic and
military pressure to counter Iran and each has sought a direct
dialog with Iranian leaders.
But our track record on Iran has been too modest. There
have been few meaningful breakthroughs or sustained reversals
in Iran's most problematic policies, and even Washington's
closest partners have often proven reluctant to jeopardize
their own trade and diplomatic ties with Iran.
We need a new U.S. approach to Iran, one that ensures
international constraints on and visibilities into Iran's
nuclear activities, deters Tehran from advancing its
provocative and nuclear and regional ambitions, and preserve
space for the Iranian people who have fought for democracy for
more than a century to bring about lasting change.
Tehran has rebuffed or slow rolled the Biden
Administration's efforts to reinState the nuclear deal to a
point of absurdity. Consumed with the war in Ukraine and the
looming challenge of China, the Administration is trying to
advance informal understandings with Iran.
Discretion is a key aspect of diplomacy, but while back
channels can facilitate limited problem solving they cannot
provide a viable platform for managing the profound challenges
posed by Iran's destabilizing policies.
President Biden has promised that Iran will not get a
nuclear weapon under his watch and fulfilling that pledge will
require a credible policy framework that can withstand public
and congressional scrutiny.
Let me also take this opportunity, as has--as have several
of the members and several of my co-panelists to appeal for
greater bipartisan cooperation on Iran. The polarized debate on
Iran undermines effective policy. Across both sides of the
aisle there is substantial agreement around the nature of the
Iranian threat and the most effective tools for countering
Tehran's malign behavior.
Effective U.S. policy must address the totality of the Iran
challenges especially but not limited to the nuclear program,
rally our allies and partners around the world to do more to
punish Iran's nuclear advances, its extra territorial
aggression, and its mistreatment of its own citizens, reinforce
deterrence through military exercises and U.S. force presence
in the region, restore efforts to enforce U.S. sanctions and
rebuild the multilateral sanctions regime that was responsible
for shifting Iran's nuclear calculus a decade ago, take steps
to reduce the vulnerability of Western governments to Iranian
hostage taking.
I'm thrilled the five Americans including Siamak Namazi,
Emad Shargi, and Morad Tahbaz, who have suffered years of abuse
by Iran, will soon be able to leave the country and rejoin
their families.
But make no mistake, there is now a $1 billion price on the
head of every dual national and Western tourist--and believe it
or not they still go--who sets foot in Iran.
And finally, we must ensure that we're doing our part to
support the democratic aspirations of the Iranian people. My
time is now complete but I look forward to your questions and
to our conversation to follow.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Maloney follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.025

Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Ms. Maloney.
I now recognize myself with 5 minutes of questioning and it
will be strictly enforced on me and then strictly enforced on
the ranking member, Dean Phillips, too, and even Kathy Manning.
But as we begin, I really want to show you that as there
may be some appearance of nonbipartisanship there is
bipartisanship and we--as you're going to be, I think, seeing
substantially great concern about the threats that exist and
the oppression of the people of Iran.
We should be working together and, in fact, Ms. Alinejad, a
question that we have or a point I want to make the world is so
inspired by the Iranian people and their pursuit of basic human
dignity, the 4,000 protests, I mean, and then, sadly, every
time we turn around the number of persons murdered increases.
And you have to put that in context, too. These
substantially young people who--their families have lost a dear
person in their family and so the moms and dads, the
grandparents, the siblings, how horrific is this?
It's critical that those who value human rights recognize
the importance of not supporting the dictators materially.
President Trump had a successful maximum pressure campaign
which denied resources to the regime.
How can we support a policy of maximum support for the
people of Iran as they are bravely pursuing political change
and reversal of the oppression and how could the passage of the
MAHSA Act have positive impact on those risking their lives for
freedom in Iran?
Ms. Alinejad. Thank you so much.
First of all, I have to say that MAHSA Act actually gave
hope to Iranian people that finally, you know, we see
bipartisan bill to try to actually isolate the killers.
But let me be very, very honest with you. Now the United
Nations actually became a place to unite the dictators from all
over the world. So for that, we need actually the U.S.
Government to take strong action and here you can help us a
lot.
How come that the members of the ayatollahs, the relative
of those who say death to America, they are here but we cannot
get a visa for the family members of those innocent protesters
who got killed? We cannot get medical visa for those women and
men who systematically got blinded by the Revolutionary Guards.
And another thing is that the Revolutionary Guards itself
is on the terrorist list by the United States of America when,
you know, the maximum pressure was applied by Trump
Administration.
But believe me, the U.S. Government should have one policy
toward Iran. Doesn't matter whether Trump is in power or Biden
is in power, Obama is in power. You have to call your allies to
designate Revolutionary Guards as a terrorist organization.
This is how you can help Iranian people who get killed in the
streets.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you very much, Ms. Alinejad, and I--
as you have specific examples of denial of visas or whatever
I'm confident that members--our office would be happy to try to
assist, OK?
Ms. Alinejad. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Mr. Wilson. And so, Mr. Taleblu, U.S. partners in the
region who oppose Iran seem to be rehabilitating its only ally
in the region, mass murderer and drug kingpin Bashar Al-Assad.
What do they hope to achieve in being--given Assad is firmly
entrenched with Iran and hosts permanent air and naval bases of
the Iranian ally war criminal Putin?
Mr. Taleblu. It's a great question, sir, and it dovetails
very nicely with, I think, what Norm Roule was talking about a
little bit earlier.
In essence, there is no way, in my view, to separate the
Assad regime in Syria from the government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. It's been tried diplomatically several times.
It has all been to folly. Every time the Assad regime has
used that to buy political space, diplomatic space, and even
economic breathing space. So it's simply a lifeline to the
Assad regime in Syria. That's, you know, discretionary note No.
1.
No. 2, I would say is that look at what U.S. partners in
the region are doing. After about 10 to 15 years, in their
view, many of the GCC and other countries--in their view of
America's failure to contain, deter, and roll back Iran they
are beginning to slowly hedge toward Iran.
Not that they're becoming pro-Iranian overnight. Certainly
not. The Gulf Cooperation Council States like Saudi Arabia,
UAE, and whatnot still deserve strong American support, full
stop.
But the reason this hedging is occurring is because they
feel that unless they increasingly even if not just politically
need to accommodate Tehran more, if they do not do that they
will have more Iranian targets and more Iranian proxy targets
on their back, not less.
So they're doing things to kind of win brownie points, you
could say, for Tehran and in essence trying to avoid the
pressure that the regime is putting on them. We have to
recognize this. We have to do better in our, you know,
military, economic, and political pushback of the Islamic
Republic and stop the rehabilitation of the Assad regime.
Mr. Wilson. And, indeed, this is another area of
bipartisanship as we were on the delegation just 3 weeks ago
and working together, and with your suggestions and all of you
we shall proceed.
And I now recognize the Ranking Member, Dean Phillips.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again to each of
you.
You know, we have these conversations time and time and
time again. We need a new approach. Don't stand with us. Let's
sit down together and figure it out.
You know, we have tried a lot of sticks. I believe this new
initiative, which I know is distasteful on the surface to many,
is a bit of a carrot. But I do want to ask each of you is there
a chance? Can you see any possibility that this potential
exchange of $6 billion in their frozen assets for some hostage
release that there's more below the surface, that there may be
a carrot there for changing the behavior, maybe aligned even
with some of the rapprochement that might be occurring with
Iran?
I know it's not comfortable but I'm just wondering what
would work--you know, what would work, maybe starting with you,
Mr. Roule. I'd just like to hear from each of you. You know,
would you support any attempt at diplomacy with Iran?
Do you think there is any chance whatsoever that their
interests might align with some of our diplomatic tools if we
leverage them appropriately? I'd love to hear from each of you
more specifically about what you think we should be doing.
Mr. Roule?
Mr. Roule. That's a great question. I have repeatedly
watched and participated in diplomacy with Iran over multiple
Administrations. We do not have a problem talking with Iran. We
just have a problem in getting Iran to say anything that is
worth hearing.
What has worked to change Iran behavior is a simple method.
It is consistent multilateral pressure and a sense that our
deterrence actions are sincere. If Iran senses that it can
outlast us, if it senses that our political divide in the
United States can undermine those threats, then it simply waits
because its leadership has sat in the same chair since 1979--
1983 for the Supreme Leader but he was around before that.
Every few years we change new Congressmen, senators, White
House personnel who come in and say, I'm a fresh face and it's
going to be different, and after a while the Iranians have seen
this movie repeatedly.
So if you're looking for the solution that brought Iran to
the table in 2014 it is not a single deal that provides them
with a carrot.
Mr. Phillips. OK. So heavier sanctions and more alignment--
--
Mr. Roule. No, consistent sanctions----
Mr. Phillips. Consistent.
Mr. Roule [continuing]. That touch the Supreme Leader.
Sanctions that are applied against individuals with no assets,
no use of the financial system, no history of travel, and who
are individuals the regime would rather not travel are symbolic
and may make you feel good. But you should also request in that
report I mentioned what is the actual impact of a sanction
placed against Iran because the sanctions that cost them money
do impact their decisionmaking.
Mr. Phillips. OK. Thank you. And I've got a little over 2
minutes left so if we could each take about 45 seconds.
Ms. Alinejad. Thank you. I----
Mr. Phillips. Let's go down the line here. Mr. Taleblu?
Ms. Alinejad. One of the relative of the U.S. hostages here
she's sitting here. Her father is in prison right now in a
death row.
Mr. Phillips. Thanks for being with us. I'm grateful. And,
unfortunately, I only have 2 minutes. I do want to hear from
each of you very specifically--very specifically--as Mr. Roule
just shared, what we should be doing.
Mr. Taleblu. First things first. Iran's changes to some of
its security posture in the region should not be mistaken for
deescalation and should not be welcomed. The Biden
Administration is fundamentally misreading what is happening.
Iran is not deescalating in the region. Iran is locking in
its posture. This is basically a knife in the back of Saudi
Arabia for 10 years and then a handshake does not account to
deescalation. Arming, training, funding the Houthis for 10
years, the Houthis are the only Iranian proxy with medium-range
ballistic missiles.
The Iranians did not create the Houthis. They co-opted that
movement there. So understand what this is first. Iran is
locking in a series of conflicts, not deescalating them;
locking in a stalemate in its favor to buy time, space,
breathing room.
Same thing with the rehab of its States. In addition to the
strong multilateral recommendations for sanctions that Norm
Roule just mentioned I would echo one other thing. Deterrence
by punishment, not just deterrence by denial. It is not enough
to have air and missile defense assets in the region----
Mr. Phillips. The punishment--what is punishment?
Mr. Taleblu. Deterrence by punishment is kinetic strikes
more----
Mr. Phillips. OK. Punishment----
Mr. Taleblu [continuing]. And lower threshold for those
kinetic strikes and more often and against the point of origin.
For example, the Biden Administration actually has a lower
threshold for the use of force than the Trump Administration
but is squandering it because its response is not at the point
of origin of those strikes.
Mr. Phillips. OK. I want to move to Ms. Maloney. And Ms.
Alinejad, you've been wonderful with your perspectives. I want
to hear Ms. Maloney answer this with 30 seconds left,
specifically.
Ms. Maloney. OK. I'll be very brief.
I agree with a lot. There's a lot of bipartisan consensus
even on this panel and certainly in this room but I would make
a strong case for the need for direct diplomacy with Iran.
I think that we have, unfortunately, made direct engagement
toxic and that simply has no historical precedent. We held
embassies in the Soviet Union throughout the cold war. We have
always had a diplomatic dialog with the Chinese.
We need to be directly engaging with the officials of the
Islamic Republic but, as my colleague said, doing so in a way
that makes clear that we are not ceding ground to them.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Ms. Maloney. My time has expired.
I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman Phillips.
We now proceed to Congressman Brian Mast of Florida.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate the time.
I want to start with you, Mr. Roule. You spend a great deal
of time on the ground in the Middle East, spent a career
spending time on the ground in the Middle East, and I want to
help you to--have you help us to understand the playbook for
Iran from your understanding as somebody that's spent time
there.
What play does Iran run at a granular level to get
influence whether in a Syria, whether in a Yemen, you know,
whether--you know, with different groups throughout Saudi
Arabia?
What is their playbook that they are running to? As I've
said many times, I think they're working to colonize every
place that they can across the region, gain financial
advantage, gain access to resources, gain influence in the
government.
Tell me what playbook do you find that they actually run on
the ground to execute those operations.
Mr. Roule. That's an important question. Iran has
consistently used proxies empowered, trained, and armed by a
small group of individuals from a force known as the Quds
Force.
Mr. Mast. Let me pause you there. I want to have you
continue to answer. That term proxy gets thrown around here all
the time, even Quds Force, Iranian Revolutionary Guard. If you
can, get even more granular, if you can, to answer that. What
are those proxy forces doing on the ground?
Mr. Roule. They take a non-Iranian official, non-Iranian
actors empowered with Iranian capability, to conduct in essence
actions that feed into Iran and that is as different as
individuals recruited in the United States to kidnap or kill
this fellow witness or using the Houthis to fire Iranian
weapons or training the Assad regime and working with the
Russians to kill Syrian freedom fighters.
And the reason for that is the international community does
not respond to Iran for the work of its proxies. We treat
actions in the United States to include the threats against
current--former and current American citizens and officials as
a legal issue, not an Iranian foreign policy issue.
The world was generally silent when hundreds of Iranian
missiles and drones aimed at civilian targets to include a
hundred thousand Americans and we treated it as a local air
defense issue and not an Iran issue.
So for Iran it's a winning strategy. It's low cost, it does
not incur a threat of attack by the United States, and it's
able to convince its targets that they should fear Iran or that
the United States will not stand up for them.
Mr. Mast. Let's continue on that thread. What do they use
to create fear from their side of it to those that they want to
engage with--to be feared or loved? What do they--what is their
tool for that?
Mr. Roule. If you look at Sunni Islam, Sunni Islam--al-
Qaida's number-one target was overthrowing Saudi Arabia. If you
look at militant Shi'a Islam, its number-one goal is to adhere
to the to--to the directions of the Supreme Leader and
fostering the influence of Iran throughout the world.
They employ the cruelest bloodiest techniques, and one more
comment to build on a comment of Masih Alinejad, their
techniques are often involving tools of weapons of mass
destruction, which means in the United States that would be
explosives over sniper scopes, which means missiles aimed at a
variety of targets do not turn left and right over American
passports.
It means women and children die along with their primary
military target, because by doing so and having the world stand
back and not respond they're able to say, you're alone and
you'd better listen.
Mr. Mast. The term you're looking for, I think, is
indiscriminate, right, versus when we put Suleimani into his
place into to five pieces on the side of the tarmac where there
was not collateral damage.
Mr. Roule. Absolutely. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Mast. Get more granular with me if you can about their
brutal tactics. What do they do specifically that makes you say
they're that brutal and bloody whether to their own people,
whether to those that they would kidnap, as we have a family
member here?
Mr. Roule. Within Iran the leadership well knows what
happens in its prison. We're talking about sexual violence
against minors. We're talking about tools that leave innocent
civilians blinded or peaceful protesters blinded.
We're talking about coercion against family members that
leave--the threat of destitution or imprisonment. We're talking
about people who disappear in their country in a way that it
hasn't occurred in the region save for Saddam Hussein's era in
such--in such a style.
There is not a limit on their cruelty. There is, however, a
limit on the amount of blood they feel they wish to spill at
once because they believe that in some ways is a--it shows a
weakness of the regime. But narrowed focused cruelty is a very
effective tool inside of Iran and Masih Alinejad, I'm sure, and
Suzanne and Behnam can comment on that.
Mr. Mast. I thank you for sharing your experience from your
time on the ground in the region. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman Brian Mast.
We now proceed to Congresswoman Kathy Manning of North
Carolina.
Ms. Manning. Thank you to my friends Chairman Wilson and
Ranking Member Phillips and thank you to our witnesses for
being at this very important hearing.
We all know that Iran is the principal source of
instability in the region. It is a major threat to our U.S.
interests and the world's leading State sponsor of terrorism.
But an Iran armed with nuclear weapons would represent an
even greater, entirely unacceptable threat and that is why now
is the time to maintain pressure on Iran and continue to
enforce strong economic sanctions that we have in place. But as
we have discussed today, that does not seem to be enough.
So, Mr. Roule, can you talk to us a little bit more--I know
you've started the discussion under prior questions, but what
should the proper approach look like? And you mentioned earlier
that what we need is a consistent multilateral pressure, that
that is the only thing that works.
I wonder if, first of all, could you elaborate on that but
also can you give us an example of when that consistent
multilateral pressure has worked?
Mr. Roule. Thank you, ma'am.
In 2014 Iran came to the negotiating table because a number
of drivers were present, most of which are absent today: great
power unity, the United States with Russia and China.
The Obama Administration had put in place the most
significant amount of sanctions that had ever been placed on
Iran, and truth in lending. They would have called it--I was
there--maximum pressure, but that just hadn't been thought of.
But it was perceived at the time that that was maximum
pressure and the Iranians thought pressure would be greater. We
had routine large American military forces in the region. We
were still in Iraq and Afghanistan. We had unity with the Gulf
States and with Europe that more pressure against Iran was
needed.
This brought Iran to the table. That does not mean Iran
came to the table for any deal. It just came to the table. What
you need is a policy that--in which Iran believes its options
to escape pressure do not exist and that's difficult with
Europe. It's difficult with Russia now and China.
But if Iran believes that sanctions are not significant or
not serious and the sanctions on Iran's oil industry do not
appear to be enforced as robustly as they should be, it tells
the Iranians they have not yet reached our red lines and it's a
very dangerous situation.
I gave a list of a number of things Iran has done and none
of those things provoked military action by the United States
or robust--a robust sanctions action. If that does not do it,
if you're in Tehran your answer is probably, I bet I can go a
little farther.
Ms. Manning. In light of what's happened with the war in
Ukraine, in light of the need for energy in many of the
European countries, and in light of the burgeoning relationship
between Iran and Russia and Russia's need for the drones that
Iran is supplying, how realistic is it to establish a
consistent multilateral pressure, the kind that you are
describing?
Mr. Roule. It's not likely at all.
Ms. Manning. So what are our other options?
Mr. Roule. Our other options are unilateral sanctions
working with Europeans and convincing other States to stand
with us. It's not the strongest play that we have had but as
other policymakers have stated you go to war economic,
diplomatic, or military with the Army you've got and that's the
current world that we now face.
But we should say there is a--there's also an action that
will happen if we do not occur. We often talk about what are
the consequences of steps. There are going to be consequences
to nonaction as well and you should consider that, ma'am, as
you're in policymaking.
Ms. Manning. Thank you.
Ms. Maloney, can you comment on the same kind of question?
You talked about the need for a new approach. You gave some
examples but can you elaborate on that?
Ms. Maloney. Thank you very much.
Again, I agree with a lot of what my fellow panelists had
to say. The conditions that we face today for multilateral
diplomacy are far less positive in terms of really marshaling a
coalition to apply the same level of pressure that brought Iran
to the negotiating table starting in 2013.
But I also would commend Congress to think about what the
United States has done over the past several years with respect
to the challenge from China. It was unimaginable that we would
have been able to marshal the pressure that we have, to build
the consensus that we have, to broker a better relationship,
for example, between the Koreans and the Japanese to build
AUKUS, to create a wider coalition of States that are prepared
to take risks and prepared to apply pressure when they
understand that there's a challenge and also that they
understand the United States is prepared to lead.
I think the same can be done with respect to Iran. It's
going to be an uphill climb. We're going to have to examine the
tradeoffs between applying pressure to Iran and what that means
for our own economy and what it means for our policy toward
China.
But, unfortunately, we have made Iran policy subsidiary to
these other much larger challenges and it has fallen off the
radar. I think, obviously, as you can tell from the consensus
amongst us it's really time to put it back front and center on
the U.S. policy agenda.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. My time has expired. Thank you all
for your testimony.
I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congresswoman Kathy
Manning.
And we are now--as an indication of how important this
hearing is, how much we appreciate the witnesses who are here--
it's really unprecedented--but the chairman of the Foreign
Affairs Committee has arrived, Chairman Mike McCaul of Texas,
and, again, it's a reiterization of how important the people of
Iran are as we want the best.
Chairman McCaul?
Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for
holding this very important hearing, very timely considering
the action on the floor that we had yesterday passing three
important bills pertaining to Iran.
And I want to thank the witnesses for being here to focus
on the threat that Iran poses to not only the United States but
Israel and Saudi Arabia and the whole Middle East.
This week as we commemorate 9/11 and the murder of Mahsa
Amini by Iran's morality police the Administration waived our
sanctions to greenlight the transfer of $6 billion for Iran,
the world's top State sponsor of terror.
Let me be abundantly clear. The Americans held by Iran are
innocent hostages who must be released immediately and
unconditionally. But paying ransom to release hostages creates
a direct incentive for America's adversaries to conduct more
hostage taking.
Iran is bragging about receiving this payment. The
president of Iran is saying that he will do whatever he wants
with the money even though it was supposed to go for
humanitarian purposes.
We need a policy to deter future hostage taking and one
that contains, not enables, Iranian aggression. A nuclear Iran,
let me say, is unacceptable and I will have a resolution on the
floor stating it's a policy of the United States that a nuclear
Iran is unacceptable, and in diplomatic speak I think the
ayatollah and the president of Iran understand what that means.
As the IAEA just disclosed, Iran could produce enough
uranium for several nuclear weapons within weeks, even as the
regime continues to stonewall their investigators. That's why
I'm so concerned the Administration may broker an informal
nuclear understanding with Iran without notifying Congress, in
violation of the Iran Nuclear Agreement Review Act.
I made this point to President Biden in a recent letter
that I sent with the Leader Scalise and Conference Chair
Stefanik. No matter what you call it--a deal, an agreement, an
understanding, an arrangement--it legitimizes Iran's nuclear
program and that is bad for the United States, our allies, and
our global security.
Time and again, this Administration continues to project
weakness on the world stage and weakness, as we know from
history, only invites aggression. Under U.S. law any
arrangement with Iran needs to be submitted to Congress
pursuant to the Iran Nuclear Agreement Review Act, a submission
which has not yet taken place.
This is not the first time Congress has been left in the
dark. The Special Envoy for Iran, Rob Malley, was on leave for
months before the media, not the State Department, revealed
that he was under investigation for potentially mishandling
classified information.
It's very concerning, deeply troublesome, and they were not
transparent with either side of the aisle on this committee.
Mr. Meeks and I registered that complaint to the
Administration.
I just believe that is totally unacceptable, and as we
continue to face the lethal threat of Iran's missiles and
drones that fuel deadly attacks across the Middle East and now
Russian attacks in Ukraine, I am pleased this week that the
House passed my bipartisan the Fight CRIME Act which imposes
sweeping sanctions on anyone doing business with Iran's missile
and drone program.
With the U.N. restrictions on Iran's missiles and drones
set to expire next month, which has been in place for 15
years--they will expire next month--we need to send a clear
message to the international community that buying Iran's
missiles and drones guarantees that you will be sanctioned.
As I mentioned this week, this is the anniversary of Mahsa
Amini's murder by Iran's morality police. Her murder is a
tragedy and an outrage and it sparked a revolution, a
revolution I hope we can continue because the people of Iran
are oppressed by this theocracy. They do not agree with it but
they're oppressed and censored and we need to empower the women
in Iran and the people of Iran.
Throughout the past year brave Iranians have taken to the
streets in protest of this brutal regime, risking their lives.
The United States needs to do more to support the people of
Iran and these protesters.
So, again, I want to thank the chairman for holding this
very timely and important hearing and I want to thank the
witnesses for all you do for the people of Iran. I know that 1
day they will be liberated.
I remember 1979 and it changed the Middle East. But you
cannot keep people under oppression forever, and just as the
Soviet Union collapsed I do believe that the Iranian regime
theocracy under the ayatollah will collapse by the will of its
own people.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Chairman Mike McCaul, and
I'm going to reiterate how important it is that we would have
the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee to come in to
show respect to our witnesses but, really, love and affection
for the people of Iran.
We want freedom for the people of Iran, the courage--and to
recognize the courage of the protesters in 4,000 different
communities, the 22,000 people who are being detained. Now we
hear over 600 who have been killed and the consequence to their
families as we see the consequence to moms and dads, to
grandparents, to siblings.
This is just--must be addressed and working together with
the leadership of Chairman Mike McCaul our Congress stands with
the people of Iran.
I'm very grateful we now recognize Congressman Brad
Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
our witnesses for joining us today.
I want to juxtapose my day yesterday with our hearing
today. Yesterday we spent the day marking the third anniversary
of the Abraham Accords. Started the morning with a group of
young people from the Accord countries, young people who
brimmed with optimism and promise of possibilities of building
relationships and pursuing peace.
We spoke about new paradigms and bridges to understanding
and today we talk about Iran--Iran, a violator of human rights,
pursuing a nuclear program, State sponsor of terrorism drones
being sold to Russia in their fight against Ukraine, piracy,
assassination, and, Mr. Roule, you said seeking hegemony in the
region for their own purposes and economic means.
Ms. Maloney, you talked about the diplomatic efforts to
constrain Iran's nuclear advances that have had little effect
for the last 40-plus years, 30-plus years--few meaningful
breakthroughs or sustained reversals--and you said quite
clearly it's time for a new approach.
Now, in 2015 I opposed the JCPOA because I felt it did not
go far enough. It did not solve the--it may have solved the
problem of the physics but it did not solve the problem of the
geopolitics and had sunsets that left Iran a nuclear power in
the end.
But I also opposed pulling out of the JCPOA in 2017 and
2018 because we hadn't strengthened our hand in the intervening
time. We hadn't laid a new foundation to create a better way to
block and ultimately permanently close Iran's pathways to a
nuclear bomb.
Again, Ms. Maloney, as you said, deterring Iran will
require a much higher level of vigilance from the U.S. and our
partners in Europe and the Middle East and beyond.
Mr. Ben Taleblu, you said we need to connect the dots. I
think you're right but I think it's more than that. It's more
than just dots. It's the lines that connect us around the
world, the seams where things come together.
It's the overlaps extending beyond the Gulf and the entire
Middle East, the war in Ukraine, the great power politics. In
fact, it runs across our entire foreign policy.
This Administration and those before have continued to make
it crystal clear that all options are on the table including
military force and I was pleased to lead with my colleague, the
chair, to say that the U.S. is committed to making sure Iran
never ever has a nuclear weapon.
But finding a kinetic--a nonkinetic solution is certainly
better than war to reverse Iran's nuclear program and other
nefarious activities.
In particular, it's a combination of stronger ties with our
allies and combined sanctions, sanctions that, unfortunately,
will begin to diminish immediately after being implemented. So
we need to ratchet them up over and over again. We need to have
the will and the resolve with ourselves and our allies.
So I've been giving a longer speech than I intended. Let me
ask the question. All right, Ms. Maloney, I'll start with you.
We need a new paradigm. You laid it out a little bit. What
are the most important things we can do here in Congress to lay
the groundwork, to do what hasn't been achieved in the past, to
better thwart Iran, to better send the signal that we have the
resolve and the will that Iran will never have a nuclear weapon
and we will do everything necessary to ensure we achieve that
goal?
Ms. Maloney. My fellow witness listed a number of bills
that are before the Congress and I think many of them do in
fact help to advance the overall goal of ensuring that we deter
Iran and that we prevent Iran from ever having a nuclear
weapons capability.
But you mentioned the Abraham Accords and there's been
discussion of the recent delegation trip to the region, and I
think that there's much more that this body can do in terms of
discussions and conversations with policymakers from across the
Middle East who in many cases are seeking to find ways to
mitigate their own threat from Iran by essentially providing
economic incentives.
We need to ensure that, first and foremost, obviously, we
have a close robust partnership with the Israelis who have been
with us every step of the way. But that needs to be the case
with our partners in the Gulf, who often play both sides of the
aisle, especially as we talk about a potential expansion of the
Abraham Accords.
It's got to be crystal clear to the Saudis and to the other
Gulf Arabs that their cooperation, their enforcement of U.S.
sanctions, their insurance that they do not somehow incentivize
the Islamic Republic to think that it can survive this current
challenge is going to be absolutely critical.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Roule, let me turn to you because your
career spans 34 years with the CIA. It was about 30 years ago
we started raising the alarm bells about Iran's nuclear
program.
We have done so many things, talked about so many ideas to
thwart it, but today where we sit Iran has enough material to
build nuclear weapons. They're advancing in that program and
they're making--reinforcing relations with China and Russia.
I'm past my time but if you can answer, what's the most
important thing we need to do now to make sure we change the
path we're going on?
Mr. Roule. Consistency of a policy that says we're open to
diplomacy but we'll absolutely use military force in certain
circumstances. The absence of consistency has catastrophic
consequences for our diplomacy. Suzanne Maloney is one of the
wisest people in Washington and her comments on the Gulf States
are spot on.
I'm going to give you an example of when we went to Gulf
States and we said we would like you to cut your ties with--
your economic ties with Iran and some of them severely cut
their economic ties with Iran at great cost to their own
economies, these States were then told in the newspaper we were
secretly negotiating with Iran and that a president of the
United States had offered to even engage the Iranian president
at the United Nations.
You have to think what does that mean today when we ask
these same countries to cut their ties with Russia. Do they
expect that we will have a secret back channel that will result
in the president of the United States meeting Vladimir Putin in
another location? This absence of consistency from one
Administration to another is corrosive and helps Iran.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you.
Chairman, thank you for give me the extra time. I'll take
two more seconds to say you opened by talking about
bipartisanship. If we can achieve consistency in Congress the
best way to do that is continuing our work together across
party lines, Republicans and Democrats.
I appreciate your leadership and I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman Brad Schneider, and,
indeed, Congressman Schneider and I have worked together on
different issues and we shall continue.
With this I am really grateful that we have Congressman Jim
Baird of Indiana.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I really appreciate
the witnesses taking their time to be here.
And, you know, it's been said and I will just reiterate
that--the fact that a nuclear Iran is unacceptable. Their human
rights violations is just unacceptable around the world and,
you know, I'm really amazed at how much fear impacts people and
their thinking.
And so I would like to turn my turn--my time over to a
colleague of mine, and he and I have been in combat and so we
do not--we do not--we're not afraid of fear, I guess.
And so with that, I'd like to turn it over and yield my
time to Mr. Brian Mast.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Baird. I appreciate the time.
I want to continue on the line of questioning that has been
brought up on both sides of the JCPOA, what do you do, moving
forward--different Administrations--and I want to bring up some
of the comments of Wendy Sherman.
So Wendy Sherman, chief architect of the original Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, and, you know, she--I do not know
if you could call it a book tour but certainly spoke publicly
about it in length, you know, following her time leaving the
Administration and during the Trump Administration.
She spoke very clearly about the fact that what allowed
them to do what they viewed as a success with the JCPOA, that
it could not have been done without Iran fully believing that
the United States of America would, as you just discussed, Mr.
Roule, take kinetic action, would go and destroy Fordow if need
be, go and destroy wherever it is that we would need to destroy
to prevent a nuclear-armed Iran. The deal could not have
happened without that.
So if that was the keystone, the kingpin, to having that
deal take place there's a very important question at play for
this Administration or for anybody viewing this Administration,
any foreign intelligence agencies looking at this
Administration.
And this is a question for all four of you as analysts of
this--of this situation. Do any of you believe that any foreign
intelligence agencies view that this Administration will, as
you said, take any and all action to prevent a nuclear-armed
Iran as Wendy Sherman said was so key or do they assess that
they do not have that level of commitment?
Ms. Maloney. I will start.
I personally believe that the Biden Administration would
take military action. Whether our adversaries believe that I do
not know. I think that the exercises such as Juniper Oak that
we have engaged in with our partners in the region have been an
important way of signaling to the Iranians and others that we
are prepared to do so.
I believe that the President, consistent with the kind of
traditional U.S. national security approach, means what he says
when he says it and in particular given how close his
relationship is with the Israelis and understanding the Israeli
perspective on this there is genuinely a commitment.
But I do not think that the Iranians fully appreciate it
and I do not know that our other adversaries do as well.
Mr. Mast. Thank you.
Mr. Taleblu. May I just chime in briefly?
Mr. Mast. All of you are welcome to chime in.
Mr. Taleblu. Thank you. It's an excellent question.
Definitely cannot purport to speak on behalf of any foreign
intelligence organization, but trying to put yourself briefly
and however flawed into the mind of the adversary I think the
Iranians have some significant room for confidence in their
assessment about American thresholds for the use of force,
about American deterrence by punishment, again, that theme
American willingness to use force in general.
So even in the situation that Suzanne Maloney outlined
where our partners and allies and, you know, allied foreign
intelligence services like Five Eyes and whatnot make an
assessment that Biden is consistent with the past five U.S.
presidents to prevent a nuclear Iran at all costs, including
using the military option, I believe that perception is eroding
in the mind of Iran's strategic decisionmakers.
Things that make that perception erode is basically a
bipartisan foreign policy failure, for instance, to enforce the
Carter Doctrine. 2019 cruise missile and drone missile strikes
at Saudi oil facilities, no kinetic American response. The loss
of American life in the Middle East, no kinetic response.
Again, last year an American citizen died due to an Iranian
close-range ballistic missile strike--I believe the family is
trying to sue the State Department or U.S. government--no
kinetic U.S. response.
These things erode the otherwise tough perception of joint
military exercises and consistent rhetoric across several
Administrations. So it's not just our rhetoric, it's the
realities that our posture creates.
Mr. Mast. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman Brian Mast.
And as another indication of the bipartisan support for the
people of Iran we have had the chairman of the Foreign Affairs
Committee, Mike McCaul of Texas, Republican, here and now we
have Congressman Gerry Connolly, the former president of the
NATO Parliamentary Assembly, of another political party from me
and so it's bipartisan.
Congressman Connolly?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
the collaboration you and I have experienced over the years,
making common cause with our allies and NATO in the terrible
depraved war in Ukraine.
Ms. Maloney, the horrors of the prospect of Iran becoming a
nuclear power have been enumerated here in this hearing. Was
there ever any attempt to kind of roll it back and prevent that
from happening?
Ms. Maloney. I believe that the----
Mr. Connolly. Speak up, please, into the mic.
Ms. Maloney. Yes. I believe that the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action was, in effect, an attempt to contain and to
begin to roll back Iran's nuclear advances. Had it been
implemented in full, had there been an opportunity as everyone
who is involved with the deal had envisioned to negotiate a
follow-on agreement that would buildupon and strengthen the
provisions of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action I believe
that we would be in a much stronger position with respect to
Iran's proximity to nuclear weapons capability.
Mr. Connolly. Would it be fair to say that that agreement
was the first time Iran sat down with the Western allies and
the United States in particular to agree to anything since the
revolution?
Ms. Maloney. The first time since the 1981 Algiers Accord
that freed the hostages in Iran.
Mr. Connolly. Now, was that agreement, the JCPOA agreement,
was that--was that ever certified in terms of compliance?
Ms. Maloney. Iran was complying with the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Mr. Connolly. And that was certified by the IAEA in Vienna.
Is that correct?
Ms. Maloney. That's correct.
Mr. Connolly. Multiple times?
Ms. Maloney. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. And in case somebody does not want to trust
an international organization, am I correct that it was also
certified twice by the President Trump State Department?
Ms. Maloney. Yes, you are correct.
Mr. Connolly. Oh. And that was in all respects, was it not,
with respect to centrifuges, with respect to the amount of
enriched uranium that had to be shipped out of the country,
with respect to lowering the rate of enrichment allowed, and
with respect to the plutonium production reactor? Is that
correct?
Ms. Maloney. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. So we actually had a vehicle and it was
working and they were in compliance, and what happened to that
vehicle?
Ms. Maloney. The Iran nuclear deal----
Mr. Connolly. You've got to speak up.
Ms. Maloney. The Joint Comprehensiveness Plan of Action has
collapsed since the withdrawal by the Trump Administration in
2018 and the reimposition of sanctions in contravention to our
obligations under the----
Mr. Connolly. So some of these people who were so quick to
talk for a kinetic solution conveniently overlooked the fact
that we had a nonkinetic solution that was working and that was
pushing Iran back from that nuclear threshold by many, many--
well, in some cases, months and some other categories years and
now we're faced with very few good options. Is that a fair
statement?
Ms. Maloney. We have far worse options today than we did in
2015 or in 2018 when President Trump exited the deal.
Mr. Connolly. And one of the biggest critics of the JCPOA
before it went into effect was the prime minister of Israel,
Mr. Netanyahu, who actually came here to Washington and spoke
to a joint session of Congress, snubbing the chief executive of
our country, President Obama, and agreeing unilaterally to an
appearance here by one party's invitation, and he claimed that
this was so important, so existentially threatening, that it
transcended politics. Do you remember that speech?
Ms. Maloney. I do remember.
Mr. Connolly. How long has Mr. Netanyahu been prime
minister of Israel?
Ms. Maloney. Cumulatively, I'm not sure I have the math
offhand.
Mr. Connolly. I think 13 years--longest serving prime
minister.
And in the early parts of his tenure if he was worried
about the existential threat Iran posed do you believe that he
could have had a kinetic option to himself at that time, an
option, by the way, Israel has in fact exercised in other
nuclear situations, Syria and Iraq to wit?
Ms. Maloney. I do not believe that the Israelis could
conclusively eliminate the Iranian nuclear program alone.
Mr. Connolly. Today. I'm talking about when he first became
prime minister. The options were better, were they not?
Ms. Maloney. They were better.
Mr. Connolly. OK. And did he exercise the kinetic option?
Ms. Maloney. He exercised considerable covert options but
not the sort of military strike.
Mr. Connolly. Right. He did not go to war with Iran. He did
not bomb Iran. But we hear some voices here today apparently
thinking it's OK for the United States to do that in a much
more complicated, difficult, and certain to be costly situation
if we resort to violence. Would that be a fair statement, do
you think?
Ms. Maloney. That is a fair statement.
Mr. Connolly. I think it's something we have got to
contemplate and I think we have to take responsibility for the
past. A lot of people who opposed JCPOA were proved wrong. They
did not cheat. They, in fact, complied.
It was certified by IAEA and by the Trump Administration
itself and we walked away from it. We did that, not Russia, not
Iran, and we need to take some responsibility for that in
trying to repair the damage we caused.
I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, President Gerry Connolly.
We now proceed to Congressman Rich McCormick of Georgia.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the
witnesses for taking time out of your busy schedule to come
speak to us today.
Despite what the current Administration would like to think
Iran continues to be a malign influence around the world. We
have seen it both with terrorism, with overt gestures of
weaponry and what they're selling to people who would do us
harm.
In a real way they are funding--they're probably the
biggest funders of terrorism in the world, in my opinion as a
military guy who's faced their weaponry all over the world and
seen what they've done in terrorism.
To be clear, we have a significant number of Iranian
diaspora in the United States, who are amazing people but very
much despise the theocracy that's oppressing the people that
they love as well.
At least from the aspect of what we have given as far as
billions of dollars, we saw it previously in the Obama
Administration--I think $1.7 billion for four people who were
given up as hostages and now $6 billion for, what is it, five
hostages.
You can see that, A, obviously it's encouraging the bad
behavior and, B, inflation isn't just here in America. I think
we can see that this is just getting worse as a policy, if you
will.
Now, we have deflected this saying, oh, this money that we
paid to them can only be used for what we say it's going to be.
Of course, I'd like to use Joe Biden's words against him. Come
on, man. It just makes no sense.
We know that that money is going to go back to Iran.
They're going to be able to spend more money on whatever they
want to because it frees up more money to spend on arms and
terrorism, everything bad. That's just common sense. It's
deductive reasoning, if you will.
I think it was an excellent point that you made about that
we lose all leverage and moral high ground when we say to other
nations, you need to cut ties--you need to not benefit Iran
economically, much to their detriment.
We say, please do this as a collaborative effort, and then
we give them billions of dollars to benefit Iran and their
economy. I think it's pure hypocrisy, and what was really
interesting, Ms. Maloney, is you actually surprised me.
I love it when people surprise me because I learn, and you
said something along the line that the Biden Administration
would be willing to use force against Iran if they saw them
approaching something that we have essentially forbidden, if
you will, or agreed upon to keep them from using nuclear arms
or use force.
The problem is that we look at our actions--that Iran would
feel empowered to seize an American ship, that they would feel
empowered to seize American citizens, does not make me think
that they take that threat very seriously, quite frankly, and
that's what worries me is that we're coming from what is a
perceived weakness.
You said whether they perceive it is the way I heard you,
quote, say. That's my concern is that we're not projecting
power. We're not projecting strength. We're not seen as world
leaders and it's creating a void of world leadership.
I'm all for individual freedoms in America. I believe in
American inalienable rights. The question is--I have to the
panel is should we as a policy not allow Americans to travel to
Iran, given that we continue to have this bad behavior, if
we're going to continue to have to bail people out? In other
words, usually we give people the freedom to take their
chances.
But given the fact that they're just doing this over and
over again and it becomes a source of income should we
literally say no more--you cannot do it?
Ms. Alinejad. May I take the question?
Mr. McCormick. Please.
Ms. Alinejad. Yes, I have no fear to say that the U.S.
Government must warn its own citizens not to travel to Iran
because my beloved country Iran under Islamic Republic is not
land of tourists. It is land of terrorism, and that actually--
there is proof and a high ranking member of Revolutionary Guard
saying that we are suffering from economic crisis in Iran and I
have a solution. He is the main advisor of Ali Khamenei. He
says that, Mohsen Rezaee, he says that if we take 10,000
Americans hostage we can actually help our economic situation
in Iran.
So it is clear, and let me--I really want to say that. We
have spent, like, 1 hour, 2 hour--I lost the time. We're
talking about nuclear deal and this is the conversation that
most of the American policymaker cares about it and mostly they
spend time to talk about this.
But believe me, Iranian people they moved on. The problem
in Iran is not nuclear, you know, deal. I'm not agreeing with
what--everything Trump did. I'm not agreeing with, you know,
all his policy.
But, believe me, Iranian people were thanking him for
walking out from nuclear deal. Believe me, Iranian people were
celebrating when Qasem Soleimani got killed because he was a
terrorist. He killed a lot of innocent people.
Don't get me wrong. We're not encouraging--we're not war
mongers. The true war mongers are the Islamic Republic actually
killing their own teenagers, sending drones to Putin to kill
innocent children in Ukraine.
So for years and years everywhere we go we just hear
talking about we want to stop Iran from having a nuclear bomb.
But how? How? You spent the resources of Americans for two
decades. You achieved nothing.
The moment when Iranian people are calling Obama, Obama,
you're either with us or with the Islamic Republic, Obama was
sending secret letter to Khamenei, to the Supreme Leader of
Iran, instead of supporting Iranian people.
Believe me, we're not calling you to bring democracy for
us. We're not actually asking Americans to help us. Clearly,
we're asking you to stop helping the killers. Imagine--imagine
in your neighborhood there is an abusive man raping girls,
raping teenagers.
What would you do? You report him to the police. You're not
going and giving him money and asking him OK, please stop.
Don't rape children. No.
This is what we the people of Iran are doing. We want to
make the Islamic Republic, the terrorist regime of Iran,
responsible, taking them to the court--to international court.
And then in the middle of our way we see, as our fellow
panelists clearly mentioned, secret and parallel negotiation
with the killers, with the rapist.
So yes, I know that you want an Iran without bomb. But Iran
is--the Islamic Republic is not trust--you cannot trust them
and what I want is clear, that help us to end this regime
because an Iran without Islamic Republic will benefit the
United States of America as well.
We, the people of Iran, are better allies for the
Americans. You meet with Ebrahim Raisi. You meet with--secretly
at the United Nations you meet with them. You secretly call the
killers but you do not even dare to meet with us.
The Biden Administration asked me to get disappeared.
President Biden does not want to meet with me, do not do
anything when I got killed here at the United States of
America. Now you have to listen to the voice of Iranian women.
That's all we want.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman Rich
McCormick.
Mr. McCormick. Couldn't sum it up better, Chair.
Mr. Wilson. Here, here.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson. Amen.
We now proceed to Congressman Brad Sherman of California.
Mr. Sherman. We were in a strong position in 2014-2015. We
had effective sanctions, particularly the banking sanctions. We
had international support and compliance with those sanctions
and we had an American public attitude that would allow us to
convey a credible threat of military action. And then, finally,
we had an Iranian nuclear program that had not been hardened
against air strikes.
Today we are in a weaker position. We still have the
sanctions and then they grab a hostage and we waive this or
that aspect of the sanctions. We certainly have no
international support and the American public is less
enthusiastic, to use a word, about the use of American military
force in the Middle East.
I think both sides of this argument agree that we had a
strong position in 2014-2015. Those who supported the JCPOA
said we had this great position; that's why we got such a great
deal. Others said we have such a strong position we should get
a better deal.
Now we're in a weaker position. Others during this hearing
have argued that we need to create in the minds in Tehran a
credible threat of military force. In order to do that we would
have to have a credible threat of military force.
I think both doves and hawks agree that it'd be great for
Tehran to fear military action and then not have to engage in
the military action. But I think that the risk of--well, I
think the American people might support action if it was highly
effective and not terribly costly.
And so I'll ask--and I hope I pronounce your name right,
Mr. Taleblu--how vulnerable is the Iran nuclear program? Not to
commandos on the ground, an invasion, and a million forces. I
realize if we could deploy a million troops we could do
something.
How vulnerable is that program? How many years or months
could it be set back by two or 3 days of American Air Force
action?
Mr. Taleblu. Thank you, Congressman. It's an important
question.
I do not think any air campaign of, you know, two or 3 days
would totally resolve the Iranian nuclear program and because
Iran is likely to respond it would beget a cycle of escalation
that the U.S. or Israel or whatever State engaging in the
military option would have to be prepared to absorb, offset,
deter, and, again, kinetically respond to.
Mr. Sherman. I think the----
Mr. Taleblu. I think it'll be, you know, several thousand
sorties. But never forget this. There's always a bigger bomb.
If the Iranians tunnel deeper the Americans produce different,
you know, massive ordnance penetrators.
The U.S. should not be in the business, even rhetorically,
of diminishing its own military deterrence. So I have
confidence in the U.S. military capability. It's more a
question of making sure that the Islamic Republic fears that.
Mr. Sherman. But you both--you have confidence in the
ability but a few days of bombing wouldn't set them back very
far.
Mr. Taleblu. Well, why would you engage in a limited--a
time-limited campaign? Why would the U.S. limit its duration?
Mr. Sherman. OK. Because the American people pulled--
demanded that we pull out of Afghanistan. The American people
demanded; we pulled out of Iraq.
Mr. Taleblu. That's right.
Mr. Sherman. Neither political party was in favor of even
leaving a few thousand troops in Afghanistan, and you cannot
have a credible threat of military force if the military force
that is credible does not credibly correlate with the public
opinion in a democracy.
But let me move on to another question and that is we have
in the past provided tiny amounts of open aid to pro-democracy
forces in Iran. I remember it was once national headline that
we provided $3 million, the first time I saw $3 million above
the fold in the newspaper back when we had newspapers.
Should we be providing covert or overt aid to democracy
forces and to what--and I realize one of our witnesses spoke
eloquently about standing with the people. We could put
economic pressure on the regime, which may hurt the Iranian
people. But what about funding democracy forces?
Ms. Maloney, with those forces be more successful if they
were funded and would they be hurt by being associated by the--
with American aid?
Ms. Maloney. This is an issue I've talked and written about
and I will say my own views have changed over the years. I have
worried about the taint that American funding might put on
legitimately Iranian groups in----
Mr. Sherman. Although that taint will exist in either case.
If we do not give them money Tehran will say we do and if we do
give them money we'll say we do not. So----
Ms. Maloney. And that's exactly the position that I hold
today. I think that we need to put all of our efforts toward
helping the Iranian people to see what they've been fighting
for for more than a century.
I do believe that the regime is more fragile than it has
ever been despite the apparent diplomatic heft that it has
through its relationships with Russia and China, and I do
believe that the Iranian people are more coherent in terms of
their own mobilization against the regime and that what we saw
last September with the protests in the wake of the death of
Mahsa Amini will 1 day be seen as the beginning of the end of
the Islamic Republic.
Mr. Sherman. Well, I hope someday that we're as robust as
Tehran accuses us of being and I regard the greatest weakness
of that regime not a weakness that they do not have enough
concrete protecting their nuclear facility but that they do not
have the support of the Iranian people.
I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman Brad Sherman.
We now proceed to Congressman Mike Lawler of New York.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I'd like to enter one of our witnesses, Mr. Behnam
Ben Taleblu, his report on Iran's ballistic missile program
into the record, specifically pages 21 to 29.
Now----
Mr. Wilson. It shall be admitted.
[The information referred to follows:]

FDD
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4431.015

Mr. Lawler. Thank you. On Monday, the 22d anniversary of
September 11th, 2001, the Biden Administration informed
Congress that it struck a deal with Iran to swap prisoners and
release $6 billion in frozen Iranian funds.
Let me be very clear. Our President, Joe Biden, announced
that he would give the worst State sponsor of terrorism $6
billion on the anniversary of the worst terrorist attack in the
history of our Nation.
It is unconscionable, and while this Administration claims
the funds will be spent on humanitarian aid the Iranian
president said, quote, ``This money belongs to the Iranian
people, the Iranian government. So the Islamic Republic of Iran
will decide what to do with this money,'' end quote.
This Administration should be absolutely ashamed of itself.
We should not only never be trading dollars for hostages--and,
yes, we want those hostages to come home, but we traded
hostages for hostages and gave them $6 billion. That's what you
call idiotic.
So it seems like either our Administration is lying or the
Iranian regime is lying, or both. Who knows? What
accountability measures are in place to ensure that this money
does not fund terrorism or Iran's nuclear program? Does anybody
know?
Mr. Roule. Sir, I think you can have confidence--and I want
to be careful how I parse this. The Administration is correct
to say that all transactions in Qatar will be very carefully
scrutinized and can be stopped if they go for nonhumanitarian
issues, package one.
Package two, this amount of money will likely free up a
similar amount of money within Tehran that would have been
intended for the same humanitarian purchases. This money can
now be used largely to sustain the regime on the inside but to
fund in a highly meaningful and impactful way terrorism, the
support of their security services, and the support of their
missile program and that will be very difficult to follow and
the Administration will have great difficulty saying that that
isn't occurring.
Mr. Lawler. So, in other words, we just gave them $6
billion to shift around another $6 billion within their own
country to fund the very terrorism or nuclear programs that
we're trying to stop. Is that correct?
Mr. Roule. That is a--that is a fair statement, sir.
Mr. Lawler. Do you all agree with that?
Ms. Alinejad. The money goes to morality police to kill
more Mahsa Amini. The money goes to Revolutionary Guards to
kill more children in Ukraine. The money goes to the relative
of the ayatollahs to actually promote Sharia laws to oppress
more women in Iran.
We all know that and that's why I wanted actually to
address that. Gazelle Sharmahd is here. That money was supposed
actually to free her father who is on the death row. Her father
is on the death row. American is in Iranian prison.
If they hand out $6 billion why they left Jamshid Sharmahd
behind? My chief of staff, Sardor Pashaei's, brother is in Iran
being hostage in the hands of Iranian regime.
So they found the tactic. When the U.S. Government does
nothing they either get the dual national citizen and kill them
or ask for more money or they get their family member of U.S.
citizens hostage inside Iran to silence us.
So that is why we all believe that this money with the help
of the U.S. Administration and the Iranian government it goes
to kill more people inside Iran, in the region, and in the
heart of Europe and Ukraine.
Mr. Lawler. No question, which is why it never should have
been released, period.
In recent months Iran has exported by some estimates more
than 2 million barrels of crude oil with the vast majority
headed to China.
Earlier this year my colleague, Jared Moskowitz, and I
introduced the SHIP Act to require the imposition of additional
sanctions on the Iranian oil trade, specifically targeting
ports and refineries that knowingly process Iranian oil.
Do you think this legislation is critically important to
apply more sanctions on Iran and countries like China, who are
trading Iranian oil in large quantities?
Mr. Taleblu. If I may take that, sir.
I would say absolutely. It builds on a very helpful
architecture of existing oil and petrochemical sanctions that
the U.S. Congress has helped get the U.S. Executive branch to
implement it in force.
In the past there were a sanctions on the sale, supply,
transfer, and insurance of oil. The Trump Administration beefed
that up with adding the storage of oil. This beefs that up
further by adding the refining.
So, again, like an accordion scaling up and down as Iran
sanctions violating scale up and down.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman Mike Lawler.
We now proceed to Congressman Jared Moskowitz of Florida.
Mr. Moskowitz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And as my previous colleague just mentioned obviously, you
know, this issue is very bipartisan. There's a lot of
bipartisan pieces of legislation that are moving through
Congress, one being the SHIP Act that I'm doing with
Congressman Lawler; additionally, the letter that we sent to
President Biden, myself and Congresswoman Nancy Mace, asking
them to deny a visa for the Iranian president to come to the
U.N. I do not believe the Iranian president should have the
League of Nations at his disposal at the United Nations.
By the way, that happened once before under President Trump
and it happened once before under President Obama where we have
denied visas to Iranian leadership. So I think we need to be
doing that as well.
You know, on the--on the latest deal let me give a slightly
different perspective. So when I was in the State legislature I
represented the district where Robert Levinson lived and as
Congressman I represent the district where Robert Levinson
lived. And so he missed birthdays, he missed weddings, he
missed grandchildren, and then he never came home because he
died, and this was all done by the Iranian regime.
And so I think we all support trying to bring Americans
home. There's no doubt about that. The disagreement is what
means are you willing to do that by, right.
And so, look, I am extremely uncomfortable with giving the
Iranian regime any dollars. But the problem is--and I do not
know that there's a right answer for this, which is why I'm not
certain I can ask it--the problem is is that when the regime
you're dealing with won't make a deal without that, right, do
you tell those American families that we cannot bring your
family home because we're not willing to give the Iranian
regime any money? And that becomes the tough part, right.
And so, yes, I do not want the Iranian regime to get any
dollars because we all know more than likely what will happen
with that money. But at the same time we have to figure out how
to make families whole--American families whole--when the when
the Iranians take them.
You know, on the Abraham Accords I think we have made
tremendous progress. I want Saudi Arabia to join the Abraham
Accords. I want Saudi Arabia to join the Abraham Accords not
just from the Iranian perspective, not just from the Israeli
perspective, but from the China perspective. If we do not bring
Saudi Arabia in then they're going to go to China and then you
have the China-Iran-Saudi Arabia problem.
And so I think, to me, this is not just an Israel Abraham
Accords issue. This is a world peace from--fighting against a
destabilizing force in Iran issue.
And, you know, I know there are lots of talks going on.
Saudi Arabia wants, you know, maybe an Article Five like
protection. Look, I think we should give that to them. If
that's what would get them away from China, away from Iran, and
into the Abraham Accords I think that that could really change
the perspective.
On direct diplomacy, you know, I'm all for diplomacy at all
times. We're always talking. There's diplomacy going on right
now with Russia, with China. We're always talking. We should be
doing the same thing with Iran.
But we have to have a credible military threat. That's why
diplomacy will work here. It will not work if we do not have a
credible military threat.
And, by the way, speaking about consistency, there's no
doubt that there's been inconsistency on the American policy
here over the last several Administrations and that has harmed
us.
But I'm not really convinced I know what the policy is
today on the military threat. And so I support the chairman on
that--on the resolution that--a sense of Congress saying that
it's unacceptable for Iran to get a nuclear weapon. We all say
that it's unacceptable but what are we willing to do about
that, right, and that's where I think America needs to speak
with one voice.
Listen, there's no doubt that we have seen in the past
these things work. Stuxnet, you know, that the virus--that
worked, right. Previous, sort of whether it's cyber or
military, interventions have worked.
We all know right now the only reason why the centrifuges
aren't going up it's not because of anything we're doing. It's
because the Iranians are not doing it, right, and they could do
it at any moment. It's not like we have some lever that would
stop them. They could do it at any moment and most likely we'll
find out after the fact because they're so close.
So it wouldn't be we could do a preemptive military strike
to stop it. It would be post. We would find out that they've
hit the threshold and then it would be what are we willing to
do.
And so, listen, I think maybe more joint military exercises
in the Middle East. I think showing maybe the Iranian regime
the military capabilities we have in the Middle East by doing
maybe some weapons tests out there. They need to understand
what we're willing to do and then we do the diplomacy. Then we
sit down with them and we try to--we try to work this out.
And so, listen, this is a bipartisan issue. I do think we
should continue to say we stand with the Iranian people. We
should do everything we can and sit down with our allies, as
you pointed out, to try to build a coalition. The same
coalition we built with Ukraine we should be building a similar
coalition with Iran.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman Jared
Moskowitz.
We now proceed to Congressman Tim Burchett of Tennessee.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I issue my
disgust with what really is going on in Iran.
Do you all believe that this Administration's weak policies
have allowed Iran to come closer to developing a nuclear bomb?
And I'm sorry if you have already answered these questions but
just act surprised and--when I ask you these questions.
Anyone?
Mr. Taleblu. Yes. In fact, there is a little bit of a time
line. With respect I took--I would take umbrage with with what
Representative Connolly said about the effectiveness of
previous measures that this Administration is trying to
restore.
If you look at the time line of Iran's nuclear escalation
Iran went from incremental nuclear escalation overtly violating
the JCPOA in 2019 but significantly began violating the JCPOA
in late 2020.
At the end of 2021 at the end of the Biden Administration's
first year in office Iran gained, according to outside nuclear
experts, irreversible nuclear knowledge, doing things it had
never done before: one, enrichment of uranium to 60 percent
purity, a threat Iran made a decade ago but only felt
comfortable acting on in 2021; two, the production of uranium
metal using highly enriched uranium, which has clear
applications for warhead designs and metallurgy; and three,
phasing in testing, deploying, and using more advanced
centrifuges, the machines that spin uranium.
So yes, quantitatively, qualitatively, it has grown under
President Biden's watch.
Mr. Burchett. Is there any way we can inspect these nuclear
facilities, honestly? I mean, is this just going to be one of
these made for TV specials that they just drive around with the
little U.N. blue hats on and everyone makes a mockery of it?
Sir?
Mr. Roule. The International Atomic Energy Agency's access
to these facilities has been severely restricted. Cameras have
been denied----
Mr. Burchett. Can you speak up a little bit?
Mr. Roule. Cameras have been denied to the IAEA. Data from
some cameras has been denied. At present the International
Atomic Energy Agency judges, and we should have confidence in
that basic judgment, that it still understands the general
capability of that program.
But because of the erosion of its access the time will
likely soon come when the IAEA itself will be forced to say it
is no longer certain that Iran's program has an entirely
peaceful nature.
And if I can add one more comment to my colleagues'.
Mr. Burchett. Quickly, please.
Mr. Roule. If Iran is permitted to keep 60 percent
enrichment by the United States international community, which
has no civilian application, have we not just agreed that Iran
can have a nuclear military program?
Mr. Burchett. Yes, sir. I agree with that.
I also am worried about the money, this so-called
humanitarian aid, where it goes. I mean, are we going to trust
somebody that we do not trust? Obviously, it's going to be used
to oppress folks.
Something else that needs to be--maybe it's been stated but
what's going to happen? The only way you're going to take this
out once they get it is through a military strike and what I
fear is it's going to be Israel that does it and then when they
do it the people surrounding them will then possibly launch an
attack on them.
I do not know how you put the genie back in the bottle.
Does anybody have any idea? Other than regime change is there
any other--we have decided to put our--instead of taking the
gloves off we put them back on dealing with these thugs and I
just do not--I do not see the international community
addressing this as it should.
There should be sanctions. They've worked in the past--
economic. I mean, if we're not going to send cruise missiles
over there then, dad gum it, the only thing we have got, any
thoughts on that, any of you all?
Ma'am?
Ms. Maloney. I'll just say that I think effective American
leadership can in fact rally the world against significant
threats, as we have seen with respect to both Ukraine and
China.
I will also point out that where we have seen Iran's
nuclear escalation it has come after catastrophic U.S.
decisions such as the 2018 decision to exit the Iran nuclear
deal as well as the 2019 failure to respond to attacks on Saudi
Arabia by Iranian missiles and drones.
Mr. Taleblu. I would also add to that, however, that the
sanctions of the Trump Administration restored what is
popularly termed the maximum pressure campaign or maximum
pressure sanctions--created the same if not greater
macroeconomic damage to Iran's economy in one to 2 years than a
decade of multilateral sanctions.
So there is no substitute for American power. There is no
substitute for American leadership. That's a critical thing to
note, and we can afford no owned goals in the management of our
relationships with our transatlantic partners.
In 2020 Europe laughed at the Trump Administration for
trying to unilaterally extend an arms embargo on Iran. In 2022
Central Europe was the victim of a widening radius of Iranian
arms and drone proliferation. No more laughing at unilateral
attempts. We need to build bridges, not destroy them.
Mr. Burchett. Mr. Chairman, I'm out of time. Thank you so
much.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman Tim Burchett
of Tennessee.
And now we proceed to the very persistent Congressman John
Moolenaar of the republic of Michigan.
Mr. Moolenaar. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I appreciate
you and the committee for the opportunity to join you today and
I appreciate the bipartisan nature of the work being done in
this committee, and one area of bipartisanship in my home State
is a resolution Congresswoman Elissa Slotkin and I have
introduced together.
Our resolution, H. Res. 554, makes a strong statement in
support of Chaldean Christians and other ethnic minorities in
Iraq who have faced persecution for a long time.
Our own government has said this persecution constitutes a
genocide and that we are deeply concerned about the oppression
religious minorities in the area--in this area of the world
face because of their faith.
I believe that passing this resolution would send a strong
message to the governments around the world including Iran,
Iraq, and others that the U.S. will not abide by the
persecution of religious minorities.
Our resolution recognizes that religious minorities in Iraq
have been an integral part of the cultural fabric and history
of Iraq and the broader Middle East for thousands of years and
there's a rich history of cultural contributions in this
region.
In my home State we're blessed to have a large population
of Chaldeans who have made our community a better place. They
contribute to Michigan society in many ways and many of those
who had to flee to escape persecution remain connected to their
homeland.
I hope that as this committee looks at ending Iran's malign
activities around the world that it considers the plight of
religious minorities in the Middle East who are often targeted
for violence and oppression. Chaldeans, Yazidis, and other
groups have faced horrific events and many of their ancestral
communities have been forever changed.
Iran's violent actions in destabilizing the region have no
doubt contributed to the cycles of bloodshed. We also know that
Iran wants to destabilize Iraq, its government, and the people
who live there.
This includes dividing the population and turning people of
different faiths against one another and I believe that passing
H. Res. 554 will affirm the support of the United States for
the religious and ethnic minority survivors of genocide in
Iraq.
When we stand with them we send a clear message to Iran and
others about religious freedom, our own values, and how we
expect Chaldeans and other religious minorities of Iraq to be
treated by their own government and others.
Again, I want to thank you for the opportunity to speak
today and I do appreciate our witnesses and was hoping I could
ask you a few questions.
Mr. Roule, there's a territory in northern Iraq that is
neither firmly in the control of the Iraqi central government
nor the Kurdistan regional government. Iran and Iranian-backed
militia have filled this void.
Could you explain what means are available for the U.S. in
this part of Iraq to further the independence and freedom of
the indigenous populations in these areas?
Mr. Roule. Thank you.
Iran's efforts to use its own personnel and proxies to
occupy portions of eastern Syria and western Iraq is done for a
variety of reasons to include the ability to build a land route
to deliver weapons from Iran to Syria to Lebanese Hezbollah.
Interdiction and prevention of this greatly increases
stability in the Middle East. The best way that we can work
this is by working through local partners who know the area the
best and we have a variety of very strong local partners. This
will be complicated. And also strong intelligence collection
regarding Iranian and proxy activities will be needed.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you.
And, Mr. Taleblu, the Iraqi constitution nominally
acknowledges the right to religious freedoms and expressly name
the minorities to which this applies. Yet, influenced by Iran
they continue to move in the direction of a theocracy, which is
the antithesis to religious freedom. What levers does the U.S.
Government have in this regard?
Mr. Taleblu. Well, there's likely several levels but one is
actually making sure the U.S. has an Iraq policy. I'm not quite
sure we have one. At best it's like a hybrid AfPak policy on
counter ISIS between the territories that Norm mentioned
between Syria and Iraq.
We actually need a whole of Iraq policy. The Iraqis
routinely come asking for sanctions waivers. There was just $10
billion given to the Iranians by way of Iraq. There's lots of
levers for pressure there.
There's the continuing--what's left of the continuing
counter ISIS campaign. There is potential efforts to help get
foreign direct investment into Iraq's energy sector. There's
tons of desalinization and environmental programs that could be
used.
In short, if we do not have an Iraq policy none of these
will function as real levers for us to effect any kind of
change on the ground. But any kind of change on the ground
would require a sustained political interest and appetite in
that in America, which, with immense respect, I do not see.
Mr. Moolenaar. I want to, again, thank you for all being
here and your testimony today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman John
Moolenaar, and we appreciate very much your dedication to the
people of Michigan that you have been here for the entire
hearing and actually paid attention and so we appreciate your
attention and your dedication to the people of Michigan.
Along with that, as we conclude I want to thank the
witnesses for their valuable testimony and the members for
their questions, along with the talented and dedicated
congressional staff who have helped today and they're available
to you 24 hours a day 7 days a week.
The members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. The witnesses are invited to remain in place
for a picture with the committee members present.
With that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:14 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
APPENDIX

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
