- GO-TO-ZERO: JOE BIDEN'S WITHDRAWAL ORDER AND THE TALIBAN TAKEOVER OF AFGHANISTAN

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

GO-TO-ZERO: JOE BIDEN'S WITHDRAWAL ORDER AND THE TALIBAN TAKEOVER OF
AFGHANISTAN

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

November 14, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-115

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Available: www.foreignaffairs.house.gov, docs.house.gov,
or www.govinfo.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-745 PDF          WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa                   SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                 Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas                BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

BRIAN MAST, FL, Chairman

SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JASON CROW, CO, Ranking Member
DARRELL ISSA, California             DINA TITUS, Nevada
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              COLIN ALLRED, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MIKE WALTZ, Florida                  SHELIA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
CORY MILLS, Florida                      Florida
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania

Parker Chapman, Subcommittee Staff Director
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

REPRESENTATIVES

Opening Statement of Subcommittee Chairman Brian Mast............     1
Opening Statement of Subcommittee Ranking Member Jason Crow......     3

WITNESSES

Lt. General (Ret.) Sami Sadat, Chairman, Afghanistan United
Front, Fmr. Commanding General, Afghan National Special
Operations Corps...............................................     5
Prepared Statement...............................................     8
Bill Roggio, Senior Fellow and Editor of the Long War Journal,
Foundation for Defense of Democracies..........................    10
Prepared Statement...............................................    12
Dr. Dipali Mukhopadhyay, Associate Professor, University of
Minnesota......................................................    19
Prepared Statement...............................................    21

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    52
Hearing Minutes..................................................    54
Hearing Attendance...............................................    55

Responses to Questions for the Record

Questions for the record submitted by Representative Mast......    56

GO-TO-ZERO: JOE BIDEN'S WITHDRAWAL

ORDER AND THE TALIBAN TAKEOVER OF AFGHANISTAN

----------

Tuesday, November 14, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Accountability,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 p.m., in room
210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Brian Mast (chairman of the
subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Mast. The Subcommittee on Oversight and Accountability
will come to order. The purpose of this hearing is to analyze
the impact of President Biden's April 14, 2021, go-to-zero U.S.
military withdrawal order in Afghanistan and the effect that
this had on the Afghan military and the Air Force in the middle
of the Afghan fighting season. I will now recognize myself for
an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN BRIAN MAST

As mentioned, we are going to examine the go-to-zero order.
Now, in the past 27 months, the disastrous images of embassy
personnel being air lifted off the roof in Kabul, the images of
desperate parents throwing their babies over walls of HKIA, the
images of Afghans clinging to the wings of transport planes,
they have been played on loops across media across the world.
The purpose of today's hearing is two-fold. It is not to
just rehash those horrifying images. It is to pinpoint, to
pinpoint the day where it all went wrong, where you could say
there is a day before and a day after, the day that President
Joe Biden announced the go-to-zero order, and it is not just to
provide an after-action report. It is to force President Biden
to do something that it seems he hasn't been willing to do
since the day he was sworn in to office, and that is to live in
reality. The reality of the circumstances that are going on
around you.
President Biden loves to say that the collapse of Kabul in
August 2021 was inevitable, but anybody who was paying an ounce
of attention can tell you that it wasn't inevitable. The
collapse of Kabul wasn't something that we were headed toward
in 2002. It wasn't something that we were headed toward in 2010
when I was airlifted off the battlefield of Kandahar. It wasn't
something that we were headed toward in 2016 when Donald J.
Trump was elected. It wasn't something that we were headed
toward on February 29, 2020, when the Doha Agreement was
signed. It wasn't something that we were headed toward on
January 20, 2021, when Joe Biden took office.
It became inevitable on April 14, 2021, when President
Biden publicly announced his plans for an unconditional
withdraw by September 11, 2021. President Biden loves to place
the blame on the Doha Agreement and President Trump's
negotiations, but in doing so I believe that he is ignoring
reality.
Let's be clear: the Doha Agreement told President Biden
what he had to do, but President Biden did not have to publicly
announce any plans for a specific withdraw date, didn't have to
be a hard and fast date that he announce to the world, a self-
imposed deadline.
President Biden did not have to redirect resources from
fighting terrorists in all capacities to drawing down all
operations at the height of the fighting season as opposed to
the winter months. President Biden did not have to knock the
knees from the Afghan military by cutting and gutting their air
support, withdrawing key contractors and pulling logistic
capabilities. President Biden did not have to abandon Bagram
Air Base in the middle of the night without so much as a dear
John letter to our Afghan partners. President Biden did not
have to ignore the fact that the Taliban was in violation of
every single condition that was set forward by the Doha
Agreement. All of those decisions were made by a commander in
chief who was determined to, in my opinion, avoid reality and
whose only north star was a political future, a political star.
Our witnesses today will be able to speak to the reality
that President Biden so obviously avoided. Mr. Roggio saw the
writing on the wall as he tracked the Taliban's takeover of
Afghanistan in real-time. General Sami Sadat was forced to live
with the consequences of Biden's delusion as his troops were
left demoralized and without resources needed to defend their
nation, a nation that myself and my colleague both spent a good
amount of time in.
I also want to thank Dr. Dipali Mukhopadhyay--I have worked
on saying that a couple times and I still mess it up, and I
apologize; I am going to have to say it a few more times--for
being here today to lend your expertise and your opinion and to
recognize the members of the Afghan Army's national female
tactical platoon, who are in attendance today.
In addition, I want to recognize the fact that Ms. Christy
Shamblin, mother-in-law of Sergeant Nicole Gee, is here today.
It is always nice to see you and I appreciate you continually
paying attention to this issue, taking of your time to
continually do so, one of the 13 killed at the Abbey Gate.
Here is why all of this matters--let me wrap this up--the
refusal to operate in reality that gave more than 13 families
the title of Gold Star on August 26, 2021, it is the same
delusion that has underestimated terrorists and led to 48
attacks against our U.S. military posts in the past month: not
living in reality of what is taking place. The same delusion
that allowed him to say that there is a safe and secure border
or that inflation is just a brief transient inflation. It is
not a recognition of reality in foreign and domestic.
Every minute that President Biden ignores the reality is
another minute that our troops across the globe are put at
unnecessary risk and another minute that the network of
terrorists from Taliban to Hamas are able to get closer to
their goals of destroying the United States of America.
I now recognize my friend, ranking member, gentleman from
Colorado, Mr. Crow, for any statement at any length that you
may have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER JASON CROW

Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman Mast, for calling this really
important hearing.
I would like to begin by recognizing Ms. Shamblin for being
here and for the sacrifice that your family has made for our
country on behalf of all of us, a sacrifice of which we owe a
great debt that our Nation will never be able to repay, but we
will certainly try to do that sacrifice credit here and moving
forward.
I also want to recognize the members of the Afghan
military, my Afghan brothers and sisters who fought this war
with great courage, with great fortitude, and both of us leave
pieces of our heart in Afghanistan and with you and your
families. Thank you for being here today as well.
The purpose here those is to have a debate about a very
challenging period in our Nation's history. The chairman talked
about pinpointing the day it all went wrong. Our service
members and the American people do deserve that. They deserve
an honest assessment of that. They deserve honesty and they
deserve candor. I, for my part, have been very clear about my
criticisms of the withdrawal, and I continue to be clear about
that. But telling the story of Afghanistan, our Nation's
longest war, 20 years, hundreds of billions of dollars,
thousands of lives, just American lives, but also tens of
thousands or more Afghan lives, requires a broader look.
It would be doing a great discredit and disservice to talk
about this simply as the story of August 2021, because the day
it all went wrong includes many days over many, many years. So
I would like to outline a chronology, a timeline, that is
extremely important here today.
As you can see, starting on February 29 of 2020, there were
13,000 American service members in Afghanistan at the time that
former President Trump signed the Doha Accord. By May 19 of
2020, there were 8,600 service members in Afghanistan. By
September 3 of 2020, Afghanistan was compelled to release 400
Taliban prisoners required under the agreement. Then, by
November 17 of 2020, we were down to 2,500 forces, or we
announced a withdrawal of 2,500 forces by January 2021, before
President Trump took--or President Biden took office.
Between December 1 and December 31 of 2020 there were 185
pro-government forces killed, over 3,000 security forces
killed, and over 1,400 civilians killed by the Taliban during
that period, far from compliance with the Doha Agreement. Then,
by January 15, before President Biden took office, we had
completed the withdrawal down to 2,500 forces. So the cement
was hardening on the events of August 2021 way before it
occurred.
Highlighting a few key events, again, it was February 29 of
2020, when Donald Trump signed the Doha Accord with the
Taliban. Then you go to September 12 of 2020. The Afghan
Taliban talks finally start, 7 months behind schedule. Then
going to October 7 of 2020, Donald Trump started tweeting and
he said specifically that American troops would be home by
Christmas. At the same time they were trying to compel the
Taliban to adhere to the deal and maintain security the
President of the United States is tweeting out that we are
going to do an immediate withdrawal of troops, undermining
everything that we had done way before 2021. So by January 15
of 2021, the Afghan first vice president says that Trump made
too many concessions to the Taliban and that violence will only
increase.
Yes, were there mistakes and missteps in August 2021?
Undoubtedly there were.we will do after-action reviews, we will
have discussions to make sure that we can never repeat those
mistakes again because we deserve to do better. Those who made
the sacrifice that month deserve us to do better.
But make no mistake, this is not the story of August 2021,
and it would be doing a great disservice to the American people
and all who made tremendous sacrifices if we did not recognize
the many missteps that were made over four Presidential
administrations, Republican and Democrat, that were made over
10 Congresses, Republican and Democrat. Too many people
sacrificed too much to look at this as a narrow story.
President Biden, when he took office in January 2021, with
the lowest number of troops that we had in decades, faced a
simple choice: Do we abide by the Doha Agreement that was
negotiated under the prior administration or do we go back to
war with the Taliban, in which case we would have to surge a
tremendous number of forces to protect the Americans who were
still there and we would fighting to this day? That was the
choice.
Now you can disagree one way or the other on what that
choice should have been, but that was the choice he was facing.
There was no status quo. That was the terrible choice and he
made the decision to withdraw and pull out and to comply with
the agreement.
With that history in mind I look forward to hearing from
the witnesses and having a discussion that befits the sacrifice
of so many folks over the last 20 years. I yield back.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Ranking Member Crow.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from Iowa, Mr.
Nunn, be allowed to sit on the dais and participate at today's
hearing. Without objection, so ordered.
Other members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
We are pleased to have distinguished witnesses before us
today on this important topic. To start, again we have General
Sami Sadat, who was final commanding general of the Afghan
National Army's Special Operations Corps and commanded the
Afghan Army's 215th Maiwand Corps into August 2021. No one is
better positioned to speak to the immediate and devastating
impact of President Biden's go-to-zero order on the Afghan
military's fight against the Taliban.
Next we have Mr. Bill Roggio, who is senior fellow at the
Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a long-time editor of
FDD's Long War Journal, where he has provided critical insight
and analysis into the Global War on Terror and the war in
Afghanistan.
Finally, again we have Dr. Mukhopadhyay, who is associate
professor of global policy at University of Minnesota. She
joined the university with tenure in 2020. She was previously a
member of the junior faculty at Columbia University.
Thank you all for being here today. Your full statements
will be made a part of the record, and I will ask that you keep
your spoken remarks to 5 minutes in order to allow time for
member questions.
I now recognize you, General Sadat, for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF SAMI SADAT, LIEUTENANT GENERAL (RETIRED),
CHAIRMAN, AFGHANISTAN UNITED FRONT, FORMER COMMANDING GENERAL,
AFGHAN NATIONAL SPECIAL OPERATIONS CORPS

General Sadat. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Congressman
Crow, and members of the committee and--good afternoon. Thank
you for inviting us for this hearing today.
Before answering questions I want to take a few minutes to
make some remarks, and my remarks are divided in three parts in
what is happening in Afghanistan under the Taliban now; No. 2,
why we got here; and No. 3, what are the possible solutions
that I can recommend to the committee.
For the past 20 years the American people helped support
and protect the people of Afghanistan, our people. We built a
new society with your support where for first time girls were
educated across the country and women were treated with
equality. A new generation grew up with the hope that this time
it would be different and Afghanistan would take its rightful
place among the family of free democratic nations.
Unfortunately it was not to last. That hope was cruelly
extinguished, but we remember how in the hard times when
President Biden and President Ghani turned their tail and run
away it was you Members of Congress who supported the efforts
of your brave service members, men and women, who saved
thousands of Afghan lives in the face of certain death as our
country collapsed. On behalf of the people of Afghanistan I
thank you. We will remember this for the rest of our days.
Twenty years after 9/11 Afghanistan fell back into the
hands of the terrorists who were the very reason why 9/11 has
happened. The consequences for the region and the world are
grave. As we can see in the recent unfortunate events in the
Middle East the rise of Taliban has given new life to the
groups like Hamas.
Today some 16,000 Al Qaeda terrorists are training in our
country. Their leaders move freely between Afghanistan and Iran
along a safe terror corridor. The former American base close to
Kandahar Airport is now full of foreign fighters terrorist as
suicide bombers. They are so imbedded into the Taliban system
that the Taliban Ministry of Defense is using Al Qaeda manual
for its training, and it's not just Al Qaeda. In our country
today we have the TTP from Pakistani Taliban, we have Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan, we have Ansarullah of Tajikistan, and
et cetera and et cetera.
With the Taliban in power terrorism has now time, space,
and inspiration that were denied by the U.S. military and the
Afghan military. The Taliban have opened some 2,000 Jihadi
madrasas housing 800,000 boys aged between 12 to 15. The
purpose is to train for global jihad.
Why is this important? The Taliban are Sunni Muslims who
follow a distorted interpretation of the Holy Koran, tailored
to serve their authority. They divide the world into two zones.
The first zone, Dar al-Islam, the Land if Islam, or the Land of
the Peace. The second is Dar al-Harb, as known as Dar Al-Kufr
as well, the Land of War or the Land of the Infidels. In their
interpretation the only place governed by Islam is Afghanistan.
The rest of the world is a place to wage war. To expand their
distorted version of Islam they started this campaign from our
neighbor in Pakistan who nurtured them for so many years with
no mercy on children, women, and non-combatants.
The next place to wage war is the Middle East. They believe
no Arab country is governed under pure Islam, hence they want
to help Al-Qaeda topple Arab governments. For them to wage war,
killing men and women, seizing property and toppling businesses
is an act of jihad to please God and die for the cause that
will be rewarded in the afterlife, and they have allied with
Iran opening a corridor of terror from Afghanistan to Iraq,
Syria, and the rest of the Middle East with the help of the
Iranian IRGC.
China, also our neighbor, is paying the Taliban large sums
of money for access to Afghan mines and routes for Iranian oil
via Afghanistan blocking any access of the United States and
allies in that region.
How did we get here? In 2020 and 2021, as predicted, the
Taliban ignored their side of the Doha deal. They didn't cut
their links with Al-Qaeda and continue to conduct large-scale
attacks on Afghan cities. To give you an example of their
brutal attacks, in the 11 months of 2020 after the deal the
Taliban conducted 4,000--48,600 attacks including car bombs,
assassinations, and large-scale assaults on Afghan cities.
I am running out of my time, Mr. Chairman. I will answer
the rest of them in the Q&A. If you want to give me some time,
I'll continue for another minute.
Mr. Mast. I can give you another minute. Go ahead.
General Sadat. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Mast. By all means.
General Sadat. In the turn we were told to halt all
military operations to give peace a chance. Our ammunition
supply was halted and 17,000 contractors who maintained our
aircraft and software system had the orders to leave
Afghanistan. Further, the Afghan government was told to release
7,000 Taliban prisoners including men who killed American and
NATO troops, drug dealers and baby killers.
We still stood our ground with whatever we could and kept
fighting but Secretary of State Mr. Antony Blinken wrote a
letter to President Ghani in which it was made public asking
the president to resign and that allow a Taliban-led--employed
the--to allow the Taliban-led government to come to power. This
made it very clear to everybody in Afghanistan and in our
region that the Afghan government no longer has the support and
trust of the United States, hence giving a chance for Iran and
Pakistan to come up with everything they have in support of the
Taliban and lead into the collapse of our country.
But despite the failures on the part of the Taliban to
stick to the terms of the deal, President Biden still went
ahead with the withdrawal leading to the chaos of collapse of
our country. It was a betrayal not only of the Afghan hopes,
but of the sacrifice of over 200,000 Afghan troops and 6,000
Americans who died for our freedom, and some of them carry
injuries, including yourself, Mr. Chairman, until this day.
I know what loss means. Some of those brave warriors fell
or were wounded when on an operation with me. To this day I
remember every moment and feel the pain in my bones.I say to
you now that I would be betraying the sacrifice if I didn't
attempt to recover our land where Afghans and Americans bled
for freedom. It would be an insult to their sacrifice to allow
the widows and children to be ruled by the brute dehumanized
Taliban.
Mr. Chairman, I know we cannot go back in the past to
change what has happened, but we can change the future and what
is to come to us. We're not going to sit idle and let it
happen. We're organizing now to recover our country, united
under one flag with equal rights for women, inclusive of all
minorities, and governed under a constitution chosen by our
people. We have set up a political movement, Afghan United
Front, to show our resolve and wanting a legitimate government
in Afghanistan.
We're not asking American boots in the ground alongside us.
We're asking for your moral and political support. In our
history, like other nations, we have seen tough times and
invasions, but we always came back together and saved our
country. We will fight for freedom and to free our country
again making the Taliban rule a brief interruption in our
history. We are ready for the great sacrifice. We will once
again be one free nation under God. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Sadat follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6745.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6745.002

Mr. Mast. Thank you, General Sadat.
I now recognize Mr. Roggio for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BILL ROGGIO, SENIOR FELLOW AND EDITOR OF THE LONG
WAR JOURNAL, FOUNDATION FOR DEFENSE AND DEMOCRACIES

Mr. Roggio. Chairman Mast, Ranking Member Crow, and other
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify and thank you, General Sadat and our members of the
panel here, for taking the time today.
There are many reasons that our mission in Afghanistan was
troubled. There can be no denying that one decision, President
Biden's April 14, 2021, order to withdraw from Afghanistan is
directly responsible for the collapse of the Afghan government
and its security forces. And that was what we have been brought
here today to discuss.
Certainly prior administrations contributed to the poor
State of Afghanistan. The Afghan government military created by
President Bush was ill-suited to combat and insurgency.
President Obama's strategy was muddled. Its surge was under-
resourced and executed on an unrealistic timeline and the
administration opened negotiations with the Taliban. And
President Trump's deal with the Taliban known as the Doha
Agreement was an absolute disaster. But this is extremely
important: Despite the mistakes of previous administrations, on
April 13, 2021, the government of Afghanistan was still
standing and the Afghan military and police were still fighting
the Taliban.
Despite statements from the Biden Administration that it
was cornered to execute the terms of the Doha Agreement, the
administration was not obligated to do so. The Taliban was not
living up to the terms of the deal as it continued to shelter
and support Al-Qaeda and other groups. The Biden Administration
knew this and yet it followed through on the Doha Agreement
anyway. The fact is that President Biden was determined to
leave Afghanistan; the Doha Agreement was a convenient excuse
to do so.
President Biden's order to withdraw had an immediate and
devastating effect on the Afghan government and military. Once
the order was given U.S. Forces were no longer supporting their
Afghan partners. Instead, the immediate focus on packing up and
leaving. We all remember the U.S. military turning off power at
Bagram Air Base and leaving in the middle of the night without
informing our Afghan partners.
For another powerful example of this I strongly suggest
watching Retrograde which documents the impact of the
withdrawal on General Sadat's command. You will see that U.S
Special Forces which supported General Sadat's corps
immediately ceased operations. Despite difficulties in the
south, this team of special forces was crucial in supporting
the Afghan military operations and holding the Taliban at bay.
Without U.S. support the Afghan military couldn't sustain its
operations.
We built an Afghan military that was dependent on Western
contractors for maintenance and logistics. Without this support
Afghan air assets, which were operating at a high tempo due to
the Taliban onslaught, were quickly degraded.
There are other factors which I've highlighted in my
written testimony that I do hope we discuss today. General
Sadat can no doubt speak authoritatively from his experience on
the impact of President Biden's withdrawal order and it had on
his soldiers and their morale.
One thing is clear: The outcome, the Taliban takeover of
Afghanistan was predictable. U.S. Government military and
intelligence officials said that the Afghan government wouldn't
be under threat for 2 years after the U.S. withdrawal. After
the withdrawal was announced I predicted that the Afghan
government wouldn't make it by the end of the summer. Kabul
fell on August 15. Panjshir, the last holdout province,
collapsed on September 7. Taliban didn't take control of
Afghanistan in 11 days. This was a process that began the day
that the withdrawal was announced and it was set up by years of
failure.
How did multi-billion dollar government organizations get
it so wrong? These are questions that you must ask. The
mistakes of past administrations were either correctable or
could have been mitigated over time. The order to withdraw was
final and once executed irreversible. However, if the Biden
Administration was hell-bent on leaving, it could have executed
a phased withdrawal that could have given the Afghan military a
fighting chance.
Why wasn't a responsible withdrawal from Afghanistan
planned and executed? The implications of the withdrawal
fiasco, both the decision to leave and the abandonment of our
ally of 20 years, and the physical implementation of the
withdrawal have lasting effects. We left an ally which
sacrificed hundreds of thousands of its security personnel and
an untold number of civilians battling the Taliban alone to the
predations of a terror group that sponsored Al-Qaeda, both
before and after 9/11.
Al-Qaeda remains ensconced in Afghanistan and today is
operating at least six training camps as well as safe houses
and a media operations center. Several Al-Qaeda leaders serve
in the Taliban's government. Sirajuddin Haqqani, one of the two
deputy emirs of the Taliban and its minister of interior, he is
a specially designated global terrorists for his ties to Al-
Qaeda. So are an untold number of his deputies listed as
specially designated global terrorists.
The Haqqani Network, which Sirajuddin Haqqani runs, is
listed as a foreign terrorist organization. Sirajuddin
Haqqani's interior ministry issues national ID cards and
passports to Al-Qaeda leaders, operatives, and their families.
Let that one sink in.
Beyond Afghanistan the ramifications of the precipitous
withdrawal are still being felt today. Jihadists across the
globe have been emboldened by our defeat. Our allies question
our commitments. Our adversaries and enemies do so as well.
President Biden's order to leave Afghanistan has gravely impact
U.S. national security. We must accept these facts if we wish
to avoid these mistakes in the future. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Roggio follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Roggio.
I now recognize Dr. Mukhopadhyay for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DIPALI MUKHOPADHYAY, ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR,
UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA

Ms. Mukhopadhyay. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and for
perfectly pronouncing my name. I appreciate that.
Thank you to you, thank you to members of the committee.
Having spent my adult life as a scholar of Afghanistan it
is a privilege to be with you. I first traveled there in 2004
and made 11 extended trips thereafter, the last of which took
place in the summer of 2021.
I start by stating a fact on which I presume we can all
agree: America's longest war was not lost in 20 days or 20
months, but rather over 20 years. Four presidents made
decisions that brought us here and each one's policies
constrained those who followed. Ultimately and in many ways the
logic, design, and implementation of the war doomed the Afghan
republic. This contention does not suggest American malice, nor
does it absolve Afghan guilt. But we must be clear, the United
States and its allies went to war in the fall of 2001 because
Al-Qaeda attacked our homeland.
The subsequent promotion of women's rights, democracy, and
development mattered to the degree they advanced the war on
terror. A friendly government in Kabul, not a sovereign Afghan
State, was the goal. This truth helps us understand the back-
to-the-future moment in which we and the Afghan people find
ourselves with the Taliban once again at the helm.
A number of early choices taken by the United States and
its allies crippled the new Afghan government before it even
got started. The Taliban regime fell swiftly and its successor
owed its existence to the West. In exchange it would not
control many of the fundamental decisions about power and
politics on the ground. The Americans prevented President
Karzai from exploring any genuine possibility of peace with
those Talibs who sought surrender, a choice that would haunt
the U.S. Government years later when it aimed to negotiate with
those same enemies on vastly worse terms.
The United States emboldened Pakistan as a key partner in
the war even as the Pakistani security establishment gave
sanctuary to those who killed American and Afghan forces for
years to come. The coalition empowered anti-Taliban commanders
as its core ground force early on and later as counterinsurgent
militia forces. Even as some of those strong me became valuable
governing partners others leveraged ongoing American support to
their own ends, often at the expense of new civil and military
institutions.
The United States invested substantial aid in those
institutions, but in erratic, incoherent, and unsustainable
terms. The risks of such built-in dependencies were especially
evident in the Afghan security sector.
The triumph of foreign designs over Afghan's self-
determination was also exemplified in the international
approach to elections. Foreign powers set an overly ambitious
tempo and then selectively addressed fraud in terms that
steadily undermined public trust and risked turning each
electoral standoff into a civil war. By the time the 2019
election arrived in Afghanistan the Trump Administration made
clear that the time for our involvement there was over. A quick
deal with the Taliban was a priority even if that meant
sacrificing the country's future as a democracy.
The ultimate precarity of Afghan's sovereignty would be
most vividly revealed in 2020 when the Trump Administration
signed the Doha Agreement with the Taliban. A boon to the
Taliban, this deal undercut any remaining leverage the Afghan
government might have had in subsequent negotiations to sue for
peace without entirely sacrificing republican values.
The Trump Administration then unilaterally dropped troop
levels to 4,500, and just days before President Biden's
inauguration to 2,500. Meanwhile, the Afghan government was
forced to release thousands of Taliban prisoners, a provision
in a deal to which it had not been a party.
I was in Kabul in March 2020 and the sense of collective
despair was palpable. Deeply disillusioned with their own
leaders, Afghans were also resentful that their experiment with
free politics mattered little to the Americans as we beat a
path to the exits.
My last visit to Kabul in the summer of 2021 is one I will
never forget. Afghan leaders were both disbelieving about and
therefore unprepared for the impending American departure, and
yet also so crippled by its possibility that dysfunction had
arrested the entire State. More striking however was the
courage of my many long-time interlocutors in civil society who
understood that all they built was now in jeopardy. They vowed
not to give up though nearly all were eventually forced to
leave in the face of near-certain persecution of death.
The progress they secured gives me great optimism for
Afghan's long-term future, but their sacrifices as well as
those of our own demand our honest and deep reflection. We may
not again engage in State building in the service of countering
terrorism, but all of our interventions disrupt the politics
and lives of others profoundly. We must learn from the Afghan
war both the productive possibilities and acute limits of
American power and try then to wield it with greater humility
and care. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Mukhopadhyay follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Mast. Thank you, doctor.
Thank you all for your comments.
I am sorry I cannot agree with what you said. I will just
start by saying I do define a win as the outcomes being better
than what I expected and a loss being the outcomes being worse
than what I expected. So I can't agree with you, but we will
have time to discuss this and debate this as we--everybody
will.
I will now recognize my colleague, Ranking Member Crow, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, chairman. I would like to talk about
the chronology leading up to the drawdown that I touched on in
my opening remarks. I served in Afghanistan multiple times. I
served in Iraq. I have been in combat environments. And we know
that the morale of forces is essential to will--the will to
fight is the most powerful thing, more powerful than any weapon
system, any strategy, any tactic, the will to fight. And morale
is essential to that.
So at a moment where we are trying to enhance morale, where
we are trying to embolden our partners, there were a series of
just deeply troubling statements and comments coming out of the
Former President's White House and from the Former President
himself.
I just would like to start with you, General Sadat, on a
few of these. Here you have President Trump tweeting out on
October 7 of 2020, we should have the small remaining number of
our brave men and women serving in Afghanistan home by
Christmas. Do you remember when that tweet went out?
General Sadat. I don't, but I was aware that he was trying
to draw down troops to a minimum level.
Mr. Crow. What was the impact of this statement and your
awareness and your force's awareness when these statements were
being made?
General Sadat. Of course statements made in Washington had
a real impact, especially on us in the battleground. And these
remarks have had its impact, but we continued to communicate
with U.S. military and there was a--we were told there was a
backup plan, that is things go south, the U.S. military will
get involved. And they were actually gearing up and preparing
for that because both us and the U.S. military, like you served
there, we knew that this deal would not stand and we will get
back on it.
Mr. Crow. Did you ever see this backup plan or get
specifics of it?
General Sadat. I was a part of a trip in--I believe it was
in February 2021 in Garmsir District where General Miller and
myself visited a Navy SEALs camp in Garmsir and there--I saw
that there was a plan, but the SEALs told us that if the orders
were given when the deal goes off completely, they can destroy
the Taliban in southern Afghanistan in 9 days. So for me that
sounded like a quite reassuring backup plan.
Mr. Crow. General, on November 11, 2020, the Former
President wrote a memo and in the memo he said I hereby direct
you to withdraw all U.S. military forces from the Federal
Republic of Somalia no later than 31 December 2020 and from the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan no later than 15 January 2021.
Were you familiar with that memo when it was signed, because it
went public?
General Sadat. No, sir, I don't recall. And I apologize for
not recalling all of this. I was a combat soldier and I was
always busy fighting. But these things had its impact for sure.
Mr. Crow. Can you comment on the morale of your forces in
2020?
General Sadat. The morale of the forces went very bad when
the Doha deal has happened. It was so dramatic. Not only our
forces politically. Also giving the region the sense that the
United States is leaving, a deterrence posture was lost.
Politically we could never recover, Congressman Crow, from what
happened in Doha. We were seen as a government that is not
respect by its own allies.
Mr. Crow. Mr. Roggio, I gather we disagree about the impact
of the withdrawal from your opening statements, but I do want
to just try to flesh out what I believe is a fact, and that is
if we had not abided by the timeline--and I know we actually
extended the timeline of the withdrawal of the Doha Agreement,
but if we had not abided by the extended timeline of the
withdrawal, it was pretty clear from the evidence we have
gathered in transcribed interviews and prior hearings that the
Taliban would have resumed offensive operations against the
United States military in earnest. And at that point we had
2,500 troops, the lowest amount we had had in almost 20--
actually over 20 years. How many troops would the United States
had to have surged into Afghanistan if we had not abided by the
withdrawal timeline?
Mr. Roggio. I can't speak to the number. I think one of my
problems with our policy in Afghanistan has always been a
discussion of the number of troops and not the quality of
troops that we put in there. We could have put 100,000 cooks in
Afghanistan and it may not have made a difference, but if we'd
have put in 5,000 combat forces, probably would have made a
significant difference.
Sir, you referenced Somalia. President Biden put U.S.
troops back into Somalia after President Trump withdrew them.
Why did he do so? Because he feared the collapse of the Somali
government. Why was Somalia and the collapse of the Somali
government more important than the collapse of our 20-year
project in Afghanistan?
Mr. Crow. Well, Mr. Roggio, on the issue of troops I agree
that composition of a unit is important, but 5,000 combat
troops without support, without logistics obviously does not
matter. So would you agree though that 2,500 troops on the
ground would not have been sufficient, that we would have had
to increased our footprint in Afghanistan?
Mr. Roggio. I do agree that we would have had to have
increased our footprint. What that number is I can't tell you,
but the--again the Afghan forces were fighting and Afghanistan
did not collapse on August 13. So the question was, was
Afghanistan important enough to the Biden Administration to
maintain a commitment in--a U.S. commitment in Afghanistan? If
the answer was yes, then he would have had to have put a number
of troops back in. And if the answer was no, then he--and as he
believed, he ordered a withdrawal. But the withdrawal, as I
stated in my verbal testimony, was never conditioned to allow
the Afghan government and military to succeed. They were not
given a chance.
So to answer your question, yes, we would have needed more
combat troops in Afghanistan, but the--how the withdrawal was
executed was entirely predictable, and we all witnessed the
results of that.
Mr. Crow. Thank you for that. I yield back.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, ranking member.
I now recognize Mr. Mills for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you to the panel for everyone coming here and for
your time in service. It is greatly appreciated.
I want to comment on a few things because every time that
we try to get to the bottom of the final decisionmaking, which
is always at the behest of the commander in chief, somehow we
find ourselves spending more time talking about Trump all over
again. And I understand my left's infatuation in the Trump
deranged syndrome, which overwhelms them, and I do hope that
through NIH or others they can seek help.
The whole point is that this was a conditions-based
agreement. It was very clear from the beginning that if the
conditions were not met, and as you said, General Sadat, that
there was a plan B, an alternative mechanism. The other thing
that our colleagues continue to fail to acknowledge is that
President Trump toward the end of his presidency had actually
reversed his decision at the advisory of the generals and was
going to maintain troops there to continue its support. We fail
to always mention that piece of things.
It is funny to me that Biden--and, Mr. Roggio, you said it
so perfectly just now; I couldn't have said it better--he was
so willing to do what was necessary to make sure that the fall
of Somalia did not occur with the government there. He was so
quick to go ahead and withdraw the Remain in Mexico Agreement.
But for some reason that Doha Agreement, he couldn't make any
changes to whatsoever. It was absolutely mandatory. No one
could change anything. Even though he was the elected
president, that wasn't a complete possibility. Can't understand
that, but that is something else.
The other thing is, is that I do agree with my colleague.
There were many missteps and playing political football through
multiple administrations and their understanding of what we are
supposed to be doing and what the mission was to achieve. We
were not originally there, as we all remember in 2001, to think
about nation building. We were there for an actual
counterterrorism operation which was to go in and stop
Afghanistan from being a safe haven of terror and to withdraw.
What did we leave? We left the Haqqani Network, ISIS
Khorasan, the Taliban, billions of dollars in equipment--and
stronger now than they were before and actually closer, I would
argue, to achieving the goal of what Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was
trying to achieve with a caliphate and a singular ISIS
cohesion, which is what we have left them, a full country to
now terrorize, exploit, and to utilize.
He is right that there was over 10 Congresses who had
gotten this wrong, which is why I ran for Congress. One of the
main reasons was to try and come in here to prevent what we
have continued to see, because the majority of Congress by the
way, only 17 percent, were actual military veterans. And we
wonder why we get it wrong.
In my military government service I spent over 7 years of
my life in Iraq, over 3 years in Afghanistan, Kosovo, Pakistan,
Northern Somalia. I know a thing or two about poor
decisionmaking. And I will go ahead and say this: it was not
the fault of the boots on the ground who was carrying out their
objectives missions. It was the suits in D.C. who was ruining
the entire thing.
We need to understand something: what we were looking into
is not just the fall of Afghanistan, but also to get an
accountability for what is already being forgotten, and it is
shameful. Shameful that we are already forgetting our 13 heroes
who had fallen at Abbey Gate.
Our State Department sat here talking about how they were
there on the ground, helping to find solutions and they were
with the troops day and night when those gates were available
to help Americans and others to be able to get out. But my
question still remains to the State Department. If you were
there day and night with our military service veterans at those
gates, then why do we have 13 fallen service members and not a
single State Department member who had fallen with them? That
doesn't tell me that you were at the gates when it was
necessary.
Mr. Roggio, I got a question for you, sir. Prior to the
U.S. full withdrawal from Afghanistan you looked at publicly
available information and warned that Afghanistan was likely to
fall to the Taliban by the end of summer of 2021, which is
exactly what we saw happen. Same thing that we warned about
because we knew that NPRI and others--and again I think it is a
different hearing, but we should be actually setting up a
subcommittee that reviews the subcontractors who was more
worried about supplying information that basically showed them
in a positive light so they could win more contracts and
followups as opposed to the ground reality where they were
evaluating the willingness to fight, the necessary equipment,
and the strategy on the ground.
Having said that, from your perspective was the problem
with the conflicting or incomplete intelligence, the leaders,
or was it both?
Mr. Roggio. Sir, I think a mix of both in my experience. I
created the map where--that we all saw on television over the
summer of 2001 where I assessed the security in the districts.
I started that I think in 2014 because I was testing the
Taliban's counterstrategy to ours. The Taliban said fine, you
want to protect the cities in key districts. We'll go in the
rural districts and we'll meet you in the cities. And I began
gathering data. And over time it became very clear to me that
the Taliban had a strategy and it was implementing it.
The problem I think was--I can't just blame the suits, sir.
I think that part of our military leadership and the top-level
leadership within the intelligence community is also
responsible for this and they need to be held to account. We
were given very rosy assessments that I could easily disprove.
And journalists who--and other experts who covered--for
instance there were times where the U.S. estimate that was
released by SIGAR would say like the province of Kunduz,
which--I can't remember; I think it has seven districts--SIGAR
would say something like oh, only one or two are Taliban-
controlled and one or two contested. Everyone who followed
Afghanistan closely would know that just about all the
districts were contested and the Taliban controlled at least
two districts at a time.
This is what I saw. And some of this was because generals
didn't want this stuck on their performance view. Some of this
was political because--look, you had General Milley stand--
General--yes, I'm sorry, General Miller stand up and say--after
he canceled SIGAR's reporting of the data on the districts he
stood up and said well, it doesn't matter. Security in the
districts doesn't matter. What matters is negotiations with the
Taliban. The top level of the U.S. military was infected by
this political solution, this negotiated solution. And that has
significant effects.
People that I have spoken to during this that were in the
military and intelligence services, people that worked, that
did the hard work, they understood what was happening in
Afghanistan. But as the information made it up the chain of
command it was softened and softened.
Why did we need to have for instance statements like
there's only 50 to 100 Al-Qaeda fighters in Afghanistan, or the
Taliban ties to Al-Qaeda are weak or non-existent? Because
ultimately three presidents wanted to leave Afghanistan.
President Obama, President Trump, and President Biden all
wanted to leave. And in order to do so there could not be
significant ties between the Taliban and Al-Qaeda and Al-Qaeda
could not have a significant presence--look, that's another
thing that I tracked here. They would tell us 50 to 100 Al-
Qaeda were in Afghanistan and yet we would kill anywhere from
25 to 75 Al-Qaeda that were--this is was from U.S. military
zone press releases that I would track.
Did Al-Qaeda have this sort of steady State where they kept
it at 50 to 100, where this estimate stayed the same? It only
went away when we conducted a raid on a terrorist training--or
two Al-Qaeda training camps in Kandahar in October 2015, I
believe it was. And they killed almost 200 Al-Qaeda fighters.
I apologize for telling a long story here, but there were
significant, significant problems within the military, with--
I'm talking the higher-level leadership within the military,
within the intelligence community, and with our political
leadership. And I do hope that a committee is set up to get to
the bottom of these key issues because if what happened in
Afghanistan stayed in Afghanistan, oh, well, fine, we lost a
brush war. Sorry, my Afghan friends, who are our friends. And I
obviously am being sarcastic there because we should maintain
commitments to our allies. But it doesn't.
What happens if we're getting it wrong in Ukraine? What
happens if we're getting it wrong with Taiwan and China? These
are the questions that we need to ask.
Mr. Mills. Well, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for allowing the
witness to go ahead and fully answer this. I agree we have a
counting issue. We didn't know how many Americans were left in
Afghanistan when they said 300, 3,000, 30,000, didn't know. We
continue to get this wrong and that is why we shouldn't engage
in warfare unless we are willing to see it through, get back to
an America first agenda and make sure that we are doing this
right so we don't repeat Afghanistan again. With that I yield
back.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Mills.
I now recognize Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
I want to say thank you so much for all of our members and
who served in Afghanistan. Thank you for your service. And for
everyone who is testifying, thank you so much for your service.
I have a few questions for you, but first I wanted to start
off that the point of this hearing is for us not to be blame
shifting, but really to identify and isolate what are the
instances that happened and so we can look for accountability
points. And so with that I kind of want to stay away from the
rhetoric about Trump and who is infatuated with it, but really
looking to the cumulative effects of the leadership and what
led to Afghanistan. So I just want to find some facts here.
I want to start off with a question for Dr. Mukhopadhyay.
Dr. Mukhopadhyay, we already discussed that at the time of the
withdrawal there were only 2,500, and we saw that Mr. Roggio
already admitted that that wasn't a number that could have been
sustainable toward winning. But I wanted to hear from you about
that. Do you think that we could have sustained that presence
in Afghan with only 2,500?
Ms. Mukhopadhyay. Thank you for your question,
Congresswoman. I think it's important to understand the 2,500
number in context, right? I want to underscore something that
General Sadat said, which I think is very powerful. He said
after the Doha Agreement, quote, ``politically we could never
recover,'' unquote.
I think for me we have to understand how did we get to
2,500 when we were--we had doubled--five-digit number, right?
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. A clarification. I don't mean to
interrupt you, but who signed us into the Doha Agreement?
Ms. Mukhopadhyay. President Trump signed the Doha
Agreement. So that was an agreement that was negotiated without
the Afghan government at the table. It was an agreement that
basically satisfied the minimum American demand and the maximum
Taliban demand and secured a promise of American withdrawal on
an established timeline, right? And what that I think did was
signal--we can talk about the military consequences of having
troops on the ground or not, but I think the political
consequences are central. And that's why I underscored General
Sadat's comment.
To signal a drop to zero----
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. I wanted to refocus us back to
the number of troops----
Ms. Mukhopadhyay. Sure.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick [continuing]. because we are going
to have more questions. But the sustainability of 2,500 troops,
was it going to be sustainable to stay there and actually
assist the Afghans?
Ms. Mukhopadhyay. No, I don't think so.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. My next question is for anyone
who would like to answer it. Now it seems like both
administrations had the goal to withdraw all the troops. Will
we agree to that?
Ms. Mukhopadhyay. Yes.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. And so with both administrations
having that goal is there a reason that you believe they would
both articulate this clear goal at the time?
Ms. Mukhopadhyay. My understanding is that both
administrations felt that this--the longest American war needed
to come to an end. I think that the speed with which the Trump
Administration moved forward and signaled both to the Taliban
and the Afghan government that Americans would withdraw no
matter what began a cascade of events that at that point the
outcome for the republic was sealed from that point onward.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. And this question is for anybody
who wants to answer it: Could you describe in detail how you
believe the Taliban would respond if the U.S. did not pull out?
Mr. Roggio. We don't know the answer to that question. We
certainly never got an opportunity to find out.
To the point of could 200--2,500 troops have secured or
have aided the Afghan security forces, I could tell you on
April 13, 2021, they were aiding.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. So how could you say with
substantial certainly that if we had stayed in we would have
actually won and----
Mr. Roggio. I certainly can't say with certainly,
Congresswoman, but what I can say with certainty is that the
withdrawal order directly led to the collapse of the Afghan
government and military.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. And that order was a derivative
of the Doha Agreement, correct?
Mr. Roggio. Look, President Trump could have pulled all of
the troops out of Afghanistan by the day that he left office.
He did not.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Yes.
Mr. Roggio. President Biden had the opportunity to adjust
course.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Yes.
Mr. Roggio. Again, he had a decision to make. Was it worth
supporting the Afghan government or was it not? He chose that
it wasn't. So look, I mean, I could blame the Bush
administration, I could blame the--we had--there's two decades
of blame to go around, but there was only one decision, only
one order to withdraw, and that was issued on April 14, 2021.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. I mean, when we say that--when
you make that statement it makes it seem as if that was
independent of the agreement. And I am looking for--because you
said with substantial certainty that if we did not pull out
that the government would have been standing, but we already
identified the terms of the agreement, the timeline where we
had three administrations who were setting us down that road.
In addition to that we also have both of the administrations
who were trying to pull out completely.
With us not identifying with a substantial certainty that
2,500 could have won and not be able to understand why did both
administrations try to actually pull out, have that goal, I
just don't feel comfortable that we have pinpointed what went
wrong and how can we in the future make sure that this doesn't
happen again?
I don't know if you want to extend any more time or if
anybody can help us find those facts to identify went wrong so
we can preclude them in the future.
Mr. Roggio. Yes, I'll just quickly--and I'd like to give my
fellows an opportunity to speak. I can't build a time machine
and change the withdrawal order and find out. I wish I could,
but I certainly cannot. But I just maintain that the Trump
agreement, there was no bigger critic of it than myself. It was
a bad deal and it's one that should have been--President Biden
himself called it a bad deal, and yet he executed that. Why are
we not asking that question? And with that----
General Sadat. Ma'am, I think there is a point that we all
need to understand. Oftentimes, we see the U.S. politicians do
not understand the capability of their own military. Twenty-
five hundred U.S. trigger-pullers was more than enough to
support this.
Ask me this, because the nature of the U.S. operation has
completely changed. In 2019, when I was commanded of JSOC, we
partnered with General Chris Donahue, one of the best warriors
that America has. And by the end of the year, we retook 12
districts, destroyed four Taliban customs, which was the main
income of the Taliban. And we have destroyed 34 percent of the
Taliban combat power, with a new room built which we called it
a CSAR, Combined Situational Awareness Room.
The United States' military has a lot of technology, very
sophisticated. If you allow them politically to use it, to pull
the trigger--and also, please remember, there was the Afghan
forces as well. Your troops ended combat operations in 2016. It
was the Afghans that were fighting. We were protecting American
bases.
2021, Congressman Waltz was in Kandahar, and it was
Afghans. And please know that even though when the Taliban
wanted to attack the American troops, there was no way they
could pass the Afghan side of it.
So it was pointless if they went on a killing spree.
Believe me, if they could kill an American infidel, they would.
It was just they didn't have the access. But they sold this so
expensively on the American side that we're no longer to attack
your troops.
The point on President Trump, we also felt that he
recoursed (phonetic) his decision. And I was, you know, told
that he wants to keep background, he wants to keep Kandahar. I
don't want to get into this blame game, but what is happening
today is as a result of the United States leaving Afghanistan.
We lost a country.
And, believe me, you lost reputation. You have less access
in the world today. You have less capabilities on
counterterrorism in the world. You have strategic vulnerability
in Southeast Asia. And you have less comparative advantage by
not having an allied government inside Afghanistan.
Even we would have been able to sustain with 2,500 if we
got continuous----
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. So you can say--thank you so much
for your giving us this time. But you can say with substantial
certainty that 2,500 would have been enough, even though the
other two don't believe so.
General Sadat. Yes, ma'am. It was enough before they came
out. It would have been enough.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you so much, and thank you,
Mr. Chairman, for the time.
Mr. Mast. You are welcome. And I said this once, I will say
it again. I think it is important to define terms. And as
Americans, we define terms as win or loss for America. And I
define that specifically with a win is the way we execute this,
we end up with outcomes that are better than what we
anticipated.
A loss is we end up with outcomes that are worse than what
we anticipated. And what happened with the way the Biden
administration did this ended up with outcomes that were
immeasurably worse than what was anticipated. And that is how I
define win and loss for America.
I now recognize my friend, my colleague, Mr. Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I continue to be
astounded at these hearings on the focus on the Doha Agreement
as though it was absolute and irreversible, when the Biden
administration on day one reversed the Keystone XL, has
reversed border policy, has reversed Iranian maximum pressure,
has reversed--reentered, tried to reenter the Iran deal, the
Paris Accords.
I mean, we could go down a long list of reversals of this
administration from the last that it had no issue doing, but
suddenly we are to believe they were handcuffed.
So let's go to the capabilities issue. A lot of focus and
discussion on the 2,500 that President Trump left in place,
along with our only air base in the world sandwiched between
Russia, China, and Iran, but it ignores the conversation on the
tens of thousands of contractors that kept the Afghan air force
flying.
President Ghani's last request as President of Afghanistan
was for President Biden to please at least allow the
contractors to stay so that the Afghan air force could continue
to fight. It ignores our intelligence professionals that has
been plussed-up. It ignores the 7,000 NATO troops that were
there and had to be fully withdrawn.
I find this a, quite a convenient narrative. But here nor
there, I think at the end of the day, while we deeply care
about our commitment to the Afghans, and it is horrendous what
is happening to our former allies, despite denials from the
Deputy Secretary of State, said she has no evidence they are
being hunted down, really the piece there is international
terrorism and Afghanistan once again becoming a platform for Al
Qaeda and Isis.
So General Sadat, you testified there are thousands of Al
Qaeda in Afghanistan, training in Afghanistan. Their leaders
are moving freely in Afghanistan. The U.N. says 30-40 senior Al
Qaeda leaders moving around freely in Afghanistan with several
hundred fighters.
Yet we have President Biden, who just on June 30 of this
year said, ``Remember what I said about Afghanistan? I said Al
Qaeda's not there. I was right.'' Patting himself on the back
in front of a group of reporters.
So General Sadat, can you speak to Al Qaeda's presence?
One, and then two, this narrative that don't worry Al Qaeda is
suddenly the not-so-bad terrorists working with the not-so-bad
Taliban against the really bad ISIS, which I think is
conflating local conflicts with--I don't believe for a second
the Taliban will stop Al Qaeda or ISIS from once again
attacking Western interests, which is their absolute goal.
But can you speak to that?
General Sadat. Thank you. Congressman, there is Al Qaeda
leaders, Osama bin Laden's oldest son, Abdallah bin Laden, he
is in Kandahar. He meets often with Hibatullah, the supreme
leader of Taliban. In fact, he is advising them on Middle East
and foreign donations collection from the Muslim countries. He
is married to a Kandahari woman from Arghandab district in
Kandahar.
Osama Mehmood, also known as Abu Zar, the leader of Al
Qaeda in Indian Subcontinent, is in Afghanistan. He lives
there. Mohammed al Romdi (phonetic), the Al Qaeda's No. 2,
comes and travels to Afghanistan.
Mr. Waltz. So just in the--excuse me, General, just in the
time I have remaining, they fully intend to rebuild and
reconstitute their ability to attack the West.
General Sadat. I can tell you with certainty that some of
the things you see in the Middle East, they have been trained
in----
Mr. Waltz. We also have U.N. reporting that Siraj Haqqani,
the Taliban's Minister of the Interior, issuing passports with
a functioning international airport to fly Al Qaeda now with
official documents all over the world. Does anyone dispute that
on this panel? Do you dispute the UN's reporting on this?
General Sadat. We agree, some Al Qaeda leaders were given
passports in order to travel and meet with their Middle Eastern
allies and branches.
Mr. Waltz. Can we just switch very quickly, can we talk
about Bagram and that critical 12,000-foot runway that was
closer to the Chinese border than Mexico City is to the border
with Texas? Who's sitting at Bagram now?
General Sadat. It is the Taliban, Congressman.
Mr. Waltz. And is there a Chinese presence? Can you speak
to the Chinese presence now in?
General Sadat. China wants to take Bagram Air Base as a
commercial hub. But we know that they could turn it into a
military air base----
Mr. Waltz. For what commercial reason? Would it be the, I
don't know, the world's third largest known lithium supply,
fifth largest known copper chromite? I mean, the whole slew of
rare earths and minerals that we are now, we are dependent upon
in our economy?
General Sadat. That is correct. China has contracts
amounting to $20 billion with the Taliban today. And they are
intending to use the Afghan mines lithium, copper, gas, and oil
and others.
China is also bribing the Taliban to allow to build a road
from China to Iran. Because China has a 25 years' oil deal with
Iran, so they can travel through Afghanistan if the U.S. Navy
blocks China in the Indian Ocean.
Mr. Waltz. General, my time has expired, but General, I
commend you for standing strong. And I commend people, the
brave Afghans that continue to resist this oppression.
I will continue to press the administration on what happens
if this deal with the devil that they have made with the
Taliban goes wrong and America is once again attacked. Because
we will need local allies, as we did when we had to go back
into Iraq after Obama pulled us out, to continue this fight
against extremism that the entire world is now seeing
tragically on full display. So thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Waltz.
I spoke in my opening statement about the failure of this
administration to recognize reality, to live in reality. I am
going to focus my questions on that.
Whether it is domestic or foreign policy, they don't look
at reality. They look at what they think is political reality,
whether it is with the southern border and saying it is secure.
Whether it is with saying that inflation is just this
transitory thing.
You know, whether it is what was taking place with the
withdrawal from Afghanistan. And the Security Council or the
President or the Press Secretary speaking about what was taking
place.
Or right up into this moment suggesting that there is
somehow combat effectiveness in having a cease-fire in the Gaza
Strip. There is a failure to live in the reality of the
situation and the reality of the situation for the betterment
of the United States of America.
I, in my statement, said I think that that April 14 date of
go-to-zero was the oh-shit moment. Like, people at that moment
said wow, I am going to have to get out of Dodge. I am going to
have to hide my family. I am going to have to find a route out
of here.
I am going to find documentation to figure out how I can
get into some other nation. I am going to be hunted. I don't
know if I am going to be able to stay in my home. We don't know
how many people are going to be requesting to get out of
Afghanistan. And when you multiply wives and children from 8-
28, the list goes on and on.
I consider that to be an oh-shit moment. But that is me. I
want to know from you all when did you identify an oh-shit
moment in that year as we were approaching the withdrawal of
Afghanistan.
Or Ms. Mukhopadhyay, Dr. Mukhopadhyay, it doesn't have to
be that year. I know you spoke about 20 years. But when did you
identify an oh-shit moment for that?
Like I said for myself, I capture it in there are ways to
define win versus loss. And it was in that time that I realized
we were going to move toward a loss, and this was going to be
significantly worse than what they are anticipating.
In that, I will leave it to you all to sort out the order
in which you choose to answer this. But that is what I would
like to know from each you, is when did you identify it as
that.
Ms. Mukhopadhyay. Thank you, Chairman. I want to start by
saying that I do remember that announcement, that moment in
April 2021. And I do remember feeling very nervous.
I will also just say that August 2021, September, right to
the present moment for me, for all of us who cared about and
worked on Afghanistan, has been a deeply challenging time and a
time for us to reckon with all of our responsibilities on that
front.
I would go back, I suppose, to February 2020 as the moment
when I considered the beginning of the end of the war. I think
that was the moment when a deal was signed between the United
States and the insurgency it had been fighting without our
partner, the Afghan Government, at the table, unambiguously
subordinating the possibility for peace in Afghanistan to our
exit and to the demands of the Taliban.
For me, that is the moment.
Mr. Roggio. I will say the moment was April 14, 2021. That
was the moment when everyone got off the fence and the Afghans
got off the fence. And they had to make decisions.
At a local level, Taliban commanders would go to district
leaders or military bases, issue an ultimatum: fight,
surrender, or just walk away. Some fought, some surrendered,
some walked away.
This to me, there was still a U.S. presence. There was
still hope that the--on April 13, there was still a U.S.
presence in Afghanistan. There was still hope that the decision
to stay, that the problems could be fixed.
I spoke to numerous officials within the Afghan Government,
within Ministry of Defense, Ministry of Interior. And both over
the span of a year, from the date of the Doha Agreement being
signed, even after the withdrawal was announced, some--many, if
not all, those would be diplomats or an advisor to the
President, people of that nature.
They were not convinced that the U.S. was going to leave up
until August 14, 2021. That is when they knew the U.S. was
leaving. That is when it all became a reality to them. And that
is when Afghanistan began to fully unravel.
General Sadat. Mr. Chairman, I think I agree with you, the
bad moment was when the announcement came in. But for me, I was
blindfolded with my brotherhood in friendship with the U.S.
military. I could never believe that when things go wrong, so
wrong, the Americans will leave us and the U.S. troops will not
help me. Will not help General Khoshal or Governor Massoud.
Because we spent 20 years building relationships. We became
brothers for real. And we, you know, we would never think that
the Taliban will be advancing on our cities and the American B-
52 will come and film them and just go away.
Mr. Chairman, there is horrendous events that the U.S. Air
Force had filmed in the last months of the war that the Taliban
were committing war crimes. They were not authorized to conduct
air strikes against them.
I think there is three distinct things that needs to be
recognized. The first thing is end of combat operation in
Afghanistan. That had already happened.
The second thing was end of prisons in Afghanistan, which
President Biden tried to achieve. And the last thing, which is
important for us, is more than everything, is the end of our
republic.
I think these three things have its own definitions. We as
soldiers fight wars and make peace for a reason. If the reason
is not achieved, we will continue to fight. If the reason is
achieved, why is everyone saying that oh, this war needed to
end? OK, end it in our loss and your loss as well. We lost the
war.
We were fighting, the Afghans were bleeding for this war.
And we just figured out how to win it. The new general officers
from a younger generation of Afghan leaders, we grew up in the
last 20 years, went to school with Americans' brats, NATO
countries, we just became general officers.
General Khoshal Sadat is sitting here, one of our best
special forces commanders. He became a general officer in 2018.
I became a general officer in 2019. Governor Massoud is sitting
here. He is young Afghan politician from Farah Province. He
became a Governor in 2021.
Just as the U.S. real partners took over the responsibility
that we knew how to fight, how to win, how to strategize and
how to combine the Afghan mindset and psyche with the U.S.
technology and strategy. We all spoke the same language, we
communicated. And this was the moment when the flag was pulled.
It is just this--a couple of more, like two or three more
years working together with the Afghans as the new generation
took over the other generations, we would have won.
You can--you have been in Afghanistan and Congressman Crow
was in Afghanistan, and some others. You can speak to this. The
Afghan special forces were one of the best special forces in
that region.
We operated in a dynamic and an environment that I would
say less special forces in the world could actually take on
that. So I am telling you it was not the lack of sacrifices on
our side, it was not lack of capabilities.
It was a political failure that came from Washington. And
of course we are blamed for this, we have our responsibilities.
We have our own political failures back at home from our own
politicians.
But what about now? Terrorism is real. Al Qaeda is real. If
you tell me the United States mainland is safe, I will tell you
it is not, sir. OK, Al Qaeda may not be able to pull out
another 9/11 attack today. But they will be able to do it
tomorrow.
The United States is not exactly a country that is concise
within its own borders. You are a global superpower. You
project power across the country. You have bases, embassies,
trade routes, envoys, and citizens traveling across the world.
Are you telling me that those citizens are less important
than your mainland here? Are they not vulnerable in Africa? Are
they not vulnerable in Middle East? Can they travel to South
Central Asia in the next 1 year? Nobody can give me that
assessment.
What I am suggesting here is a way forward for us. We are
ready to partner again. We are ready for the great sacrifice.
This is why we set up Afghanistan United Front.
The young generals, young politicians, Afghan soldiers,
civil society members to come together and craft a future for
Afghanistan to free ourselves from this religious tyranny, from
this terrorism.
We don't like Al Qaeda to be our guest. We refuse to accept
that. And we need a little bit of help from your side. We need
political support. Because we don't have a government.
Remember, when 9/11 happened, you guys came to us. We
helped you. We went to war not only against Al Qaeda, but we
went to war against every single individual, every single
country that was at war with the United States.
I am not saying it didn't benefit us, it benefited us
greatly. We built a complete new country, and we are grateful
and thank you. But the time didn't end.
The world has become so small that anybody can travel from
any part of the world and do things in another part of the
world. So that said, if you allow Al Qaeda and Taliban and
other extreme organizations to grow in capabilities, to start
completing their trainings, they will come back and attack you.
If Al Qaeda starts attacking ten countries, 12 countries
simultaneously in Middle East and Africa and Europe, can the
United States respond to that? I am suggesting we go back to
the root of the problem, we start a new partnership, Mr.
Chairman. We are ready for it.
Mr. Mast. Thank you for your reflection, General. Thank you
all for your answers.
I now recognize my friend Mr. Burchett.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is an honor to
call you a friend, brother, thank you for what you did for our
country. And that you continue to do.
Before I give my questions, I just want everybody to know
that Staff Sergeant Ryan Knaus was the last person who died in
Afghanistan. And he was a constituent of mine. His family are
dear friends of mine.
And they named the--I live on a State highway, and they
named that, at my suggestion, they named that road after him.
So I am reminded of his sacrifice and the sacrifice you all and
your people have made. So thank you all so much.
I am wondering, and you can just answer these briefly,
because I have got quite a few questions. General Sadat, what
was the fighting like with the Taliban before President Biden's
go-to-zero Order, and what was it like after?
General Sadat. Sir, on the 31st of April, the last of
American troops left from Helmand. On the first of May, the
attacks in Helmand has decreased by 380 percent. This was like
influx of hundreds and hundreds of Taliban driving from Iran
and Pakistan.
The first prevention capital they wanted to capture was
Helmand, where my command was. Unfortunately, Helmand is
located just as a node in front of Iran and Pakistan. In the 4-
months that continued, the Taliban has lost 10,000 of their
forces. But they couldn't take Lashkar Gah.
They conducted 17 suicide attacks only against myself when
I was moving from one front line to another. But they couldn't
take what they wanted to take. But the fighting was vicious. We
lost a lot of people. Taliban lost a lot of people.
It was very tough, very difficult. It was like in the
movies. And you can only see it in some of the World War II
movies, except it was real.
Mr. Burchett. All right. My father fought in the Second
World War, so, in the Pacific, so thank you. Were the women and
girls allowed to go to school before President Biden withdrew
from Afghanistan?
General Sadat. Yes, sir.
Mr. Burchett. And I assume they are not now, that is
correct--is that correct? No? OK.
Mr. Roggio, is that how you pronounce that name?
Mr. Roggio. Yes, sir.
Mr. Burchett. Oh, got it right. How many articles or
studies did the Foundation for Defense of Democracies publish
about the Taliban possibly taking over before it happened?
Mr. Roggio. I couldn't count, sir. We publish numerous
studies on--yes, I honestly, sir, I just----
Mr. Burchett. You weren't surprised.
Mr. Roggio. Yes, no, I wasn't surprised. This is something
we warned about.
Mr. Burchett. Right. Were you surprised at how fast they
did take over?
Mr. Roggio. No, sir.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Why does this administration continue to
say they were surprised by how quickly the Taliban regained
control? I mean, everybody was talking about it. Everybody said
it was going to happen. It was on the news. It just seemed to
me, you know, that with them to say that to me was just
ridiculous.
Mr. Roggio. It would be an admission that they--if they
knew that Afghanistan would have collapsed so quickly then, and
they withdrew anyway, it would have been an admission that they
left Afghanistan to the predations of the Taliban.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Why does this administration continue to
say, though, why would they say they are surprised? I mean,
they just have to admit--they just have to admit they were
wrong?
I mean, it is kind of like our southern border. They can't
admit we got a problem with fentanyl because they would have to
admit it is coming over the southern border.
I mean, it is the same type of deal. It is kind of a
diversion in my opinion. It just seems to me, you made a
mistake, let's move on, take your lumps and go.
Mr. Roggio. Yes, I, you know, I think this administration--
look, either it understands that Afghanistan was going to
collapse, or it didn't know. Neither is good. So it has
maintained the quick collapse narrative in order to not--you
know, this administration doesn't want to reflect on its
failure in issuing the order to withdraw from Afghanistan.
Even the State Department report that was issued, oh, I
want to say a month or two ago, you know, the primary blame was
placed on President Trump. And as I have said numerous times,
that Doha deal was a mistake, but it was a mistake that could
be corrected.
The withdrawal could not--the administration clearly hoped
that it would gain some type of Vietnamesque decent interval.
Withdrawal from Afghanistan, maybe it collapses in a year or
two, and they could point the finger at the Afghan Government.
Mr. Burchett. I am running out of time. Real quick, if the
evacuation were properly planned, would the attack at Abbey
Gate have occurred?
Mr. Roggio. No, that would have been an extremely difficult
attack to have been carried out at Bagram. Anyone who has been
to Kabul, which I have, and of course my panelists have as
well, knows that conducting an evacuation from Hamid Karzai
International Airport would have resulted in an absolute
disaster. A private in the U.S. Army would have understood
this, sir.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Thank you so much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Burchett. You should know I have,
you know, while I pinpoint us on starting on time, I have a
laissez-faire approach to stopping the clock for individuals.
If you are saying something valuable, we want to hear it, so.
I now recognize my friend Mr. Crow again for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman.
Dr. Mukhopadhyay, I would like to go back to you. You
earlier were trying to provide some additional context around
the issue of the draw-down and the troop number. And I would
love to hear you finish that line of thinking.
Because I think the context around that and what was going
on politically and within Afghanistan in the months and years
leading up to that is very important here.
Ms. Mukhopadhyay. Thank you, Congressman. Yes, actually in
2019, I wrote a piece for Lawfare in which I talked about as
the debate was happening and around what the troop numbers
should be, and it was very contentious, as you will no doubt
recall. I was of the view, as General Sadat explained, that
Afghan forces were doing the bulk of the fighting.
So really what was significant about our troop presence, in
addition to all of the support that contractors provided, was
the political import of the troop presence. Because the
political import for me was a signal on the part of the
Americans to Afghan elites, to soldiers and citizens, and to
the Taliban, and to the neighbors that the U.S. Government had
confidence in and investment in the republic.
So the question of how to end the war, I think we all know
that Republicans and Democrats agreed the war needed to come to
an end. The question was how to do that responsibly.
The reason that I keep coming back to the Doha Agreement,
but really it is not just the Doha Agreement, right. It is
starting with the negotiations that began by President Trump in
2018. Was that that set of negotiations signaled to the Afghan
Government, to the Taliban, to the Afghan people that in fact
the U.S. Government no longer had confidence in and investment
in the republic.
I think it is important to say when we keep zeroing in on
April 2021 that as Mr. Roggio's own data shows, that only 129
of the 407 districts in Afghanistan at that time were fully
controlled by the government, right.
This, again, this was a process of the Taliban recognizing
that it was winning and the Afghan Government being in a
position to never be quite clear to be able to predict what is
going to happen.
Because President Trump raised the number of troops, then
dropped the number of troops, then changed his mind, then
signed the agreement, then dropped the number below what the
commitment actually was to the Taliban.
I can tell you that even after the April 21 announcement, I
was in Kabul in June 2021, and it was very clear to me that
senior members of the Afghan Government did not believe that
the Americans were going to leave. And I don't think that we
can attribute that to President Biden's decision.
It was a much longer pattern of feeling a sense
simultaneously on the one hand, as General Sadat said, that we
would never abandon them, and on the other hand a sense that at
any moment we might abandon them. And that unpredictability was
most acute in the Trump period.
There is plenty of blame to go across, as I said in my
opening comments, across all four administrations. But that
kind of unpredictability around troop numbers created a sort of
political instability in Afghanistan that I don't think--that
was a domino effect after February 2020 that I don't think we
could have reversed.
Mr. Crow. Thank you for that.
General Sadat, to you for a moment. This is not a trick
question, I have no idea the answer to it. I am really curious
your thought on this.
Is there an amount of time that, after 20 years, more than
20 years--well, about 20 years, that the U.S. could have kept
troops there, but then the Afghan forces could have stood on
their own? And then we could have gone to zero? Do you have
that number in your head?
Because I mean, we had been talking--we tried all the
different, as Mr. Roggio said, all the different levels, all
the different surge strategies, different tactics. We tried so
many different things.
I am just wondering if there is an amount of time in your
head that if you had just, you know, x more years, that the
outcome would have been different.
General Sadat. It wouldn't have been about the years, it
was about the approach. I think to be honest, we have to go
back a little bit on negotiations.
Negotiations with Taliban started in 2011 when they opened
an official office in Doha. It was during President Obama,
pulling out five detainees out of the prison and the next day
giving them a political stature globally.
I think if that didn't begun, the Americans negotiated with
Afghan Government directly about your leaving, our country
wouldn't have collapsed. In case that we continued to receive
the amount of support in terms of military and combat from the
U.S.
I think what killed us, sir, that we could never recover
was the fact that the U.S. Government went behind our back and
spoke to our enemy, made a deal with our enemy, making us look
like we are the outsiders. And the real deal is with the
Taliban.
I think without the U.S. Government talking to the Taliban,
the Afghan Government would have absolutely not only sustained
but we would actually succeed because of the reasons I just
mentioned, the younger generation of Afghans. You fought and
worked with Afghan military. We raised through the ranks, and
20 years was the time we grew up in politics and military.
I have a young colonel here, Colonel Parwani, he is not
even 30 years old. But he was leading vicious wars in Kunduz
and in Kandahar and in Helmand. So they became more
sophisticated, more capable.
I believe it would have been--look, Afghanistan became a
political toy a little bit. When President Bush was in charge,
that was the best chance for Afghanistan. We appreciate, we
honor President Bush. He listened to Afghans. We worked with
the Afghans.
When President Obama came, President Obama and President
Karzai had bad relationship between each other. So it affected
us. Then President Biden, back then Vice President, came and
fought with our president. And their relationship became
stained. It further affected us.
I sometimes feel like President Biden has a vendetta
against Afghans. The way he comments on us, the way he treats
Afghans. The other couple of months ago, he wanted to give our
money to 9/11 victims.
Some of these things, look, we are a nation. We are a great
nation. Our people are very proud people. We are the most loyal
people that you can find if you become our allies. If you
become our enemies, we will fight to our death.
We are not just going to disappear tomorrow. We will rise
again. We will get rid of the Taliban. And we hope that we can
do it together with you. And it will be good for you to have a
friend, to have an ally in that part of the world. We will take
care of your interests as well as long as you give us some
support.
Things have happened, awful things, bad things. But I am
asking humbly this congress, please, let's focus on what we can
do together in the future.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, General.
Mr. Mast. Thank you. I am going to ask a couple more
questions myself now. And circled around the go-to-zero order.
Mr. Roggio, can you discuss that in relationship to Taliban
advancements?
Mr. Roggio. Yes. So by August, or I'm sorry, by April 2021,
just again, I want to be clear that the map I created is an
assessment. You could flip some of these numbers either way.
But it painted a picture. A picture, by the way, that was very
close to what the Special Investigator General for Afghanistan
Reconstruction posed.
There's differences between our methods and when their data
was released. My data was real-time, their data was always 90
days old. So it was always difficult to compare, but it was
always 5-15 percent in together.
Anyway, somewhere--the Afghan Government--the Taliban
controlled about 70 districts. The Afghan Government, I believe
you gave the number, I don't have them off the top of my head.
It is somewhere around 120 or so. And the rest were
contested. That meant that the Afghan military was battling the
Taliban for control of these districts.
That number stayed pretty steady from 2020 to 2021, give or
take. And as General Sadat noted, there was a significant--when
President Trump, when he restructured his Afghanistan policy,
the Taliban actually lost control of the districts.
And the Afghans, they lost control of about 25 districts.
So they are at their low peak of the numbers were in the 50's
of the districts they controlled. The number of contested
districts actually went down as well.
So, and as General Sadat noted, the Afghan military was
conducting primary security responsibilities. After by the end
of May, middle of June, the Taliban doubled the number of their
districts that they controlled.
It was clear that they were waiting for this moment, for
the U.S. withdraw, in order to launch its offensive. As General
Sadat noted, fighters were flowing from Iran and Pakistan into
Helmand and----
Mr. Mast. Let me pause. It is clear to you.
Mr. Roggio. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mast. It is clear to me. Let me just ask that
pointedly. Was it clear to you, General Sadat?
General Sadat. Sir, I was blindfolded again. I didn't
believe that this day will happen. Maybe I was in full denial.
It was my country. I was--it was clear toward the end because
every day I was waiting for my own death as I was fighting in
the front line. So, yes, when, you know, we didn't get support.
I got B-52 a couple of times, you know, chaired up (phonetic).
It didn't support me, it didn't drop bombs. So yes, we were
doomed.
Mr. Roggio. Congressman, if I could just maybe add one
thing. U.S. military by the middle of June, their numbers of
the districts that they were saying were controlled by the
Taliban were half the numbers that I was reporting. And then
within 2 weeks, their numbers matched mine.
Mr. Mast. Why do you think that was?
Mr. Roggio. Because the U.S. military was telling us that
the withdrawal was being conducted in orderly fashion and the
Afghan military or I'm sorry, the Afghan Government was not in
danger of collapse. Admitting such a rapid degradation in the
security in the districts in Afghanistan would have been
admission that that policy was failing.
The administration, again, wanted to leave Afghanistan. It
was not going to change its policy, even though the facts on
the ground were showing that the security situation was
deteriorating----
Mr. Mast. Is there anybody specific that you attribute to
telling you that?
Mr. Roggio. Oh, it was General Milley himself said it on
television.
Mr. Mast. How do you, General Sadat, looking at what Mr.
Roggio just said, what was being put out in the media here,
what was being said by General Milley, what was being put out
in intelligence, how did that rosy--we will call it a rosy
assessment, that is an understatement. It is an understatement
to call it a rosy assessment.
How did that affect your decisionmaking on the ground? Did
you buy into it? Did you not buy into it? You mentioned already
that it gave you some blinders to some extent, your
relationships. But can you help elaborate on that just a little
bit?
General Sadat. Sir, the truth of the matter is after
President Biden announced withdrawal, the U.S. forces and
Afghan forces were in complete disarray with each other.
Everybody was trying. The U.S. forces were ordered to leave the
Afghan forces we were trying to hold with our teeth, with our
hands, whatever we could, we could have got.
So no, nothing really mattered to me anymore whatever
Washington was saying. I was trying very hard with my brothers
to save our country. The truth of the matter is it was
excruciating to separate two war brothers, two--like two
militaries that worked for 20 years. Suddenly we were told not
to work anymore.
Mr. Mast. You are saying what Washington was saying, and I
am not trying to put words in your mouth here. I am actually, I
am trying to understand what you are saying. What Washington
was saying didn't matter to you at all on the ground there
because it was----
General Sadat. I didn't trust them.
Mr. Mast. Garbage, it was crap.
General Sadat. I don't want to jump into the--I have a lot
of respect for the U.S. military, for the veterans. I have
worked with the CIA as a counterterrorism task force commander,
with the U.S. military for several years.
But it seems as if when it came to Afghanistan, during
President Biden, a lot of the decisions made in the U.S.
military and in the CIA were very, very politically driven.
Sometimes they told us that as we don't know about what
President Biden is thinking and deciding, they didn't know as
well. President Trump, of course he had made mistakes. The Doha
Agreement was a mistake.
But he listened to his generals. He listened to the
assessments. He sent us letters about how can we win, for
example, what can we do these things.
But I think when it came to President Biden, the vendetta
didn't really allow President Biden to see Afghanistan for what
it is.
Even today as this administration's diplomats are going
around the world and lobbying for Taliban, the fact that
everyone is trying to push Afghanistan under the rug, sir, is
going to hurt your national security. You are not recognizing
the threat as it is.
Mr. Mast. I appreciate that, General.
I now recognize my friend Mr. Nunn.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate you, Chairman
Mast, for leading this very important after-action. It is the
only one that has really been done in the House here, despite
nearly 2 years of an absentee administration evaluating its own
failures.
I have flown enough combat missions in both Afghanistan and
Iraq to know what success looks like, including support to
special operations Afghan forces on the ground in the area, as
well as to know what failure looks like. In this case the
failure in the withdrawal from Kabul resulted in volunteer
veterans, myself and many included through Task Force Argo,
helping to evacuate 3,000 individuals.
For those individuals in the audience who have been part of
that incredible volunteer team, a salute to each of you. You
have done more than our own Federal Government has done to help
save Americans in that horrible situation.
I want you to know that in every mission that we flew, when
we landed, we immediately did a post-flight report. That is the
critical after-action that really drives so that we can prevent
failure in the future and advance successes that can be
replicated.
Your testimony today does so in a way that the rest of the
administration has refused to acknowledge.
Sadly, 13 Americans gave their lives in the evacuation,
including Corporal Daegan Page from my own district in Red Oak,
Iowa, who manned the line, despite intelligence being very
clear that there was a threat in the area, sacrificing so the
other Americans and Afghan allies could evacuate.
The honor and bravery of these American soldiers will never
be forgotten. Their sacrifice in the theater of combat forever
reminds us that our freedom is not free.
As geopolitical tensions across the globe continue to rise,
the U.S. military must be prepared for future events that could
have been learned years ago from our withdrawal from
Afghanistan.
So we are going to go Air Force style, and I am going to do
gun ship questions here. That is meant to be the ability for us
to get back and forth very quickly here.
Lieutenant General Sadat, now, you led special forces in
Afghanistan. In fact, you are still on a hit list by the
Taliban in country today for the service that you rendered in
the defense of Americans and your country.
I want to begin by first thanking you very much for all
that you have done to help save the lives of our brothers and
sisters in uniform. But also to your own country. Your service
and sacrifice is not unnoticed.
I would begin with saying did you find that the Biden
administration communicated a plan for withdraw to your team in
a timely manner?
General Sadat. No, sir, there was no team--no plan, sorry.
A plan is when it is communicated to the partners on the
ground. We were Afghans, we owned Afghanistan. We were in
charge there. There was no plan shown to us.
Mr. Nunn. As a result, were your special operators put at
great risk?
General Sadat. They were at great risk, even----
Mr. Nunn. Were Americans who depended on you to be the
front line also put at great risk?
General Sadat. I think the confusion was real, and it put
everybody at risk.
Mr. Nunn. What was the impact of President Biden's go-to-
zero order on assistance that the U.S. was providing to the
Afghan military? Did it degrade your capabilities?
General Sadat. It immediately shut down all software
system, including the aircraft software system for intelligence
collection navigation and other matters.
Mr. Nunn. I want to deep dive with you on that. As a recon
airborne guy myself here, to the best of your knowledge, was
close air support or armed over-watch, or even over-watch of an
intel asset provided during the evacuation of Kabul?
General Sadat. There were airplanes, but they didn't have
the authority to pull the trigger.
Mr. Nunn. Did you ever receive updates from them on what
was happening real time on the ground?
General Sadat. No, sir.
Mr. Nunn. What was the U.S. retrograde of Air Force cover
in the immediate vicinity's impact to your team on the ground?
General Sadat. One day in June I called the U.S. forces in
Doha to give me support, and they said every day we can only
send three drones to Afghanistan. I said we used to have 20
drones, why not. They said the country of Oman is only allowing
three drones per day.
This is the time that across Afghanistan over 500
engagements are happening between Afghan and the Taliban
forces. The U.S. could only get three drones to Afghanistan,
and those were used to support the U.S. presence in Kabul, the
embassy, and also the----
Mr. Nunn. General, we have talked about how degraded your
forces were, as a result how vulnerable both Americans and
Afghans were. What did the go-to-zero order have on the Taliban
at this same time?
General Sadat. It was celebration. They distributed sweets
amongst each other, saying that the best has happened and we
are going to take over the country.
It also gave them this, what do you say, this steroids.
Therefore a lot of them killed themselves, actually. It was
unbelievable. What I saw was the zombies rushing into to take
over the streets and cities, although they died in hundreds.
Mr. Nunn. General, for your troops, for the forces you
commanded, the abandonment by the Biden administration, what
happened to the special operations forces that were left behind
in Afghanistan?
General Sadat. Some were killed, and some 30,000 Afghan
forces are in Taliban prison. Some 10,000 special operators are
in Iran, but every day they are being arrested, tortured, and
sent back to Afghanistan.
The other day I got a call from Colonel Raziq (phonetic).
He is one of the police officers who served under Khoshal in
Pakistan. He lost one of his legs in Grishk District of
Helmand. The police took over his prosthetic leg and had him
crawl for 30 feet into reaching the car. He called me back and
he said, sir, what do you want me to do? Should I kill myself,
go to Afghanistan, or go to Iran?
In Iran, our officers, general officers and colonels are
working in flour mills. They are doing dirt jobs. They are
working in street cleaning. Whatever money they earn, they have
to give for visa. Iranian visa is very, very expensive. When
their visas expire, they are being kicked back to Afghanistan.
And the Taliban immediately arrests them, and then they
disappear from the radar.
Mr. Nunn. General, thank you very much for your service,
for the service of the forces under you. It is never an
advantage or a wish to have to lose our own forces at the hands
of the enemy. It is even worse when we have to hand our own
forces over to the enemy.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you very much for leading on
this. And I want to emphasize the fact here that after two
decades of service by both American men and women and by your
own countrymen, we leave behind a situation worse than where we
found it. And we put on the altar of sacrifice the very men and
women who stood up for a future of Afghans.
Know that you have allies here. Thank you for the after-
action.
I yield my time, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Nunn.
Mr. Crow, you are recognized for a closing statement.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman. And thank you all to the
witnesses. This was a really important discussion, and thank
you again to the folks in the audience for your service and
sacrifice in a lot of different and very important ways.
I wanted to just discuss for a moment something that
General Sadat said. And you made a really important comment,
General. And behind that comment was this idea that over 20
years, the United States had 100,000 troops there at one point.
We tried many different strategies, many different approaches.
I will ardently push back all the time on anybody that says
that the Afghans were not willing to fight for their country. I
mean, that is an absurd comment. And it is one that deserves to
be called out whenever it is said.
Because I don't need to tell you all the heart, the grit,
the sacrifice, how many of your brothers and sisters gave
everything for your country.
So it wasn't that. It wasn't, you know, the lack of a
willingness of the Afghans to fight. So it really was this
issue of politics. It really was this issue of the message that
was being sent and the lack of an ability to have a viable
political process that set the Afghan Government up for
success.
For me, the conclusion to that is that that whole problem
happened way before April 2021. And again, my criticisms and
critiques of the manner of the withdrawal are well-documented,
right.
There were a lot of problems. I have been very clear about
that, and we owe it to people to make sure we are correcting
those, and that in the future, God forbid if we are ever in a
situation of conducting a NEO of that magnitude again, that we
fix it, and we do it better and we do it differently.
But the concrete had hardened so much by that point, from a
political perspective, that from the Taliban's point of view,
it was very clear America was done. It was clear we were going
to leave. At some point or another, it was clear, probably
years ago, that that was going to happen. Which put everybody
in untenable situation.
I have learned to take people's word in this business that
a lot of times if you actually listen to them, they will just
tell you, right.
So I wanted to go to back to the former President. This was
former President Trump at a rally in Ohio on June 26, 2021.
This is what he said. ``I started the process. All the troops
are coming back home. They couldn't stop the process. Twenty-
one years is enough, don't we think? Twenty-one years. They
couldn't stop the process. They wanted to, but it was very
tough to stop the process.''
Message after message, time and again, it was clear to the
Taliban the way this was going to go.
I am sorry to all of you, to my Afghan brothers and
sisters. You deserve better. And I am willing to talk with my
colleagues here and to continue to talk with all of you about
what we can do to keep the faith and to move forward.
Because there are things that we can do. This is a story
that I don't believe is done. And we will continue to work with
you on that.
One other call here, in addition to our policy with regard
to Afghanistan, is we have obligations that we have not yet
fulfilled to those who are still left behind, our partners and
our brothers and sisters who are seeking refuge, who are
hiding, who every day are fearing for their lives.
We must pass the Afghan Allies Protection Act to expand the
special immigrant visa program, to expand the P-1 and P-2
programs, to streamline that process, and to do everything
possible to continue evacuations from Afghanistan to get people
to safety. That is our obligation.
In addition to that, we must pass the Afghan Allies
Adjustment Act to make sure that those who we have got out of
Afghanistan have a clear path to start a new life in the United
States, because they will be incredible citizens. They will be
incredible parts of our community, I know it. They are my
neighbors already in many respects, and we owe it to them.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Crow.
Like any event, the game ultimately ends. And throughout
the game, there's mistakes that are usually made on both sides,
but in the end there is a winner and a loser. I defined winner
and loser as the outcomes being better than expected or the
outcomes being worse than expected, and that is how I give that
definition. And I think it is quantifiable.
This resulted in a loss. Outcomes worse than expected,
immeasurably worse than expected. For not just what was the
moment. Certainly to this moment, and likely for at least a
generation to come.
That happened because of abandonment and ignorance.
Ignoring reconnaissance, intelligence, surveillance at a basic
level. Just looking. And just to look, you had to willfully
ignore what was taking place to get to the loss, the worse
expectations, or the worse outcomes compared to what could have
been expected.
You had to willfully ignore what was taking place on the
ground. And you had to abandon the people on the ground in
order to reach what the administration wanted to reach, which
is what they announced on the go-to-zero day, September 11
withdraw. Political withdraw date. Political celebration
withdraw date.
Let's reach a day that is an anniversary of the 9/11
attacks and make that our withdraw date, no matter what. No
matter, we are going to do this. It doesn't matter if we ignore
how many special immigrant visas need to be issued, and if
those people won't be able to get the documentation that they
need because there's no Americans on the ground.
It doesn't matter how many provinces are being taken over.
It doesn't matter the Taliban advancement. It doesn't matter if
we have to leave these air bases and retreat to another one.
It doesn't matter if we have to call on an unnumbered
amount of civilians not working for the State Department or the
Department of Defense to come in and help get people out.
Definitely not a part of any plan.
It doesn't matter what has to happen, we are going to
abandon, we are going to ignore in order to get to the
political outcome that we desire. That resulted in a loss.
Outcome worse than expectations.
I thank you all for your testimony, your eyewitness
accounts, your firsthand accounts. Sharing your heart about how
you felt about the situation at the time, rehashing that. It is
of great value to each and every one of us on both sides of the
aisle.
Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for each and every one of you. I hope that you will
respond to those in writing.
Pursuant to committee rules, all members may have 5 days to
submit those statements, questions, and extraneous materials
for the record, subject to the length limitations. And without
objection, this committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:55 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
