- EXAMINING FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET FOR SOUTH AND CENTRAL ASIAN AFFAIRS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET FOR
SOUTH AND CENTRAL ASIAN AFFAIRS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE MIDDLE EAST, NORTH
AFRICA AND CENTRAL ASIA

JOINT WITH

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE INDO-PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 13, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-46

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-740                 WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey      GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida GABE AMO, Rhode Island
KEN BUCK, Colorado AMI BERA, California
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANDY BARR, Kentucky TED LIEU, California
RONNY JACKSON, Texas SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
YOUNG KIM, California DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida COLIN ALLRED, Texas
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan ANDY KIM, New Jersey
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,  SARA JACOBS, California
American Samoa KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio       Florida
JIM BAIRD, Indiana GREG STANTON, Arizona
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
THOMAS KEAN, Jr., New Jersey JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
CORY MILLS, Florida SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas JASON CROW, Colorado
JOHN JAMES, Michigan BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director
Sophia Lafargue, Minority Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on the Middle East, North Africa, and Central Asia

JOE WILSON, South Carolina, Chairman
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota, Ranking
TIM BURCHETT, Tennesse                   Member
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 BRAD SHERMAN, California
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia
Gabriella Zach, Subcommittee Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on the Indo-Pacific

YOUNG KIM, California, Chairwoman
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 AMI BERA, California, Ranking
MARK GREEN, Tennesse                     Member
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  ANDY KIM, New Jersey
AMATA RADEWAGEN, American Samoa      BRAD SHERMAN, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia
MIKE WALTZ, Florida                  WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
Dan Markus, Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

WITNESSES

Page
Ms. Elizabeth Horst, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau
of South and Central Asian Affairs, U.S. Department of State...    10
The Honorable Michael Schiffer, Assistant Administrator, Bureau
for Asia, U.S. Agency for International Development............    14

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    43
Hearing Minutes..................................................    44
Hearing Attendance...............................................    45

MATERIAL FOR THE RECORD

Material for the record submitted by Representative Manning......    39

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions for the record from Ms. Horst to
Representative Keating.........................................    46
Responses to questions for the record from The Honorable Michael
Schiffer to Representative Phillips............................    51

EXAMINING FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET FOR
SOUTH AND CENTRAL ASIAN AFFAIRS

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 13, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Middle East, North
Africa and Central Asia, Joint with
Subcommittee on the Indo-Pacific,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The committees met jointly, pursuant to call, at 2:28 p.m.,
in Room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Joe Wilson [chair of
the subcommittee on the Middle East, North Africa and Central
Asia] and Hon. Young Kim [chair of the subcommittee on the
Indo-Pacific] presiding.
Mr. Wilson. Ladies and gentlemen, as Chairman of the Middle
East, North Africa, and Central Asia Subcommittee, I am
grateful to hold this joint hearing with Indo-Pacific
Subcommittee Chairwoman Young Kim, to examine the fiscal year
2024 budget for South and Central Asian Affairs. And, we
welcome each person here today. And we're particularly
appreciative of our witnesses today.
Central Asia's geographic proximity to Russia, China,
Afghanistan, and Iran, have contributed to its minimal economic
impact globally and relative neutrality toward the malign
interests of its neighbors.
As a war criminal Putin continues the genocidal invasion of
Ukraine, the countries of Central Asia are in a particularly
difficult situation, given their deep historical, geographical,
and economic ties to Russia.
It would seem that their relative respective governments
are seeking to decouple from Russia where possible and balance
their economic and security policies to respond to the
realities imposed by war criminal Putin.
Memberships in the Putin-led multilateral organizations
like the Eurasian Economic Union and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization have inevitably proven to be more of a
burden than a benefit. Members take on the burdens of
sanctions, ancillary trade policies, and military dysfunction
with no clear benefit.
Sadly, on the current trajectory, the main beneficiary of
any of the decoupling with Russia, will be the Chinese
Communist Party. The countries of Central Asia are rich in
critical minerals and the Chinese Communist Party has already
significantly increased its predatory economic and security
engagement in Central Asia.
Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan
and Uzbekistan are all members of the debt trapping colonizing
Belt and Road Initiative. As one of the first to recognize
their independence of the five Central Asian states following
the collapse of the Soviet Union, the United States now has a
mutually beneficial opportunity to increase engagement with
Central Asia, particularly Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and
Uzbekistan.
As democracies work to rid our supply chains from malign
influence, Central Asia could play a role in diversification.
The Central Asia area could present an alternative to Russian
energy for our European allies.
Additionally, minerals that are critical to our supply
trains are largely controlled, sadly, by the Chinese Communist
Party. Expansion of the United States' economic and security
strategies in the Indo-Pacific, is critical to counter the
malign expansionist threat of the Chinese Communist Party.
The U.S.-India relationship is a vital pillar of our
presence in the Indo-Pacific. India has achieved tremendous
success as the world's largest democracy, shifting from
socialism to free market capitalism.
With success comes responsibility. And India has an
opportunity to expand their own manufacturing defense
capabilities to protect their interests against those of Putin
and the Chinese Communist Party.
My father's service in India with the Flying Tigers of
World War II, and as the former Chairman of the India caucus, I
was born with an appreciation of the people of India. We are
always hopeful America's long-term partner, Pakistan and its
significant note to recognize the developing democracy of
Bangladesh, well represented here in Washington by Muhammad
Imran.
Following the disastrous withdrawal from Afghanistan, which
resulted in the death of 13 service members, abandonment of our
allies and their families and the creation of a safe-haven for
terrorists, the people of Afghanistan are suffering under
Taliban rule. Women are prevented from working and girls are
unable to attend school, effectively confining them to their
homes.
Recently, President Biden remarked that Al-Qaeda is gone
from Afghanistan. And, that we received, quote, help from the
Taliban to keep the terrorist extremists at bay.
The U.N. Sanctions Monitoring Team concluded in a report
that there are over 20 armed groups. And, they have enjoyed a
greater freedom of movement and planning under the Taliban. The
Administration's reckless remarks are sadly completely detached
from reality.
As we consider American priorities for South and Central
Asia, I want to thank the witnesses again for their service
expertise and look forward to their presenting their remarks.
And, it's a real honor for me to be now recognizing our very
esteemed Ranking Member, Dean Phillips, all the way from
Minnesota.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Chair Wilson, for holding this
important meeting. And, to Chair Kim and Ranking Member Bera
from the Indo-Pacific Subcommittee, for joining us in this
important work.
As I said during our last hearing, it is our subcommittee's
core responsibility to use Congress' power of the purse to
guide the State Department and USAID's activities, and support
our diplomatic corps, and then to provide robust oversight over
the execution of that terribly important work.
I'd like to extend a warm welcome to Principal Deputy
Assistant Secretary Elizabeth Horst and Assistant Administrator
Michael Schiffer. Thank you both for being with us today.
We had a wonderful conversation with your colleagues not
long ago, who handle Near East Affairs just last month. And, I
look forward to engaging with both of you today on the Biden
Administration's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request for South and
Central Asia.
This hearing comes on the heels of the 2023 NATO Summit,
where U.S. and European partners demonstrated unprecedented
unity and support for the Ukrainian people in their fight
against Russian aggression. Russia's illegal and unjust
invasion of Ukraine has done more than just strengthened the
NATO alliance, it has demonstrated to countries around the
entire world that Russia is not a dependable partner.
I'll say it again, not a dependable partner. Not
diplomatically, not economically, and not militarily. And, has
created an opening for strengthened U.S. engagement
particularly in South and Central Asia.
In fact, I believe that the Biden Administration has
rightly taken advantage of these opportunities by increasing
engagement with the five Central Asian countries. Not only are
these countries strategically located between Russia, China,
Iran, and Afghanistan, but they are countries with growing
economies, flourishing populations, and increasing interests in
working with the United States of America.
We must stay vigilant in our support for advancing
democratic values and human rights in the entire region. I
remain particularly concerned by the Kyrgyz court's decision to
terminate as a media outlet, Radio Azattyk, which is Radio Free
Europe and Radio Liberty's local media outlet and a very
trusted source for independent and reliable information in the
country.
Nevertheless, I've been pleased by regional efforts to
reform and to modernize and to integrate including through
cracking down on corruption, strengthening institutional checks
and balances, and advancing individual rights and freedoms. I
look forward to hearing more from our witnesses today about how
the United States is using this unique moment to advance our
relationships with the C5.
Pakistan, a major non-NATO ally, and the only formal U.S.
ally in the SCA region, is experiencing multiple crises at the
moment. Monsoon flooding during the summer of 2022 affected 33
million people, with over one-third of the country's territory
reportedly under water at the height of the rainfall.
This natural disaster, in combination with one of the very
worst economic crises in Pakistan's history, widespread
protests because of former President Khan's arrest, and
increased terrorist attacks from the Pakistani Taliban, have
left the country terribly vulnerable.
Ensuring the future of democracy and long term stability in
Pakistan, is in our United States' national security interests.
And, I do hope to hear from our witnesses today about how the
Biden Administration is supporting the people of Pakistan
during these challenging times.
Finally, since the United States withdrawal from
Afghanistan in 2021, one of the main questions I, and, I
believe, most of my colleagues on both sides of the aisle have
been struggling with, is how to provide support to the people
of Afghanistan who are experiencing a crushing economic and
humanitarian crisis, while preventing that support from
benefitting the Taliban.
As of May 2023, the World Food Program projected that 28
million people, two-thirds of Afghanistan's population will
require some form of assistance this year to survive. And, at
the same time, I am deeply, deeply disturbed by the Taliban's
crackdown on everyday life for the people of Afghanistan,
particularly as Chair Wilson has already mentioned, for women
and girls who just by way of example, have been barred from
universities and public parks, and face restrictions on travel
without a male relative and on public dress.
As the proud father of two wonderful daughters myself, this
is heartbreaking and shameful. While we cannot and we should
not recognize or support the Taliban in any way, we must work
alongside our international partners to support the Afghan
people and continue to advance the rights of women and girls in
the country.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
how the Administration is carrying out this important work,
while ensuring that humanitarian assistance undergoes proper
vetting and oversight to ensure it reaches the people who need
it the most and does not benefit or empower the Taliban.
As we look at some of these challenges facing South and
Central Asia today, great power competition, threats to
democracy, economic and environmental shocks, just to name a
few, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about how the
State Department and USAID plan to use the requested funds for
Fiscal Year 2024 to mitigate these challenges, create
opportunities, and demonstrate United States leadership and
commitment to our partners in South and Central Asia.
With that, I yield back and thank you.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Ranking Member Dean
Phillips. And, we're indeed so fortunate to have both
subcommittees together. But, such an important subcommittee,
incredible. We're so happy to be here with the Chairman of the
Indo-Pacific Subcommittee, Young Kim.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Chairman Wilson. I am
delighted that both of our two subcommittees can work together
to examine the Fiscal Year 2024 budget for South and Central
Asia.
This hearing presents a remarkable opportunity for the
subcommittee on the Indo-Pacific to shape the United States'
approach to the crucial region of South Asia. South Asia holds
immense significance for our foreign policy and national
security interests.
And, the six nations in the region face a dynamic
geopolitical landscape that presents challenges for U.S. policy
objectives. First and foremost, we must acknowledge the
escalating assertiveness of the CCP globally, and especially in
South Asia.
The CCP is aggressively asserting leadership in regional,
economic, and financial initiatives. It is promoting its Belt
and Road Initiative, which is an effort to boost infrastructure
development and economic connectivity.
The most prominent Belt and Road project, the $60 billion
China/Pakistan Economic Corridor, or CPEC, would grant China
access to the Arabian Sea, allowing a portion of China's
seaborne trade to effectively bypass the Strait of Malacca, the
strategic choke point that connects the Indian Ocean and the
Pacific Ocean.
Under CPEC, the CCP built a major port at Gwadar on
Pakistan's Arabian Sea coast, coupled with a dual use military
airbase and naval facility in nearby Jiwani. Under the guise of
economic development, the CCP is using its South Asian
neighbors to advance its agenda and undermining the rules based
international order.
Landlocked Nepal, who has relied on India for the majority
of its trade and transit routes, has recently turned to Beijing
for investment. And, the CCP has pledged connectivity projects
that will provide alternative routes and reduce its dependency
on India.
With the United States holding and withdrawing aid in
Bangladesh due to various concerns, the CCP has seized the
opportunity, leaving little choice but to lean on Chinese
investments. Meanwhile, the CCP has made significant and
increasing foreign direct investment in Sri Lanka and has
repeatedly been the top source of foreign direct investment to
Sri Lanka.
Second, the CCP's intensifying of its presence both along
the Indian border and the Indian Ocean. China's fishing vessels
are engaging in illegal, unregulated, and unreported fishing.
Aid and cooperation play a pivotal role not only in
advancing U.S. interests in South Asia, but also in enhancing
their prosperity. Yet, this year's South and Central Asia
budget represents a 2.3 percent decrease from the previous
year.
And, it remains the least funded region by the State
Department. At a time when the region faces the threat of
terrorism, refugee displacement, and democratic backsliding,
this budget discrepancy highlights the need for greater U.S.
engagement.
As the CCP aims to expand its economic activity, influence,
and enhance its strategic presence, the United States must
respond by bolstering our diplomatic presence in the region. It
is imperative that we foster greater cooperation with the six
South Asian nations on the economic, diplomatic, and security
fronts.
Our first step must be ensuring that all embassies and
consulates are up and running. And, we must appoint and confirm
ambassadors in a timely manner.
Secondly, the U.S. must continue to deepen existing
partnerships while also forging new ones. We must explore new
avenues to expand our development and economic cooperation,
maritime safety and security, and strengthen the capacities of
law enforcement agencies by working bilaterally with South
Asian countries.
Indian Prime Minister Modi's recent visit to the United
States delivered new bilateral initiatives to the table. Not
only will this increase U.S.-India cooperation, but it helps
set a precedent for how the United States should be conducting
policy in the region. We must expand and accelerate such
efforts across the region.
So, in closing I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
and the members from both subcommittees. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Young Kim. We
now proceed to the Ranking Member Ami Bera.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Chairman Wilson and Ranking Member
Phillips and the Chairwoman of the Indo-Pacific Subcommittee,
Congresswoman Kim for hosting this hearing.
I'm going to keep my comments short. But, I appreciate the
President's FY 2024 budget, because it represents the values
and the importance.
But, I have to go on the record, yesterday, you know, was
really disheartened to see the House Appropriations Committee
Republicans and pass their Fiscal Year 2024 state foreign ops
and related programs appropriations bill with a 15 percent cut
in spending from Fiscal 2023 levels.
So, as we go through the budget process, we've got to fix
that. In a nonpartisan way, you know, Democrats and Republicans
agree that the importance of countering China's economic
coercion, the importance of making sure we have a robust
diplomatic presence throughout the region, South Asia, Central
Asia, Middle East.
The fact that we have to have robust funding to provide
alternatives to China's Belt and Road Initiative, that's
incredibly important. That we have to adequately fund USAID,
State Department, to have the resources to mount robust public
information campaigns to counter this information that's out
there.
And, that's why budgets reflect our values and priorities.
And again, my disappointment in the 15 percent cut. And,
hopefully as we go through the appropriations process and the
budgeting process, we will be able to remedy that and
adequately fund State and USAID.
In addition, I'm heartened and look forward to working with
the Chairman and the Ranking Member of the Middle East, North
Africa Subcommittee on strengthening our relationship with the
Central Asian nations. Incredibly important right now,
especially on the heels of the unprovoked Russian invasion of
Ukraine.
You know, but, the countries in Central Asia, while not
perfect countries, very much want the U.S. presence there. And,
you know, on that note, have had conversations with the
Administration.
We've introduced legislation with some of our colleagues in
a bipartisan way on the Ways and Means Committee to repeal
Jackson-Vanik to allow our companies too more fully engage in
Central Asia. And, that will be a piece of legislation that I
look forward to working with my colleagues on the other
subcommittee with.
In addition, you know, I'm proud on the Indo-Pacific
subcommittee we had an earlier hearing on the Indian Ocean
Region. A region that, you know, often we don't pay adequate
attention to.
But, if we look at the competition that's taking place in
there, you know, whether it's in Djibouti, whether it's
increasing PRC presence in the Emirates, whether it's a
presence developing ports in Pakistan, this is a place where, I
think, our two subcommittees can also, you know, increase our
presence and understanding. Because this is a huge maritime
region where the number of goods and services that travel
through the Indian Ocean is incredibly important to us.
In addition, you know, look forward to working with the
Administration to make sure we get an ambassador to the
Maldives. An incredibly important, you know, there has been a
nomination. You know, there's some hold ups on opening the
embassy there. But, I think we've got to get that done and get
our ambassador in place.
And lastly, you know, as we think about, you know, the two
decades long war with Afghanistan, the one way we can
adequately honor our men and women that served in Afghanistan,
is to make sure those refugees that have come to the United
States, that we honor them with that service.
And, to that note, the Afghan Adjustment Act has been
reintroduced. And, I think, this is an incredibly important
piece of legislation.
My home district in Sacramento County has the largest
Afghan refugee population in the country. And, we've got to
give these individuals a pathway to become permanent, legal
residents. And, the Afghan Adjustment Act does that with
additional security background checks and so forth.
So again, I think, this is an incredibly important
legislation that the two subcommittees certainly should work
closely together, as well as with all of Congress to get passed
and sent to the President's desk.
So, with that again, I thank the Chairman and Ranking
Member of the subcommittees for hosting this hearing. And, I
look forward to the witness testimony. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much to Ranking Member Ami Bera.
And, as we begin today, we think of history. And, I appreciate
Congressman Bera pointing out the bipartisanship that I think
you're going to see substantially, not all, here.
But, we began the day in a bipartisan manner. I was with
Congressman James Moylan, the Delegate from Guam. Today is the
79th Anniversary of the liberation of Guam.
And so, there are things we don't want to repeat. And so,
but how brave the people of Guam, who were the only American's
who actually lived under the occupation of the Imperial Japan.
And so, as history is being made, we need to understand and
learn from history, peace through strength. With that, I'd like
to thank both of our persons here today, Secretaries, and we'll
begin with your presentations. And then, we'll go into a
strictly maintained five minute question period.
So, Secretary Elizabeth Horst, thank you. You are the
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for the Bureau of South
and Central Asian Affairs. And then, grateful to have Michael
Schiffer, the Assistant Administrator for the Bureau for Asia
USAID.
And so, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH HORST, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF SOUTH AND CENTRAL ASIAN AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE; AND MICHAEL SCHIFFER, ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU FOR ASIA, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT

STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH HORST

Ms. Horst. Chairman Wilson, Ranking Member Phillips,
Chairwoman Kim, and Ranking Member Bera, South and Central Asia
is a region vital to our national interests.
It is at the crossroads of strategic competition with China
and Russia. It is where the future of 21st Century economy will
be written. And, it is home to one of our most consequential
relationships, India.
The President's Fiscal Year 2024 Foreign Assistance Request
is $1.223 billion for South and Central Asia, providing the
resources necessary for our ambitious agenda. It includes funds
to expand our diplomatic presence in the Indo-Pacific, to build
resilient energy markets, and to support counterterrorism and
maritime security.
The budget request also includes $2 billion over five years
in mandatory funding to enable the United States to make game-
changing investments in the Indo-Pacific to out compete China.
We look forward to working closely with Congress as we advance
our goals in South and Central Asia.
I've heard from many members on this Committee that we need
to match our words with our resources in the Indo-Pacific. This
budget requests substantial increases in funding for the
region, and I'd like to provide some examples of how we would
use these funds if appropriated by Congress.
India is an essential partner in the Indo-Pacific. Prime
Minister Modi's state visit to Washington last month
demonstrated that we are growing closer in alignment,
specifically on emerging technologies and defense. Assistance
to India targets energy security, supporting India's ambitious
goal of 500 gigawatts of renewable energy by 2030.
We appreciate Congress' partnership on India, including on
ensuring that the advancement of democracy, human rights, and
religious freedom, are at the center of our partnership.
Our Indo-Pacific assistance also enables us to work with
key maritime states of Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and Maldives to
build maritime surveillance, counter illegal fishing, and
prevent the illicit trafficking of people and goods. For
example, we've provided three U.S. coast guard cutters to date
to Sri Lanka, using Foreign Military Financing.
And, when I visited the Port of Colombo earlier this year,
I heard firsthand how Sri Lanka is using these vessels to
patrol its exclusive economic zone and provide security to
nearby shipping lanes. Ultimately, this has helped Sri Lanka
resist pressure tactics by the PRC.
I know the integrity of Pakistan's democracy is a key
concern to those on this committee. We firmly believe that a
prosperous, democratic, and human rights-respecting Pakistan is
important to U.S. interests.
We use our foreign assistance to support Pakistan's
independent civil society, strengthening their advocacy for
reform, oversight, and accountability.
I personally talked with advocates and journalists who
thanked the United States for continuing to foster democratic
communities and spaces. More broadly, our assistance to
Pakistan targets discrete areas where we can productively
collaborate with Pakistan, including on countering terrorism,
promoting health, and addressing the climate crisis.
Last year, catastrophic monsoons killed over 17 hundred
people, displaced millions, and left a third of the country
underwater.
The United States' leadership and swift response provided
substantial assistance. And, a Defense Department air bridge
delivered humanitarian supplies. Moving forward, our resources
will focus on Climate-smart agriculture, clean energy, and
water management.
Our assistance to Afghanistan is consistent with our
continuing interest in supporting the Afghan people, protecting
United States citizens, and resettling Afghans to whom we have
a special commitment.
We strongly and unequivocally condemn the Taliban's
systemic abuses of women and girls, and other marginalized
groups in Afghanistan.
And, the United States will continue to provide assistance
addressing the basic needs of Afghans where women can be safely
and meaningfully involved in the aid cycle, from aid
assessments to delivering monitoring. We have carefully crafted
assistance to support the Afghan people, not the Taliban.
In Central Asia we have a historic moment of opportunity.
The countries of Central Asia are under enormous pressure from
Moscow, which exerts significant control over energy and trade.
Despite this pressure, they have refused to send troops to
fight with Russia in Ukraine. They have emphasized Ukraine's
independent sovereignty and even provided humanitarian
assistance to the people of Ukraine.
That is why last year we launched the Economic Resilience
Initiative in Central Asia. This initiative aims to catalyze
transformative economic growth in the wake of Russia's war of
aggression in Ukraine.
And, through our assistance, we are expanding alternative
trade routes, teaching thousands of Central Asians English,
expanding job opportunities for returning labor migrants, and
helping businesses succeed and grow.
These efforts demonstrate our reliability as a partner,
bringing Central Asia in closer alignment with us over the
long-term.
In conclusion, the President's budget request for Fiscal
Year 2024 charts a clear path for engagement across South and
Central Asia. And, we look forward to partnering with Congress
on our interests in this strategically important region. Thank
you.
[The statement of Elizabeth Horst follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California [presiding]. Thank you, Ms. Horst. I
now recognize Mr. Schiffer for his opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL SCHIFFER

Mr. Schiffer. Chairwoman Kim, Ranking Member Phillips,
Ranking Member Bera, Chairman Wilson, distinguished members of
the committee, thank you for inviting me to testify here today
for the U.S. Agency for International Development and to speak
about our role in advancing U.S. foreign policy priorities in
South and Central Asia, and our Fiscal Year 2024 budget
request.
South and Central Asia faces pressing challenges with
implications for countries far beyond the region, including an
intensifying climate crisis, longstanding conflicts that
disrupt livelihoods, and tangible threats to sovereignty in a
region significantly affected by the gravitational pull from
the People's Republic of China and from Russia.
However, public and civil society leaders across the region
are consistently signaling pent up demand for regional
cooperation opportunities and greater connectivity, improved
democratic governance, and responsible stewardship of natural
resources.
As such, the President's FY 2024 budget request for USAID
includes slightly over $1 billion, $1.03 billion for South and
Central Asia in the development assistance, economic support
fund, assistance for Europe, Eurasia, and Central Asia, in
Global Health Program's USAID accounts.
Our FY 2024 budget request supports the overreaching
development principals laid out in the President's Indo-Pacific
and Central Asia strategies to improve resilience to health and
climate threats, foster sustainable, inclusive, and transparent
economic growth, and strengthen democratic institutions, good
government practices, and human rights.
In Afghanistan, we will continue in a very, very difficult
environment to collaborate with partners on the ground to
preserve the gains that have been made over the past 20 years
in areas of health, education, livelihood, human rights, and
civil society, with a focus on the protection of women and
girls and human rights.
And, I want to assure this committee that USAID is fully
cooperating with the Special Inspector General for Afghanistan
Reconstruction/SIGAR. We have long been and remain committed to
helping SIGAR fulfil its important statutory mandate.
Consistent with President Biden's deep commitment to
transparency for the American people, USAID believes in the
importance of Inspectors General to protect against fraud,
waste, and abuse.
We are committed to cooperating with all oversight bodies,
including SIGAR, this committee, Congress, and both State and
USAID's Inspectors General. Moving forward, USAID will continue
to work closely and proactively to keep SIGAR, Congress, and
other oversight bodies appraised of our activities on the
ground.
In South Asia, our request is designed to promote regional
cooperation to address regional challenges, addressing the root
causes of climate change, bolstering gender equality and human
rights, promoting democratic institutions and transparency,
fostering inclusive economic growth in the wake of COVID-19,
and enabling free and open digital technology and connectivity.
This is especially important given that South Asia remains
one of the least integrated regions of the world. We look to
collaborate with our partners in the Quad and India to leverage
innovations and partnership opportunities to address regional
and global threats like the climate crisis, which is already
contributing to losses of life and livelihood and global health
security, consistent poverty and socioeconomic disparities.
Likewise, as Secretary Horst offered, our development
assistance in Pakistan is structured to help Pakistan build a
stable, peaceful, and prosperous country. And to recover fully
from the catastrophic floods of last year.
Increasingly in Central Asia, we find partners that are
seeking greater cooperation and engagement with the United
States on strategic priorities such as economic integration and
diversification and the clean energy transition.
Indeed, our work in Central Asia is emerging as proof that
development principals grounded in pluralistic values, good
governance, and economic inclusion can deliver greater
resilience, diversified economies, and stability based on
partnerships and participation in the rules based international
order.
This request supports USAID's work with both the
interagency and our host government countries to address the
mounting effects of climate change, advocate for rights,
freedoms, and protections. And, where possible, support
activities, journalists, and citizens facing intimidation and
threats.
With your continued support, and on behalf of the American
people, USAID will continue our central role in realizing this
vision, will increase in partner countries' reliance and
advancing sustainable prosperity and security for communities
across the Indo-Pacific.
I look forward to your counsel and guidance and to your
questions. Thank you.
[The statement of Michael Schiffer follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Mr. Schiffer. I will now
recognize myself for five minutes. I want to thank both of you
for your opening statements.
The PRC is pouring money in infrastructure projects in the
region, especially in Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and Maldives. So,
what has the Administration found to be the most effective
method to counter the PRC's cash diplomacy and infrastructure
projects?
And, what are we doing to ensure that the United States
remains a partner of choice? I'd like to hear from both of you.
Mr. Schiffer. Thank you for that question. You know, I
would start by offering that it's critically important as we
think about how to compete effectively with the CCP. That we
start not with what we're against, but with what we're for.
What our affirmative vision for the region is.
And, our value proposition and what we can offer as a
development partner. We have a better development model. We
have a better development model because it's grounded in robust
governance institutions and vibrant, and support for vibrant
civil society.
That's the key catalyst that allows for development
engagement and economic growth to be sustainable over time. I
think many of our partners in the region understand that.
The main question that they have, frankly, and this is one
where this committee can be critical, is whether or not we have
the endurance to show up every day, meet them where they are,
and work with them to solve their problems.
When we have the support that we need, when we have the
robust resourcing that's reflected in the President's budget
request so that we can do that, we're able to be successful.
We found, for example, in Central Asia, and I will be
sparse on the specifics here, but happy to come back to the
committee in an appropriate setting, that we have a demand
signal to work with them and provide technical assistance on
financial management and debt management. And, they have asked
us to lean in.
Likewise, we've had a number of requests, and again, happy
to come back in an appropriate setting, to work to make sure
that American manufacturers of high tech goods have market
access and are able to provide them with the equipment and the
materials that they're looking for so that they don't have to
rely on other more suspect suppliers.
So, we have opportunities. We just need to make sure that
we have the support to be able to show them.
Mrs. Kim of California. I want to hear from Mr. Schiffer
also, for your opinion before we get into another question.
Ms. Horst. Sure. Thanks much for the question.
Mrs. Kim of California. Or, Ms. Horst.
Ms. Horst. I want to underscore what Assistant
Administrator Schiffer had said about where we are offering an
alternative. And, this is a word that many of you used in your
opening statements.
And, that's really an American strength. We offer an
alternative model to development. And, through our diplomacy,
through a number of things, not only the bilateral support that
we do, but also through the Quad, which is a grouping with
Japan, India, and Australia, we've been able to offer a number
of the countries in South Asia an alternative to what China
offers.
We are careful about the way we use tools such as the
Development Finance Corporation, the DFC, the Millennium
Challenge Corporation, and others, again, offering an
alternative to the way China finances its infrastructure
projects.
We know that long-term, we think this is where these
countries will be most independent, most sovereign. And, we see
a good response to that as well.
Mrs. Kim of California. I want to hear from Mr. Schiffer.
What does the USAID program in South Asia look like?
And, how can USAID expand its presence in South Asia to
help support the economic growth and support investments in
food security?
Mr. Schiffer. Well, thank you. That is an excellent--it's
an excellent question. And, I would offer, you know, first off,
as I know you appreciate, our presence in South Asia is varied
because we seek to meet our partners where they are.
And, the challenges that we have when it comes to food
security, for example, in Sri Lanka or Nepal, are very
different then what we face in Bangladesh or India.
The President's budget request includes $126 million for
economic growth in agriculture, which is a 43 percent increase
over the 2023 request. Precisely because as you suggest, we
recognize that this is an important area for us to engage,
especially given some of the knock-on effect of Russia's
illegal unjust further invasion of Ukraine.
And, there are real opportunities to work in the region on
food security in ways that help drive economic growth and
development.
Mrs. Kim of California. All right. Thank you. My time is
up. I want to recognize Ranking Member Phillips for five
minutes for your questions.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Chairwoman. I want to continue to
dig a little deeper on Chairwoman Kim's questioning about our
Central Asia strategy.
Clearly, Russia's war in Ukraine, China's aggression in the
region, has opened a door of opportunity, I think it's fair to
say, for us to deepen our engagement.
I'm curious what both of you here, starting with you, Ms.
Horst, what do you hear from the C5 countries about what they
would like to see more of from us?
Ms. Horst. Thanks for that question. As I noted in my
statement, we have a moment of opportunity with Central Asia
right now. This is a time when they have shown remarkable
independence and the message that we offer as an alternative to
both Russia and also China, is one that's really resonating.
The program that I mentioned called ERICEN, the Economic
Resilience Initiative in Central Asia, is just one example
where we're trying to do alternative trade routes. We're trying
to increase English language training so that----
Mr. Phillips. Ms. Horst, I don't want to interrupt, but----
Ms. Horst. Sure.
Mr. Phillips. My very distinct question is, what are we
hearing from them about what they want? And, maybe this
intersects. But, I really want to hear what we're being asked.
We don't get to hear much of that.
Ms. Horst. Fair question. What they're asking from us is
support on sanctions. Helping them find a way that they can
resist both pressures and giving them an alternative.
Mr. Phillips. Um-hum.
Ms. Horst. We have engaged very much with them on
sanctions, particularly in Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan.
Mr. Phillips. Okay.
Ms. Horst. As a way to not crush their own economies when
they are at risk, particularly in Kazakhstan, they have had
200,000 Russians come over the border. And, they're looking for
ways that they can make sure that they maintain their own
internal security, both in Kazakhstan and other places.
So, that's what we're hearing from them. They have really
embraced the C5 +1 format, as you mentioned. And, we're seeing
that as a format that is a way that we can do regional
connectivity in a way that we haven't in the past.
Mr. Phillips. Okay. And, Mr. Schiffer, anything you want to
add to what you might be hearing from any of the C5 countries?
Mr. Schiffer. Sure. It's a very good question and a very
important one. I was lucky enough to travel out to Central Asia
earlier this year with Deputy Administrator Coleman. Although
we went in February and I would recommend to Members of the
committee that they go in the summer.
Mr. Phillips. Ms. Horst and I are Minnesotans. We
understand.
Mr. Schiffer. And, I would offer that we heard consistently
as we traveled across the region, a demand for U.S. engagement
so that they had a diversity of options.
And, that they could be connected not just to the north, to
Russia, or to the east to the People's Republic of China, but,
to the west, to Europe and the United States as well.
They look to us to provide technical assistance. I had
mentioned earlier the demands of, you know, what we've gotten
on debt management and financial management.
Mr. Phillips. Um-hum.
Mr. Schiffer. They're looking to us to work with them to
digitize their customs so that we can----
Mr. Phillips. Okay.
Mr. Schiffer. Reduce the cost of those transactions and
increase trade flows. And, help them to build a middle
corridor.
So, I think there are significant opportunities.
Mr. Phillips. Okay. And, based on the budget and your
strategies, you believe we're well equipped to fulfill some of
those requests?
Mr. Schiffer. I would offer that if the President's Budget
request is met, we're well positioned to fulfill those
requests.
Mr. Phillips. Okay. Contin--Ms. Horst, you mentioned
Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, and, you know, we all note their
economic and their political reform progress, also some
increased interest in foreign investment and trade.
Can you talk a little bit more about how we are supporting
those particular efforts with countries that we believe are
moving in the right direction?
Ms. Horst. Sure. It's something we've been working on for a
long time. And, I think we're starting to see payoffs for.
Particularly in Uzbekistan where we're seeing a real reform
agenda under the President.
We see opportunities for American companies in a variety of
ways, including in tech. We have a nascent in agriculture as
well, there's opportunities there.
In Kazakhstan in particular, we've had a long relationship
in the energy sector. And, we're trying to work with Kazakhstan
to make sure they can diversify how Kazak energy gets to other
parts of the world so it's not as reliant on Russia.
That's something that's very new. But, it's something that
we're working with them on.
Mr. Phillips. And, conversely, can I ask you about
Kyrgyzstan and, you know, I would argue they're backsliding.
And, how are we addressing that?
Ms. Horst. Yeah. We do have concerns about democracy in
Kyrgyzstan. I do want to thank you and several others who
helped. We have good news on Radio Azattyk.
As we heard this morning, the Bishkek City Court overruled
the decision that had kept Radio Azattyk offline. And, I think
that's one example of when we work together, we are able to
push back and help Kyrgyzstan keep on its democratic path.
Mr. Phillips. Wonderful. I see my time is expiring, so I
yield back. Thank you both.
Mrs. Kim of California. All right. Thank you. I now
recognize Representative Barr for five minutes.
Mr. Barr. Well, thank you, Madam Chair. And, thank you to
Assistant Secretary Horst and Administrator Schiffer for your
service.
I want to start with a Belt and Road Initiative question.
It's obvious that the Russian, the war against Ukraine has left
a vacuum in Central Asia. And, the CCP is clearly attempting to
fill that vacuum through Belt and Road Initiative.
But, the Administration's budget request for development
assistance in South and Central Asia includes zero funding for
Central Asia. You've mentioned DFC. And, I think DFC plays an
important role, could play an important role in countering BRI.
But, can you talk about how the Administration is
countering Belt and Road in Central Asia?
Ms. Horst. Broadly speaking, again, what I said before is
the way we attempt to counter Belt and Road is to offer an
alternative. To offer a diverse way of funding infrastructure,
of developing their economy, of economic reform.
We think that that is the best possible way to push back
against China. Our assistance often comes with strings
attached. And, sometimes it doesn't seem like the fastest way
to go forward.
But, our experience has shown us that it is the long term
in the best interest of the Central Asian countries.
Mr. Barr. Are you all collaborating with DFC on specific
projects in Central Asia to help attract that diversity of
financing, private financing as an alternative to China?
Ms. Horst. So, we work with DFC. I don't have the
specifics. And, I'd be happy to get back to you about
specifically what DFC is doing.
But, broadly speaking, across the region we see DFC as an
excellent arm that offers an alternative to the way that other
countries have financed.
Mr. Barr. Well, let me give you a couple of examples.
There's a China-Pakistan Economic Corridor. Which is a BRI
project so far worth more than $62 billion. And, Pakistan is
more than $30 billion in debt to China and unable to pay.
And then there's another example in Sri Lanka. According to
the Director of the Asia-Pacific Department at the IMF, the Sri
Lankan economy is expected to contract by 3 percent. And, the
nation defaulted on its debt.
But, China exploited this financial weakness, engaging in
debt trap diplomacy. China is Sri Lanka's biggest credit and it
accounts for 10 percent of the country's foreign debt.
So, is DFC, the State Department, are you all involved in
those two countries?
Ms. Horst. So, in Pakistan, absolutely. The DFC is very
interested in Pakistan. And, it has a project with a wind farm
that has shown an alternative way of financing.
Just a quick note on the CPEC as we call it, the Chinese-
Pakistan Economic Corridor. This is something that we have long
cautioned Pakistan about. And, we have said buyer beware.
And, several years into the CPEC, I think the Pakistanis
can make their own decision on whether this was a great
investment. Or, whether they should be trying to a foreign
investment that may come with strings attached but is really a
long term better bet.
The same is true for Sri Lanka as well.
Mr. Barr. Thank you. And, my final question relates to
India. We had a great visit from Prime Minister Modi. He was
well received there. Going to be celebrating their 75th year of
independence coming up.
We've got an excellent bipartisan delegation led by our
colleagues, Congressman Waltz and Congressman Khanna, coming up
in August to India. Sadly, I will not be joining them. But, I
think they're very capable of representing our interest there.
I led, I co-led legislation with Congressman Waltz to fast-
track U.S. weapons sales to India. We know of India's over-
dependence on Russia for arms. And, we want to create some
separation there.
What additional steps can the State Department take to help
India get the weapons independent of Russia?
Ms. Horst. Sure. Thanks for that question. So, you are
exactly right, that Prime Minister Modi's visit last month was
demonstrating how consequential our relationship is with India.
And, one of the things that came out of it was this
increased relationship in our defense relationship. We're
looking at a number of different ways where we can collaborate
on security and defense production.
And, this is something we work on daily with our colleagues
at the Pentagon as well. This is an important area where I
think, to your point, we're going to help India diversify away
from Russia's defense industry.
Mr. Barr. And, how fast do you think we can achieve that?
Ms. Horst. You know, that's a question for both the Indian
side and the U.S. industry. We're moving faster than you would
expect.
But, it's probably never as fast as people want it to be.
Mr. Barr. Yeah. While I don't pretend to speak for all of
my colleagues, but, I can think the sense of Congress is
probably that we want that accelerated.
Ms. Horst. Yeah.
Mr. Barr. But, with that, my time is expired. I thank the
Chair, and I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. I now recognize Ranking Member Bera
for five minutes.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Chairwoman. I'm thrilled about the
interest in Central Asia and the importance at this moment in
time. You know, except for Kyrgyzstan, the Central Asian
nations are governed by Section 402 of the Trade Act of 1974,
the so-called Jackson-Vanik Amendment.
And, Jackson-Vanik is an outdated Cold War relic that
originally targeted the Soviet Union and aligned communist
countries. Which prevented the immigration of Jews and other
religious minorities.
In order to earn most favored nation tariff rates, the
State Department must annually certify the countries under
Jackson-Vanik, allowing free immigration. The State Department
does so regularly for Kazakhstan without issue, as Kazakhstan
has a reputation of multiculturalism and religious tolerance.
However, Jackson-Vanik strains U.S. relations with
Kazakhstan, a nation that is a tough neighborhood. And, my
colleague from Minnesota, Mr. Phillips, asked, you know, what
are they asking for?
And, you know, I've traveled to the region. And, routinely
the Central Asian nations are asking for a repeal of Jackson-
Vanik as, you know, it impedes trade and investment.
You know, I'm proud to co-lead the bipartisan Kazakhstan
Permanent Normal Trade Relations Act of 2023, along with
Representatives Panetta, Aderholt, Titus, and LaHood.
I guess Ms. Horst, what impact does Jackson-Vanik have on
U.S. relations with Kazakhstan and our ability to, and our
companies' ability to fully invest?
Ms. Horst. Thanks for that question, because we couldn't
agree with you more that Jackson-Vanik is a tool of an era that
has since passed. And, it is no longer the tool that we wanted
it to be.
You asked what impact it has? It holds back the
relationships that we have with these countries. And they do
ask for us to repeal it.
We think that if we were able to repeal it, we would then
be able to offer permanent normal trade relations. Which would
again, to the earlier question about how can we help diversify,
how can we help Central Asia push back against Russia and
China? This is exactly one of the ways we do it.
We very much would support graduating these three countries
from Jackson-Vanik. We'd love to do all three at once. But,
even if it was independently, individually, we'd very much
welcome that.
We think there are other tools we can use to push these
countries on their human rights record. And, right now Jackson-
Vanik just no longer is the tool that it used to be.
Mr. Bera. Right. Well, I look forward to working with the
Administration to get this done. Switching and maybe
Administrator Schiffer, in early 2020 before the pandemic shut
things down, I traveled to Sri Lanka and Nepal, specifically
because these were MCC Compact countries that had MCC Compacts
that were having trouble getting through their parliaments.
Fortunately, we were able to get this to completion with
Nepal. And the Nepalese people are thrilled with the
investment.
We didn't have the same success in Sri Lanka. What is
fascinating to me is, you know, a few months ago the Sri
Lankans came into my office and they now very much want the
MCCs back in Sri Lanka.
And, you know, as I pointed out to them, it's going to be
very difficult, because, you know, you were awarded the
compact.
That said, it was also, as I was in Sri Lanka and Nepal,
the disinformation campaigns about, you know, what these
compacts meant and the importance of using tools like that,
especially as we see the debt trap that Sri Lanka is in and the
real challenge that they have. They understand that today.
I guess, Mr. Schiffer, you know, thoughts about how we
should both, you know, perhaps go back to Sri Lanka and think
about, you know, the MCC again. Not easy to do. But, I think
it's important to consider given where they are and the
instability they have there.
But also, how we sell these programs and counter some of
the disinformation?
Mr. Schiffer. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
It's a really important one.
You know, I would offer that first off, for Sri Lanka, you
know, right now our focus is in making sure that they are able
to continue to perform under the IMF package that they've
received that has helped to pull them back from, you know, the
brink of what we had thought was going to be a financial
catastrophe last year.
They have done a good job thus far in living up to their
commitments. And, done a good job on debt restructuring. We
continue to provide them with technical assistance and advice
for that.
But, that is thing one. If they are able to stick to that
plan, we have indicated to them that we want to engage, whether
it's with the MCC, DFC, our own programs with our colleagues at
State to help them to drive the economic future that we think
the Sri Lankans deserve.
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentleman's time has expired.
Sorry. I now recognize Representative Baird for five minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Madam Chair. And, I appreciate the
witnesses being here. My question deals with back in April the
Uzbekistan Energy Minister announced plans for the country to
use supplies of Russian gas via the Central Asia Central--or
Center gas pipeline.
So, the CAC pipeline runs along the Turkmenistan and
Kyrgyzstan border with--and goes through then Kazakhstan. So,
and it ends up in Russia.
While there's been no official set in stone deal for the
volume that is planned to be transported, this is still a clear
effort by Russia to reassert their influence over Central Asia.
Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan already exports about $40 million
per month in gas to China, which is nearly half of their
overall exports. They average around $90 million.
So, however, when I looked at the State Department's budget
justification, none of these energy deals were mentioned. And,
it seems to focus on clean energy versus what Russia is
actually doing.
So, it was mentioned that there is an increasing need for
ENR and USAID to support targeted initiatives to increase
energy security. So, my question is, what are these targeted
initiatives?
And, what's the State Department doing to counter Russian
reassertion into Central Asia? And, why was there no mention of
energy, Russian oil and gas, as part of the countering their
influence in countries like Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and
Kazakhstan?
Mr. Schiffer. Well, if I can take the liberty of starting.
Sir, it's an excellent question. It is one that I would offer
both USAID and State are focused on.
And, we are working together to increase private sector
investment and cross border energy trade. And, just to give you
one little example, in this part year the State Department
provided USAID with $4 million in countering PRC influence
funding that allowed us to create a virtual platform called the
American Innovation Center for Central Asia.
Through which, our Power Central Asia activity partners and
U.S. companies have been able to install American technology in
the Central Asia electricity fund, or electricity system.
And, we have used those funds further to install a wide
area monitoring system that allows for a regional electricity
trading platform to increase the electricity grid's stability
and to make sure that American and European energy flows are
also part of the regional energy portfolio.
Mr. Baird. And, in addition to that, I think Russian gas is
somewhat dirtier than the U.S. gas or the CNG. So, I think
that's a factor, Madam Undersecretary.
Ms. Horst. Let me just add that you've put your finger on a
problem that is very real for Central Asia. And, they have 70
years' worth of infrastructure that's integrated with Russia.
So, peeling them off from that is going to take time and
investment. And, that's exactly what Assistant Administrator
Schiffer described.
And, what we are trying to do is provide alternatives. But,
it will take time. We are in constant dialogue with these
governments about what the alternatives are, because frankly,
they're worried about Russia turning off the tap.
They're at incredible risk because of the extraordinary
influence that Russia has over their energy and economy.
Mr. Baird. One last question for either of you. You know,
can we put sanctions on the Russian oil and gas if that deal
did go through?
Ms. Horst. So, right now we have encouraged countries
around the world to adhere to the price cap that goes on for
Russian oil and gas. And, the goal is not to disrupt global
energy markets to make sure that Russian doesn't profit from
its energy sectors.
And, that's something we've been working with countries
around the world, including India and the region.
Mr. Baird. I appreciate your answers and thank you very
much. And, I am always interested in making sure that our
adversaries are not using these resources to support their
efforts.
And so, thank you for your answers.
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentleman yields?
Mr. Baird. I yield.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. All right. Now I
recognize Representative Sherman for five minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Ms. Horst, an easy question. On
July 26, we're having a briefing on democracy and human rights
in Pakistan. All of my colleagues here are urged to attend. Can
we count on you or perhaps a lesser light from your bureau
joining us and providing some information on those topics to
members of Congress?
Ms. Horst. Absolutely. We'd be delighted to talk about what
we're doing in Pakistan.
Mr. Sherman. See you on the 26th. We forget how important
it was to get Osama Bin Laden. Here was a man who had killed
thousands of Americans on American soil.
What would our image be if we had not gotten him? How many
terrorist attacks would he have inspired? How many would he
have actually planned?
We sent in SEAL Team Six, 23 men. No man was left behind
until you realize there was a 24th man, Dr. Afridi. A Pakistani
doctor who risked his life to help us get the worst terrorist
in the world.
He remains behind bars. He doesn't have an American family
or American fans really to put pressure on the State Department
to get him out.
Brittney Griner, on the other hand, was an American. She
did not deliberately risk her life for the benefit of the
antiterrorism efforts. She has, of course, inspired many girls
through her great basketball play. We sent back to Russia the
Merchant of Death, Viktor Bout in order to get her out.
In prior years I have talked to your predecessors and
suggested that we take Pakistan up on what may still or may not
still be on the table, and that is a trade of Siddiqui for
Afridi. And, they have assured me to be confident that we're
going to get Dr. Afridi out without giving up Siddiqui. That
confidence was obviously misplaced.
Are we willing, obviously you're going to tell me that we'd
like Afridi freed, and he's got to be freed, and you can pound
the table for emphasis.
But, are we willing to make sure Afridi gets out? And, are
we willing to take steps that are unpleasant in order to get
him out?
Ms. Horst. So, of course, as you know, we are very
concerned about Dr. Afridi. He is innocent and we would like to
get him out----
Mr. Sherman. Are we willing to trade Siddiqui for Afridi?
Or are we willing to do anything else that's going to be more
successful than the last decade of failure?
Ms. Horst. I can't answer your question on that now. But,
what I can promise you is to look and to see what kind of
creative solutions we might do to bring Dr. Afridi home.
Mr. Sherman. Are you opposed to trading Siddiqui for
Afridi?
Ms. Horst. I would have to look at the legal ramifications
of that.
Mr. Sherman. There are no, we let out Bout. We can, you
know, the President can let out anybody he wants.
Ms. Horst. It's the sort of thing that I would want to
consult with my colleagues at DOJ. But I agree with you that we
need to work to get Dr. Afridi home, Dr. Afridi out.
Mr. Sherman. Well, nothing else other than a trade for
Siddiqui is likely to work. Everything else that your many
predecessors have said, which is almost exactly your words, has
been a total failure. And we should not forget the 24th man.
Let's see, Pakistan was, is supposed to have a Supreme
Court. That Supreme, well, it does have a Supreme Court that
has ordered elections in one of its states, I believe it was
Punjab. Those elections are not happening.
They're supposed to be nationwide elections in October.
What can we do to make sure that democracy really prevails and
that the majority of Pakistani voters can vote for the prime
minister and parliament of their choice?
Ms. Horst. So, we have conveyed publicly and privately that
we expect Pakistan to adhere to its constitution and laws. And
we fully anticipate that there will be elections no later than
November.
It is something that is important to us. And we think that
Pakistan has a democratic tradition it needs to follow.
Mr. Sherman. Have we commented on the failure to have
elections in Punjab which were ordered by the Court?
Ms. Horst. So, this is a complicated, I'm no by no means an
expert on Pakistan's constitution.
Mr. Sherman. I hope we would comment. And finally, we need
an Indian consulate in Los Angeles. We need an American
consulate in Chandigarh.
I know we're creating some other consulates. And, we need
to start seeing immigration visas processed in more than one
place in India, perhaps like the Embassy in Delhi, in addition
to Mumbai.
There is, it is so important that we improve the visa and
the passport process. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentleman's time has expired.
Now I recognize Representative McCormick for five minutes.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mrs. Chair. And, thank you to the
witnesses today for being here. The President's 2024 Fiscal
Year budget request includes $11.1 billion for the Department
of State and USAID to outcompete China.
However, because of the foreign policy failures of the
Biden Administration, in my opinion, countries throughout
Central and South Asia are becoming trapped by China's Belt and
Road Initiative.
This is having far reaching implications for the United
States security policy in the region. For example, Pakistan
owes nearly one-third of its foreign debt to China.
And in particular I'm troubled by recent Chinese build-up
in the Ream Naval Base in Cambodia and the creation of the
Gwadar Port in Pakistan, which have now been strengthened by
the PRC's deterrence capabilities against the free navigation
of the South Asia and Indo-Pacific waters. Really concerning,
obviously, with those ports right there.
We all know the PRC uses the debt trap program, and maybe
the United States has some ancient investments in similar ways.
But, that's inconsequential right now.
What we're seeing in China's misbehavior is starting to
warp that region right now. I'm really concerned about our
priorities and how we're going to bolster the U.S.
relationships with those countries, such as India obviously
being the most populous country in the region that has a
similar constitution and similar outlooks on the world
politics, and how we're going to evolve in those security
changes.
Specifically, I know you talked to Mr. Barr and his
question, but it was kind of vague as far as our arms sales,
how we link them, India to the west instead of to Russia. You
said it was moving quickly but didn't give any specifics.
And, I particularly want to know what are the hold-ups that
we're encountering? Because I've heard rumors about 51 percent,
I know you know. And, what they want to have ownership of, and,
what is holding back that transmission, especially with Ukraine
going on right now in which Russia really can't afford to sell
arms too anywhere else right now.
So, this is the perfect time to transition them to a
western style and linked not only in their arms sales, but also
military exercises.
Ms. Horst. There was a lot in that question. So, let me try
to hit some of the things. So, I think we've talked a little
bit about what we're doing to counter China broadly across the
region.
Pakistan is increasingly in debt to China. And, they know
that and they're in trouble. And, I think they're seeing the
consequences of this relationship.
What are we doing about that? We are again trying to offer
an alternative through a variety of tools that we have, but,
it's long-term. China didn't establish itself quickly and, we
are doing the same in a long-term way.
With regards to what India is doing, and how we're trying
to diversify, these are deals that are going on with private
American companies. So, I'm not at liberty to talk about the
details.
But, we'd be happy to follow up with your staff as we are
able to talk about what we're doing to make this move faster.
Michael, you may want to add something.
Mr. Schiffer. Yes. If I can just add to that briefly. You
know, we are clear-eyed about the challenge that we face from
the PRC and the nature of the competition and its implications
for development diplomacy.
That's why the Administration has asked for the out-compete
funds as well as robust resources across the Indo-Pacific and
for Central Asia. As we've talked about, you know, earlier
today, we are facing a clear demand signal in the region for
the United States to show up, to have a certain trajectory, and
to be an enduring partner.
That's what we want to do. Those are the sorts of programs
that USAID and State are seeking to develop so that we can
provide an alternative and demonstrate that democracy delivers
and that we have a better development model.
We hope and look forward to working with this committee to
make sure that we have the resources to be able to do that.
Mr. McCormick. Great. And I know we're going over there
also on our own CODEL to address this with India and other
countries. We'll be in Bangladesh as well.
We also just dropped a bill recently that would shore up
India's longstanding claim to the Arunachal Pradesh region, as
well as to dispute China's claims in Tibet and so forth.
I guess I'm just looking at what the Department itself can
do to shore up these, to strengthen these relationships that
really lay a bulwark against China's aggression in those
regions. Policy or otherwise that we can do to just kind of
bolster our relationships to push back against that kind of
aggression.
Ms. Horst. And, we appreciate both what Congress's role is
playing in helping strengthen our relationship with India.
Prime Minister Modi's visit last month, I think, really
demonstrated that we're in new territory with India in an
exciting way. Not just in the capital, but across the country.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I now recognize
Representative Connolly for five minutes.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the Chair. And, I welcome our two
witnesses. This is a budget hearing. So, let's talk a little
bit about the budget.
The Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Ops and
relations programs cut $16.4 billion, or 24 percent from the
President's request, $7.2 billion or 12 percent below the
enacted levels last year. I don't know, could that have an
impact on programs, Ms. Horst?
Ms. Horst. So, the budget, we will make do with the budget
that the President----
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Horst, I didn't ask that. Could this have
an impact on what you're planning and what you want to do and
the objectives you set out?
Because presumably, you put a number to the President's
request for a reason.
Ms. Horst. Correct. We did. Will it have an impact? Most
likely, yes.
Mr. Connolly. Most likely?
Ms. Horst. Yes. It will have an impact.
Mr. Connolly. That's your answer? Oh, okay. So, you're
inviting Congress with that answer, to cut 24 percent from the
President's request.
I don't know. I've been working in foreign aid for almost
50 years. I think it's unbelievable and potentially
catastrophic. And, I think it will most certainly hurt your
programs.
Mr. Schiffer, maybe it would hurt AID programs. Apparently
the State Department doesn't think so.
Mr. Schiffer. From an AID perspective, but really----
Mr. Connolly. Could you speak up, please?
Mr. Schiffer. Certainly. My apologies. From an AID
perspective, you know, we think that development diplomacy is
the ground game for this national security.
Mr. Connolly. Yeah, yeah. I know. Would 24 percent hurt
your programs?
Mr. Schiffer. We think that the budget proposal that the
President made is the necessary funding that we need to be able
to----
Mr. Connolly. It's not a very good answer when you have a
whole bunch of people who are, you know, giving Torquemada a
run for competition in slashing your budget.
And, I would suggest to both of you, you need a more robust
response. In that budget, it only includes, with respect to
climate change, money for biodiversity conservation.
It actually prohibits funding for the green climate fund
and the clean technology fund. And prohibits funding for any
loss and damage claims attributed to climate change.
I don't know, in your region, is it affected by climate
change? Could those prohibitions affect what you do and how you
respond to the manifestations of climate change?
Mr. Schiffer. I would offer that we always appreciate
having the discretion to be able to face the problems that we
see in the region. The Administrator and other senior members
of this Administration have made very clear that once we put on
climate----
Mr. Connolly. Well, I know the AID--let me suggest to you,
Mr. Schiffer, I know the AID Administrator. I think she'd have
a more robust answer.
I think she would decry an explicit prohibition. Because it
will be harmful to the countries we serve in that region and
make us even less competitive against the Chinese, whom we are
concerned about.
What about you, Ms. Horst? Prohibitions bother you? Or, are
we just going to live with them?
Ms. Horst. We would----
Mr. Connolly. Remember the Senate hasn't been heard from
yet. Your answers can influence what happens in the other body
that hopefully will be more enlightened than what happened in
the Foreign Ops subcommittee.
Ms. Horst. To echo what my colleague, Mr. Schiffer, has
said. We work with the constraints that we're being given.
But we also have found very creative ways to counter what's
going on in climate in our region.
Mr. Connolly. I would say to you both, the constraints are
not given. This is a markup from the Foreign Ops subcommittee.
This is an opportunity for you to weigh in on whether those are
wise decisions or you're just going to live with them.
Could we move beyond the bureaucratic for a minute and
actually talk about a budget policy that is evolving and that
we can still shape presumably to your advantage and that of the
countries we serve?
Mr. Schiffer. Our view is that the budget proposal that the
President is making----
Mr. Connolly. Yeah. I know.
Mr. Schiffer. But, that's, that is----
Mr. Connolly. We stipulate that.
Mr. Schiffer. That is the budget we would urge Congress to
have.
Mr. Connolly. Are you going to defend it?
Mr. Schiffer. We're seeking----
Mr. Connolly. We will stipulate that that's what, you know,
all the wisdom went into that. This is the specific item.
Mr. Schiffer. I think you'll appreciate that, you know,
discretion can be the better, you know, can be the better
source of valor here.
We obviously have, you know, support what is in the
President's budget proposal. That is what we would like to see
Congress enact as proposed.
Mr. Connolly. I'm sure you're both good people. But, your
answers are very weak. And, are not the kind of answers, not
the kind of conviction we need in these programs if we're going
to fend off the kinds of cuts that are being proposed that are
almost unprecedented.
And, I urge you to take that spirit back. But, this was not
helpful. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. I now recognize Representative
Lawler for five minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Well, that was entertaining. And, I commend the
witnesses for not being led to state things that obviously you
don't feel are true.
And clearly, the talking points that get used are not
reality. So, thank you for actually holding your ground and not
being led to say stupid things.
Ms. Horst, is Al-Qaeda in Afghanistan?
Ms. Horst. Pardon me. So, we believe right now that Al-
Qaeda cannot use Afghanistan as a base from which to hit the
United States.
Mr. Lawler. No, no, no. I asked you a very specific
question. Is Al-Qaeda in Afghanistan?
Ms. Horst. That is something that I think I'd rather talk
about in a classified setting. This is a more general answer
because of the nature of intel and some of our counterterrorism
work that we're doing.
Mr. Lawler. On June 30, when the Administration tried to
whitewash the Afghanistan withdrawal by releasing the report on
the July 4 holiday weekend, President Biden was asked about the
report. And, he stated that Al-Qaeda is gone from Afghanistan.
Do you agree with the President's statement that Al-Qaeda
is gone from Afghanistan?
Ms. Horst. I would not contradict the President.
Mr. Lawler. So, you are stating for the record that Al-
Qaeda is not in Afghanistan?
Ms. Horst. What I'm stating for the record is that we no
longer believe that Afghanistan is a base from which Al-Qaeda
can threaten the homeland.
Mr. Lawler. Not what I'm asking. Are you--you just said on
the record that you will not contradict the President. The
President said Al-Qaeda is gone from Afghanistan.
Are you stating for the record that Al-Qaeda is gone from
Afghanistan, i.e., no longer there in Afghanistan?
Ms. Horst. That is not what I'm stating. I am stating that
I don't think that Afghanistan is a threat, that Al-Qaeda
cannot pose a threat to the United States from Afghanistan.
And, when it does, as we saw in the example from al-
Zawahiri, we are willing to go in and unilaterally take care of
that threat.
Mr. Lawler. Do you agree with the President that the
Taliban are helping the United States?
Ms. Horst. I think that we are carefully monitoring to see
whether the Taliban are living up to their commitments when it
comes to counterterrorism.
And again, when we think that they are not, we are going in
on our own.
Mr. Lawler. Do you agree with the President that the
Taliban are helping the United States?
Ms. Horst. I think that the Taliban understand what their
obligations are to us.
Mr. Lawler. So, when they bar female aid implementors from
working, is that part of their obligations to us? Do you think
they're helping us?
Ms. Horst. We've been very clear with the Taliban that what
they're doing with women and girls is absolutely abhorrent. We
have made it clear that any kind of normalization with the
Taliban depends on them allowing 50 percent of their country to
be participating in public life in this sphere.
So, we've been very clear----
Mr. Lawler. So, if they're, if what they're doing with
women is abhorrent, what exactly are they doing that's helping
us?
Ms. Horst. I did not say that the Taliban were helping us.
Mr. Lawler. Okay. So, you disagree with the President's
comments that the Taliban are helping the United States?
Ms. Horst. What I----
Mr. Lawler. Thank you. And, I would just note, last month
the United Nations Sanctions Monitoring Team reported that the
Taliban has appointed at least three Al-Qaeda members to senior
government positions.
The Taliban pays Al-Qaeda monthly quote/unquote welfare
payments. Al-Qaeda is operating at least six training
facilities in Afghanistan, including one specifically dedicated
to training suicide bombers. And, the Taliban uses Al-Qaeda
manuals to train their security forces.
So again, I ask you, do you agree with the President that
Al-Qaeda is gone from Afghanistan and that the Taliban are
helping the United States?
And therefore, is the U.N. Sanctions Monitoring Team lying
when they released this report? Or, do you disagree with what
the President stated publicly?
Ms. Horst. I would let the U.N. Monitoring Team report
stand on its own. And again, come back to my point that we
carefully monitor what is a threat to the United States.
Mr. Lawler. Okay. So, do you agree with the U.N. Sanctions
Monitoring Team report?
Ms. Horst. I would----
Mr. Lawler. Do you think that is a----
Ms. Horst. I would need to read it more in detail. I will
frankly tell you that I need to read it more in detail before I
can tell you whether I agree or do not agree.
Mr. Lawler. Okay. I would just state for the record, it is
clear that when the President said Al-Qaeda is gone, and that
the Taliban are helping us, that was a lie. It's not true.
And, the U.N. Sanctions Monitoring Team's report does stand
on its own and should be believed by the Administration. And
the Administration should take it seriously.
I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I now recognize
Representative Castro for five minutes.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. The Administration's Indo-Pacific
strategy recognizes the importance of both the Pacific and
Indian Oceans to U.S. interests.
How do you define what U.S. interests are in the Indian
Ocean region? And, what are U.S. security and economic
interests there?
And also, can you break down for me what in the President's
budget request for FY24 is specific to the Indian Ocean in the
context of the Indo-Pacific?
Mr. Schiffer. Sure. Thank you for that question,
Congressman. You know, I would say at the broadest level, our
interests are in working with partners in the region to build
strong and prosperous societies that are able to grow their
economies and able to develop strong, vibrant civil societies
and democratic institutions of governments.
Societies in countries that can contribute to the rules-
based international order and work with us to solve common
problems, including the problem of climate change. So, at a
most general level, that is what we seek to do.
In terms of the Indian Ocean specific breakdown, I will
have to pull into that and get back to you. And, we will follow
up on that.
Ms. Horst. Yeah, I would just underscore that our
principles are about interconnectivity and diversification.
And, we are using a number of tools, both on the economic
side and the political side, as well as on the security side,
to make sure that an Indo-Pacific region that's free and market
oriented and secure is our ultimate goal.
Mr. Castro. And back in 2016, Congress and the Obama
Administration designated India as a quote, major defense
partner. And, terms like treaty ally and major non-NATO ally,
are well defined in U.S. policy and come with specific
commitments and privileges. Whereas, major defense partners are
an evolving concept.
What does major defense partner mean to the Biden
Administration in the U.S.-India relationship, and how does it
specifically set India apart?
Ms. Horst. We saw with Prime Minister Modi's visit last
month that defense and security is becoming an increasing
important part of our relationship with India and so, the term,
major defense partner reflects just that. That we are trying to
increase co-production. That we are looking for ways that we
can coordinate on maritime domain awareness and other areas and
truly expand the partnership beyond where it has been in the
past.
Mr. Castro. And then finally, there has been considerable
debate, especially during Prime Minister Modi's state visit to
the United States last month, on whether the United States bet
on India has been worth it, particularly when it comes to
whether India will align with the United States on Indo-Pacific
security issues.
What does the bet on India mean for you? And, what are our
expectations from India on alignment on these security issues?
Ms. Horst. So the bet on India, if you've read the National
Security Strategy, is very clear. That we see India as being
central to our Indo-Pacific strategy.
And, what that means is the two biggest democracies in the
world are working together to make the region more secure. That
is it fundamentally, I think.
Mr. Schiffer. And, I will offer from USAID perspective, I
think we see a significant opportunity. And Prime Minister
Modi's visit really captured a lot of energy around this to
take our development diplomacy partnership with India to the
next stage so that we're no longer just working in India.
But, we're working with and through India to provide public
goods to the region and to construct that free and open Indo-
Pacific order that we are seeking to support.
Mr. Castro. All right. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Mr. Castro, did you yield back the
balance of your time?
Mr. Castro. Yes.
Mrs. Kim of California. Oh, thank you. I now recognize
Representative Manning for five minutes.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Madam Chair. I think I'll continue
the discussion of India that my colleague started.
And, Ms. Horst, there is no question that our relationship
with India, the world's most populous democracy, is critically
important, particularly in light of our changing and
challenging relationship with China. And, you have both
referenced the visit of Prime Minister Modi and the importance
of that relationship.
But, I'd like to raise an issue that is particularly
distressing but is rarely discussed. And, that is the well-
known problem of and culture of gang rape and other instances
of sexual and physical violence against women in India.
And, I'd like to submit for the record a recent article
about the culture of gang rape, the impact it has on Indian
women, and the persistence of this problem and the failure of
the government to deal with that problem.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Manning. You've both talked about the importance of
human rights and the importance of equality, particularly
gender equality.
So, I wonder if you could talk a little bit about what, if
anything, the SCA is doing to address this problem, to make
sure the perpetrators are held accountable, to change the
attitude toward gang rape, and to improve gender equality
overall?
Ms. Horst. So, thank you for highlighting a problem that is
just gut wrenching when you dig into it. The United States has
worked with India on a number of issues, including human rights
and gender rights.
We have the U.S.-India Women's Alliance, which is an
umbrella organization that highlights a number of things we're
doing to promote women economic empowerment and women's rights,
gender equality issues.
We had what was called the Shatter Summit that was hosted
here a few months ago that exemplified what the United States
and India can do together to look at these issues of
discrimination against women.
We also work on some basic things like rule of law and
democracy programs. So, those are the kinds of things that
we're looking at when we look at this terrible problem.
And, I'm going to turn to my colleague at USAID for some of
the specifics on what we're doing on his side of the house.
Mr. Schiffer. Sure. Thank you. And, thank you for raising
this very important issue.
You know, we work with our partners in India to provide
counseling for victims of gender-based violence. We work with
our partners in civil society in India to address the broader,
you know, context in which these activities take place.
And we also work, as Secretary Horst pointed to, to make
sure that we are supporting programs that will empower women
economically, politically, socially, so that we can advance,
you know, their state and their status in Indian society.
Ms. Manning. I'm delighted to hear you're working with the
women. But, they don't seem to be the problem. It's the men who
are the problem.
So, what are you doing to work with the men, work with the
cultural issue, and work with the government?
Mr. Schiffer. Well, our--the gender-based violence
counseling that we do, for example, and the groups that we
support that provide those services, that's not just for women.
That is a broader effort that includes both men and women.
And frankly, we also work, as you know, on promoting issues
related to the entire spectrum of the LGBTQI community, because
this issue of gender-based violence is one that cuts across all
of, you know, the full range of vulnerable communities.
So, this is, I mean, this is something that, as I know you
appreciate and understand, requires a certain amount of
cultural delicacy and sensitivity. But, it is one that we are
paying a lot of attention to.
Ms. Manning. Ms. Horst, you look like you have something
else to say on this issue.
Ms. Horst. I was just going to note, within the context of
what we're doing to combat trafficking in persons, we also work
on the prevention and prosecution side with the Indian
government across India and, we have been eager to partner with
them to see what they can do to strengthen that aspect of it,
both prosecution and protection.
Ms. Manning. I would just like to encourage as our
relationship with India deepens, as we look at them as a more
important ally, that this issue be raised at a governmental
basis.
There was a--there have been many articles about gang
rapists who were convicted and then released after a very short
amount of time, not serving anything close to their prison
term, and paraded around the country.
So, my time is expiring and I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. We have now come to the
end of our hearing.
So, I want to thank Ms. Horst and Mr. Schiffer for your
valuable testimony. And, I also thank my colleagues and members
for their questions.
The members of the subcommittees may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we ask you to respond to those
in writing.
Pursuant to committee rules, all members may have five days
to submit questions, statements, and extraneous materials for
the record, subject to the length limitations.
And, without objection, the subcommittees will now stand
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:56 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
