- FULL COMMITTEE MARKUP

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MARKUP OF VARIOUS MEASURES

=======================================================================
MARKUP

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 28, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-3

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-735                       WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER SMITH, New Jersey        GREGORY MEEKS, New York
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           BRAD SHERMAN, California
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia
DARRELL ISSA, California             WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK GREEN, Tennessee                TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA SALAZAR, Florida               ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AMATA RADEWAGEN, American Samoa      KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                    Florida
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   GREG STANTON, Arizona
MIKE WALTZ, Florida                  MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
THOMAS KEAN, New Jersey              JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
CORY MILLS, Florida                  SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               JASON CROW, Colorado
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director
Sophia A. LaFargue, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

LEGISLATION
BILLS EN BLOC

Page
H.R. 1093........................................................     2
H.R. 1159........................................................     9
H.R. 1189........................................................    12
H. Res. 90.......................................................    20
H.R. 406.........................................................    24
H.R. 1149........................................................    26
H.R. 1157........................................................    42
Meeks Amendment #15 to H.R. 1157.............................    52
H.R. 1107........................................................    55
Davidson Amendment #25 to H.R. 1107..........................    64
H.R. 1154........................................................    67
H.R. 1153........................................................    82
Meeks Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute #16 to H.R.
1153.......................................................   112
Meeks Amendment #11 to H.R. 1153.............................   122
Kamlager-Dove Amendment #17 to H.R. 1153.....................   125
Manning Amendment #4 to H.R. 1153............................   127
Jacobs Amendment #11 to H.R. 1153............................   130
Phillips Amendment #14 to H.R. 1153..........................   133
Allred Amendment #8 to H.R. 1153.............................   136
H.R. 1151........................................................   138
Kim of California Amendment #13 to H.R. 1151.................   151
Perry Amendment #3 to H.R. 1151..............................   154

APPENDIX

Markup Notice....................................................   156
Markup Minutes...................................................   158
Markup Attendance................................................   159
Markup Summary...................................................   160

MATERIAL FOR THE RECORD

Statement for the record submitted by Representative Connolly....   162
Material for the record submitted by Representative Phillips.....   164

VOTE

Vote Meeks Amendment #15 to H.R. 1157............................   167
Vote Allred Amendment #8 to H.R. 1153............................   168
Vote Jacobs Amendment #11 to H.R. 1153...........................   169
Vote Manning Amendment #4 to H.R. 1153...........................   170
Vote Kamlager-Dove Amendment #17 to H.R. 1153....................   171
Vote Meeks Amendment #11 to H.R. 1153............................   172
Vote Meeks Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute #16 to H.R.
1153...........................................................   173
Vote to Report H.R. 1153.........................................   174
Vote Y. Kim Amendment #13 to H.R. 1151...........................   175

FULL COMMITTEE MARKUP

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 2:53 p.m., in Room
210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Michael McCaul [chairman of the
committee] presiding.
Chairman McCaul. The quorum being present, the Committee on
Foreign Affairs will come to order.
The committee's meeting today to consider H.R. 1093, to the
Secretary of State to submit to Congress a report on
implementation of the advanced capabilities pillar of the
trilateral security partnership between Australia, the United
Kingdom, and the United States; H.R. 1159, to amend the Taiwan
Assurance Act of 2020 to require periodic reviews and updated
reports relating to the Department of State's Taiwan
guidelines; H.R. 1189, Undersea Cable Control Act; H.R. 1157,
Countering the PRC Malign Influence Fund Authorization Act;
H.R. 1107, PRC is Not a Developing Country Act; H.R. 1154, Stop
Forced Organ Harvesting Act; H.R. Resolution 90, Demand that
the Government of the People's Republic of China and the
Communist Party of China immediately release Mark Swidan; H.R.
1151, Upholding Sovereignty Airspace Act; H.R. 406, Providing
Appropriate Recognition and Treatment Needed to Enhance
Relations with ASEAN Act; H.R. 1149, Countering Untrusted
Telecommunications Abroad Act; and H.R. 1153, Deterring
America's Technological Adversaries Act.
The Chair announces that any request for recorded votes may
be rolled and as he may recess the committee at any point.
Without objection, so ordered. Pursuant to House rules, I
request that members have the opportunity to submit views for
any committee report that may be produced on any of today's
measures. And without objection, so ordered.
I am pleased that we will be considering 11 China-related
bills on today's markup. We must act now to stop China's
aggressive behavior, whether it be in our airspace against
Taiwan and our allies or against the Uyghurs and other minority
populations.
Pursuant to notice, I now call the measure and their
amendments that were circulated in advance which without
objection will be considered en bloc.
[The amendments offered en bloc of Mr. McCaul follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. And each is considered as read. And the
amendments to each are considered as read and are agreed to.
And without objection, after remarks, the committee will vote
to order the measures favorably reported en bloc.
The measures in the en bloc package are H.R. 1093, to
direct the Secretary of State to submit to Congress a report on
the implementations of the advanced capabilities pillar of
trilateral security partnership between Australia, the U.K.,
and the United States; H.R. 1159, to amend the Taiwan Assurance
Act of 2020 to require periodic reviews and updated reports
relating to the Department of State's Taiwan guidelines; H.R.
1189, Undersea Cable Control Act; H. Res. 90, Demanding that
the Government of the People's Republic of China and the
Communist Party of China immediately release Mark Swidan; H.R.
406, Providing Appropriate Recognition and Treatment Needed to
Enhance Relations with ASEAN Act; and finally, H.R. 1149,
Countering Untrusted Telecommunications Abroad Act.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement. I
introduce this bill with Ranking Member Meeks to begin in this
committee the important task of examining the necessary steps
to deepen diplomatic cooperation as part of the Australian,
U.K., United States trilateral security agreement known as
AUKUS. AUKUS is an agreement with two pillars.
The first is a nuclear powered submarine program. The other
pillar is to collaborate on high tech research and fielding of
advanced capabilities. Pillar 2 is critical to the long-term
success of AUKUS because it will maintain our technological and
military superiority over the Chinese as well as our allies.
But this agreement will require the export of defense and
military-related technologies, a State Department
responsibility. We are nearing the end of the 18-month
consultation period on AUKUS which began on September 15, 2021
and has largely been a DOD-led effort. What this bill intends
to do is to bring diplomacy back into AUKUS with the State
Department leading that charge.
And it will examine State Department's implementation of
the International Traffic and Arms Regulations commonly
referred to as ITAR. We are facing a generational challenge
from the CCP. We must bring all tools to bear and our efforts
to counter Chairman Xi's attempts to disrupt the global balance
of power. With the U.K. and Australia, our three nations have a
shared strategic goal of defending the Indo-Pacific region.
By preserving freedom of navigation and freedom of
international commerce through waterways, this agreement will
uphold the international rules-based order and most importantly
protect American interest and prosperity. We are allies and
partners in the Indo-Pacific region and cannot afford to wait
on Xi or other authoritarian leaders to dictate when and under
what circumstances the strength of our security agreements in
the Indo-Pacific are to be tested. This bill presses the State
Department to act and account for our arms transfers with the
U.K. and Australia so that we can act seamlessly now and not
during a time of crisis or war.
I also support the Taiwan Assurance Implementation Act.
There is no question that Taiwan is under threat from the CCP.
They will use any means necessary to unify, even force.
Secretary Blinken acknowledged that China's plans to annex
Taiwan are moving much faster under Chairman Xi.
As the PRC ramps up aggression against Taiwan, the United
States must ensure that we are committed to a robust and
expansive relationship with Taiwan. We cannot abide by outdated
guidelines or self-imposed restrictions to bolstering our
political, economic, and defense ties. This bill amends the
Taiwan Assurance Act of 2020 to add a more specific reporting
requirement and ensures Congress has appropriate oversight over
our relationship with Taiwan.
And the State Department's engagement with Taiwan is in
coordination with our current geopolitical environment. This
bill also strengthens the reporting requirement and the TAA
which had bipartisan support last Congress. It also ensures
that State is approaching this relationship in a manner
consistent with current U.S. foreign policy and national
security goals.
Lastly, I urge my colleagues to join Mr. Cloud and me in
condemning the malign actions of the Chinese Communist Party
upon one of our very own Mark Swidan. Mark is a Houston
resident from my own state of Texas who has been wrongfully
detained by the Chinese Communist Party since 2012 for a crime
he did not commit. He has not spoken to his family since 2018,
and it is time to bring Mark home.
In 2019, the U.N. working group on arbitrary detention
looked into his case and found that factually it was impossible
for him to have conducted any of the crimes charged against
him. This resolution not only condemns the CCP for their brazen
violation of international law but also demands the CCP
immediately release Mr. Swidan. Additionally, it calls upon the
Biden Administration to demand the immediately release of Mark
and to hold the CCP accountable.
If we are seen as a weak nation, we will be treated as
such. Appeasement only invites aggression. As the CCP ramps up
its hostage diplomacy, it is imperative that we demand the
release of Americans in China and hold the Chinese Communist
Party accountable for blatant violation of human rights and
international law.
With that, I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I support all the
measures in the en bloc and will speak on just a few of them.
On H.R. 1093, as the United States looks to build on the
important shared security partnerships with Australia and the
United Kingdom within the AUKUS framework, I am proud to co-
lead this bipartisan initiative with you, Mr. Chairman, on
advanced capabilities.
As we engage in strategic competition, sharing our own
advances in defense capabilities in a safe, secure, and
regulated manner with our partners is critical to this effort.
And again, thank you in working together on this particular
bill.
I also support H. Res. 90 which condemns the unjust and
arbitrary detention of Mark Swidan by the People's Republic of
China and demand his immediate release. He has been detained
for over ten years. And we need to redouble diplomatic efforts
to secure his immediate release.
Mr. Castro's timely bill, H.R. 406, reinforces the
importance of diplomacy in our engagement in the Indo-Pacific.
This measure strengthens our diplomatic ties with the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations or ASEAN, one of the
most critical regional organizations in the Indo-Pacific
region.
H.R. 1149 authored by Mrs. Wild takes several steps that
will promote our foreign policy interests, bolster our national
security, and aid our economy. It requires the State Department
to ensure it is not relying on unsafe equipment and its
embassies across the world. It authorizes the State Department
to provide diplomatic support for telecommunication projects
and pushes the United States Trade and Development Agency to
finance important telecom projects.
And finally, it requires mobile network operators listed on
American stock exchanges to disclose whether they have Huawei
or ZTE or other unsafe equipment in their networks or make use
of unsafe surveillance video equipment. And I am also glad to
support H.R. 1159 by Rep. Wagner and my friend, Jerry Connolly
to amend the Taiwan Assurance Act, a bill that I think that is
important and again speaks to the bipartisanship of this
committee. With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman McCaul. Do any other members seek recognition on
the en bloc? Mrs. Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank you, Chairman McCaul. And I want to
thank Ranking Member Meeks. I would also to thank them both so
much for working with me on H.R. 1159, the Taiwan Assurance
Implementation Act, which will ensure tangible and sustained
progress in the U.S.-Taiwan relationship.
I am happy to say it has been included in this en bloc
package. I would also like to sincerely thank Representative
Connolly for co-leading this legislation. He is truly a
respected voice of authority on this issue and a tireless
champion for the U.S.-Taiwan relationship.
There can be no question that U.S. support for Taiwan is
not just bipartisan but nonpartisan. And I thank the gentleman
for working with me to advance the Taiwan Assurance
Implementation Act. Confronting China is a once in a generation
challenge.
To guarantee the prosperity of American communities for our
children, we must defeat China's plan to replace the United
States as the world's preeminent power. If we are to be
successful, we cannot be ruled by fear. That means boldly
standing by our friends and partners, particularly Taiwan.
But for decades, the United States unilaterally restricted
its engagement with Taiwan to appease China, subjecting our
partners to an exhaustive set of arbitrary guidelines and
checklists to avoid being the slightest chance of offending
Beijing. These guidelines dictated how and where U.S. diplomats
could meet their Taiwanese counterparts with symbols Taiwanese
officials could display and who was permitted to visit each
country. In 2020, Congress pushed the administration to move
beyond these outdated, unnecessary restrictions by passing the
Chairman's Taiwan Assurance Act.
Former Secretary Pompeo moved decisively to implement this
important law, declaring all self-imposed guidelines null and
void. And our partners in Taiwan welcomed this unmistakable
show of support, hailing the decision as an end to decades of
discrimination. However, the administration has declined to
continue this policy of resolute unflinching public support.
And hiding behind opacity and red tape hurts our
partnership with Taiwan at a moment when we need to be standing
shoulder to shoulder with our allies and our partners. Any
waffling invites bullies like Xi and Putin to push the
envelope. With Russia, trying to change the borders of an
independent and sovereign neighbor by force and China
threatening to do the same to Taiwan, the United States must
not waiver.
The geopolitical situation surrounding Taiwan is changing
rapidly. Our relationship with Taiwan must be flexible enough
to meet these new challenges. Unfortunately, the State
Department's classified Taiwan contact guidelines are often not
conducive to a robust relationship with Taiwan.
And Congress has little insight into the decision making
behind these guidelines. This Taiwan Assurance Implementation
Act would re-authorize the 2020 law, strengthen its reporting
requirements, and require greater transparency from the State
Department. It would ensure the United States is approaching
its relationship with Taiwan in a manner that deepens our
relationships with democratic partners who are under threat by
aggressive dictatorships.
And it would ask the administration to identify
opportunities to list remaining self-imposed restrictions on
engagement. I urge each of my colleagues to support this
important bill and vote yes on the entire en bloc package which
I wholeheartedly support. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you. Do any other members seek
recognition on the en bloc? Mr. Connolly is recognized.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
you and Mr. Meeks for a bipartisan en bloc package. And I want
to thank my friend, Mrs. Wagner, for her leadership on the is
Taiwan legislation and join here in urging our colleagues to
vote for it today.
The Taiwan Relations Act is unique in many ways in foreign
policy for the United States in that it originated in Congress
itself. It was not an executive branch initiative. It was a
legislative branch initiative in response to the normalization
of relations with Beijing. And it was designed to provide a
very thorough, clear architecture--not always clear, sometimes
ambiguous for a reason--governing our relationship with Taiwan.
And to me, central to that is the ability of Taiwan to
defend itself with our help. And that is a promise, as you
pointed out this morning, Mr. Chairman, that sometimes has been
kept sort of in a breach and sometimes has been kept in a very
slow moving way. And that is not the right signal to send to an
aggressive Xi Jinping who is moving on many, many fronts,
threatening his neighbors, encroaching on territorial waters
and airspace, making ludicrous claims about the entire South
China Sea, engaged in kinetic or threatening to be engaged in
kinetic activity on the India border, on the Vietnam border,
and, of course, with Taiwan across the Taiwan Strait itself.
So this is the time for the United States, especially this
Congress, to be very clear and very firm in reasserting our
support for the right of the Taiwanese people to decide when
and how and if they are going to manage their relationship with
Beijing. So I welcome this legislation project, co-sponsor it,
thank my friend from Missouri for her leadership, and urge my
colleagues to support it. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you. Any other members seek
recognition on the en bloc? Mr. Mast is recognized.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to, number one,
just express my support for the en bloc package, and number
two, speak about an issue that we are addressing in this en
bloc package and that is undersea communications through cable.
It is something that such a huge percentage of our
communications, be it financial, be it telecommunications of
any sort.
It is the mode of transferring that trans-ocean. It is
something that year after year we see an increasing amount of
Chinese companies investing in the technology needed to bring
this to fruition. The exact same Chinese Communist Party that
wants to see American topple and communism on top, whether that
is just for China or for Russia or for other dangerous allies
that they have made.
That cannot be the entities that we have to look to, to get
the equipment, the parts, the technology that we need to be
able to communicate across the globe. It is not just dangerous
for the United States of America. It is irresponsible.
And in this en bloc package, I am proud to see that this is
an issue that we are addressing here very directly. And in
that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the assistance on the
legislation. I thank you for the en bloc package as a whole,
and I yield back to you the remainder of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back. Any other
members seek recognition on the en bloc? Mr. Cicilline is
recognized.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think it is very
clear that members of this committee on both sides of the aisle
recognize that the People's Republic of China's continued
economic coercion and aggression in the Indo-Pacific presents
serious challenges to our national security. To meet these
challenges, the United States must be prepared to confront them
with American leadership, diplomacy, and investment.
And that is why I strongly support Representative Castro's
H.R. 406, Partner with ASEAN Act, and this en bloc package and
urge my colleagues to do the same. The Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, or ASEAN, provides a unique opportunity for the
United States to expand our diplomatic architecture, strengthen
our relationships, and advance our shared goals in the region.
I was pleased to see the Biden Administration announce the
launch of five high-level dialogues as part of the newly
established U.S. ASEAN comprehensive strategic partnership to
expand engagement on issues from women's empowerment to climate
and energy.
The U.S.-ASEAN comprehensive strategic relationship is
critical to enabling the United States and ASEAN to cooperate
on a number of regional issues like tackling food insecurity,
improving access to clean water, expanding opportunities for
women entrepreneurs, investing in sustainable infrastructure,
and expanding maritime cooperation to counter illegal fishing.
At a time of strategic competition between the United States
and China, it is time for Congress to pass the Partner with
ASEAN Act and affirm this important relationship between the
United States and our Southeast Asian allies. Other major
regional, international organizations such as European Union
and African Union have been recognized under the International
Organizations Immunities Act, and ASEAN deserves to be held to
the same standard.
I would like to again thank Representative Castro and Young
Kim for their leadership on this issue, especially during this
moment of strategic competition with China. And with that, I
yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Any other members
seek recognition on the en bloc? Mr. Smith is recognized.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And like
other members, I support all of the bills included, embedded in
the en bloc. And thank you for your leadership on all of this.
I would like to speak very briefly in support of Brian
Mast's bill, H.R. 1189, the Undersea Cable Control Act. My
colleague from Florida--who has also just been reappointed as a
member of the Congressional Executive Commission on China which
I chair, I want to offer my congratulations to him--has
pinpointed another overlooked area of strategic importance,
undersea cables. His legislation would eliminate the transfer
of sensitive technologies to our adversaries, i.e., the
People's Republic of China, that could be used to enhance their
undersea cable capability and threaten another area of U.S.
technological preeminence.
I would also like to stress a related point that a
vulnerability of undersea cables. Cable locations are well
documented which makes them susceptible to an international
attack and one which does not require great offensive
capabilities. Repair efforts depending on location and other
factors could take several weeks.
Submarine cables that serve the U.S. mainland are thus
potential targets and any asymmetric plan of attack by a
hostile power, one for which we are completely unprepared. And
who would do such a thing? Well, just last week Chinese fishing
boats or in reality Chinese maritime militia under the guise of
fishing boats severed several cables in the Matsu Island, the
offshore island still controlled by Taiwan which many will
recall was a crisis point in the 1950s.
Two cables were cut, the 20th time in the past five years
that the cables had been so disrupted. It is reasonable to
conclude that this is intentional sabotage, a trial run to
disrupt communications at essentially a forward operating base
in the defense of Taiwan as well as to inflict hardship on the
residents of the island. This is a blunt, bellicose message not
only to the brave people of democratic Taiwan but should also
be one directed at us and a wake-up call.
Again, I thank my friend for authoring this bill, Mr. Mast.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McCaul. Do any other members seek recognition on
the en bloc? Mr. Lawler is recognized.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
commend you and my colleagues for putting forth this package of
legislation today as a member of both this committee and the
House Financial Services Committee. We are taking on the
Chinese Communist Party and the People's Republic of China very
clearly and in a bipartisan way.
And I think the bills that we are advancing, both in this
committee and the House Financial Services Committee today, are
bills that are long overdue and legislation that will put the
United States in a strong position moving forward. It is clear
that the Chinese Communist Party and the People's Republic of
China are our greatest geopolitical threat. And the work that
this Congress is undertaking is critical to put us in a
position to be economically competitive and also to ensure our
military and national security successes going forward.
And I thank Taiwan, and I want to commend the vice chair,
the gentlelady from Missouri, for her legislation, the Taiwan
Assurance Act. I think we are moving forward with a number of
pieces of legislation that is important to strengthen the
relationship with Taiwan and ensure that they are protected
from naked aggression that China has engaged in, in recent
years. And with respect to the ASEAN nations, I think moving
forward, that will be a pivotal part of the world, both from
the standpoint of our economic and national security
perspective but also obviously in terms of keeping China and
the Chinese Communist Party in check.
So this is a great bloc of bills that you have put forth,
Mr. Chairman. And I thank you for that, and I yield back my
time.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you. Any other members seek
recognition on the en bloc?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further discussion, the
committee will proceed to consider the noticed items en bloc.
Pursuant to the previous order, the question occurs on the
measures en bloc.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it and the
measure considered en bloc are agreed to.
Without objection to the motion to reconsider is laid on
the table. Staff is authorized to make any technical and
conforming changes. Pursuant to the previous order of the
committee, each measure is ordered favorably reported.
Pursuant to notice, I now call H.R. 1157, Countering the
PRC Malign Influence Fund Authorization Act of 2023. The bill
was circulated in advance. The clerk shall designate the bill.
[The bill H.R. 1157 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Clerk. H.R. 1157, a bill to provide the authorization
of appropriations for the countering of People's Republic of
China----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, the first reading is
dispensed with. The bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point. Is there any discussion on the bill?
Ranking Member, Mr. Meeks, is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chair. We must authorize funds
for the Countering People's Republic of China's Malign
Influence Fund to position USAID and the State Department for
strategic competition with China. This should be a bipartisan
bill.
It is unfortunate that despite our best efforts, it isn't.
We want the State Department to be laser focused on the
challenges posed by the PRC. We also need to make sure that our
institutions are nimble and have the flexibility to address
what is likely going to be a constantly evolving series of
challenges.
And the rigid language in the bill does not provide for
this flexibility. Given the amount of money this bill
authorizes, it is important that we have strong bipartisan
deliberation on the strategic focus and the future of this
fund. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of
my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Is there any further
discussion on the bill?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further discussion of the
bill, the committee will move to consideration of amendments.
Does any member wish to offer an amendment?
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Ranking Member Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. I have an Amendment No. 15 at the desk.
Chairman McCaul. Clerk shall distribute the amendment.
Clerk shall report the amendment.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Meeks follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Clerk. Amendment to H.R. 1157, offered by Mr. Meeks of
New York. Section 2(a), in the matter preceding paragraph (1),
strike the dollar amount and insert ``400 million dollars''.
Section 2(e), in the matter preceding paragraph (1), strike
``shall include efforts'' and insert ``should include
efforts''.
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman, Ranking Member Mr.
Meeks, is recognized for five minutes on the amendment.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is a simple
amendment that I am offering to improve the legislation offered
by my colleague, Representative Andy Barr. It increases the
authorized amount for the Countering PRC Influence Fund to 400
million dollars.
My Republican colleagues are constantly telling us that we
need to do more to counter China and criticize the President
for not doing enough. So let's authorize this important tool
with the amount requested by the administration and the amount
Mr. McCaul's bill last year authorized. And let's make sure our
diplomats and development professionals are set up for success.
The amendment also makes two minor edits to the bill so
that our diplomats are able to be nimble in the face of an ever
evolving set of challenges posed by Beijing. I hope my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle will consider this
amendment seriously. With this amendment included, I would
enthusiastically support the underlying bill. So I urge my
colleagues to support the amendment, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back. I oppose this
amendment for the following reasons. The current year
appropriations are 325 millions. House Appropriations Committee
has asked us not to go over that amount given larger 150
account concerns.
We also need to find a CUTGO for the Meeks requested
inquiries. Do any of the members seek recognition? Mr. Mast is
recognized.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise in opposition to
the ranking member's amendment. This amendment, it attempts to
weaken the strict reporting requirements in this bill and it
doesn't conform to the actual appropriations of the Countering
Malign Influence Fund.
This amendment, it does something important. You look at
Section 2(e) where it says in the matter preceding paragraph
(1), it says strike shall include efforts and insert should
include efforts. And when it does that to change that instead
of have the report include that shall, a definition of how such
program or activity is relevant to the strategic competition
with the People's Republic of China, it weakens this bill.
The language of the amendment would decrease the specific
reporting requirements to make sure that every single program
funded in the Countering PRC Malign Influence Fund can show
that it actually counters PRC malign influence. That is a big
problem. So I urge my colleagues to oppose this amendment, and
I thank the Chairman for yielding me the time. And I yield
back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back. Any other
members seek recognition?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further discussion, the
question now occurs on the amendment offered by Representative
Meeks.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the noes have it and the
amendment is not agreed to.
Ranking member is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. I would like a recorded vote.
Chairman McCaul. Roll call vote has been requested.
Pursuant to the Chair's previous announcement, this vote will
be postponed. Are there any further amendments?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further amendments,
pursuant to notice, I now call up H.R. 1107, PRC is Not
Developing Country Act. The bill was circulated in advance. The
clerk shall designate the bill.
[The bill H.R. 1107 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Clerk. H.R. 1107, a bill to direct the Secretary of
State to take certain actions with respect to labeling the
People's Republic of China as a developing country, and for
other purposes.
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, the first reading is
dispensed with. The bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point. I now recognize myself for a statement
on the bill.
China is not a developing country despite PRC's self-
designation. The PRC is the world's second largest GDP and a
top consumer exporter. It is home to more than one-fifth of the
world's 500 largest companies.
The PRC gets little to zero interest loans from the World
Bank with a developing nation status. The PRC then turns around
and uses that money to finance their Belt and Road debt trap
diplomacy. This ends up holding other nations hostage or
leaving them bankrupt through their malign activities to expand
their footprint around the world, often raping countries of
their--truly developing nations of their natural resources.
It allows the PRC to get almost zero interest-free loans
and charge these serious interest rates to truly developing
nations who then turn around into a debt trap. Eventually, the
IMF comes to their need with a bail out. This is the PRC's
ability to manipulate current global institutions that we have
the United Nations.
For the life of me, I don't know why we allow them to
continue with this developing nation status that they use to
their advantage to finance their Belt and Road Initiative. And
for these reasons among many more, it allows them to compete
with the United States in space and hypersonic technology. I
have been a longtime proponent of ending this designation.
They are no longer a developing nation as they were when
they first entered the WTO and the World Bank. And for that
reason, I would support this amendment or this bill. And with
that, I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield?
Chairman McCaul. And Mr. Connolly is recognized.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend for yielding. I just want
to associate myself with those remarks. I saw this bill and
felt it is about time.
China has managed to become a great country but not always
through noble means. It has stolen intellectual property. It is
extorted from counties that invested in it.
It has intimidated its neighbors. And as you said, it has
manipulated the international machinery to its advantage. China
is no more a developing country today than we are.
And it has benefitted unfairly at the expense of others
including us to get to a competitive position. Well, it is now
the second largest economy in the world, largest military in
the world. And it is more than capable of standing on its own
two feet and competing with the rest of us on a level playing
field.
So I enthusiastically support the bill and associate myself
with your remarks, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for yielding.
Chairman McCaul. I thank the gentleman from Virginia. Well
stated. I think we can all agree on this one. Is there any
further discussion on the bill? Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I strongly support this
bipartisan measure, and thank Representatives Young Kim and of
course Representative Gerry Connolly. Despite being the world's
second largest economy, the People's Republic of China often
enjoys, as indicated, and seeks the status of a developing
country.
And they do this in international treaties and
organizations to gain undeserved special treatment or to avoid
taking on greater global responsibilities. This bipartisan
measure calls on the Secretary of State to take diplomatic
action at various international organizations and treaties
where China is a member to change the PRC status to an upper
middle income, high income, or developed country. Propose the
development of such mechanism if one does not exist and prevent
the PRC from gaining preferential treatment if it does have the
status of a developing country.
The steps this measure calls for highlight why it is so
critical that the United States remain engaged and present in
international organizations and treaties. It is only engaging
can we change things as we have seen time and time again. If
the United States takes our ball and goes home, China
immediately fills the void and takes advantage by shaping and
guiding the institutions for its own benefit.
This is a good bill. It sends the right message. And I
support this measure and urge my colleagues to do the same. I
yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Is there any further
discussion on the bill? Mr. Hill is recognized.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for your
leadership in this package of important bills today,
particularly the ones that counter the Chinese Communist Party.
I am glad that representative Young Kim is now also a member of
the House Financial Services Committee where she is bringing
her expertise that she is demonstrating in this bill.
I want to associate myself with the comments made by Mr.
Connolly and you, Mr. Chairman, and say that this is a good and
important measure. China is deeply involved in the multilateral
at the United Nations and in the multilateral banks. And this
is a way for us to send the signal that it is time for them to
graduate from developing country status and use this as a wake-
up call with our friends and allies around the world to be
absolutely, as Ranking Member Meeks said, engaged in the
multilateral.
When we see this space, the Chinese take it. And if you
have concerns about who is appointed at the World Health
Organization, you ought to be involved. If you are concerned
about telecommunication standards in the world, then you ought
to be involved in the multilateral process.
So at the World Bank, China is down to a billion dollars a
year credit capability. And as Chairman McCaul has said, that
is really like a carry tray. They get a billion dollars from
the World Bank and then they are out making predatory loans
around the world as the world's current largest creditor
country.
It just makes no financial sense whatsoever. So I think
Young Kim has--with her bipartisan colleagues including Gerry
Connolly have a bill here that we should all support and
persuade the other G-7 countries to support this kind of effort
as well. And with that, I yield back to the Chair.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Is there any further
discussion on the bill? Mr. Smith is recognized.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair. I want to thank
Young Kim for this very important bill regarding the ongoing
labeling of the PRC as a, quote, ``developing country''. This
is smart targeted legislation which calls upon U.S.
policymakers to oppose an international organization such as
the United Nations such bogus labeling. The PRC is now a
wealthy nation, much of it ill-begotten.
And it directs much of its wealth towards placing countries
such as Sri Lanka, Uganda, and Djibouti into debt bondage,
bribing and corrupting local politicians the world over as it
seeks to create dependency via programs such as the Belt and
Road Initiative. The PRC should not be preferenced as a
developing country when the reality is it is now an upper
income developed nation which has directed resources outward as
well as militarily in order to threaten the global order. I
yield back, and I applaud her on her bill.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Is there any further
discussion on the bill? Mr. Davidson is recognized.
Mr. Davidson. Move to strike the last word. Thank you,
Chairman. Thanks to our colleague, Young Kim, for introducing
this bill. I applaud the effort and have personally been
affected prior to coming to Congress as the owner of
manufacturing companies in Ohio.
By China's refusal to comply with the terms of the World
Trade Organization framework, they exploit the developing
nation status. And this bill hopefully will correct that. I do
have an amendment. I appreciate the hard work of Young Kim and
her staff and the committee's staff to try to get language that
will make it even stiffer.
The underlying bill contains a provision that would be
waivable by the President. And we continue to surrender our
authority. And I think it is important for us to stake claim to
that and say, well, under what conditions would you be able to
waive it? And if you want a waiver, why not come back to us?
But nevertheless, as has been highlighted, China is a net
lender to countries. And frankly, when you look at a metric
called net international investment position of countries which
is what we own of the world versus what the world owns of us,
for the United States, the world owns more of us than we own of
them. China is the opposite.
Germany is frankly in the strongest position per capita at
about 32-37 per capita. But the United States is in a deficit
of nearly 50,000 dollars per capita. China is in the middle of
the pack in this metric, but they have a net favorable
investment.
So they own more of the world than the world owns of China.
Now a lot of that goes with their refusal to comply with the
terms of the World Trade Organization. And the exploitation of
the developing country status is just the tip of the iceberg in
terms of how they are exploiting it.
But I am so thankful, Chairman, that you are moving this
bill early in our markup and that it is so bipartisan to
confront the abuses of China because it has been bad for
America. It has been bad for our economy. It has been horrible
for our middle class and the constituents we represent. And I
urge all of our colleagues to support the bill.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back. Is there any
further discussion on the bill? Ms. Kim is recognized.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Chairman McCaul, for
holding today's markup. And I am speaking in strong support of
my bill, H.R. 1107, the PRC is Not a Developing Country Act.
This is a legislation I introduced with my colleague, Gerry
Connolly.
And I thank all the members who spoke in favor of this
bill. This bipartisan bill seeks to address the People's
Republic of China's exploitation of its status as a developing
country in treaties and international organizations. The PRC is
the world's second largest economy, accounting for 18.6 percent
of the global economy.
The economy size is second only to that of the United
States which is treated as a developed or high income country
in treaties and international organizations. The PRC exploits
their status as a developing country by applying for
development assistance and loans from international
organizations despite spending trillions on infrastructure
projects in developing countries as part of the debt trap
diplomacy scheme known as the Belt and Road program. In fact,
their withdrawal of loans that should be for developing
countries enables the PRC to finance the Belt and Road program.
The PRC is Not a Developing Country Act states that it will
be the policy of the United States to oppose the labeling or
treatment of the PRC as a developing country in any treaty,
international organization, or international agreement to which
the U.S. is a party. It also directs the Secretary to seek
mechanisms in international organization to change the status
of the PRC from a developing country to developed country. This
legislation will level the playing field for developing
countries and hold the PRC accountable for its exploitation of
development assistance and loans.
So I urge my colleagues to support, and yield the balance
of my time. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields back. Is there any
further discussion on the bill?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further discussions, let me
just say I want to thank Congresswoman Kim for bringing this
legislation. It is long overdue. This will force the State
Department to treat the Chinese Communist Party and their
government as who they really are, not a developing nation but
an economic power that must be dealt with.
And I think this will get to the core of their ability to
manipulate our global institutions to get interest-free loans
and then turn them around to manipulate developing nations at a
usurious interest rate and then take over their rare earth
minerals and ports and bases and then be bailed out by the IMF.
I give them an A+ for being smart and clever. But I am glad we
finally caught up to this.
And we are going to pass this at a committee I hope
unanimously and get it to the floor as soon as possible. So
with that, does any other member--does any member wish to offer
an amendment?
Mr. Davidson. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the
desk.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Davidson is recognized. And the clerk
shall report the amendment.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Davidson follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Clerk. Amendment to H.R. 1107, offered by Mr. Davidson
of Ohio. Page 4, line 1, insert, not later than--
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman is recognized for
five minutes on the amendment.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the Chairman. And I thank, as I said
earlier, the committee staff and Congresswomen Young Kim's
staff for working together. This puts bounds on the
administration in terms of their ability to just waive this
requirement.
So a lot of times, we pass bills and we feel united in
Congress. And they never become law because of the process for
omnibus language. And it never sticks to the appropriations.
And then we have laws that we are supposed to see
faithfully executed by the executive branch. And they will come
and say things like we heard earlier in the hearing about the
Uyghurs. We ask about their opinions on matters.
And it is, like, well, at some level, while I am curious
about your opinion, your job in the executive branch is to
faithfully execute what we passed and becomes law. And I just
think this is such an important measure that we don't want them
to just say, well, the Chinese people are going to get mad.
Well, we know they are going to get mad.
They have used this to their great advantage overall. And
we have seen our people back home all over the country jumping
up and down hopping mad because we are not confronting China.
And in this Congress, in this moment when we are united, I
would hate to give the administration an out. So while I had
hoped that we could land on language that was maybe even
tighter, this language does tighten it up and make it harder
for the administration to waive this requirement to say you are
going to stop supporting China's claim that they are a
developing economy.
I appreciate the thoughtful consideration of the amendment.
I urge all of our colleagues to support it. And I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Gentleman yields back. Let me just say I
support this amendment. And do any other members seek
recognition?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further discussion, the
question now occurs on the amendment offered by Mr. Davidson.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it and the
amendment is agreed to.
Are there any further amendments?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further amendments, I move
that the committee report H.R. 1107 as amended to the House
with a favorable recommendation.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it and the
motion is agreed to.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid on the
table. Staff is authorized to make any technical and conforming
changes. Pursuant to notice, I now call up H.R. 1154, the Stop
Forced Organ Harvesting Act of 2023. The bill was circulated in
advance. The clerk shall designate the bill.
[The Bill H.R. 1154 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Clerk. H.R. 1154, to combat forced organ harvesting and
trafficking in persons for purposes of the removal of organs,
and for other purposes.
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, first reading is
dispensed with. The bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point.
Chairman McCaul. Is there any discussion on the bill? Mr.
Smith, the author of the bill is recognized.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you, the Ranking Member for including it in this markup.
I want to thank you for cosponsoring it. I really deeply
appreciate that. I want to thank Bill Keating, as well as Kathy
Manning for joining on as cosponsors originals as well. It's a
bipartisan bill. And I think it will make a difference.
And special thanks to Mary Vegel, Vegil I should say,
Janice Kaguyutan, did I get it right Janice? Pierre Lattazi and
Doug Anderson for working to get this bill ready for today.
Mr. Chairman, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
which monitors trafficking in persons as well as narcotics,
last year estimated that human trafficking for forced organ
removal is a criminal enterprise worth between $840 million and
$1.7 billion. But, then they said, this is a mere tip of the
iceberg and called it a hidden crime.
Well, it has become apparent however through open source
investigation and witness accounts is that there was one
country, one country in particular which is engaged in state-
sponsored harvesting of human organs from otherwise health
human beings on a systematic and industrial scale in absolute
violation of ethics governing transplantation.
That country is the Peoples Republic of China under Xi
Jinping and the Chinese Communist Party. Their cruelty of
murdering between 60,000 to 100,000 young victims every year,
average age 28, to steal their organs, is unimaginable.
In May of last year, I chaired a chilling, eye-opening
hearing at the Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission entitled
Forced Organ Harvesting in China, Examining the Evidence. Ethan
Guttman, Senior Research Fellow in China Studies for the
Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation testified that 25,000
to 50,000 camp detainees are being harvested every year.
Twenty-eight year olds he goes on to say from Xinjiang
camps can be theoretically harvested for two or three organs.
That's up to 150,000 organs just from the Uyghurs. The Kilgour,
Matas, Gutmann Report of 2016 estimated China's total
transplant volume at 60,000 to 100,000 annually.
Religious dissidents targeted for harvesting include Falun
Gong practitioners, whose peaceful meditation and exercise
practices unfortunately make their organs desirable. They're
very healthy people, so they're targeted. They have been
declared by the Chinese Communist Party an evil cult and thus,
fit for butchering.
Uyghurs and other central Asians in concentration camps in
the Xinjiang Uyghur autonomous region are targeted as well.
Indeed, we even know the ideal age, like I said, for harvesting
is 28 years old. This has been deemed the peak of organ
ripeness by the Chinese medical establishment. And young
Uyghurs are subjected to comprehensive blood tests to find a
cross match for organ recipients.
Sifting through the evidence as an independent body called
the International Tribunal sitting in London, has concluded,
and I quote them, forced organ harvesting has been committed
for years throughout China on a significant scale. And that
Falun Gong practitioners have been one, and probably the main
source of organ supply.
And the evidence, Mr. Chairman, as you know has been in
plain sight. We also know that through open source Chinese
language media that elderly high ranking Chinese Communist
Party officials have received replacement organs from the very
people they despise and oppress, like the Falun Gong, like the
Uyghurs, at the People's Liberation Army Hospital 301, located
in Beijing.
While this shocks me, and it should shock all of us, and I
know it does, I can't say it surprises me. Almost 25 years ago,
Doug Anderson remembers it so well because he was on our
subcommittee, I chaired the first human rights hearing with a
Chinese security official who testified that he and his other
security agents were executing prisoners with doctors, of
course, there and ambulances to harvest their organs for
transplantation.
But, it was done then on a very small scale. Now, it is
massive and of course, the victims it is an unconscionable
abuse of victims.
Indeed, at the last hearing we actually had a doctor who
testified how he had performed one such surgery on a victim, a
botched execution, who as he began cutting, discovered that he
was in the state of shock, that is to say, the victim, a live
vivisection on a living human being.
To combat these heinous and inhumane practices, we've
introduced H.R. 1154. And what it does, it amends the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961 to require reports on forced organ
harvesting and trafficking in persons for purposes of the
removal of organs in foreign countries.
It secondly imposes sanctions on any person the President
determines funds, sponsors, or otherwise facilitates forced
organ harvesting or trafficking in persons for the purpose of
removing their organs. And it sanctions, those sanctions
include blocking and prohibiting all transactions in property
and interest in property, and making that person inadmissible
to the United States, and ineligible to receive a Visa.
This is a start. I hope this Committee will support it
robustly. Yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Is there any further
discussion on the bill?
There being no further discussion of the bill, the
Committee will move to consideration of amendments. Does any
member wish to offer an amendment?
There being no amendments, let me first just say, I want to
thank the gentleman for bringing this long overdue bill. You've
been a champion of human rights for many, many years in the
Congress.
And I can't think of anything more horrific or more
barbaric than this practice that the Chinese Communist Party
engages in to hold people down against their will, and
sometimes anesthetize them, sometimes not, and take out their
very vital organs and then sell them for hundreds of thousands
of dollars. It is absolutely disgusting to me.
And I want to thank you again, for bringing this not only
to the Committee's attention, but to the American people who
may not understand what type of nation we're dealing with. And
how complete disregard for human life and human rights that the
Communist Chinese Party has.
There being no amendments, I move that Committee report
H.R. 1154 to the House with a favorable recommendation. All
those in favor signify by saying aye.
All those oppose signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the Chair the ayes have it. The motion is
agreed to. And, without objection, the motion to reconsider is
laid on the table. Staff is authorized to make any technical
and conforming changes.
Pursuant to notice I now call up H.R. 1153, Deterring
America's Technological Adversaries Act.
[The Bill H.R. 1153 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The bill was circulated in advance and the
Clerk shall designate the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 1153. A bill to provide to provide the
clarification of non-applicability----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection the first reading is
dispensed with. The bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point. I now recognize myself for an opening
statement.
While the nation looked at the sky in disbelief as a spy
balloon from the Chinese Communist Party's military traversed
the continental U.S. gathering sensitive data and sending it
back to the mother ship in Beijing, many Americans do not
realize one of the greatest surveillance efforts from the CCP
has been silently gathering personal data in their pockets.
Of course, I'm referring to the social media app called
TikTok. It is no secret that TikTok is beholden to the CCP. In
fact, President Biden, his national security officials, have
been sounding the alarm over the last three months.
Biden's FBI Director said that TikTok's parent company is
quote, controlled by the Chinese government, end of quotes.
President Biden's Director of National Intelligence explained
that the PRC is quote, collecting foreign data to then use it
to target audiences for information campaigns, end of quote.
And Biden's own Deputy Attorney General said quote, I don't
use TikTok, and I would not advise anyone else to. And we just
heard today from one of our witnesses, our Undersecretary for
the Bureau of Industry and Security, stating that TikTok was a
threat to the national security of Americans in the United
States.
The United States Congress, literally the people in this
room, agreed that TikTok is so dangerous that we banned its use
on federal government devices. And it's not only Congress, more
than 30 states have banned TikTok from state issued devices,
including my home state of Texas.
So, why is Congress and the majority of states blocking
access to TikTok? We've all seen what the PRC does with this
type of data against its own people, interrogations,
imprisonment, and shipping minority groups to genocide camps.
TikTok is a modern day Trojan horse of the CCP used to
surveil and exploit Americans' personal information. This
legislation is the first step in protecting Americans against
subversive data collection.
Currently, the courts have questioned the Administration's
authority to sanction TikTok. My bill empowers the
Administration to ban TikTok or any other software application
that threatens U.S. national security.
And, make no mistake, TikTok is a national security threat.
It allows the CCP to manipulate and monitor its users while it
gobbles up Americans' data to be used for their malign
activities.
Anyone with TikTok downloaded on their device has given the
CCP permission and a backdoor to all their personal
information. In other words, it's a spy balloon in your phone.
And I have no doubt the PRC will look to weaponize this
intelligence as they seek to upend the global balance of power
in this great generational competition.
It is time to act. This is an issue that affects all
Americans. And it's time we put an end to the hostile efforts
of the CCP to exploit Americans and their personal privacy.
And I urge my colleagues to support this bill as we did
impose this on all members of Congress. Is there any further
discussion on the bill?
The Ranking Member, Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I oppose this measure.
And I do so actually regretfully, given that I strongly prefer
when you and I work together and are able to figure and work
something out collectively.
But, on this I forcefully and unequivocally oppose. And
that's because I think that this legislation would damage our
allegiances across the globe, bring more countries into China's
sphere, destroy jobs here in the United States, and undercut
core American values of free speech and free enterprise.
These ills are not just bad policy, they would actively
undermine our national security. The legislation before us
today is unvetted and dangerously over broad.
It applies mandatory sanctions to companies that have
independent American subsidiaries without giving any
consideration to the consequences. What would happen to these
subsidiaries?
The bill does not say. The bill would impose sanctions on
companies with a combined market capitalization of over a
trillion dollars, while explicitly refusing to authorize one
penny to the agency that oversees sanctions enforcement.
How will the government handle enormous new
responsibilities with no additional resources? The bill does
not say.
The Data Act will also result in sanctions on individuals
and companies in ally and partner nations around the globe.
Now, Mr. McCaul, Chairman McCaul to his credit, was ahead
of the curve in Washington D.C. about the importance of
semiconductors. He fiercely believes, and correctly so in my
view, that semiconductor manufacturing and supply chains are
crucial to national security.
But, the TSMC, Samsung, SK Hynix, all make significant
revenues selling chips for Chinese companies that would be
sanctioned by this bill. Under the secondary sanctions set
forth in this legislation this means each of these Taiwanese
and Korean entities would be subject to mandatory sanctions.
How does it make sense to sanction the very companies the
Executive Branch and bipartisan members of this Committee are
actively courting to build fabs in the United States? The bill
does not say.
A different approach is and was possible. We could have
held hearings before the markup, and carefully crafted
bipartisan legislation together.
Instead, my staff and I received the text of this
legislation a little over a week ago. And have only had several
days to review a bill that would dramatically rewrite the rules
based international economic order.
We specifically offered the Chairman and his team a
detailed outline of the scope of legislation we could accept
under this significant time crunch. But, ultimately they were
not amenable to that proposal.
Even though this measure was noticed just a few days ago,
and the text of the bill is still not available on Congress'
official legislative website, companies, countries, and civil
society groups have already reached out expressing concern
about the scope and soundness of the legislation before us
today.
I believe my amendment in the nature of a substitute is a
correct path that we must take. It will address the original
stated scope of this bill, real and genuine privacy concerns
related to TikTok, without causing more problems than it
corrects.
But, if my substitute amendment is not adopted, I must
oppose this legislation and urge all of my colleagues to do the
same.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back. Is there any
further discussion on the bill?
Mrs. Wagner is recognized.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I support this
piece of legislation. China's digital espionage programs are a
colossal national security risk to the United States of
America.
And, not just us, but also for all private citizens. The
intelligence collected from American citizens through these
programs supports the development of China's surveillance
state.
The Executive Branch needs clear authority to cut off the
flow of private American data to the CCP through apps like
TikTok. CCP data espionage empowers abusive--abusive as I said,
Chinese--pardon me. I lost my place here.
It absolutely empowers the abusive Chinese government to
reach ever deeper into the lives of its own citizens,
especially Uyghurs, Tibetans, Christians, and dissidents. The
U.S. should not be complicit in these abhorrent practices.
And I support the Chairman's bill to protect the privacy of
American citizens and attack the CCP's mass surveillance
systems. And I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields back. Is there any
further discussion on the bill?
Mr. Stanton is recognized.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, data
privacy is national security. And the U.S. government should
take seriously any attempts by foreign governments or foreign
owned corporations to gather unlimited data on U.S. citizens.
But, the Data Act in its current form is a poor way to
accomplish that goal. We've been asked to rush this bill
through Committee with no input from sanction experts,
technologists, the business community, or even the regulatory
agencies who would be in charge of enforcing the ban. And I
expect that they would have a lot of valuable feedback.
The sanctions in this bill are extremely wide ranging, with
an unknown impact on other businesses operating in the United
States. Not to mention the real constitutional and legal
questions this bill raises.
If we want to get serious about protecting the data privacy
of millions of Americans about our national security in the
21st century, then this deserves close study and open dialog,
neither of which have happened.
For that reason, I urge my colleagues to vote no. Let's do
this correctly.
Chairman McCaul. Any further discussions on the bill? Mr.
Cicilline is recognized.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I'm wondering, Mr.
Chair, if you would yield to a question?
As I read the bill, I have some of the very same concerns
that the Ranking Member and Mr. Stanton just raised. This
appears to be a, maybe the broadest sanction and position I've
ever seen and maybe ever imposed in history.
And it's not permissive. It requires the imposition of
sanctions. So, I think when you think about the unintended
consequences, there aren't provisions that allow the President
and the Administration not to impose them.
So, I think we have to be particularly careful here. And
what I'm particularly unclear about is in the--on page 12 of
the bill it requires the imposition of sanctions if it's
reasonably believed to have facilitated or maybe facilitating,
or contributing to China's, and it lists a number of things,
military intelligence, espionage, censorship activities, all
those sound reasonable to me.
But, Roman Numeral IV says, control or use of
recommendation algorithms that are capable of manipulating
content. There's no definition in the legislation of what the
recommendation algorithms are.
So, we are requiring the imposition of sanctions against an
organization that facilitates or maybe facilitating, or maybe
contributing to China's use of something called recommendation
algorithms, with no definition of what that is.
And so, I am just wondering what the intent is. I've spent
a lot of time studying algorithms, and I'm so heartened to hear
my colleagues talk about the surveillance state which allows
technology platforms to relentless collect data even here in
America.
But I think the dangers are particularly obvious with
respect to the Communist Party of China. But, this particular
provision with recommendation algorithms, I have no idea what
that means. And if we're requiring the imposition of sanctions,
we ought to have a clear understanding at least of what that
means. And I don't know if somebody can answer that.
Chairman McCaul. Sure. And, the gentleman yields?
Mr. Cicilline. Oh, of course.
Chairman McCaul. Yes. The algorithms are manipulated by the
PRC to send messages of influence, typically political messages
on devices where TikTok has been downloaded as an app.
This bill applies to PRC owned and facilitated use of this
data with respect to military intelligence, espionage, or
weapons proliferation activities. I think that's very clear.
With respect to the fact this hasn't been discussed in the
past, we discussed this on the EAGLE Act last Congress, as I
recall. We've had a lot of discussion and debate on this.
Why are we talking about this?
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Chairman, if I can just ask, I don't--my
question is not about military intelligence or espionage, I get
that.
If you go down four more lines, Roman Numeral IV, it says,
control or use of recommendation algorithms that are capable of
manipulating content. What does that mean?
Because recommendation algorithms is not a term of art. It
is not defined in the bill. And again, this is requiring the
imposition of sanctions if it's reasonably believed, or that it
maybe facilitating, not just the items you mentioned, but also
this item, control or use of recommendation algorithms that are
capable of manipulating content.
That--I don't even know what that is. And so, before I--
you're asking us to vote to require the imposition of sanctions
on--that might reach a number of different companies.
It seems to me I want to have an understanding of what's
the attempt here. What is that language intending to require
us, or require the Administration to impose sanctions on it?
Chairman McCaul. This particular, you're taking about
Clause IV, was actually brought to our attention by President
Biden's national security team.
That these algorithms, recommendations are being
manipulated by the PRC to send messages to particularly most
TikTok users are younger generation, to influence them, and to
influence their political affiliation. And to gain influence to
their--to favor the PRC.
Mr. Cicilline. Yeah.
Chairman McCaul. Again, why is this being brought up?
Because the prior Administration tried to ban it three times.
The courts considered that ban and said that the President did
not have legal authority to do so.
All I'm trying to do is create a Constitutional framework
through which the President, and we don't have permissive
language, you're correct in that. It is mandatory that the
President would sanction companies that fall within this
definition that deal with military intelligence, espionage,
weapons proliferation.
Mr. Cicilline. Well, I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would
just say that I think what's most disappointing about this is,
I think there is broad and maybe universal support on this
Committee to do exactly what this bill attempts to do.
But, this is incredibly important that it be done right and
that it be done well. And I think we all have confidence that
if Mr. Meeks and you had the opportunity to work in this in a
serious way, we would come up with a bill that would earn the
votes of every single person on this Committee.
I'm not sure why we are being asked to sort of jam through,
but I think with all due respect it's not well written. It
doesn't have definitions about critical components.
We all want very much to give the Administration the tools
that it needs. But, I--in its current form without a lot of
amplification and a lot of definitions, it's difficult for me
to support this.
And I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Is there any further discussion on the
bill? Mr. Mast is recognized.
Mr. Mast. Mr. Chairman, I yield to my colleague Mrs.
Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank my good friend and colleague from
Florida for yielding. And I'd like to address, Mr. Chairman,
this myth that somehow this bill is vague or over broad.
The sanctions clearly apply only to companies under CCP
control and facilitating transfers of sensitive personal data
to the CCP military, espionage, influence operations, et
cetera. I can also say that a national security waiver lets the
Executive Branch decide the scope of actions preventing over
broad use.
And lastly, I'd say that, you know, it has a five year
sunset. Which means Congress retains a check whether to extend
the sanction authority or not.
And I'd also say that this is an urgent, urgent issue. A
supreme national security risk. The Biden national security
officials, including the head of this Administration's CIA and
FBI are ringing alarm bells about TikTok, and revealing extreme
urgency.
So, I think there is clear and present danger. The timing
and the urgency are necessary. I thank the gentleman for
yielding. I don't know if the Chair would like additional time
or not.
If you--I yield back to the gentleman from Florida.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mrs. Wagner. And I would just say, I
appreciate and I take the opportunity to thank the staff, both
majority and minority, that work together on this legislation
all the way back into February, looking at this. Looking at
issues that the FBI, the CIA had been bringing up on this very
issue. And what was brought up even long before that in the
EAGLE Act.
So, there was work done, bipartisanly across the Committee.
And I want to thank all the staff for their work on that.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield the remainder of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Any other further
discussion on the bill? Mr.--Mrs. Kamlager-Dove.
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair and to our Vice--
to our Ranking Member, Mr. Meeks. I want to speak to this bill.
I am strongly opposed to this ill-conceived and hastily
drafted piece of legislation which could decimate U.S.
companies at no benefit to U.S. national security, and has
concerning implications for Americans' right to freedom of
expression.
I do believe until this is worked out more clearly that we
should oppose this precipitous legislation. To me, this bill is
clear evidence of an attempt to use a hot button issue to jump
into the spotlight with no regard for the actual policy impact.
For one, the bill tries to bypass a review of the Biden
Administration's foremost experts on the topic, but CFIUS and
the Commerce Department, which is drafting a strategy to
address the implications of foreign owned applications.
And anyone who cares about protecting national security,
and I know that's all of us, and not just scoring political
points, would allow the experts to fully analyze every single
angle of this issue and recommend the best course of action.
Even more concerning are the bill's vague definitions, and
they are, under which American companies with no real
connection to the PRC's malign influence could conceivably be
banned from doing business in the United States. And I'm
concerned about this because of all of the entertainment
companies that are in my district who could become collateral
damage as a result of this ill constructed bill.
And, given that their work in the arts is a key avenue for
Americans' freedom of expression, I can also see concerning
implications for the protection of civil liberties in this
country.
Clearly, this bill would have serious ramifications that
members of this Committee and civil society stakeholders have
barely begun to address, but, I know care for deeply.
So, I once again, believe this to be harmful and
counterproductive. And I certainly urge my colleagues to
continue to work on this issue and oppose this bill in the
meantime.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Mast. Will my colleague yield for a moment?
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. Yes.
Mr. Mast. I just--I was interested by what you said. I was
wondering if you could just elaborate on some of the companies
that you said would be affected?
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Well, I have an amendment here, because
for example, there are video gaming industries that are in my
district that could become collateral damage.
They have nothing to do with national security. But, they
are owned--they are Chinese owned companies, and so they could
conceivably be banned.
Mr. Mast. Could you tell me which ones so I could go look
at this further?
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. I can certainly make sure that you get
that information.
Mr. Mast. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. Is there any further discussion on the
bill? There being no further discussion, the Committee will
move to consideration of amendments.
Does any member wish to offer an amendment?
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. I have an amendment, number 16 at the desk.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Meeks follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The Clerk shall report the bill--
amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R.
1153, offered by Mr. Meeks of New York.
Strike all after the enacting clause, and insert all----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman is recognized for
five minutes on the amendment.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Based on our
conversations, I was really expecting your legislation to focus
more narrowly on TikTok rather that the entire Chinese economy.
And, with due respect, I believe that H.R. 1153 bites off
more than it can chew, as I laid out in my comments on the
underlying measure. And I'm offering this A and S Amendment
because I want to lay out a roadmap for a pragmatic approach to
address the challenge that arise from TikTok's popularity.
Let me be clear on this. I believe concerns about TikTok by
the United States government and our allies are justified.
And I supported the restrictions of TikTok on government
devices, and I'm glad that the European Union and Canada have
quickly followed us in this prudent step. More needs to be done
as well.
Americans' sensitive data should not be going to
ByteDance's Beijing headquarters. Stories about TikTok
employees using locational data to spy on journalists is
entirely unacceptable.
Whatever action the United States government takes must be
thoughtful, holistic, and with our American values, which we
must never yield on, in mind.
For years, the PRC has banned American internet companies
from operating in China on baseless national security concerns.
The CCP forced out Google, one of the largest companies in the
world, out of fear that their citizens could search for
accurate information.
Now, Chinese exchange students cannot even use their Gmail
when they go home for summer break. So, we should not blatantly
imitate the PRC's censorship policies.
More Americans use the TikTok app then citizens of any
other country in the world. Six of the seven most followed
accounts in the world are American.
We should not dismiss the soft power that comes with the
America way of life being broadcast all over the world. If our
national security mandates more dramatic action, I will oppose,
I will take it. But, we cannot act rashly without consideration
of the very real soft power, free speech and economic
consequences of a ban.
My amendment lays out an alternative path. First, it asks
the Administration to decide if TikTok should be sanctioned
under current law via the Global Magnitsky Act or the recently
passed Intellectual Property Violative Sanctions legislation,
which I was proud to get done last Congress.
Second, I want to allow the CFIUS process to play out. The
Executive Branch is working on a negotiated compromise of
TikTok as we speak.
And, as I understand it, more drastic force divestment
options remain on the table if TikTok fails to demonstrate that
it can't keep American data safe. But, we should not preempt
this careful interagency process that I am confident will
produce a result.
Finally, my A and S comes with a real deterrent. Once a
negotiated agreement with CFIUS is reached, my A and S requires
the President to regularly notify Congress if TikTok is keeping
its end of the deal.
If the company is not, my amendment grants the President
the power to sanction TikTok notwithstanding the Berman
Amendment. This will be an important lever to ensure the
company's compliance.
So, I urge all of my members to embrace this salient but
still powerful approach to addressing TikTok. I also encourage
my colleagues on both sides of the aisle on the Energy and
Commerce Committee to develop privacy legislation that will
keep Americans' data secure from the PRC's draconian national
security law.
We need to address TikTok and this amendment in the nature
of a substitute is a fine place to start. So, I urge bipartisan
support for my A and S.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. I oppose this
amendment. Let me just first say that we have had discussions
with the minority staff since all the month of February. We
asked for edits and never saw anything of substance.
I raised an amendment at the EAGLE Act in 2021. Everybody
knows what TikTok is. If it's too dangerous to be on our phones
as members of Congress, in my judgment, it's too dangerous to
be on our children's phones. And that's the whole point of this
bill.
It's also the point of this bill to give the Administration
the constitutional framework within which to ban TikTok if it
believes it's in the national security interest of the United
States. It also mandates sanctions on companies engaged in
espionage and involved with the military, the Chinese PLA.
This was done after consultation with many legal experts,
including many national security advisors within the Biden
Administration, many of whom have said, as I've mentioned
before, that TikTok is a threat to our national security.
I met with many cabinet officials on this subject as well.
And I will hold their conversations private. Suffice it to say
that the ODNI, the FBI Director, the CIA Director, all believe
that this is a threat, a backdoor into our children's phones. A
spy balloon into their phones.
I heard this over and over again. I believe the time to act
is now. And I do not agree with the comments that somehow this
is political or that any way this was brought in haste.
We've been in discussions with the minority for a month on
the language of this bill. We do have mandatory language. I
don't believe permissive is proper at this point in our
history.
Again, the bill doesn't require the President to do
anything. It doesn't give him the authority that he needs to
address the threat of TikTok, and I'm talking about the
amendment in the nature of a substitute, my good friend Mr.
Meeks.
I always like to work in a bipartisan fashion, and most of
you who know me, including the Ranking Member, know that that
is my style. But, the time has come to protect our children
from the PRC, from the Chinese Communist Party putting a
backdoor in their phones, unwittingly, I might add.
Not knowing what the PRC is collecting when they get the
keystrokes to what they are typing. When they get the data
that's on their phone. When they push campaigns coming out of
the PRC to influence their thinking.
When they're addicted to this, this app, not knowing that
it's allowing one of our major foreign adversaries, I would
argue probably the biggest foreign adversary we have right now,
access into their data. Passwords, privacy, bank accounts, all
sorts of personal private information that we're allowing
access to a foreign nation adversary.
This should be a bipartisan bill Mr. Ranking Member. And
you and I are often in a bipartisan manner working together to
do the right thing for the American people.
But, I want to rise above politics and do what's right for
the American people and most importantly our children and this
young generation who may not understand what unwittingly
they're doing by downloading this app.
So, there has to be a better way. This bill, unlike others
introduced, provides the Constitutional legal framework to move
forward to authorize the President of the United States, within
his discretion, looking at our national security, the question
whether to ban TikTok, as so many states have done, as Congress
has already done amongst ourselves.
How can we ban TikTok among ourselves and not ban it for
our children? Again, I ask that question. That is the moral
question of today and our time.
So, let's talk about what's real here and what's not. This
is a protection of privacy. It's a protection from a foreign
adversary. It's a protection of our children.
And, for that reason, I oppose this amendment.
Mrs. Wagner. Will the Chair yield?
Chairman McCaul. The Chair recognizes Mrs. Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. I appreciate that. I'd like to speak to the
Ranking Member's, I'm going to call the myth, that Congress
should somehow delay action until negotiations between TikTok
and CFIUS end.
Let's be clear. The negotiations between TikTok and CFIUS
have no deadline. And TikTok has no requirement to reach an
agreement.
TikTok has no incentive to reach an agreement because U.S.
courts have indeed questioned the Executive Branch's authority
to restrict its operations.
The bill does not preempt or foreclose an agreement with
CFIUS. Instead, it gives the Executive Branch authority to act
at any time, including a violation of any potential agreement
between companies like TikTok and the U.S. government.
I couldn't agree more with our Chairman, Mr. McCaul, that
Congress must act to allow a ban on companies like TikTok to
occur. Otherwise, this malign influence tool of the CCP will
continue to operate as a threat to our children, a threat to
our national security, a threat, I think, to our very way of
life.
So, I thank the Chair for yielding and I yield back the
remainder of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields back. Are there any
other members seek recognition on this amendment? Mr. Stanton
is recognized.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I'll yield my
time to Ranking Member Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. And I want to say to the Chair, and
generally we do, and we, you know, this is a rare that we have
complete disagreement.
You know, what I recall with the EAGLE Act, we had
language. We laid out the language. We sat in offices. We went
through the bill thoroughly, not just staff, but you and I, and
trying to get something done.
From what I'm told, the first time that my staff saw the
bill, can't negotiate something without seeing the bill, the
first time that they saw it was on February 17. And then we
tried to figure out and have conversation in that regard.
That's not trying to come up to something where we can
really work on something that's important. And to say that we
have to do it now and utilize fear to try to pass a bill, fear.
Now, I've been in Congress now 25 years. I've seen that
tactic utilized before. Fear that Iraq had weapons of mass
destruction without evidence or proof.
We should not be making judgments based upon fear. We
should not be making judgements based upon speculation.
Especially when we have a process going in place with CFIUS to
determine what the facts are.
This is far too serious for us to make a decision by fear
and be wrong. It puts us in trouble with our allies and moving
forward.
There's no need to rush this. We could have hearings and
discuss this, and witnesses, and experts. So that we can make
sure that the world sees that the United States moves in the
direction of making sure that we act on facts not fear.
So, in my mind, we should get it right. You don't try a
case without facts. Let's obtain the facts. Let's let the CFIUS
process that's in work, that's in progress now, to be
completed.
There's no need to rush it. Let's get it right. My A and S
helps us and focuses on what is in need right now. It gives us
the flexibility to make sure that we move further if the facts
show that they do.
And it gives us the opportunity to again show the world
that the values of the United States, the principals of the
United States, and that we tell others, we live by. And not
following the arbitrary ways of the PRC as they've done to some
of our companies, as I annunciated as an example, with Google.
We can do this the right way. With that, I yield back my
time to Mr. Stanton, yield back Mr. Stanton's time.
Mr. Stanton. Thank you, Ranking Member Meeks.
I will yield back the remainder of the time to the
Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
Any further discussion on the amendment?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. Let me say we often--we work together.
I've been--I brought this up as an amendment to the EAGLE Act.
Our staff has been working for the month of February. They saw
the text here right on the 17th. It's unfortunate we didn't get
a lot of response.
The CFIUS--all I heard back was that, well, let CFIUS right
itself out. I don't know how long it's going to take to allow
CFIUS to make a determination and what this bill does is it
authorizes the president. It actually gives him an authority
that the prior president administration did not have.
So that if CFIUS is violated by ByteDance, TikTok, it gives
the president authority to sanction them and it gives him
authority to ban TikTok. And quite honestly, this is an
authority that this administration, many of whom have asked us
as Congress to give them because they know they don't have the
authority under case law.
The prior administration tried to ban it three times and
this administration knows full well the dangers and risks of
TikTok and what it poses to our children and they've been very
clear about it.
Even today, we heard testimony to that fact. Again, we're
providing a constitutional legal framework. The president can
then sanction and act on this and ultimately ban if he deems it
in the national security interests of the United States.
I don't think that's dangerous at all. I think it's
dangerous not to pass this bill because if we don't and we
allow TikTok to continue its surveillance in this country of
Americans and particularly our children then we have not done
our job on this committee.
And I can't wait until CFIUS reaches an agreement and,
again, this will give the president the authority to enforce it
if it's violated.
So with that, is there any further discussion on the
amendment?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further discussion, the
question now occurs on the amendment offered--in the nature of
a substitute offered by Mr. Meeks.
All those in favor signify by saying aye.
All opposed signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the noes have it and the
amendment is not agreed to.
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Chairman, I ask for the yeas and nays.
Chairman McCaul. A roll call vote has been requested.
Pursuant to the Chair's previous announcement this vote will be
postponed.
Are there any further amendments?
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk,
number 11.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Meeks is recognized. The clerk shall
report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to H.R. 1153, offered by Mr. Meeks of
New York. In Section 202(f) strike ``vital to the national
security interests'' and insert ``in the national interest.''
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Meeks follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. Without objection further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My second amendment is
quite a simple one. It changes the waiver standard by--its
waiver stand in the underlying bill to allow the administration
additional flexibility and I want to explain how I think about
waivers, going forward, as I am confident this issue will arise
again during this Congress.
First off, I do not believe we should be passing
legislation without a waiver. The world is simply too
unpredictable for Congress to sometimes permanently--
permanently lock in the executive branch to sanctions policies.
Because of a lack of a waiver we have significant trade
sanctions on some Central Asian countries that did not even
exist as independent nations when the sanctions were imposed.
We did not get rid of those Cold War relic sanctions on Ukraine
until 2006.
Second, I do not think there is a one size fits all
template for sanctions. In some cases, a very high standard
national security waiver is appropriate. This makes the most
sense in situations where the economic impact on our country is
negligible and when other allies and partners have already
imposed the sanctions contemplated by the legislation.
In cases where economic considerations are at the forefront
of the bill, as with H.R. 1153, which repeatedly refers to
economic considerations, I think a national interest waiver is
the correct standard.
It does not make any sense to refuse to let the president
even consider the fact that people could lose their jobs and
their incomes or make foreign policy considerations like the
importance of maintaining alliances.
I encourage all members to support my amendment as it
allows the president to consider issues we do not want him to
factor in--that we do want him to factor in when making crucial
sanctions decisions.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields.
I oppose my good friend's amendment primarily because it
lowers the bar for waiver authority in my bill. It goes from
the vital national security interest to only national
interests.
We learned our lesson that this administration could abuse
the national interest waiver with Nord Stream 2. We can't have
a lower bar for something as important as this. We all need to
protect Americans from the CCP influence. This amendment would
overly undermine, I believe, the effectiveness of my bill and
for those reasons I oppose.
Do any other members seek recognition?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. Seeing no further discussion, the question
now occurs on the amendment offered by Mr. Meeks.
All those in favor signify by saying aye.
All those opposed signify by saying no.
In the opinion the Chair the noes have it and the----
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman McCaul [continuing]. Amendment is not agreed to.
Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. I ask for a roll call vote.
Chairman McCaul. A roll call vote has been requested.
Pursuant to the Chair's previous announcement this vote will be
postponed.
Are there any further amendments?
Ms. Dove is recognized.
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have an
amendment at the desk, number 17. And I just want to say as a
new member of this committee how much I appreciate the decorum
and the tenor of the Chair.
This amendment that is being passed out illustrates how
American companies in my district with no real connection to
the PRC's malign influence would become collateral----
Chairman McCaul. If the gentlelady will pause and allow the
clerk to distribute the amendment.
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. Absolutely.
Chairman McCaul. And the clerk shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to H.R. 1153 offered by Mrs. Kamlager-
Dove of California.
[The Amendment offered by Mrs. Kamlager-Dove follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. Without objection further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentlelady is recognized for
five minutes.
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This amendment illustrates how American companies in my
district with no real connection to the PRC's malign influence
would become collateral damage. In this case, an American video
game company headquartered in my district is Riot Games and
they actually make ``League of Legends''' is owned by a Chinese
company and it would be directly impacted despite the
relationship posing no real national security threat. The
bill's narrow exemptions would not protect this company or
others like it, which is why I am submitting one that would do
so.
I think people's ability to innovate, design, and create
should not become victim to a counterproductive even though
well intentioned approach to how we deal with the PRC. I
encourage my colleagues to support this amendment and I yield
back the balance of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields back.
Are there--is there any further discussion on the
amendment?
Mr. Kean is recognized.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I oppose this amendment
because it creates an unnecessary carve out for a sanctioned
company. It's important as we're having these conversations
that we have a comprehensive approach that captures all aspects
of a corporate entity that has the potential to threaten our
national security.
Thank you. I yield back to you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
Any further discussion on the amendment?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further discussion the
question now occurs on the amendment offered by Mrs. Dove.
All those in favor signify by saying aye.
All those oppose signify by saying no.
Chairman McCaul. In the opinion of the Chair, the noes have
it. The amendment is not agreed to.
The gentlelady requests a recorded vote. A roll call vote
has been requested. Pursuant to the Chair's previous
announcement this vote will be postponed.
Are there any further amendments?
The clerk shall distribute the amendment.
Mrs. Manning. The amendment is Manning number four.
Chairman McCaul. The clerk shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to H.R. 1153, offered by Ms. Manning
of North Carolina. Add at the end of Section Two----
[The Amendment offered by Mrs. Manning follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. Without objection further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentlelady, Mrs. Manning, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mrs. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I offer my common sense amendment to H.R. 1153 to protect
American companies, including those in North Carolina, from the
unintended consequences of being exposed to sanctions if they
happen to have foreign investors as minority shareholders.
Mr. Chairman, we can agree that we should take concrete
action to address serious threats to national security, data
privacy, and cybersecurity.
However, I'm concerned that without sufficient safeguards
sanctions in this bill could be applied not just to companies
in Europe and Asia but also to penalize transactions by
American companies if they happen to have foreign minority
shareholders, which, by definition, have a non-controlling
interest in a company.
This bill as written could expose some of the most
successful homegrown American tech startups, including
companies with multibillion-dollar valuations, which support
thousands of American jobs like Epic Games in North Carolina.
Sanctions could be imposed under this bill even though there's
nothing to suggest that these American companies pose a
national security risk.
We should go after bad actors in a smart and targeted way
without unnecessarily hurting ourselves or costing our
constituents good jobs. That's why my amendment clarifies that
this bill would not target independent U.S. entities engaged in
legitimate transactions simply because they may have foreign
investors.
If we're going to succeed and win in our legitimate
competition with China then we can't afford to pass overly
broad or self-defeating policies that would harm our alliances
or damage free enterprise, which are the source of our
competitive advantage.
We need thoughtful policies that accomplish our specific
goals without inflicting damage on our own economy and that's
why I urge my colleagues to join with me in supporting my
amendment, and I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields.
I'm opposed to this amendment. Do any members seek
recognition? Mrs. Radewagen.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I oppose this
amendment because it creates an unnecessary exemption. We do
not have a full understanding of the intent and consequences of
this amendment and have seen how the PRC can manipulate various
levels of ownership of companies to influence decision making.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields back.
Any further--any other members seek recognition on this
amendment?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further discussion, the
question now occurs on the amendment offered by Ms. Manning.
All those in favor signify by saying aye.
All opposed signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the Chair the noes have it and the
amendment is not agreed to.
Mrs. Manning. Mr. Chair, I ask for a recorded vote.
Chairman McCaul. Roll call vote has been requested.
Pursuant to the Chair's previous announcement this vote will be
postponed.
Are there any further amendments?
Ms. Jacobs is recognized. The clerk shall distribute the
amendment and the clerk shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to H.R. 1153 offered by Ms. Jacobs of
California. Strike paragraph six section 201(a).
[The Amendment offered by Ms. Jacobs follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. Without objection further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentlelady is recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My amendment strikes a
provision that imposes incredibly broad secondary sanctions on
people and entities on top of the bill's already overbroad
direct sanctions.
This is counterproductive to national security. Russia's
invasion of Ukraine has shown how important our relationships
with our allies are. We've seen firsthand how our ability to
build international coalitions has directly protected our
national security interests and that means being a good partner
and ally.
Sanctioning our partner and allies' largest companies like
this bill would require us to do is a formula to end alliances,
not bolster them. The provision my amendment would strike also
would apply to developing countries, which, as we heard from
administration officials today, often explicitly state that
they do not want to choose between the United States and China.
If we force them to do so we may not like the choices they
make, given the PRC's broad investments around the globe and we
could risk losing them as partners altogether. The regulatory
burden imposed by this provision on the U.S. government to
enforce such sanctions would be unprecedented. This is
particularly alarming, given that the bill explicitly refuses
to authorize a penny for broader enforcement. This provision is
a formula for weakening our alliances, downgrading America's
standing in the developing world, and closing off America from
the countries around the globe.
We should strike it and I encourage all my colleagues to
support this amendment to do that.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields back.
I oppose this amendment. Do any members seek recognition on
this amendment?
Mr. Baird is recognized.
Mr. Baird. Mr. Chairman, I oppose this amendment because it
undermines the criteria for sanctionable activity. Entities
assisting companies that are threats to the national security
should be subject to the same enforcement actions, including
sanctions, and for these reasons, I oppose.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
Are there any further discussion on the amendment?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further discussion the
question now occurs on the amendment offered by Ms. Jacobs.
All those in favor signify by saying aye.
All those opposed signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the Chair the noes have it. The amendment
is not agreed to.
Ms. Jacobs. Mr. Chairman, I request a recorded vote.
Chairman McCaul. A roll call vote has been requested.
Pursuant to the Chair's previous announcement this vote will be
postponed.
Are there any further amendments?
Mr. Phillips. Mr. Chair.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Phillips is recognized.
Mr. Phillips. I have an amendment at the desk, Phillips
number 11, please.
Chairman McCaul. The Clerk shall distribute the amendment.
The clerk shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to H.R. 1153 offered by Mr. Phillips
of Minnesota. Strike Section 101.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Phillips follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. Without objection further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And first, let me thank
you for bringing this to the Foreign Affairs Committee. I just
wish that this institution and this country was talking more
about how to protect children and adults, all Americans, as it
relates to their personal data and the algorithms that are
indeed corrupting so many around the world.
Unfortunately, this is, in my estimation, somewhat limited
and we should be having a broader conversation. As it relates
to this specific legislation, sadly, I do feel there are too
many flaws. But I want to focus my amendment on one of the most
sacred principles that we hold in America and that is freedom
of speech.
My amendment would strike Section 101, which aims to
severely change the Berman amendment and drastically limit
freedom of speech. The Berman amendment to IEEPA was
established to protect Americans' First Amendment principles.
This amendment took away the president's authority to regulate
or ban imports of informational materials like films and
photographs and other forms of media from adversarial countries
since such authority would restrict free speech protections.
Since its implementation the Berman amendment has been used
to ensure that dissidents all around the globe can sell protest
art, books, and films to Americans in the United States.
Thus, it would be counter our values to ban a platform for
free speech be it one from China, from any other country or,
frankly, one domestically, and that's why I'm profoundly
opposed to changing the Berman amendment.
TikTok's management of Americans' privacy data and its
potential to be used by a foreign government to influence
American audiences is indeed an issue of real concern. That is
true.
However, this bill, in my estimation, is not the solution.
It could have unintended impacts on our freedom of speech or
commerce by law-abiding American companies and individuals and
the activities of allied nations.
It would also be irresponsible, in my estimation, to move
forward without fully understanding the bill's consequences and
implications. I believe we should seek out thoughtful,
effective responses to the challenges of data privacy abuse,
misinformation, particularly when it involves authoritarian
governments such as China.
But those responses should not come at the cost of
Americans' freedom of speech and economic liberty.
Unfortunately, I believe this bill does not represent such a
measured approach. In fact, I call attention to a recent
Bloomberg editorial on this subject.
I quote verbatim, ``Perhaps the most important reason to
avoid a ban is that it would be a missed opportunity. With
Congress keen to crack down on the app, President Biden's
administration could ask Chinese leaders to come to the
negotiating table.
In exchange for forestalling a ban it could ask for
security concessions on TikTok, one of the country's few
notable tech exports, and also press for better treatment of
U.S. companies in China. It could even have tried to establish
reasonable rules of the road for the digital economy including
online privacy, data security, market access, and much more.
In fact, a process of this kind--peaceful, technical and
incredibly boring--is precisely the kind of thing that U.S. and
China could use right now at a moment otherwise simmering with
tension and unpredictability. Instead, Congress seems to be
choosing blunt force, so don't expect much progress.''
Thus, I urge my colleagues to support this amendment and
with that, I yield the balance of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
I oppose this amendment very succinctly. This is a
clarification of the Berman amendment, not a change to it, and
it's central--it gives the needed authority to the president to
ban TikTok if in the national security interest of the United
States.
With respect to any negotiations with the CCP, this does
not prohibit or put any restrictions on the president from
having negotiations with a foreign adversary like Communist
China, although I would offer my own editorial that I don't
think a negotiation in good faith with the CCP on this issue
would be very fruitful. But that's just my, perhaps, cynical
view and opinion.
And with that, is there any further discussion on the
amendment?
Mr. Baird is recognized.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I oppose this amendment because it weakens the criteria
that could be used to sanction PRC companies that are trying to
influence U.S. policies in favor of the PRC's strategic
objectives. We must have the necessary authority to act against
PRC efforts and malign influence on U.S. policy.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
There being no further discussion, the question now occurs
on the amendment offered by Mr. Phillips.
All those in favor signify by saying aye.
All those opposed signify by saying no.
In the opinion of Chair, the noes have it. The amendment is
not agreed to.
Are there any further amendments?
Mr. Allred. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk
if we're not going to go vote.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Allrod [phonetic] is recognized.
Mr. Allred. It's Mr. Allred, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Recognized.
Mr. Allred. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, I share many
of your concerns----
Chairman McCaul. Before you begin, the clerk shall
distribute the amendment and the clerk shall report the
amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to H.R. 1153 offered by Mr. Allred.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Allred follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. Without objection further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Allred. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I share many of the
concerns that have been discussed here about TikTok but I see
the sanctions package here as overly broad and undercooked.
I think it could have serious unintended side effects, and
the broad brush approach advocated by this legislation could
lead us to penalize TikTok, ByteDance, Tencent and its
affiliates but also impact unrelated independent companies who
just happen to be a subsidiary of TikTok's parent companies.
Notably, the measure would have detrimental effects on our
European allies' entertainment software industry. With the
current introduced language European video game companies who
are affiliated or subsidiaries of Tencent would automatically
be designated under Section 202, immediately placing companies
out of business and even affect our own domestic operations in
this space.
What my amendment does is clarify that European
entertainment software companies should be excluded from
Section 202 sanctions. If we wish to effectively curb Chinese
influence we need to be cognizant of our allies so they do not
get negatively affected.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
I'm opposed to this amendment. Do any members seek
recognition on this amendment?
Mr. James is recognized.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I oppose this amendment
because it creates an unnecessary loophole for a subsidiary of
a sanctioned company. We cannot support a half measure that
allows a subsidiary of a sanctioned PRC company to escape from
needed accountability.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
Is there any further discussion on this amendment?
[No response.]
Chairman McCaul. There being no further discussion the
question now occurs on the amendment offered by Mr. Allred.
All those in favor signify by saying aye.
You don't have to. You don't have to if you don't want to.
All those opposed signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the noes have it. The
amendment is not agreed to.
The yeas and nays have been requested and pursuant to
Chair's previous announcement the vote will be postponed.
Are there any further amendments?
Seeing no further amendments, we're going to take a short
recess to vote and come back and entertain Mr. Meeks' final
bill, and then we will vote on all the recorded votes.
We stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Chairman McCaul. The committee will come back to order.
Pursuant to notice, I now call up H.R. 1151, Upholding
Sovereignty of the Airspace Act.
[The Bill H.R. 151 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The bill was circulated in advance. The
clerk shall designate the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 151, a bill to hold the People's Republic
of China accountable for the violation of United States
airspace and sovereignty with its high-altitude surveillance
balloon.
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, first reading is
dispensed with. The bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point. I now recognize myself for a statement
on the bill.
I would like to thank, Ranking Member Meeks, on this one we
can agree. Working together, this legislation protects the
sovereignty of the U.S. airspace and condemns the actions of
the Chinese Communist Party. As the CCP grows more belligerent
in their behavior we must make sure that we have the proper
safeguards in place to prevent future surveillance aircraft
from violating our airspace. Congress is united against the
threat of the CCP. We must continue to condemn these brazen
acts of aggression against us as well as our allies and
partners.
Earlier this month I introduced House Resolution 104
condemning the CCP's use of their spy balloon. It passed
unanimously 419 to 0. We must continue to show our nation and
the world that our national security is not a partisan issue
and that we are united in our efforts to counter the malign
influence of the CCP.
Data collection and large-scale surveillance by the CCP
poses a significant threat to Americans as well as our national
security. This legislation is important because it calls upon
Secretary of State as well as the Director of National
Intelligence and the U.S. representative to the United Nations
to create a process to share information regarding airspace
violations by the PRC.
Most importantly, it requires a report on export controls
for technologies that may be exported which would support the
People's Liberation Army intelligence gathering which they
could use against their own citizens to suppress, detain, and
imprison their own citizens. It also authorizes sanctions
against individuals in the PRC that are involved in the global
surveillance balloon program. As the CCP ramps up its efforts
to challenge the global balance of power we must stand united
and condemn these activities.
And I want to commend the ranking member, my good friend,
Mr. Meeks, for bringing this bill forward.
I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
you. Again, we could have vigorous debate, but we are always
friends and working together. And here is a bill that we can
agree upon. So I thank you for co-leading this bill with me.
This bipartisan legislation is both timely and necessary.
It has only been a few weeks since the PRC surveillance balloon
intruded our airspace and violated U.S. sovereignty. Since then
we have learned that the United States and Canada aren't alone,
that PRC surveillance balloons have violated the sovereignty of
over 40 nations across five continents. This blatant disregard
for the airspace and sovereignty of other nations is not just
inconsistent with international rules; it is dangerous and
provocative.
Since that incident, I have been deeply troubled by
Beijing's response. Instead of apologizing, Beijing has
resorted to denials and absurd misinformation and propaganda.
And I am glad that President Biden safely and successfully took
down the balloon earlier this month and in a way that allowed
us to track/monitor the balloon and learn a great deal about
the PRC's surveillance balloon program. Since that day, the
Biden Administration has smartly declassified additional
information about the PRC's global program and shared it with
the world.
H.R. 151 calls on the State Department to work with our
allies and partners as well as in multilateral organizations to
name and shame Beijing for its wanton infringement of other
nations' sovereignty through its surveillance balloon program.
It also provides the President an authorization to hold those
responsible accountable and calls for reporting and action by
the Department of Commerce to prevent U.S. companies from
exporting goods and technologies that support the PRC's
military civil fusion related to its surveillance balloon
program.
I support this legislation and I ask all of my colleagues
to do the same. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
Is there any further discussion on the bill?
Mrs. Kim of California. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment
at the desk.
Chairman McCaul. Mrs. Kim is recognized.
Oh, I am sorry. There being no further discussion on the
bill, the committee will move to consideration of amendments.
Does any member wish to offer an amendment?
Mrs. Kim is recognized.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank Ranking Member Meeks for offering this legislation to
hold----
Chairman McCaul. If the gentlelady will pause, the Clerk
shall distribute the amendment.
[The Amendment offered by Mrs. Kim of California follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. Okay. Sorry about that.
Chairman McCaul. And the clerk shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to H.R. 1151 offered by Mrs. Kim of
California. Section 4(a). Insert before paragraph 1----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentlelady is recognized for
five minutes.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do want
to thank our Ranking Member Meeks for offering that legislation
to hold PRC accountable for its blatant violation of U.S.
airspace and I am offering an amendment to this bill to make it
the policy of the United States to use its voice in the
International Civil Aviation Organization, ICAO, to advocate
for Taiwan's participation in ICAO meetings and events.
The PRC currently sits as a council member of this board
and it is ironic considering how frequently the PRC violates
the airspace of the United States, its allies, and Taiwan. The
PRC's airspace violations do not conform with the principles
outlined in the ICAO's strategic objectives.
Taiwan is a frequent target of the PRC's airspace
violations and in the last year has seen a significant increase
in intrusions of its air defense identification zone by PLA
aircraft. Taiwan does not currently have membership in an
international organization devoted to aviation in which it can
condemn these violations. This amendment would hopefully change
that.
So I urge my colleagues to support this amendment and I
yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields back.
I support this amendment. Do any other members seek
recognition?
Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. Yes, Mr. Chairman, the bill is about the PRC's
surveillance balloon and an effort to call the PRC out for its
violations of U.S. sovereignty and it actually has nothing to
do with Taiwan.
Last Congress, as Chair, I tried to make sure that we did
not have any amendments or bad-faith Democratic amendments on
bipartisan bills particularly that were agreed to ahead of the
markup. And so even today I have tried to make sure that we did
not have any bad-faith amendments on bipartisan bills. But this
is a non-germane amendment, and I hope that we can work to make
China an area of bipartisan cooperation in as many areas that
we are there in bipartisan.
But I unfortunately have to oppose this amendment and urge
my colleagues to do the same because this amendment changes
exactly what the focus of the bill is and I would believe--and
I believe that the amendment is non-germane to the bill. And so
with that I strongly oppose the amendment and urge my
colleagues to do the same.
Mr. Perry. Mr. Chairman, I have got an amendment at the
desk.
Chairman McCaul. The Chair yields back. Is there any
further discussion on the amendment offered by Mrs. Kim?
Mr. Perry is recognized.
Mr. Perry. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I support
Representative Kim's amendment. I think it is germane and I
think we ought to approve it. And I yield the balance.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
Any further discussion on the amendment?
As I said, I support this amendment. I hope it will not
jeopardize final passage. As I said, I am very much in favor of
Mr. Meeks' bill on Chinese surveillance through the spy balloon
and protecting our sovereignty and our airspace.
There being no further discussion on the amendment the
question now occurs on the amendment offered by Mrs. Kim.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the Chair the ayes have it. The amendment
is agreed to.
Mr. Meeks. I ask for a roll call vote.
Chairman McCaul. Roll call vote has been requested.
Pursuant to Chair's previous announcement, this vote will be
postponed. Are there any further----
Mr. Perry. Mr. Chairman, I have got an amendment at the
desk.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Perry is recognized.
Mr. Perry. I think they are going to distribute the
amendment.
Chairman McCaul. And the clerk shall distribute the
amendment and the clerk shall report the amendment.
[The Amendment of Mr. Perry follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Clerk. Amendment to H.R. 1151, offered by Mr. Perry of
Pennsylvania.
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Perry. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. This
amendment requires a classified briefing on all UFOs since
2017. Some of these incursions by China were characterized as
unidentified foreign objects. I still am not aware of what the
makeup of some of these objects were recently because they were
characterized that way.
And so I am asking in light of that in relation to this
bill, which I think is a decent bill and I am planning to
support it, that we also get a classified briefing because we
are also now understanding that China has done this for some
time, not just recently. And I would like to understand fully
what their involvement has been, where if at all these have
breached United States airspace, and what we know about these
vehicles that allegedly have intruded United States airspace in
the past.
And so that is all it does is ask for--require a classified
briefing on similar objects since 2017 and I urge adoption. And
I yield.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
Let me say I support this amendment. I think especially in
light of the three unidentified objects after the spy balloon
that this Congress and this committee that has oversight on
espionage that we be entitled to a classified briefing on this
issue.
Do any other members seek recognition?
Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I will support
this also. I will support this amendment, but I would like to
point out that the administration has provided us this exact
classified briefing already and has indicated they will
continue to keep Congress appraised--apprised of similar
developments in the future. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
Any other members seek recognition?
Seeing none, no further discussion, the question now occurs
on the amendment offered by Mr. Perry.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the Chair the ayes have it. The amendment
is agreed to.
Are there any further amendments?
No further amendments, the committee stands in recess until
7:15 as members of the Financial Services Committee return, at
which time we will reconvene to have our recorded votes.
[Whereupon, at 5:23 p.m., the subcommittee adjourned, to
reconvene the next day.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
