- STABILITY AND SECURITY IN THE WESTERN. BALKANS: ASSESSING U.S. POLICY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STABILITY AND SECURITY IN THE WESTERN
BALKANS: ASSESSING U.S. POLICY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 18, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-38

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-237                       WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. MCCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey      GREGORY MEEKS, New Yok, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina                Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania   BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
KEN BUCK, Colorado AMI BERA, California
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANDY BARR, Kentucky TED LIEU, California
RONNY JACKSON, Texas SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
YOUNG KIM, California DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida COLIN ALLRED, Texas
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan ANDY KIM, New Jersey
AMATA COLEMAN-RADEWAGEN, American SARA JACOBS, California
Samoa         KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio   Florida
JIM BAIRD, Indiana GREG STANTON, Arizona
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
TOM KEAN, JR., New Jersey JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MIKE LAWLER, New York JONATHAN JACOBS, Illinois
CORY MILLS, Florida SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
RICH MCCORMICK, Georgia JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas JASON CROW, Colorado
JOHN JAMES, Michigan BRAD SCHNEIDER. Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Staff Director
Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

Subcommittee on Europe

THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey, Chairman

JOE WILSON, North Carolina           WILLIAM KEATING,
DARRELL ISSA, California                 Massachusetts,Ranking Member
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      DINA TITUS, Nevada
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
KEITH SELF, Texas

Katherine Earle, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Escobar, Gabriel, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of European
and Eurasian Affairs, U.S. Department of State.................     7

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    29
Hearing Minutes..................................................    30
Hearing Attendance...............................................    31

STABILITY AND SECURITY IN THE WESTERN.
BALKANS: ASSESSING U.S. POLICY

Tuesday, July 18, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Europe,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:01 p.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Thomas Kean, Jr.,
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Kean [presiding]. The Subcommittee on Europe of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to discuss U.S. policy in
the Western Balkans and to hear from the Administration on the
latest issues in the region.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Three decades of U.S. diplomatic and economic investments
in the Western Balkans have contributed to greater stability,
forward movement on Euro-Atlantic integration, and economic
growth. However, the Biden Administration needs to
fundamentally rethink its approach if it hopes to lock in the
region's western trajectory; push back against the malign
influence of Russia, China, and corrupt local actors, and
ensure desperately needed internal reforms are made.
In particular, two critical pillars of U.S. Western Balkans
strategy are in crisis mode: the normalization of relations
between Kosovo and Serbia and the protection of the sovereign
territorial integrity and multi-ethnic character of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The European Union has an important role to play in the
region. Yet, to date, the EU efforts have been complicated by
the need for unanimity in most of its foreign policy
decisionmaking, the slow-moving EU accession process, and the
fact that five of its member States do not recognize Kosovo.
Therefore, it is incumbent upon the United States to take a
leading role in the Western Balkans. The last Administration
understood the importance of U.S. leadership in the region.
This hearing provides an opportunity to ensure that the
Biden Administration is similarly invested and to conduct
congressional oversight of its approach to pursue peace,
prosperity, and stability in the region.
There is no single issue holding back the Western Balkans
more than the failure to normalize relations between Serbia and
Kosovo. Under this Administration's watch, recent violent
protests in northern Kosovo threatened an escalation which
could have engulfed the entire region.
The bottom line is the current U.S. approach is failing to
keep a lid on ethnic tensions and instability. Kosovo Prime
Minster Albin Kurti's uncoordinated action using the Kosovo
Special Police Force to install local mayors, despite being
democratically elected, is imprudent and destabilizing.
However, subsequent violence committed by Kosovo-Serb
protestors, which led to dozens of serious injuries among KFOR
peacekeepers, must also be condemned, as to any direct or
indirect role Belgrade played in organizing and arming those
protests.
I'm concerned that this Administration has failed to speak
clearly about the latter. I welcome last week's announcement
that Kosovo would take some initial de-escalation steps. In
particular, the President of Kosovo's militarized Special
Police Forces must be withdrawn from Serb-majority areas.
However, as the United States keeps up pressure on Prime
Minister Kurti, I strongly urge the Administration to also
engage Kosovo Serbs in Belgrade to ensure new local elections
will not, once again, be boycotted.
I share this Administration's concern that Kosovo has not
implemented an Association of Serb-majority Municipalities, as
it committed to a decade ago. The rights and concerns of Kosovo
Serbs must be safeguarded, as these Municipalities are more
deeply integrated into Kosovo.
However, I also want to hear a commitment today from our
witness that the U.S. and EU pressure campaign to push Prime
Minister Kurti on an ASM being meshed by assurances that, if
Kosovo engages credibly, the United States will exert the exact
same pressure on Belgrade, not only to do the same, but also
uphold its obligations under recent agreements, including its
pledge not to object to Kosovo's membership in any
international organization. I do not see any other way to
ensure the implementation of an ASM and safeguarding of Kosovo
Serbs' rights without undermining the Kosovo government's
authority over its own sovereign territory.
Given the difficulties moving forward on normalization
talks, the prior Administration, rightfully, diagnosed that
making progress on outstanding economic and technical issues
between Kosovo and Serbia in the 2020 Washington Agreement
could, potentially, lay the groundwork to address thornier
political issues. I was very disappointed when their plan to
establish a DFC presence in Belgrade was scrapped by this
Administration.
I hope to hear more today about how the United States is
promoting economic development and U.S. investment across the
region. We cannot lose sight of the fact that, despite
disagreements with the current government's approach to Serbia,
Kosovo is an important U.S. partner.
For example, Kosovo was one of the first U.S. partners to
offer to temporarily host evacuees from Afghanistan in 2021.
Serbia, too, is a critical partner in the region. While it
hasn't imposed EU sanctions on Russia, I am thankful for its
support for Ukraine at the U.N. and its decision to take in
thousands of Ukrainian refugees.
Yet, this Administration must be clear-eyed in our
engagement with Belgrade. The recent U.S. decision to sanction
pro-Russian spy chief Aleksandar Vulin is a reminder that
malign actors continue to exercise Russian influence in Serbia.
The United States cannot let up pressure on either Russian or
PRC inroads in Serbia, as both will threaten the countries'
stability, prosperity, and Euro-Atlantic integration.
Sadly, these threats to peace and stability are also
increasing elsewhere in the Western Balkans. Milorad Dodik's
secessionist policies and assault on the authority of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's constitutional court seriously undermines the
Dayton Agreement.
Unfortunately, this grave threat to peace has not been met
by a serious U.S. response. In particular, more sanctions are
needed now.
We also are eagerly awaiting the formation of a new
government in Montenegro. A new governing coalition will have
high expectations to fight back against entrenched corruption
and organized crime. It will accelerate Montenegro's U.N.
ambitions and counter foreign malign influence.
In North Macedonia and Albania, the International Forum's
requirement for EU membership must continue to receive high-
level U.S. support. America's security is inextricably tied to
Europe's security, and Europe cannot be secure if instability
in the Western Balkans is allowed to boil over. This will take
real American leadership, lest we allow Russia, China, and
corrupt local actors to fill that vacuum and undue the last
three decades of progress.
I now recognize the ranking member, the gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Keating, for any statement that he may have.
Mr. Keating. Well, thank you, Chairman Kean, for holding
what is an important hearing.
And thank you, Deputy Assistant Secretary Escobar, for
returning to this subcommittee to discuss U.S. policy toward
the Western Balkans, a dynamic and diverse region in Europe.
Mr. Escobar, I want to begin by thanking you for your
personal commitment to the region and the effort you and the
Administration have taken to support peace and stability. Under
your leadership, the Biden Administration has worked to take a
more active, but also nuanced approach to the Balkans. You and
your colleagues have spent countless hours listening to the
concerns and considerations of the diverse groups present in
the Balkans, and I know, based on these conversations, you have
often had to take tough policy decisions.
Having served as both chair and now ranking member, it is
clear to me that the Western Balkans is a vibrant region with
incredible potential, and we must do everything in our power,
along with our European partners, to support continued
democratic development, rule of law, and increased protection
of human rights.
Yet, recent tensions in the region underscore that the
fragile peace established after the wars of the 1990's remains
tenuous. For example, the recent escalation intentions between
Serbia and Kosovo, and violence in northern Kosovo, have been
extremely alarming. In response to these events, the United
States and the European Union have spoken almost in unison,
calling both Kosovo and Serbia to return to the negotiating
table and take specific, concrete steps to de-escalate tensions
and to avoid actions or rhetoric that would be construed as
escalatory.
These steps would include immediately returning to the EU-
facilitated dialog; holding new elections in nothern Kosovo and
encouraging full participation; the formation of an Association
of Serb-majority Municipalities in Kosovo; resumption of
efforts to recognize each other's documents and national
symbols, and an end to all lobbying efforts by Serbia against
Kosovo's membership in international organizations.
I welcome the government of Kosovo's public acknowledgment
of the need for new elections, as well as their efforts to hold
structured, biweekly meetings with EULEX and KFOR, as
appropriate, to review and understand the security situation
there.
Finally, I believe that all of those who committed to
violence on May 29th should be held accountable. I call for a
full judicial review of recent events. Should these specific
steps be taken, I believe there is a real possibility that the
path toward normalization can be resumed--a prospect that would
have significant benefits to all the people in the region.
On Bosnia, I welcome the EU's decision to grant candidate
status in December 2022, pending a significant acceleration in
domestic reforms. Adopting these reforms is likely to be
difficult, given the current political dynamics in Bosnia,
however.
I would urge the Administration to extend full support to
the reform process, while encouraging Bosnia's leaders to
prioritize these reforms. Bosnia still has not adopted reforms
to implement several key European Gary of Human Rights'
rulings, some of which have found that parts of Bosnia's
constitution violates the European Convention on Human Rights.
Further, I continue to be concerned by the violent,
escalatory rhetoric and secessionist threats from Republika
Srpska Leader Milorad Dodik. Despite efforts by the Biden
Administration to sanction individuals actively working to
undermine the Dayton Accords, realities on the ground threaten
stability in Bosnia and make is susceptible to foreign malign
influence.
In Montenegro, I'm pleased with the outcome of recent
elections and encourage the State Department to continue to
support those politicians actively working to achieve EU
integration for Montenegro.
Taking a step back on a few broader topics, I continue to
be encouraged by the progress toward greater economic
integration in the region, such as the Berlin Process. To that
end, EU accession remains a necessity for the region, and I
commend the decisions that have allowed North Macedonia and
Albania to move forward with their accession process.
EU membership for North Macedonia and Albania will be an
added strength to our Transatlantic Alliance at large. And I
encourage those EU States who remain in opposition to recognize
these reforms and compromises in North Macedonia and Albania to
make sure they recognize the actions they have taken and move
the process forward. They deserve accession.
Finally, I believe we must, also, recognize the immense
strain Russia's war of aggression in Ukraine has caused on the
economies and societies in the Western Balkans. Russia's
actions have resulted in increased inflation and endangered
energy and security interests. And Russian malign influence has
sought to exploit corruption and societal divisions in the
region.
Recognizing these realities, we must redouble our efforts
to engage with countries of the Western Balkans; continue to
encourage robust foreign direct investment from the United
States and EU, and further strengthen our bilateral and
multilateral partnerships. The time for an active U.S.
engagement in the Balkans is now. I'm glad to see this
Administration taking concrete steps to support the de-
escalation of recent tensions, while prioritizing Euro-Atlantic
integration.
I look forward to hearing the testimony today, and I yield
back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Ranking Member Keating.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from Illinois,
Mr. Schneider, be allowed to sit on the dais and participate in
today's hearing. Without objection, so ordered.
Other members of the subcommittee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
Mr. Kean. We are pleased to have a distinguished witness
before us today on this important topic. Mr. Gabriel Escobar is
Deputy Assistant Secretary in the Bureau of European and
Eurasian Affairs at the Department of State.
Mr. Escobar, thank you for being here today.
Your full statement will be made part of the record and I
will ask you to keep your verbal comments to 5 minutes, in
order to allow time for member questions.
I now recognize Mr. Escobar for his opening statement.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF GABRIEL ESCOBAR, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY,
BUREAU OF EUROPEAN AND EURASIAN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE

Mr. Escobar. Chairman Kean, Ranking Member Keating, and
members of the committee, I appreciate your invitation to
discuss the Biden Administration's Western Balkans policy.
Our policy is grounded on a very simple principle: the
continued integration of the region into Euro-Atlantic
structures strengthens Europe a geostrategic partner; fortifies
democratic governance and the rule of law, and makes these
countries more secure and prosperous, and thus, makes the
region a better partner for the United States.
The obstacles are formidable. Stalled progress on
democratization, corruption, energy dependence on Russia,
ethno-nationalist politics, and harmful disinformation are just
some of the challenges. Yet, they are not insurmountable. Our
engagement is focused on resolving lingering tensions that
threaten regional stability and on helping these countries
fight corrosive corruption and disinformation from both
external and internal bad actors.
Let me begin with Kosovo and Serbia. In February and March,
the EU, with strong U.S. support, achieved the breakthrough
agreement on the path to normalization of relations with an
Implementation Annex. Both countries must fulfill their
independent obligations under this agreement.
A key element is Kosovo's obligation to establish an
Association of Serb-majority Municipalities to empower
Municipalities with shared interests, language, and culture to
coordinate on common challenges, such as delivering public
services, education, and health care. Kosovo and Serbia also
agreed to recognize each other's documents and national
symbols. But, most importantly, Serbia will no longer lobby
against Kosovo's international integration.
Since then, there have been a series of serious tensions
and unacceptable violence against KFOR, police, and journalists
in nothern Kosovo. In response, NATO deployed reinforcements
and maintains an enhanced posture to ensure a safe and secure
environment.
We, and the EU, called for immediate de-escalation, a
refocus on implementing their agreements, and to hold new
municipal elections, and with the participation of Serbs in the
north. We are urging both parties to fulfill all of their
obligations, which are essential to their respective European
paths.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, regrettably, Republika Srpska
President Milorad Dodik remains focused on dismantling the
State constitution and the Dayton Peace Agreement. Dodik's
persistent secessionist and anti-democratic actions threaten
the stability, security, and prosperity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the wider region.
We will continue to call out and hold accountable those who
undermine the Dayton Peace Agreement or threaten the country's
sovereignty, territorial integrity, and multi-ethnic character.
We are also seeking to bolster Dayton, including through the
European Union's EUFOR ALTHEA mission and support the Office of
High Representative's use of Bonn Powers to counter threats to
Dayton.
In Montenegro, we see renewed momentum toward realizing its
European future. Recent Presidential and parliamentary
elections were free, peaceful, and reinforced the people's
desire for EU integration and for reforms to advance that goal.
Both Albania and North Macedonia have opened EU accession
negotiations. Both are solid partners in encouraging Serbia and
Kosovo's normalization, and both are stalwart NATO allies.
To further its EU aspirations, the government of North
Macedonia has committed to a constitutional change to recognize
its Bulgarian minority. We strongly support this difficult, but
necessary, step.
Transatlantic and European integration are essential to
reducing the influence of harmful actors like Russia and the
PRC that seek to destabilize the region and hinder its
integration, while expanding their influence.
Russia is the exclusive natural gas provider to some
Western Balkans countries and a serious threat to regional
stability. Even as it wages a war on Ukraine, the Kremlin feeds
disinformation to sow tensions.
The PRC pairs insidious narratives undermining trust in the
West with corrosive, entrapping investment.
We offer alternatives to build resilience; align critical
infrastructure procurement and foreign investment with EU
standards to counter disinformation, and to develop clean,
reliable, and affordable energy.
The citizens of the Western Balkans want a better future
for their children, stronger and transparent democracy,
accountable governments, and greater economic prosperity and
security. As we help them realize this vision, continued
bipartisan congressional engagement remains invaluable.
Thank you and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Escobar follows:]

[
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Escobar.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions.
As I said in my opening remarks, the government of Kosovo
must engage upon the implementation of an Association of Serb-
majority Municipalities, as it committed to do 10 years ago.
However, the United States must ensure that an ASM protects the
rights of Kosovo Serbs without undermining Kosovo's authority
over its sovereign territory.
Mr. Escobar, can you publicly commit that if Prime Minister
Kurti engages credibly on the implementation of an ASM, the
United States and the EU will apply the same amount of pressure
on Belgrade to respond in good faith and uphold its obligations
under recent agreements?
Mr. Escobar. Absolutely. The recent agreement, especially
the Ohrid Agreement, provides an incredible opportunity for
both countries to create a peaceful and sustainable
relationship between the two and open the door to greater
European integration. The agreement requires Serbia to
recognize Kosovo's sovereignty and territorial integrity; to
recognize its national symbols, flags, government documents,
diplomas, passports, license plates, ID cards, and to refrain
from blocking Kosovo's integration into any international
organization.
From the Kosovo side, it requires Kosovo to implement its
existing legal obligation to form an Association of Serb-
majority Municipalities. We believe that both countries should
immediately engage on that without preconditions; that both
countries should begin the process of doing their part without
regard to any sequencing plan that is not included in the
process.
So, we do commit to make both sides acknowledge their
existing legal obligations and to move fast, as fast as they
can, and hopefully, we would be able to make significant
progress on both of those this year.
Mr. Kean. Thank you.
I am very concerned by the recent violence in nothern
Kosovo. What additional steps must Prime Minister Kurti take to
de-escalate the situation before the United States and the EU
remove their sanctions?
Mr. Escobar. Well, first, Chairman, I wouldn't call them
``sanctions.'' I call them ``consequences.''
So, the United States and the EU have put together a three-
point plan that involves de-escalation, removal of special
police, the withdrawal of protestors, and the process to create
new elections with the participation of the Serbs with no
conditions, and then, to return to the EU-facilitated dialog.
So, those are the conditions.
Now, we have gotten a commitment from Serbia that they
would remove the protestors and that they would participate
fully in the elections. We haven't fully gotten that commitment
from the Kosovo side, but we do agree with Kosovo on many of
the democratic standards that they would like to apply. And we
do agree with Kosovo that those who attack journalists, Kosovo
police, and KFOR troops should be punished.
But we still would like to see greater alignment on the
European-facilitated plan. We will continue to work with the
government of Kosovo to try to convince them that it is in
their interest to align with the United States, the U.K., NATO,
the European Union, the Quint, and with North Macedonia and
Albania, who are also part of this process.
Mr. Kean. Can you detail how the Administration is engaging
with Belgrade and the Kosovo Serbs are participating in new
local elections, as you just said?
Mr. Escobar. Absolutely. Well, first of all, I want to be
very clear that, in the process of the democratic development
of Kosovo, we have sided with Kosovo at every opportunity.
So, we recognized the need for new elections, despite
Serbia's objections. We recognized the legitimacy of the
elections, despite Serbia's objections that the turnout was too
low. We recognized the authority of the mayors, despite
Serbia's objection.
What our singular request was that Kosovo not try to
install the mayors by force where there were protests
occurring. That did not diminish Kosovo's legitimacy or
authority.
But, in the meantime, we have been very tough with Serbia
on the conditions that we require for participation in what is
a democratic process in Kosovo. So, we have gotten pledges that
they will not oppose this, and there are consequences for
Serbia, should it oppose it. So, we will continue to work with
the European Union to ensure that their three-point plan does
get implemented.
Mr. Kean. OK. There have recently been numerous high-
profile corruption scandals in Montenegro. These are good
allegations that a crypto fugitive gave funds to a political
campaign in exchange for favors, as well as reports of close
ties between the police, former government officials, and
organized crime bosses which revealed Belivuk by Sky ECC
mastering communications.
How is the United States helping Montenegro combat
corruption and organize crime? And how corruption in Montenegro
increased its vulnerability to Russian and PRC malign
influence?
Mr. Escobar. Well, I would start by saying that corruption
is a problem throughout the region. I am pleased to hear and
see that, in my discussions with the new Montenegro leadership,
that they are committed to the fight against corruption; their
EU path, which includes making significant reforms on rule of
law, and their NATO path. It is true that it remains a
vulnerable NATO ally, but I do think that there is overwhelming
public support for fighting corruption, for being an important
member of NATO, and for pursuing their European Union
integration.
So, we will continue to finance some of the reforms. We
will continue to use our assistance money to strengthen the
capacity of the police, including to investigate crypto and
other complex crimes. And we continue to look at Montenegro's
development as important for the rest of the region as well.
Mr. Kean. Thank you.
I now recognize Ranking Member Keating for any questions he
may have.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Now, we have discussed the significance of this region in
many respects, but how has China used the Belt and Road
Initiative to influence the Western Balkans? How do they
leverage their loan dependencies and debt traps for influence
in that region?
Mr. Escobar. Absolutely. As I said in my opening statement,
China rarely exerts positive influence in the region. It
provides deceptively attractive infrastructure support, mostly
through nontransparent means of financing. It refuses to align
on economic and social impact studies. And once it does, it
does use this debt to extract political concessions, including
nonconcurrence in international bodies on criticizing the
activities of the PRC.
So, there is always a political cost to this deceptively
attractive economic investment. What we have said repeatedly is
that the reforms that the European Union is requesting, as they
join the common economic market, makes things more transparent.
And with that transparency, I believe that American firms can
outcompete Chinese firms any day of the week.
Mr. Keating. And I was going to ask how, independently or
together, the United States and the EU can counter that kind of
influence. And obviously, their movement toward the EU
accession is one that, with rule-of-law issues and stability,
will be enticing.
But could you comment a little bit more on the appetite for
private investment in that area? Because, in this area, like so
many areas of the world, these countries want to deal with us,
but we are not there. But one of the reasons we are not there
is because that kind of rule of law and stability isn't in
place. So, how close are we to bigger investments in the area
that I think will provide a much better alternative than the
Chinese?
Mr. Escobar. I agree. And, look, the region is already, as
you said, hungry for it. Seventy percent of the Western Balkans
is tied the European common market, and that common market
benefits us because a majority of American investment comes
through European subsidiaries of American companies. So, as
they align closer in a regulatory and legislative manner to the
European common market, it really does facilitate foreign
direct investment.
Prior to the COVID crisis and the current economic crisis,
the Western Balkans was the fastest-growing part of Europe with
enormous opportunities for energy, shipping, transportation,
IT, and a host of other sectors. So, we plan to be present and
plan to encourage those countries to make the reforms necessary
and the transparency measures necessary to attract greater
Western investment.
Mr. Keating. The greater influence you mentioned from
Russia is through the energy sector. An instance of U.S.
involvement has been the Millennium Challenge with Kosovo and
the investments there that are going to be spawned from that in
alternative energies and renewable energies--batteries,
storage, and other issues.
What can we do? And how has the Ukraine War changed things
in terms of the energy dependence in this region, as it has
through other parts of Europe?
Mr. Escobar. Well, for one thing, the trends that we are
seeing in the rest of Europe, which is a recognition that
dependence on Russian energy is harmful, has permeated the
thinking of the Western Balkans. So, many of the countries are
already making the right moves in creating sustainable,
independent energy sectors. I would say that a star in this
field is Albania, which will be an exporter of energy to the
region very soon.
So, I look forward to working with the region and working
with European partners, including Greece and others, to deepen
the energy independence of the region.
Mr. Keating. I think this is the concrete type of approach;
that it is best way to counter what people like Milorad Dodik
are doing with his rhetoric. Rhetoric is one thing, but action
is another.
So, do you think this is the best way to approach persons
that have been twice designated, for instance?
Mr. Escobar. I definitely do. And it is true, look,
Russia's influence comes to manifest itself in two ways. One is
through disinformation, which is cheap political tool, but the
other is through energy. They have nothing else. Russia
provides no bilateral trade, no assistance, no capacity-
building, and no support for democratic reforms. It simply
traps them into energy dependence.
So, the quicker that we can help the region reduce its
dependence, either through LGN or through renewables, the
faster we will be able to counter Russian influence in the
region.
Mr. Keating. Yes, Russia has lost more than the war in
Ukraine in its influence in the region and around the world.
I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Keating.
I now recognize Mrs. Wagner from Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank the chairman for organizing this very
timely and important hearing.
And, Deputy Assistant Secretary Escobar, I appreciate your
service and your time here today.
When you last appeared before this committee over about a
year and a half ago, we discussed the serious crisis facing
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Today, the country is experiencing no
less than an assault on its constitution and democratic
institutions. Reckless secessionists like Milorad Dodik,
President of Bosnia's Republika Srpska entity, and his Russian
backers, are counting on the United States to stand by while
they undermine the region's peace and stability.
As guarantor--we are the guarantor in the United States--of
the Dayton Peace Agreement that ended the horrific violence
Bosnian war, the United States must prioritize deterring these
destabilizing, destructive, and anti-democratic actors.
This morning, alongside Representative Wild, Chairman Kean,
and Chairman Turner, I reintroduced the Upholding the Dayton
Peace Agreement through Sanctions Act. My bipartisan bill would
codify--codify--key sanctions authorities to send an
unmistakable message to any actor that threatens the peace, the
security, stability, or territorial integrity of Bosnia. If
such destabilizing behavior is not ceased, he or she will be
sanctioned, period. Peace in Bosnia came at a very steep price,
and those who would threaten that hard-won peace must be held
to account.
Deputy Assistant Secretary Escobar, Dodik's unilateral
removal of Republika Srpska from the jurisdiction of the
Constitutional Court--I think just a couple of days ago--of
Bosnia is a serious, serious escalation in his campaign against
Bosnian sovereignty.
He has also threatened to hold a referendum on independence
by the end of the year. This would be taking a sledgehammer to
the foundations of peace in the Western Balkans. How is the
State Department seeking to prevent this? And how can we bring
a stop to Dodik's constant assaults on the Dayton Agreement?
Mr. Escobar. Well, Congresswoman, I want to start by saying
I agree with absolutely every word that you have said. His
assaults on Dayton and on the constitutional order of Bosnia
and Herzegovina represent not just a threat for the country,
but a threat for the region.
Mrs. Wagner. Yes.
Mr. Escobar. The United States is committed to the
territorial integrity, the sovereignty, and multi-ethnic
character of Bosnia and Herzegovina. And so, it is our intent
to use absolutely every tool that we have to prevent that from
happening and to hold those that would damage the country
accountable. So, that includes a stronger peacekeeping force
under the EUFOR ALTHEA mission----
Mrs. Wagner. OK.
Mr. Escobar [continuing]. The full support for the High
Representative and his use of Bonn Powers. And we are
coordinating with the European Union, with the EBRD, IMF, and
other international actors to withhold money from those who
would damage the country.
But, most importantly, we see sanctions as a very effective
and very important tool in our foreign policy toolbox.
Mrs. Wagner. And you would agree my piece of legislation is
timely and necessary?
Mr. Escobar. I would, absolutely.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you.
Mr. Escobar. And if I can add that we are just at the very
beginning of showing what the consequences are going to be. You
can count on an American reaction to all of these destabilizing
views.
Mrs. Wagner. While the United States has sanctioned other
persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina for undermining the Dayton
Accords, do you assess sanctions are being used effectively to
deter destabilizing behavior? And are there more individuals--
obviously, there have to be--in Bosnia and Herzegovina who
should be sanctioned?
Mr. Escobar. I agree with that. And I will say that they
are effective. There are two metrics that I can tell you that
are effective. One is that in private conversations the one
thing that officials from Republika Srpska ask us is, ``Please,
no more sanctions.''
Mrs. Wagner. Well, I do not know what the delay is, but the
time is running out, sir. It really is.
The United States and U.K. sanctioned Dodik last year, but
the EU has yet to do so. Why has the EU not sanctioned Dodik?
Mr. Escobar. Well, that is a very good question. The most
common answer that I hear is that the EU requires 27, unanimous
consent of all 27 member-States.
Mrs. Wagner. Well, we have got to get Hungary onboard, and
I hope that we will do more to apply pressure and influence
there.
My time has run out and I yield back. And I thank you.
Mr. Escobar. Thank you.
Mr. Kean. Thank you.
I now yield 5 minutes to Ms. Titus of Nevada.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
I would like to go back to Mr. Keating's because I agree
with him how much of an influence China has had in the area.
Over the last decade, we know they have invested some $32
billion in infrastructure. And Albania, Bosnia, Herzegovina,
Montenegro, North Macedonia, and Serbia have all joined their
Belt and Road Initiative. So, there's no question that they are
there, and they make these offers that are too hard to turn
down, if we are not there with some investment ourselves.
But what is happening with the Russian influence seems to
be more insidious. And we see that through the disinformation.
I understand the energy question, but the disinformation
question is harder to get at, I think.
We certainly saw it when North Macedonia was having the
referendum to change the name in Greece and Macedonia and
accept that, so they could move to the West. Russia did not
like seeing them move to the West, moving along that path to EU
membership. So, they were in there with a good bit of
information.
Could you talk a little bit more about how that works in
some of these other countries?
Mr. Escobar. Well, look, I think that disinformation is a
very cheap tool for Russia, and it does seek exclusively to
create inter-ethnic tensions and doubt about these countries'
commitment to European integration.
So, what we have sought to do is to work with governments
to, first of all, identify the outlets for disinformation; to
look for ways to shut down outlets that are purely propaganda
and not necessarily have any journalistic value at all. We have
also looked to use our sanctions authority for people whose
sole purpose is to create disinformation in the region on
behalf of Russia.
And so, we will continue to work with governments. Now, the
most important thing is that we need partners to call it out.
And I would say that, overwhelmingly, particularly in the
countries that are NATO members in the Western Balkans, we have
had a very good level of success in pushing back on Russian
disinformation.
Ms. Titus. Well, how would you comment on the status of
free press in these countries?
Mr. Escobar. I would say that, to varying degrees, it is
challenging, but international organizations have said that
there is still far too much pressure--financial, personal, and
legal--on some of the independent outlets in the region. I
would say that protection of journalists in the region lags far
behind the rest of Europe.
And part of the requirement for European accession is about
free press. It is about protection of not just independent
journalism, but civil society as well. And we stand side by
side with our European partners to hold governments to account
on that.
Ms. Titus. I serve on the HDP, House Democracy Partnership,
and we have exchanges with a number of these countries. And, of
course, the problem of corruption and rule of law, those are
certainly some of the barriers standing in the way to moving
along this path to accession.
But one of the problems is, every time we go to visit, it
is a whole new group of people, and you do not have established
parties. You often have Associations of personality.
So, I just wonder, how are you dealing with that lack of
institutional stability to help move away from some of the
disinformation or more toward the West?
Mr. Escobar. Well, in general, one of the reasons why one
of the pillars of our policy in the region is European
integration is that it is about creating sustainable and
durable institutions. So, we are working to create
institutions. We are also doing it bilaterally through USAID to
create--not only to help finance civil society, which will be
the continuity on some of this, but also to create independent
institutions, independent judiciary, and independent ombudsman
offices that will help us; that will be long-term partners in
this process.
Ms. Titus. Just finally, I know Greece is not part of your
domain or bailiwick or jurisdiction, but I do not see how you
can make policy in the Western Balkans without Greece being a
big part of that. Certainly, in the development of energy, we
see that now, and even in the whole situation with the
Macedonian name. I mean, Greece has got to be a big player in
everything done here.
Mr. Escobar. Greece is an example, at least in Kosovo, that
not all non-recognizers are adversaries. I do engage the Greek
government frequently. They are helpful. They are an integral
part of bringing stability to the region politically, but,
also, they are one of the leading countries that are moving to
help diversify the energy picture in the Western Balkans. So, I
do engage with Greece, and Greece is absolutely indispensable,
as is Austria, as is Slovenia, and others.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Ms. Titus.
I now recognize Mr. Huizenga of Michigan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you. I appreciate it, Mr. Escobar.
Serbia has imported arms from China, including drones,
according to reports. How does this affect Serbia's aspirations
to join the EU, given the EU's arms embargo against the PRC?
Mr. Escobar. I would say that it challenges it. Now, there
are some technical complications here. Now, one of the
discussions that we have with Serbia is that the CAATSA
sanctions prevent them from buying Russian weaponry. And they
dramatically decreased their procurement from Russia, but, in
doing so----
Mr. Huizenga. So, not just China, but Russia as well?
Mr. Escobar. Right. But they have increased from China,
which is not limited by any of our sanctions regimes. We have
said that, if they truly want to be part of the Euro-Atlantic
community, that they show it, in part, through their military
procurement.
So, we would like to see greater engagement from European
and American companies in that vein. That said, we also want to
be very careful about our existing policy that supports Kosovo,
as we do so. So, we would like to see a comprehensive
discussion on how Serbia should be behaving in the region.
Mr. Huizenga. My understanding is it is something like 30
tanks and 30 armored personnel carriers have been bought,
purchased from Russia. They have also purchased some air
defense systems, as well as attack/transport helicopters.
Has it been communicated to Belgrade that the United States
could respond to significant purchases of Russian military
equipment----
Mr. Escobar. Absolutely.
Mr. Huizenga [continuing]. Per those mandatory sanctions?
Mr. Escobar. Absolutely. Absolutely. We have given them----
Mr. Huizenga. And what has their response been?
Mr. Escobar. Their response is they understand and they are
adapting.
Mr. Huizenga. I'm sorry, they are what?
Mr. Escobar. They are adapting their procurement
strategies----
Mr. Huizenga. Adapting? Meaning they are stopping?
Mr. Escobar. I would say that they have curtailed it
significantly as a result of our----
Mr. Huizenga. So, they are not stopping, but maybe curbing
their purchasing?
Mr. Escobar. It is a complicated procurement process that
involves----
Mr. Huizenga. Oh, yes.
Mr. Escobar [continuing]. That involves what they are
buying----
Mr. Huizenga. Sanctions are complicated.
Mr. Escobar. No, well, it----
Mr. Huizenga. I sit on the Financial Services Committee----
Mr. Escobar. Yes.
Mr. Huizenga [continuing]. Where most of those sanctions
run through.
Mr. Escobar. Right.
Mr. Huizenga. But, pretty typically, either that switch is
thrown on or off.
Mr. Escobar. That's right. And so, look, there are some
challenges when you are talking about existing contracts that
require logistical support for already-purchased weapon
systems.
Mr. Huizenga. So, fair to say we have warned Belgrade
that----
Mr. Escobar. Very forcibly so, sir.
Mr. Huizenga. OK. I'm glad to hear that.
Along that vein, you had mentioned Kosovo and advocating
for Kosovo, and I see we have the Ambassador is here in the
audience as well. Five member-States of the EU--Spain, Greece,
Romania, Cyprus, and Slovakia--currently do not recognize
Kosovo's independence. This would seem to be a serious obstacle
for Kosovo in the Euro-Atlantic integration.
How is the State Department engaging with these countries
to urge them to recognize Kosovo?
Mr. Escobar. Well, I have permanent contact with all five
of those countries. Now, one of the things that they do want,
and one of the things that I have been trying to convince the
government of Kosovo, is they want to see a European process in
order to satisfy their requirements under their own laws, under
their own national legislation, to be able to recognize.
Now, it is our position that----
Mr. Huizenga. Meaning what exactly?
Mr. Escobar. Well, I'll say that, from our perspective, it
is our highest aspiration that Kosovo be a member of NATO, a
member of the European Union, and have a seat at the United
Nations. Now, for some of the countries, they cannot recognize,
absent a bilateral agreement between Serbia and Kosovo. For
others, they do not recognize unilateral declarations of
independence. So, they would like to see an agreement on
normalization.
This is one of the reasons why the Ohrid Agreement offers
us the greatest opportunity in 15 years to partner with the
government of Kosovo to begin, not just a regional, a European
recognition campaign, but a global recognition campaign.
Now, what most of these countries would like to see is they
would like to see the goodwill from Kosovo in fulfilling its
part of the agreement, which is the Association of Serb-
majority Municipalities. So, one of the reasons why I have
encouraged the government of Kosovo to go ahead and move
forward on this, with American support, in a way that ensures
that the ASM does not violate their constitution, their legal
structure, or their functionality. So that we can move forward
this year on a recognition campaign. To date, I have not gotten
that alignment from the government of Kosovo.
Mr. Huizenga. All right. In my last remaining few seconds
here, is the Biden Administration planning to continue to use
sanctions to address Russian influence networks in Siberia, as
well as across that Western Balkans region?
Mr. Escobar. Yes.
Mr. Huizenga. OK. And maybe we will followup with a
``how?''
[Laughter.]
Mr. Escobar. Yes, sir.
Mr. Huizenga. I wish I had more time for the ``how?''
Mr. Escobar. Yes.
Mr. Huizenga. That is, actually, the important part.
So, with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Huizenga.
I now recognize Mr. Costa of California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think this is an
important hearing.
And let me followup with my colleague's last question and
ask you the ``How?''
Mr. Escobar. Well, I will say that, on sanctions on Russia,
we are constantly looking for ways to limit Russia's malign
influence everywhere we see it, including the Arctic region,
including the Baltics, including the Balkans.
And so, the sanctions part is a really important piece of
it. The energy diversity part is very important. I have to say
that, in the past year and a half, since the beginning of the
unprovoked aggression by Russia on Ukraine, we have seen a
tremendous convergence with our European partners on the need
to limit Russia's ability to do harm in this world.
Mr. Costa. No, and that is true, but, as noted before,
sanctions can be effective, are complicated. And, of course,
notwithstanding probably the most fierce sanctions that Russia
has ever felt, they still are able to find workarounds, and
therefore, we must constantly be on it. We need our European
allies, obviously, at the same time, to ensure--I mean, the
amount of fuel, of energy that Russia is still managing to sell
is financing their war and continuing to maintain their economy
in ways that we had hoped it would not be.
You talked more on the issue of Kosovo and Serbia, and the
trajectory on your comprehensive normalization efforts. And you
have these conditions that have been stated. You know, that was
back in March, I guess, of 2023 and acceptance of the
Implementation Annex. And both the EU and we view these as
being legally binding, as I understand it.
So, when you look at the five bullets, the parties agreed
to establish good neighbor relations. The parties agreed to
mutually recognize respective national symbols and documents.
Serbia will not object to Kosovo's membership in any
international organizations, and to work toward implementing
the ASM and the agreement.
Where are we on these five bullets? Because I think we are
now in July, and what do you see the prospects of successful
implementation and agreement before the end of the year? I
mean, who needs the most prodding and pushing in this instance?
Mr. Escobar. Well, I would say I do not see a lot of
goodwill on either side to implement that agreement. We have
tried repeatedly on both sides to make movement. And in the
meantime, what we have seen is a series of escalating tensions
in the region.
Mr. Costa. And finger pointing.
Mr. Escobar. And finger pointing. So, our position is that
the agreement was immediately implementable upon agreement. And
so, each side had to map out a way in which they were going to
do their part.
So, for Serbia, it will require entering into legislation,
the recognition of Kosovo's national symbols, and all of the
other elements that I talked about before.
And for the Kosovo side, it was the immediate work on the
draft statute of the Association of Serb-majority
Municipalities.
To date, we have seen neither party move forward on that.
Mr. Costa. And so, are these negotiations continuing with
both ourselves and the EU sitting down with both these parties
across the table to create some level of momentum?
Mr. Escobar. Yes. Unfortunately, over the last 60 days,
what we have seen, what we have had to focus our attention on,
is preventing the violence in the north from spreading even
further and from destabilizing the region. But that was the
point of the EU three-point plan on de-escalation, which we
support----
Mr. Costa. Well, Russia's influence on Serbia, obviously,
isn't helping.
Mr. Escobar. It is not helping, but I will tell you that,
on much of this, it is not so much a bilateral issue as a
failure of ethnic reconciliation inside of the country as well.
Mr. Costa. Well, the ethnic recognition goes back----
Mr. Escobar. It goes back a long----
Mr. Costa [continuing]. Hundreds of years, I mean.
Mr. Escobar. I would say not as far, and much of it is
regional. Because if that were the case, the entire region
would be embroiled in ethnic rivalry. And I will say that,
right now, we have a two-track Balkans. We have those that are
NATO members that are actively contributing to the regional
stability. And not surprisingly, those are the ones that have--
--
Mr. Costa. Before my time is--what are the efforts on the
Western Balkans to respond to the rising white nationalism and
antisemitism across Europe?
Mr. Escobar. We are working very hard. We call it out
wherever we see it. Part of the reform process is the
protection of minorities, and it is the fight against harmful
and fascist rhetoric as well.
Mr. Costa. All right. My time is expired, but to be
continued. Thank you.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Costa.
I now recognize the vice chair of the committee, Mr. Self
from Texas.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My history, I traveled extensively through Bosnia and
Herzegovina when I was in NATO; build the forces to go there,
the combined forces, international forces, and the force to go
to Kosovo. I have actually been in Belgrade to see the bomb
damage that we inflicted with a Tomahawk into the MOD building,
which they kept for whatever reason.
I see some, I hear some internal dissonance in your
testimony and this discussion. You said we have sided with
Kosovo at every turn. I think you since have backtracked on
that to a more balanced approach, but I do not think there is
any doubt that Vucic incited the boycott of the Kosovo
elections. There can be no doubt of that. What I'm less certain
of is that Serbia delayed their own elections based on the
Kosovo elections.
I want to point out to people--and I, hopefully, will get
to a question--this is not Ukraine, which is on the edge of
NATO. This is Serbia and Russia surrounded by NATO nations.
This is, potentially, more dangerous than Ukraine to NATO,
should this violence spread.
I'm uncertain as to why we do not have sanctions on Serbia
now. Because they have imported heavy weapons from Russia since
2017, which should have led to sanctions under something called
the Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act in
2017. We will stop there and ask you, why not?
Mr. Escobar. Well, I will tell you that, on the sanctions
question, it is not office that deals with the sanctions
question, but I do understand the process. The CAATSA sanctions
are not merely about purchasing Russian weapons. If that were
the case, we might have a problem with India, Turkiye, and
others.
And so, really, it is about the level of purchase and the
technological capability of the purchases. That is why we have
continually had this discussion with Serbia about the risk that
they are taking from----
Mr. Self. Well, let me ask you that. Let's followup on that
point.
Mr. Escobar. Yes.
Mr. Self. Do you have discretion on sanctions? Would those
sanctions not help with what you are trying to achieve,
implementation of the agreement?
Mr. Escobar. Where we have the greatest leverage or the
greatest flexibility is on Western Balkans sanctions to
sanction those who undermine regional stability--and we have
used those liberally--and for corruption. And we have used
those extensively as well.
CAATSA is a different issue because it is a different
office, and it is really a question of sanctions that are
aligned with our Russia policy, which I do not deal with.
Mr. Self. OK.
Mr. Escobar. But I'm happy to take that question back.
Mr. Self. Very good.
Mr. Self. In the interest of time, I was kind of surprised
to see that Eliot Engel, a colleague from across the aisle who
used to chair this committee, just wrote a piece on Serbia and
Russia. And he reached the conclusion--now, remember, he is a
colleague from across the aisle who used to chair this
committee, that reached the conclusion that the Biden
Administration is appeasing Serbia. Any comments on you, as a
Biden Administration official?
Mr. Escobar. I would say that is factually wrong. So, in
the last 60 days, everything that we have done has prejudiced
Serbia. We were in favor of visa liberalization for Kosovo,
Council of Europe membership for Kosovo. We are in favor of
supporting their elections over Serbia's objections. We
recognized the results of the elections, even with a 3 percent
turnout, over the objections of Serbia. We recognized the
authority of the mayors over the objections of Serbia. We have
sanctioned their intel chief. So, there is----
Mr. Self. But you are also supporting new elections. And in
a previous hearing, I made the point that, when we have a low
turnout in the United States, which we often do, we do not ask
for new elections. And yet, you have joined the EU in calling
for new elections, have you not?
Mr. Escobar. We have. In fact, the government of Kosovo
itself has said that these elections are a key to stability
because----
Mr. Self. So, is that not an indication that Kosovo is
willing to work with Serbia?
Mr. Escobar. That is. Now, we would like to move forward on
that part as well. So, we have a commitment from both sides. We
have a commitment from Kosovo that they would welcome new
elections. They see that having ethnic Albanian mayors in
predominantly Serb Municipalities--with in some cases some of
the municipal members had only a single vote, their own--that
is not a recipe for stability.
Mr. Self. I understand.
Mr. Escobar. So, we are working with both sides.
Mr. Self. My time is up. So, I would just ask you, do not
let this Russian proxy inside NATO territory get a toehold.
Thank you, sir.
I would yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Self.
I now recognize Mr. Moran for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moran. Secretary Escobar, thank you for your time
today.
I want to talk to you a little bit about Montenegro. And
you know, China has spent a lot of time and a lot of money,
through its Belt and Road Initiative in the Balkans. And they
have, particularly, back in 2014, invested about $1 billion
with Montenegro for a major highway system there. That is about
20 percent of the GDP of Montenegro, and the principle cost of
that is just enormous to me, as I think about their total GDP.
Do you know what progress Montenegro has made in paying off
this significant debt to China?
Mr. Escobar. Well, look, I do not know all the details, but
I do know that the former Minister of Finance did a really good
job of refinancing, with international assistance, some of that
debt to lower the interest rate and to lower the debt load.
But we agree. And unfortunately for Montenegro, we use the
example of that road as an example of the malign debt trap that
China uses to pressure countries in the region.
Mr. Moran. Yes, that is why it surprised me that, in March
of this year, it looked like that Montenegro signed another MOU
for China to do some additional investment for another road to
its Belt and Road Initiative. Is my understanding correct?
Mr. Escobar. I think it is the same road, sir.
Mr. Moran. The same road? Are they doing more financing or
is it a refinancing? What happened in March of this year?
Mr. Escobar. Unfortunately, I do not know the details of
that. I will have to take that back and get back to you on
that.
Mr. Moran. When you say that the international community
stepped in and helped with some of the terms of the financing,
is China still the principal creditor behind the financing?
Mr. Escobar. Oh, no, I did not say that we stepped in. I
said that----
Mr. Moran. No, I said, ``the international community.''
Mr. Escobar. Right.
Mr. Moran. You mentioned that somebody in the international
community----
Mr. Escobar. That's right, the international community. I
believe it was through international lenders. But that was not
through the U.S. Government.
Mr. Moran. But is China still the principal creditor? Or
has somebody else stepped in the middle of that as the new
creditor?
Mr. Escobar. For that road, I believe they still are, but,
again, I do not know the full details of that.
Now, if I can say one thing about Montenegro, the recent
Presidential and parliamentary elections are poised to make
Montenegro one of the fastest-achieving candidates for European
Union membership. So, I'm very confident that the new
leadership of Montenegro is taking it in the right direction
and that they are very clear about how they see Chinese
investment.
Mr. Moran. Yes, in April 2023, Jakov Milatovic was elected
and supplanted the prior leader of Montenegro. And that was
good news because it looks like that the new leader is more
pro-American than his predecessor. Is that your understanding
as well?
Mr. Escobar. Well, I would say they are equally pro-
American, but I would say that it was a welcome transition. The
previous president had been in power for over 30 years nonstop.
So, this democratic transition is exactly what we are looking
for from aspirant countries in the region.
So, I hold out a lot of hope for the future of Montenegro.
Mr. Moran. Do you know why the country of Montenegro sought
out this financing originally in 2014 and continues to look
toward China for assistance in its infrastructure? Is it
because it has no other place to go? Is the United States
stepping in to try to assist? Give me the sense of why there is
only----
Mr. Escobar. Well, I would say that it is consistent with a
lot of the patterns that we have seen in the Western Balkans,
which is deceptively cheap infrastructure projects that come
with built-in financing.
I believe the United States and Europe have to figure out
the financing piece. And that will be important for small
countries like Montenegro and others in the region.
Mr. Moran. Yes, I absolutely agree with that. So, tell me,
what are your thoughts, specifically, on how we do that? How do
we get ourselves between China and these smaller countries that
are seeking infrastructure investment?
Mr. Escobar. Well, we see DFC as an important part of that,
and we would like to see a more active presence of DFC in the
region.
Mr. Moran. Does DFC allow us to invest in countries for
national strategic purposes, in addition to qualification on
economic bases?
Mr. Escobar. I cannot speak on behalf of another agency,
but I do certainly hope, and I do believe, that they have the
same strategic vision and aspiration that we do.
Mr. Moran. All right. I will use the remainder of my time
just to reinforce that I think it is imperative for us to do,
as you have mentioned, get between China and some of these
smaller countries across the world, including the Balkans, and
to make sure that we are not allowing them to become
financially captive to China, so that they are no longer
influenced by China for their foreign policy, their economic
policy, and frankly, their military policy.
I appreciate your time.
I yield back.
Mr. Escobar. Thank you.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Moran.
I now recognize Mr. Issa from California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
With no disrespect to our witness, it should be noted that
this is an unusual situation in which we are hearing from the
Administration, but we are not hearing from the parties who, I
believe, would be able to give us a lot more insight into some
of the instability in the regions and the causes. And this is
particularly true in northern provinces of Kosovo. Albeit a
small population, it is still a population that needs to be
resolved, and I will ask about that later.
My first question is, the Prime Minister's unilateralism is
well-documented and is a major obstacle to progress. What and
how should we be dealing with, quite frankly, a head of State
who is not part of the solution?
Mr. Escobar. Well, I would say, to begin with, we have made
our requests very public and very clear. The European Union,
for its part, has imposed consequences, and we have as well. We
withdrew Kosovo from a major international military exercise as
a result of the unilateralism. And we continue to look for ways
to partner with what is one of our closest allies in the
region.
I do have to say that we are concerned about the lack of
alignment that Kosovo has, not just with the United States, but
with the entire Transatlantic community. So, that includes the
U.K., the European Union, NATO, the Quint, and its neighbors
Albania and North Macedonia.
We are looking actively for ways that we can convince the
government to see the United States, again, as its primary
partner in the region, and that alignment with the United
States only benefits Kosovo. It does not detract from its
aspirations.
Mr. Issa. And following up on the United States being
primary, historically, it certainly is fair to say that in many
ways the United States is taking a back seat to the European
Union on many of these issues. Can you describe what the
benefits are of a lesser involvement, lesser engagement, and
letting the European Union have, if you will, the front seat?
Mr. Escobar. Well, first of all, I respectfully disagree
that we have taken----
Mr. Issa. I thought you would.
Mr. Escobar [continuing]. A backseat. But, you know, it is
important that the European process be the face of our
Transatlantic engagement.
The challenge for Kosovo to be a part of NATO and a part of
the European Union is it runs through five non-recognizers. So,
we need a European path that the European non-recognizers
understand and accept as the basis for their foreign policy
decisions.
However, we are very, very firmly in support of that
process. We bring the two parties together. We support every
outcome financially, politically, and through capacity-
building. And we will continue to do so.
And in the meantime, we are one of the primary guarantors
of a safe and secure environment in Kosovo through our
contributions to the NATO peacekeeping force in Kosovo. So, we
are very involved and very engaged in this process.
Mr. Issa. Well, following up on ``very involved and very
engaged,'' and recognizing that I'm not asking for unreasonable
risk, but the State Department, by definition, takes risks in
every place they go, particularly in areas of conflict. It is
my understanding that we have not had U.S. diplomats in north
Kosovo to meet with the parties there in, if you will, any
reasonable time in the last year. Can you explain how the
meeting elsewhere is the equivalent of going to the region and
meeting there?
Mr. Escobar. Well, that, again, I respectfully disagree. I,
personally, travel to Mitrovica almost every time I go. I talk
to----
Mr. Issa. When was the last time you were in north Kosovo?
Mr. Escobar. The last time I was in north Kosovo was in the
fall of last year. Now, since then, I have been with leaders of
Kosovo, including Serb leaders, in other parts of Kosovo, in
other parts of the region. I speak to the leader of Srpska
Lista on a regular basis.
And as we speak, we have a group of Kosovo Serbs, civil
society leaders, here in town, and they are having contacts
with people on the Hill as well. So, we have significant
contact with Kosovo Serbs.
Mr. Issa. Last, I just want to slip in one last question,
if you do not mind. Do you believe that there is a
constitutional way to resolve this multi-ethnic problem in a
way that keeps a united Kosovo?
Mr. Escobar. Absolutely. Absolutely. I think that the
Association would do that. On one hand, it would allow Serbs to
exercise their rights of self-governance, as was envisioned
under the Ahtisaari Plan, as is required by the Brussels
Agreement, the Ohrid Agreement, and the European Council
conclusions, but also takes into account the fact that these
people are also dual citizens. So, there are European models
that we can implement, if we have the goodwill of the parties.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Issa.
I now yield to Mr. Lawler for 5 minutes from New York.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It has been over a decade since the 2013 Brussels
Agreement, and progress between Serbia and Kosovo on
normalizing relations is clearly stalled. Is it time to reopen
this agreement and think anew?
Mr. Escobar. No, I would say no. I think it is a good
agreement. It is a valid agreement. And it is the basis for the
Ohrid Agreement, which creates real possibilities for both
countries to integrate closer to the European Union and to
create a peaceful and sustainable relationship between the two.
What we need from both sides is to rise above the politics
of ethnic rivalry, populism, and ethno-nationalism and look at
the real opportunities of joining a union where they will be
forced to live not just with the people of their own ethnicity,
but people of all ethnicities in the European Union. So, that
is what we need, is we need some political courage on both
sides.
Mr. Lawler. I'm certainly sympathetic to Pristina's
concerns that the Association for Serb-majority Municipalities
could be manipulated by Belgrade as a lever of influence. Has
the Administration tried to, instead, develop a new construct
which would protect ethnic minorities, specifically, the Kosovo
Serbs, in Kosovo without undermining Kosovo's sovereignty over
northern Kosovo?
Mr. Escobar. That is our stated policy. In fact, the
Secretary's counsel, Derek Chollet, and I published an op-ed in
Kosovo outlining that any such Association should not undermine
Kosovo's constitutional authority, its legal structure, or its
functionality; that it really would be about delivering,
effectively delivering, services, municipal services, in
Serbian language to a population that speaks Serbian. That is
really what it is, and nothing more.
So, we have been working--we had offered, in fact, Albania
has offered to help draft that statute. And we are hoping that
Kosovo will understand that it has an obligation, and while it
fulfills that obligation, it should be in line with European
standards.
Mr. Lawler. Five member-States of the European Union--
Spain, Greece, Romania, Cyprus, and Slovakia--currently do not
recognize Kosovo's independence. This is a serious obstacle to
Kosovo's Euro-Atlantic integration. How is the State Department
engaging with these countries to urge them to recognize Kosovo,
and then, begin the conversations about EU and NATO membership?
Mr. Escobar. Well, first of all, we have had these
conversations not just with the non-recognizers in Europe, but
other non-recognizers around the world. The main obstacle for
many of the countries is they believe that unilateral
independence creates instability and not stability.
For some, there are constitutional requirements that it be
a bilateral agreement. This is one of the reasons why the Ohrid
Agreement, which was brokered by the European Union, and
monitored by European Union under European standards, gives us
the greatest opportunity to advance that cause in the last 15
years.
So, as we have done that, we have started to explore that
not only with the five non-recognizers, but with NATO and the
European Union as well, to look for ways to foster the
development--or sorry--integration of Kosovo into those
structures.
Now, the one thing that I hear back almost unanimously is
that they are waiting to see goodwill from Kosovo on the
implementation of the ASM.
Mr. Lawler. OK. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Lawler.
I now recognize Mr. Schneider of Illinois for 5 minutes.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am grateful
for the chance to be here.
Deputy Assistant Escobar, it is good to see you again.
Again, thank you for your patience, and as always, we are
grateful for you sharing your sister with us.
Mr. Escobar. Thank you.
Mr. Schneider. She is wonderful to work with.
This has been a very important hearing so far. The Western
Balkans, effectively, form an island surrounded by NATO and the
European Union, and our role has to be to work with our
European allies to facilitate a future in which all the
nations, religions, and ethnicities of the Western Balkans can
live side by side in peace and prosperity.
We know it is not an easy task, and the last paragraph of
your opening statement I think said it beautifully, but we have
to make sure that the citizens of the Western Balkans are able
to see a future for their children and are fully invested in
it.
You started to talk earlier and ran out of time--I want to
give you a chance--you mentioned the two-track Balkans.
Mr. Escobar. That's right.
Mr. Schneider. Could you expand on that?
Mr. Escobar. Yes. Well, look, it would be a mistake to look
at the Balkans as a single unit. What we have is, we have three
countries in the Western Balkans who have advanced their
European candidacy the fastest, who are, not coincidentally,
members of NATO. They have been very instrumental in supporting
our efforts to create regional stability--and not just regional
stability, but European stability. And that is Montenegro,
North Macedonia, and Albania. And we work very closely with
them.
North Macedonia, in particular, was extremely helpful in
helping us reach the Ohrid Agreement. So, we count on those
three countries to help extend our reach into the other three.
Now, we have three others--Serbia, Kosovo, and Bosnia and
Herzegovina--that are lagging in their efforts to integrate
into the European Union. I would say that the one thing that
they have in common is that they have not reached the level
where the politics, the domestic politics, do not depend on
ethnic rivalry.
So, we are working with our European partners and our
regional partners to find ways to create inter-ethnic
reconciliation and regional integration. And I would say that,
without those three members, we would be much further behind
than we are now.
Mr. Schneider. Let me build on that a little bit. Ethnic
groups often view the world as a zero-sum game. One wins; the
other has to lose.
Mr. Escobar. Right.
Mr. Schneider. Is that the case here, and if it is, are
there ways we can work to demonstrate that it is not a zero-sum
game, but a win/win for all players, if we can find a path to
bring more integration?
Mr. Escobar. And that is our plan. So, one is integration
into the European Union. So, it will be a benefit for the
region. It will be a benefit for Europe because these countries
do have enormous potential economically and socially and
culturally. And that includes economic integration among the
region.
And so, we have been supported by the three NATO countries
in the Western Balkans in our efforts to promote regional
economic integration which transcends the ethnic difficulties
of the region.
Mr. Schneider. Great. And the other thing, the last
question I will have, given the time, but you mentioned that
integration is essential to reducing the influence of harmful
actors. We have talked a lot about the Russians, about the PRC.
You also mentioned corrupt local actors.
Rather than focusing on them, I would like to ask you, are
there existing or up-and-coming benevolent or strong actors
that we should be working to build relationships with, looking
to reinforce and strengthen their position?
Mr. Escobar. Well, yes. I mean, throughout the region, we
do have very solid partners who believe in European integration
and NATO engagement and the fight against corruption.
And I would say that one of the bright spots in the
Montenegro parliamentary and Presidential elections is that,
overwhelmingly, the winners were the ones who were focused on
those three aspects of their policy.
Mr. Schneider. Great.
And with a few seconds left, I know in 2020 Albania hosted
the Balkans Forum Against Anti-Semitism. Can you tell us a
little bit about the progress in the Western Balkans in
countering antisemitism since that Forum and what we should be
doing to strengthen that going forward?
Mr. Escobar. Well, I would say, in Central Europe, it is
always a challenge, but I would say that most of the countries
in the region have made progress in codifying protections for
minority groups, in fighting extremism, and working with us,
particularly on the antisemitism piece.
Mr. Schneider. Great. Well, I know we have an excellent
ambassador in Deborah Lipstadt. Hopefully, we can work together
there.
I have seven more questions and no more time. So, Mr.
Chairman, thank you again for allowing me to sit in on this
hearing.
And I yield back.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Schneider.
With no further questions from the members, I want to thank
our witness, Mr. Escobar, for his valuable testimony and the
members for their questions.
Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
written questions for the witness, and we ask that you respond
to these promptly in writing.
Mr. Kean. Pursuant to committee rules, all members may have
5 days to submit statements, questions, extraneous materials
for the record, subject to the length limitations.
Without further objection, this subcommittee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:20 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
