- ACHIEVING PEACE THROUGH STRENGTH IN THE INDO-PACIFIC: EXAMINING THE FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET PRIORITIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ACHIEVING PEACE THROUGH STRENGTH IN THE INDO-PACIFIC:
EXAMINING THE FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET PRIORITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE INDO-PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

July 18, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-32

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-166PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania      BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California      GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida      AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee      TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas      DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa      SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK, Florida
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas      GREG STANTON, Arizona
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
JIM BAIRD, Indiana      JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida      JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      JIM COSTA, California
CORY MILLS, Florida      JASON CROW, Colorado
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia      BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on Indo-Pacific

YOUNG KIM, California, Chair

ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 AMI BERA, California, Ranking Member
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MARK GREEN, Tennessee      BRAD SHERMAN, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADAWAGEN,       WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
American Samoa      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida

Daniel Markus, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Kritenbrink, Honorable Daniel, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
East Asian and Pacific Affairs, U.S. Department of State.......     8
Ronning, Michael, Acting Deputy Assistant Administrator, Asia
Bureau, U.S. Agency for International Development..............    14

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    45
Hearing Minutes..................................................    47
Hearing Attendance...............................................    48

STATEMENT SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

Statement submitted for the record from Representative Connolly..    49

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    51

ACHIEVING PEACE THROUGH STRENGTH IN THE INDO-PACIFIC:
EXAMINING THE FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET PRIORITIES

Tuesday, July 18, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Indo-Pacific,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:09 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Young Kim (chair of the
subcommittee) presiding.
Mrs. Kim of California. Good morning, everyone. The
Subcommittee on the Indo-Pacific of the Foreign Affairs
Committee will come to order. The purpose of this hearing to
examine the Fiscal Year 2024 budget requests for the State
Department's Bureau of East Asian Pacific Affairs.
Let me now recognize myself for an opening statements. The
hearing is important for the U.S. Congress to shape the United
States approach, resourcing, and goals in East Asia and the
Pacific Islands. The Biden Administration has correctly
identified the People's Republic of China as the only
competitor with both the intent to reshape the international
order and the economic, diplomatic, military, and technological
power to do it.
The October 2022 National Security Strategy further says
that Beijing has ambitions to create an enhanced sphere of
influence in the Indo-Pacific. Yet despite this recognition, we
are still woefully underperforming in the Indo-Pacific and we
are not competing with the PRC from a position of strength.
East Asia and the Pacific Islands are on the front lines of our
competition with China.
And yet, EAP remains a small fraction of the State
Department's overall budget and programming. And instead of
pursuing competitive actions against the PRC, we are chasing
Chinese Community Party Officials with fruitless engagements.
The PRC presents a significant threat to the well-being and
prosperity of key U.S. allies and partners in the Pacific.
None understand this reality better than Taiwan. While
Congress has signed off on multiple arms sales to support
Taiwan and enhance its defense, there still remains
approximately 19 billion dollars backlogged in weapons
deliveries. So my Arms Exports Delivery Solutions Act was
passed in last year's NDAA.
Yet the report we received from your department earlier
this year did not clearly lay out a description of the actions
the United States is taking to expedite deliveries of defense
articles and services to Taiwan, including whether we will
provide interim capability or solution which I explicitly asked
for in that bill. We must ensure we're doing all that we can
now to bolster Taiwan's defense against an increasingly
aggressive PRC. It is clear our allies in the Indo-Pacific
share our concern about the PRC's growing aggression toward
Taiwan.
When I travel with Chairman McCaul to Northeast Asia
earlier this year, we heard the same thing from all of our
allies, that Ukraine today could be Taiwan tomorrow and that
U.S. leadership is key to bringing democratic countries
together in the fight against authoritarianism. Our allies and
partners are also worried about the growing use of economic
coercion. Last month, I held a roundtable with the Ambassadors
from South Korea and Japan where we discussed how we could work
together to combat economic coercion.
The United States in the Pacific economic framework is not
enough to meet the growing trade and investment needs in the
region. And I was disappointed to hear that the Biden
Administration was not interested in pursuing free trade or
investment deals with our partners. We must have a concrete
economic agenda in Asia to be competitive in the region.
Nowhere is this more true than in Southeast Asia which has
immense economic potential. So I look forward to traveling to
the region next month to discuss security, economic energy, and
human rights cooperation. Finally, we all agree that we are in
an era of strategic competition with China and that this
competition requires a whole of government approach.
Yet I am worried about the growing trend of the State
Department not being forthcoming with information about its
engagement with the PRC or actions taken by the PRC that
directly affect United States national security such as the spy
balloon and the spy base in Cuba. In June, I sent a letter
noting concern about your trip to Beijing on the anniversary of
Tiananmen. I am also disappointed that this hearing originally
scheduled for June was pushed due to Secretary Blinken's travel
to Beijing which the Department itself admitted would not be a
game changer.
I have also send letters about getting briefings about the
spy balloon and spy base in Cuba. We cannot pull together a
whole of government approach to combat growing PRC aggression
if the State Department refuses to engage with Congress and the
American people in a timely manner. In short, the Indo-Pacific
region is critical to U.S. national security and competition
with PRC.
So we must do more with our allies and partners, especially
economically to maintain U.S. leadership in the region. And to
properly deal with China, the U.S. Government must be in
lockstep in communicating openly across bridges about the
threat that PRC presents rather than prioritizing fruitless
engagement with our counterparts in Beijing. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses and members of the subcommittee on
these important issues. So I now recognize the ranking member,
the gentleman from California, Mr. Bera, for your opening
statements.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Chairwoman Kim, for hosting today's
hearing. I would also like to thank our witnesses for
participating in this important hearing and express
appreciation for this Administration's consistent engagement
with Congress. Today's hearing focuses on the Biden-Harris
Administration's proposed budget for East Asia and the Pacific.
Successive Administration, Democratic and Republican, have
underscored the economic and strategic importance of the Indo-
Pacific and express an commitment to prioritizing the region.
However, the Indo-Pacific region has remained under resourced
when considering its strategic importance, economic heft, and
staggering population. That's why last year I introduced the
Indo-Pacific Engagement Act which passed into law in Fiscal
Year 3's NDAA.
This bipartisan legislation directed the assistant
secretaries for East Asian and Pacific Affairs and South and
Central Asian Affairs at the State Department along with the
assistant administrative for the Asia Bureau at USAID to
provide an independent assessment of the resources they need to
fulfill the Indo-Pacific strategy. Last week, the
Administration submitted the first Indo-Pacific Engagement Act
report to Congress. And I'd like to thank EAP and SCA as well
as the Asia Bureau at USAID for putting together this
comprehensive and insightful report.
Noting the strategic competition with the PRC is the pacing
geopolitical challenge of our era, the report found that 41.3
billion over the next five fiscal years is needed to implement
our objectives in the Indo-Pacific of which 8.1 billion is for
diplomatic engagement, 1 billion is for USAID operating
expenses, and 32.2 billion is for foreign assistance.
Unfortunately, last week, the House Appropriations Committee,
Republicans passed their Fiscal Year 2024 State, Foreign
Operations and Related Programs appropriations bill with a 15
percent cut in funding from Fiscal Year 2023 levels. While the
Republicans' SFOPs bill fully funds the President's budget
request for the Indo-Pacific strategy, it underfunds the
operations and staffing of the State Department and USAID.
If the U.S. is going successfully outcompete Beijing in the
Indo-Pacific and around the world, we cannot take a step
backward and cut resources from key national security agencies.
In addition to the appropriated funds, Congress must also
authorize the Fiscal Year 2024 President's budget request for
mandatory funding that includes 7.1 billion over 20 years to
extend assistance related to the compacts free association with
the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, and Palau. I welcome the news
of renewed COFA pacts signed with Micronesia and Palau, and I
hope there will be a final agreement with the Marshall Islands
soon.
The COFA agreements signal the United States sustained
commitment to our partners in the Pacific. With some provisions
set to expire at the end of this fiscal year, it is critical
that Congress approve these agreements through implementing
legislation as soon as possible. While competing vigorously
with the PRC is central to the U.S. interest in the Indo-
Pacific, it is also important for Washington to maintain open
channels of communication with Beijing to reduce the risk of
miscalculation.
With that, I applaud the Administration's continued use of
diplomacy to raise areas of concern with the PRC so that the
relationship does not veer into conflict. I look forward to
hearing from Assistant Secretary Kritenbrink on his engagements
with the PRC, including last month's trip to Beijing with
Secretary Blinken. With that, I look forward to work with the--
continuing to work with the Administration and continuing to
work with the full committee and the subcommittee in a partisan
way, and I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Ranking Member. Our
subcommittee is honored to have the presence of our full
committee chairman, Michael McCaul. So now I would like to
recognize him for any opening statement you have.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding this
important hearing. Secretary, welcome to the Foreign Affairs
Committee. And I think every member of this Congress and the
Administration should be deeply concerned about the growing
aggression of the Chinese Communist Party.
As I have said before their tentacles reach every corner of
the globe. And we are facing a generational threat, a great
powers competition. And we must address this issue with a
seriousness it deserves.
And I agree with Secretary Blinken that China is the only
country with both the intent and power to reshape the global
balance of power. And while diplomacy and negotiation should
always be a priority, effective diplomacy should shape the
adversary rather than the other way around. Recently, I think
our recent diplomacy toward the CCP has demonstrated weakness
and weakness only invites aggression and emboldens dictators
such as Chairman Xi.
So let me provide some context as to what I am talking
about. In mid-January, several media outlets reported that
Secretary Blinken planned to visit Beijing in early February,
aiming to set a floor for their relationship. On January 28,
the Administration identifies a CCP spy balloon over the United
States, surveilling some of our most sensitive military sites.
Shockingly, it took a full 7 days for Secretary Blinken to
cancel the trip following significant congressional pressure.
Fast forward to the spring when the CCP raids multiple American
businesses. Then on May 10 and 11, Jake Sullivan meets with his
counterpart in Vienna.
It appears the Biden Administration is extending an olive
branch to China. But how does China respond? On May 15, the CCP
State Intelligence begin hacking senior level officials at
State and Commerce Department, including Secretary Raimondo and
as I have been told, sir, your account as well, Mr. Secretary.
One week later on May 22, the CCP effectively banned Micron
from selling its chips to China or in China. On June 2,
Secretary of Defense Austin requested a meeting with the CCP
counterpart of the Shangri-La dialog. That request was rejected
and Secretary Austin settled for a mere handshake.
On June the 4th, the anniversary of Tiananmen Square
Massacre, you, Mr. Secretary, arrived in Beijing to negotiate
Secretary Blinken's trip later that month. This was an
astonishing display of appeasement and indifference to the
brutality and human rights violations of the CCP by this
Administration. Then on June 8, media reports surfaced about
the CCP establishing a spy base in Cuba.
On June 16, the State Department, including the Secretary,
Defense Secretary, and all hacked officials learned that their
emails have been compromised by the CCP. We understand this
attacked targeted at least nine officials from the bureau that
you oversee. And it's possible that your own email has been
hacked.
All told, it appears that tens of thousands of emails were
stolen. Despite being aware on this hacking, on June 18,
Secretary Blinken still traveled to Beijing. And in early July,
I learned that the State pulled down a congressional
notification that included defense services for Taiwan.
I am deeply concerned that the price we paid to secure
Secretary Yellen's trip to China and just the price we paid to
just merely get a meeting with Chairman Xi may have been too
much. Moreover, last year I gave you all through my legislation
Presidential drawdown authority to get weapons to Taiwan
immediately. That has not been used to this day.
I've signed off on weapon sales, 23 weapons sales as far
back as 5 years ago, none of which have been delivered. As
we've learned in Ukraine, we need to provide these weapon
systems before a conflict erupts, not after. That is the goal
of deterrence.
I recently went to Taiwan with both the chair and ranking
member of the subcommittee. And the first question President
Tsai asked me was, where are my weapons that I paid for? This
Administration appears indifferent to CCP hostility, appeasing
rather than simply to facilitate talks.
Don't get me wrong. I think diplomacy is important. I agree
that the Secretary and you, sir, need to talk. It's unfortunate
we cannot have a military to military communication between the
CCP and the United States.
In sum, I think this Administration finds itself trapped in
a cycle where the CCP dictates the terms, the timing, and
conditions of our meetings rather than the other way around.
This is precisely why I made it a point to be here today. You
should be at the table out of strength and leverage, not out of
weakness and appeasement.
Approximately 7 months ago, multiple Commerce officials
assured me that an update to the Huawei export control
licensing policy was done. Seven months later, the rule has yet
to be released. In May, Reuters reports that the State
Department is delaying not only Huawei controls but other
sanction packages as well. congressionally mandated sanctions
under the Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act have been repeatedly
killed by the State Department as well. Then on May 19, I sent
a letter requesting documents to understand the situation
better. But I've been stonewalled.
On June 13th, I sent a second letter requesting a narrower
set of documents, specifically the competitive action calendar.
This is one document. While State agreed to provide--Madam
Chair, I would really like to finish this statement.
While State agreed to provide the documents, they asked for
some time to gather them saying they believe they could produce
them in several weeks, and I agreed to them. However, in early
July, State informed us that they could no longer provide a
timeframe. On July 11, I was forced to serve a subpoena for
these documents, yet the deadline came and went.
Last night, we received a response from State with respect
to the subpoena. But it's insufficient. Mr. Secretary, your
Department is in violation today of a congressional subpoena.
This is unacceptable and I will have to prepared for further
action.
I hope you will work with us and this committee. We must
acknowledge China for what it is and respond to it with
strength. With that, I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you very much. Other members
of the committee are reminded that opening statements may be
submitted for the record. And we're now pleased to have a
distinguished panel of witnesses before us today on this
important topic.
First the Honorable Daniel Kritenbrink is the Assistant
Secretary of State for the Bureau of East Asian and Pacific
Affairs at the U.S. Department of State. And Mr. Michael
Ronning is the Acting Deputy Administrator for the Asia Bureau
at the U.S. Agency for International Development. Thank you for
being here today.
Your full statements will be made part of the record. And I
will ask each of you to keep your spoken remarks to 5 minutes
in order to allow time for member questions. Let me now
recognize Assistant Secretary Kritenbrink for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DANIEL KRITENBRINK, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF EAST ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Kritenbrink. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, Chairwoman
Kim and Ranking Member Bera, Chairman McCaul, members of the
committee and subcommittee. Thank you very much for the
opportunity to appear before you today to testify regarding the
President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request for East Asia and
the Pacific. As President Biden Stated in our National Security
Strategy, U.S. leadership in the Indo-Pacific which, of course,
includes the EAP region, is critical because the Indo-Pacific
fuels much of the world's economic growth and will be the
epicenter of 21st century geopolitics.
As an Indo-Pacific nation, we are committed to building the
collective capacity of our allies, partners, and friends to
sustain a region that is free and open, connected, prosperous,
secure, and resilient. The EPA Bureau holds a key
responsibility to advance the Administration's priorities in
the Indo-Pacific. Our Indo-Pacific strategy includes our
approach to the PRC but is not defined by it.
In other words, we have an Indo-Pacific strategy of which
China is a part and not the other way around. That said, while
strategic competition with the PRC remains a global challenge,
competition is most pronounced in the Indo-Pacific.
The Administration's approach to the PRC is to invest,
align, and compete. We are, one, investing in the foundations
of our strength at home, two, aligning with allies and partners
on our approach abroad, and three, competing with the PRC to
defend our interests. Our objective is not to change the PRC
but rather to shape the strategic environment in which it
operates, building a balance of influence that is favorable to
the United States, our allies and partners, and the interest
and values that we share.
In support of the Administration's Indo-Pacific strategy,
the President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request for EAP
includes a diplomatic engagement budget of 533 million dollars
and a foreign assistance budget of 1.36 billion dollars. In
addition, the President's budget request includes 2 billion
dollars in mandatory funding to support the Indo-Pacific
strategy and 7.1 billion dollars in mandatory funding to
support the compacts of free association. Further, the Fiscal
Year 2024 budget includes 2 billion dollars in mandatory
funding to support international infrastructure globally, which
would include projects in our region.
Here I would not like to provide a brief overview of how
the President's budget for EAP directly supports the five
objectives of the Indo-Pacific strategy. First, we are
advancing a free and open Indo-Pacific. The Fiscal Year 2024
budget supports our commitment to maintain sovereignty and
territorial integrity, unimpeded lawful commerce, the peaceful
resolution of disputes, and the freedom of navigation and
overflight in the maritime domain.
These efforts complement our expanded diplomatic presence
across the Indo-Pacific, including opening embassies in the
Solomon Islands and Tonga and planning for new embassies in
Kirabati and Vanuatu. The Fiscal Year 2024 also supports our
continued investment in democratic institutions. Second, we are
building connections in the Indo-Pacific and beyond.
President's request supports our bilateral relationships as
well as engagement with a host of regional groupings and
institutions, including ASEAN, AUKUS, the Quad, the Pacific
Islands Forum, the Pacific community, and the Mekong-U.S.
partnership to build capacity and address shared challenges.
Third, we are driving Indo-Pacific prosperity. With the
continued negotiations for the Indo-Pacific economic framework
for prosperity, our hosting of APEC in 2023, and the launch of
the partnership for global infrastructure and investment, the
President's budget will promote a connected, resilient, and
fair Indo-Pacific economy. Fourth, we are bolstering Indo-
Pacific Security.
Recognizing that security is a necessary condition for
prosperity, our budget request will build the capacity of our
partners to respond to and resolve both domestic and
transnational security threats. We also remain committed to
maintaining peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait. Our
One China Policy which has remained consistent has helped to
maintain cross-strait peace and stability for the past 40
years.
In line with the Taiwan Relations Act, the United States
will continue to assist Taiwan in maintaining a sufficient
self-defense capability. Fifth, we are building regional
resilience. U.S. security depends on our collaboration with our
allies and partners to address shared challenges to build
resilience to transnational threats.
In summary, the United States' role in the region must be
more enduring than ever. Our allies and partners are looking to
our ability to deliver resources as a sign of our commitment.
Building on existing efforts, the President's Fiscal Year 2024
budget request will allow us to do just that.
Finally, I also want to sincerely thank the chairwoman and
her staff for agreeing to reschedule this hearing so that I
could testify upon return from the Secretary's recent trip to
Beijing. Thank you very much. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Assistant Secretary Kritenbrink
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I now recognize Mr.
Ronning for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL RONNING, ACTING DEPUTY ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, ASIA BUREAU, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Ronning. Chairman McCaul, Chairwoman Kim, Ranking
Member Bera, and distinguished members of the committee, thank
you for inviting me to testify on USAID's role in advancing
U.S. foreign policy priorities in East Asia and the Pacific. We
are all well aware that the East Asia and Pacific region is
home to the majority of humanity, the world's fastest growing
economies, and busiest maritime trade routes. These countries
are essential partners in creating a free and open Indo-Pacific
and improves lives in Asia, underwrites regional stability and
security, and helps generate prosperity here at home.
At USAID, we approach development in the region with the
understanding that the People's Republic of China is trying to
rewrite existing regional rules and norms for its own narrow
advantage. However, our development approach starts not with
the question what we are against but rather what we are for.
USAID embodies what the United States can offer the region as a
partner and friend in development to communities and families
who are seeking to transform their lives and more broadly as a
leader in U.S. efforts to advance a free and open, connected,
prosperous, secure and resilient Indo-Pacific.
That is what the region wants, and that is what we strive
to provide. I've had the privilege to work on USAID's
development in humanitarian efforts in East Asia and Pacific
region for much of the past decade. A recurring theme in our
discussion throughout the region, be in the Pacific Islands or
the Mekong is the importance of showing up and following
through on America's commitments.
Countries in the region count on the United States to be a
bulwark of stability in a rapidly changing region. And this
Fiscal Year 2024 request is an opportunity to cement a
reputation as a reliable partner. USAID will work in lockstep
with Congress to achieve these ambitious objectives.
The President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request for USAID
includes 964.4 million dollars for East Asia and the Pacific
which is a 194 million dollar increase or a 25 percent increase
over the Fiscal Year 2023 request. We believe that this
increase is merited by the scope and scale and the urgency of
the challenges we face in the region. In line with the
Administration's priorities, USAID's request prioritizes key
sectors to advance U.S. national security and prosperity
alongside that of our partners and allies in Asia and the
Pacific.
First, to boost inclusive economic growth, USAID will
promote trade and investment, private sector productivity, and
digital connectivity. Second, our demand driven climate change
activities will reduce emissions, protect critical ecosystems,
implement regulatory forums, mitigate resource conflicts, and
help partners transition to renewable energy. Third, we will
work to reverse democratic backsliding and strengthen
democratic institutions and norms.
Fourth, to bolster women's economic empowerment, gender
equity, human rights, USAID will work to increase women's
political, civic, and economic engagement, address gender
inequality, and combat gender-based violence. Finally,
strengthen health systems to detect and respond to emerging
threats, USAID will continue to bolster the resilience of
partner countries and their economies to prevent, detect, and
respond to pandemic threats, increase their ability to
withstand future shocks. With your continued support, this
budget request will allow USAID to deliver on our commitments
across East Asia and the Pacific.
As Administrator Power has noted, it is in America's best
interest to feed the world, to help protect fellow democracies,
to advocate for the dignity of all people, not only to reflect
an America that is generous, compassionate, and moral, but also
to protect the safety and the prosperity of the American
people. With your continued support and on behalf of the
American people, USAID will continue our central role in
realizing this vision while increasing partner countries'
resilience and advancing sustainable prosperity and security
for communities across the Indo-Pacific. I look forward to your
counsel and your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Michael Ronning follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Ronning. I now recognize myself
for questions. As I Stated in my opening statement, we traveled
to Asia and we were in Taiwan, and we're greeted by 10
battleships, 70 fighter jets, and live fire action drills.
It was a display of bravado. But it's also a demonstration
of how hostile and aggressive the Chinese Communist Party is
becoming. And I was notified that I was sanctioned on the day I
left.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, we had several
requests regarding the competitive actions calendar. We were
very patient with several letters. I finally served a subpoena.
The due date was yesterday, and we still have not received
anything. We were told by staff that this is a simple document
that could be pulled and produced in a very short period of
time. Mr. Secretary, can you tell this committee when you will
be able to comply with the subpoena?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Mr. Chairman, thank you again for the
privilege of being here today, and thank you for your question.
I want to assure you that the Department is committed to
working with Congress and with you and that we have responded
in writing to your letters on this issue, first on June 16 and
then again yesterday when we provided further information about
the competitive actions that we have taken under the Biden
Administration. This is part, as you know, of an ongoing
accommodations process with the committee, and we are very much
committed to working with you on that.
We are committed to responding to your and committee's
request in a timely manner. We are balancing a growing number
of congressional inquiries involving priorities. Again, this is
part of an ongoing accommodations process with the committee.
And we are committed to engaging with you, sir.
Mr. McCaul. I appreciate that. I'm just trying to be
patient with it. It's disturbing when I find out about this
when I read the newspaper and Reuters is reporting this and
someone on your staff has leaked this information. And yet this
committee, Congress does not have it. And quite honestly, that
is not the way we should be doing business.
And so I am going to ask you three questions about some of
the issues that have been raised by the press. One is that the
State Department is no longer enforcing human rights sanctions,
including those against Uyghur Muslims under the Uyghur Muslim
Policy Rights Act. Do you have any information on that?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes, sir. First of all, Mr. Chairman, it
is absolutely not true that we are pulling our punches in any
way. And in fact, U.S. Government and the State Department have
taken an unprecedented number of steps against the Chinese in a
broad range of areas. That has continued from the beginning of
this Administration. It has continued up until today.
Specifically we are committed to holding China and Chinese
officials to account for the ongoing egregious abuses against
Uyghurs in Xinjiang.
Mr. McCaul. My time has expired. But I take it your answer
is you have not delayed or you are still enforcing the
sanctions?
Mr. Kritenbrink. We are absolutely enforcing. And in fact--
--
Mr. McCaul. That is your testimony?
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. We've carried out--we've
sanctioned four PRC officials under Treasury GloMag Sanctions,
31 entities under the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act,
another 26 entities under the Commerce Bureau of Industry and
Security list, and 8 PRC firms tied to----
Mr. McCaul. OK, great. And if you just produce this
competitive actions calendar, it would solve this whole
problem. I would not even have to ask these questions. Second,
export controls on Huawei, have those been delayed or pulled
down?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Again, sir, we do not pull our punches.
And as you know, this Administration has already taken steps
against Huawei.
Mr. McCaul. They did. They did. I thought Estevez did a
pretty good job earlier on, and now we have not seen anything
in the timeframe that this sort of charmed offensive is taking
place with respect to Beijing.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Well, I would say, Mr. Chairman, some
people have described what the Chinese are doing as a charm
offensive. That is absolutely not what I would describe what we
are doing.
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. McCaul. So your answer is that you have not delayed or
pulled down exports to licenses from the United States to
Huawei?
Mr. Kritenbrink. That is correct. I cannot comment on
ongoing processes in the end user review committee. But we are
committed as we've demonstrated, steps we have taken in the
technology space, including I think most significantly the
October 7 Advanced Computing Rule. We are committed to
defending our national interest. We are committed to preventing
advanced U.S. technologies from falling into the hands of the
Chinese----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. McCaul. Let me ask you this question. Why did State
recently pull down DDTC 22-087 which included a license to
provide defense services to Taiwan?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Mr. Chairman, I'll have to check if that's
the specific case that you're referring to. And I will check on
that. But if it the one I think you're referring to, my
understanding is a direct commercial sale was notified by
mistake.
It was pulled back. But my understanding it has since been
formally notified I believe just yesterday. It may have been
the day before.
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. McCaul. And I have to refer to it--I know it is very
cryptic. I am obligated to refer to it in that manner.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes, sir. But I just want to State, sir,
and I'd be happy to work with your team as well. But we have
taken an extraordinary number of actions over the course of
this Administration. And we have done it in advance of every
one of these engagements that you have mentioned. We've done it
after every one of these engagements. We do not pull our
punches. That is not what we are about. We believe----
Mr. McCaul. OK.
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. That we are engaging the
People's Republic of China from a position of confidence,
confidence based on I think the extraordinary success of our
diplomacy in the region to shape the external environment,
confidence based on our investments and our strength at home.
And I think with that in mind, we approach the Chinese in a
very realistic, clear-eyed way and I think from a position of
strength.
Mr. McCaul. And look, I appreciate both of you all's
service. I mean, this is the top threat I think to our national
security. Last question, why is State not using the
Presidential drawdown authority that Congress gave you to get
weapons to Taiwan now?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes, sir. We are absolutely committed to
using all tools at our disposal to make sure that we meet our
obligations----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. McCaul. But why aren't you using that drawdown
authority that Congress gave you?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Here is what I would say, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Austin spoke to this in May. I do not have anything
further to add to his commentary.
I do not have anything to announce today. But I will
reiterate. We are committed to using all means at our disposal.
We are grateful to you, Congress, and this Committee for those
tools. And we will----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. McCaul. Well, if we need to get in a classified setting
for you to answer that question. Congress passed--it was my
bill. We passed it. It's law.
And I was told the President would use that drawdown
authority to get half a billion dollars of weapons into Taiwan.
And now we are not seeing that authority exercised. So if I'm
not correct, I need the information. And if you prefer that in
another setting, that is fine----
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes, sir.
Mr. McCaul [continuing]. With this committee.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Sir, I would be delighted----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. McCaul. But certainly I need a better answer than we're
doing everything possible.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes, sir.
Mr. McCaul. I'm just not seeing it happening.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Mr. Chairman, respectfully, I do just want
to underscore we are committed using all tools at our disposal.
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. McCaul. Well, then use them. We gave you the tools.
Mr. Kritenbrink. And again, we've taken an extraordinary
number of steps. The reason why----
Mr. McCaul. Use the tools and authority Congress gave you
because Taiwan does not have any weapons, period. My time has
expired.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Thank you, sir.
Mr. McCaul. Chair now recognizes the ranking member.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate working
with you, Mr. Chairman and with the chairwoman of the
subcommittee and all of Congress in a bipartisan way because I
think we recognize the competition that we're in with the PRC
and the importance of maintain as I think we all say a free and
open Indo-Pacific, a rules-based order. The ability for all the
people in the region to thrive, prosper, and experience the
freedoms that we have all been able to experience.
I also appreciate the hard work that this Administration
has done. I look back at the last two and a half years.
Elevating the Quad Coalition to the leader's level and really
giving it significant importance.
Working together with our allies in Japan and Korea, to
really get the trilateral relationship to a place that I would
not have expected it to be just two or 3 years ago. And I
applaud the Moon and Kishida Administrations as well for the
hard work and moving that alliance to a place where continues
to move forward. I applaud the engagement of both State and
USAID in the Pacific Islands, super important allies.
They're very close to us and again applaud getting the COFA
Agreement to where it is. We've got a little bit of work and
Congress has to do its work as well, passing the implementing
language and getting that to the President's desk. So again,
none of these are easy.
We are in a competition. And I guess I should also add that
no one wants a direct confrontation with China. That's not our
intent. I do not think that's the intent of the countries in
the region.
And while it is very difficult to practice diplomacy with
the PRC, I do think it's incredibly important to maintain and
look for lines of communication where they're possible and take
advantage of those, even if they are not always productive and
fruitful. I think it is important for us to maintain that
engagement and dialog where we can because the challenge is
that not just the region but the planet face are paramount. We
saw this with the pandemic but we also see those every day
right now, both in our country but also across the world with
climate change.
And it will take cooperation, participation, and working
together to address these challenges, particularly with the two
biggest powers in the world, the United States and the PRC.
Secretary Kritenbrink, let me turn to the COFA Agreement again
which I think is incredibly important. It has served us fairly
well.
I will meet with representatives of the Republic of
Marshall Islands later on. And I think it's important for us to
get their acceptance of it. But can you give me an update on
the current State of negotiations with the Republic of Marshall
Islands?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Mr. Ranking Member, thank you very much
for your comments and for your question. Let me just State
specifically on your question regarding the COFA. We are
absolutely committed to getting the COFA done.
I think as you know, this is really, I would argue, central
to our entire position in the Pacific, including particularly
in the Northern Pacific. It is really the foundation of our
engagement there. As you know, we've already concluded MOUs
with Federated States of Micronesia and Palau.
The outstanding negotiations are with the Marshall Islands.
I do not want to get into all of the details of the
negotiations. And I know that our Special Envoy Joe Yun has
been up here to brief you and others.
But we're committed to getting this done. I am confident we
will get there with RMI. Every one of our partners, sovereign
partners in the Pacific, they have their own needs, desires,
their own politics. We're working through that right now.
But I'm confident that we will get there. And I think as
you know as part of the President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget
requests, it includes 7.1 billion dollars mandatory funding
over 20 years to fund the compacts. And it does include what
we've agreed on, at least to date, the top lines for RMI.
Mr. Bera. And as I mentioned previously, we really do
appreciate that mandatory funding and the 20-year funding to
give assurances to the States in this region.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bera. I do not have much time left. But you've got
Congress' support and we will continue to work to get this
done. So with that, let me----
Mr. Kritenbrink. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member.
Mr. Bera [continuing]. Yield to the chairwoman.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I now recognize myself
for 5 minutes. Secretary Kritenbrink, you accompanied Secretary
Blinken on his recent trip to Beijing just recently in June.
And shortly after that meeting, Secretary Blinken said that the
spy balloon chapter should be closed.
Well, this was a spy balloon which is a product of an
adversary's military that flew across the continental United
States. And the Administration believes we should simply move
on? And at one point, President Biden even characterized this
national security threat as, quote, ``silly.'' Do you agree or
disagree with President Biden's characterization that the spy
balloon incident as silly? I just need a simple yes or no from
you.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Madam Chairwoman, thank you. I think----
Mrs. Kim of California. A simple yes or no. I mean, we can
continue the dialog.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Well, ma'am, what I would say is I agree
with the President's assessment from the beginning. We took
this extremely seriously. This was an outrageous violation of
American sovereignty.
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mrs. Kim of California. Yet he called it silly, right? So
the State Department----
Mr. Kritenbrink. And the President shot the balloon down.
Mrs. Kim of California. My time. I'm going----
Mr. Kritenbrink. Sorry.
Mrs. Kim of California [continuing]. To reclaim my time
back. State Department, did you demarche the Chinese Embassy
with respect to the balloon?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes, we did.
Mrs. Kim of California. And what date did that occur?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I do not have all of the details in front
of me. I did not come with a timeline, ma'am. But my
recollection it was immediately after we found out about it.
Mrs. Kim of California. Do you recall which----
Mr. Kritenbrink. And I believe that was February 1.
Mrs. Kim of California [continuing]. U.S. officials were in
the meeting?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I do.
Mrs. Kim of California. Could you tell me?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I will say we do not normally divulge all
of the details of our----
Mrs. Kim of California. You can at least tell me which
officials were there in the meeting, right?
Mr. Kritenbrink. But I can tell the Secretary of State and
the Deputy Secretary of States. We took this incredibly
seriously, and we wanted to send a message this was an
outrageous violation of our sovereignty.
Mrs. Kim of California. Then can you----
Mr. Kritenbrink. We demanded it be removed, that it never
happen again. And then we shot it down.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Thank you. Let reclaim
my time.
Mr. Kritenbrink. So respectfully, Madam Chairwoman, this is
very serious. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Kim of California. Will you commit to sharing any
technical analysis of the balloon with the committee?
Mr. Kritenbrink. What I will commit to is I'll refer you to
Department of Justice and the FBI which are in charge of this.
And we support whatever decisions they make.
Mrs. Kim of California. All right. So you see we're having
this continue dialog. So the chapter on the spy balloon is not
closed. The American people still have so many unanswered
questions about this flagrant violation of the American
airspace. And given that it flew across the entirety of the
continental United States, we're questioning this
Administration's ability to respond to provocation from the PRC
in the future.
So since the spy balloon incident in February, the PRC had
raided American companies, namely it banned Micron from its
market. And it threatened restrictions on critical minerals and
cyberattacked our top officials as was mentioned in Chairman
McCaul's statements. So since February, can you name one
substantial action the PRC has taken to improve relations with
the United States other than taking our meetings on their
terms?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Well, Madam Chairwoman, a couple of
things. First, I would completely disagree with the
characterization that we took meetings on their terms. In fact,
just the opposite is true. The meetings happened on our terms
and our timeline that we insisted on and that we stuck to.
And Madam Chairwoman, I fully agree with your assessment
that some of the steps that China has taken against Micron,
against other American firms on the ground absolutely
contradict their supposed statement that China is open for
business and that they need foreign investment whereas when
they take these steps that obviously contradict that statement
and then undermine the business environment, that is not in
their interest and it certainly increases tension in the
relationship. And these are issues that Secretary Blinken
raised directly when he was in China. And also, there's steps
to both threaten and actually restrict----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Let me reclaim my time
back.
Mr. Kritenbrink. If I could just finish on the last one,
Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Kim of California. I do not completely agree with your
assessment that the meetings were taken on your terms or on our
terms because it is my understanding we insisted our travel to
Beijing despite--I mean, even canceling your appearance before
my subcommittee hearing. So anyway, in your meetings with PRC
officials, was the PRC's actions against Micron subject? And if
so, what message was communicated by your delegation? And were
there any countermeasures threatened?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Madam Chairwoman, we absolutely raised the
Micron case and the other cases that I referred to, the
unacceptable steps that China has taken against our firms while
in Beijing. Secretary Blinken also underscored how unacceptable
it is that China has taken these steps against our firms. And
again, it undermines, absolutely contradicts their claim that
they are open for business.
And we'll continue to fight and advocate for our
businesses. Secretary also met with the American business
community there. And what he heard from them was that, one,
yes, this trading relationship and the presence of our
businesses in China remain very important. But No. 2, they have
a range of concerns including these actions. And we are
committed to defending them and advocating for them.
Mrs. Kim of California. My time is up. But I look forward
to continuing this dialog, especially as we have an upcoming
meeting coming up. Thank you.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes, ma'am. I look forward to that. Thank
you.
Mrs. Kim of California. All right. Let me now recognize
Representative Andy Kim for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. Thank you. I really appreciate the
two of you coming out here to chat with us here about some of
these important issues. Secretary Kritenbrink, I want to just
start with you. I guess I wanted to just ask you, how critical
is it to the ability of us to be successful in the Indo-Pacific
for us to be able to build strong coalitions throughout the
Indo-Pacific as well as globally focus on the issues that we
face there? How important is that coalition building?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, vitally important, essential
to everything that we do. It animates really everything that we
do. Whether you come at it from the perspective of building the
kind of region that we want to see, a free an open, prosperous
region that we want to see or if you come at from the
perspective of our China strategy.
It's that aligned pillar that is most important. Whatever
perspective you come at it from which you come at this
challenge, our building coalitions with our like-minded allies,
partners, and friends, building their collective capacity to
counter common threats and to seize shared advantages. That's
central to everything that we do, sir.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. And I appreciate you framed that
within your testimony as well, talking through those five
different pillars of which one of them was certainly about
building those connections throughout the Indo-Pacific and
beyond. I wanted to ask you. We're talking about the recent
diplomatic engagements between the United States and China.
I guess I wanted to ask you what have been the reactions of
different countries and partners in the region to our
diplomatic efforts? Has that been well received? Do they
appreciate that or do they have concerns? I'd be interested in
hearing a little bit more color in that.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Thank you, Congressman. I'd say two
things. First of all, I think the unprecedented steps that
we've taken to strengthen our allied and partner relationships
across the entire region, as the ranking member mentioned a
moment ago, with our five treaty allies, with AUKUS, with
ASEAN, with the Quad and others.
This has been greatly appreciated by the region. And they
have told us repeatedly how important it is for our shared
security and prosperity. I have never seen a stronger demand
signal from the region for American engagement, Congressman.
And I would also say our partners are also very gratified
for our approach to the People's Republic of China. They know
that we've been clear eyed and resolved. And as you know, many
of the steps we've taken together with our partners have been
explicitly designed to counter the threats and challenges posed
by the PRC.
But at the same time, I would argue that our allies and
partners absolutely agree it is in no one's interest to have an
unintended conflict, to have a miscalculation that could veer
into conflict. And so therefore, I think our partners to a
person in our conversations have said they are reassured by our
resolute approach to the PRC and simultaneously they're
reassured that at the same time we are committed to keeping
channels of communication open so that we do not have a
miscalculation.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. The last time I was out in the
region, I heard something similar. I guess I wanted to just
kind of flesh this out a little bit more. I was told by some
counterparts in the region last time I visited that, yes, there
are very legitimate, incredible challenges that we face with
China.
But when it comes to the U.S. and China and that
relationship, they said that it was very important that the
United States act as the responsible actor, that they not be
seen as the provocateur, they not be seen as the aggressor. And
otherwise, that would potentially make it harder for some of
our partners in the region to actually partner with us and
build coalitions. That was something that I heard. Is that
something that you would hear as well from some of your
counterparts?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I hear it on a daily basis. We make sure
that our allies and partners know that they are intrinsically
valuable to us, that they are the central animating feature of
our foreign policy, not just in the China context but within
the China context. You're absolutely right. If we're going to
build a coalition of like-minded nations committed to
protecting and preserving the world's basic international order
and countering all challenges to it, they have to be confident
that, in fact, we are responsibility, that we're clear eyed and
levelheaded.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. One sentence that you said in your
testimony, that was just very illustrative of this. And I want
to just raise it. You said our Indo-Pacific strategy include
our approach to the PRC but is not defined by it.
And then this next sentence, in other words, we have an
Indo-Pacific strategy of which China is a part, not the other
way around. And I just want to highlight that. I think it's
very well structured to look at that bigger picture. And I
applaud you for thinking about that because it allows us not to
be reactionary, just simply reaction which I find oftentimes we
feel like we are on these issues.
The last thing I just want to point out is that some of my
colleagues here have been pushing back and calling for major
cuts to State Foreign Ops. I worry about that in terms of our
ability to implement this strategy that you're talking to us
about. How would those types of cuts impact the ability to
deliver the kind of success that we need in the Indo-Pacific?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Well, Congressman, I would say two things.
First of all, I agree that it's our approach to allies and
partners is where we spend the bulk of our time. Again, it is
important to the region. It is important to our China strategy.
We are, of course, grateful to Congress for the support
that we receive. But some of the discussions that I have heard
about, massive cuts to the State Department budget would be
devastating to what we are trying to achieve, would be
devastating to our ability to compete and outcompete with the
People's Republic of China which is both a regional----
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentleman's time is up.
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. And a global challenge. Thank
you, sir.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Let me now recognize
Representative Davidson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the chairwoman. I thank my
colleagues. I thank you all for coming in today to provide your
testimony. And hopefully we'll make some progress here on
policy.
The previous Administration put Huawei on the Department of
Commerce entity list back in 2019. Our committee discovered
that during a 6-month period in 2020, 2021 less than 1 percent
of licenses were denied and more than 60 billion worth of
licenses were approved, licensing America's sensitive
technology to Huawei. Last week, it was reported that Huawei is
poised to return to the 5G smartphone industry.
And it's also been reported that Huawei has had active
involvement in the Chinese spy base in Cuba. The State
Department is an active and voting member of the dual use
export controls process that Commerce oversees. Mr. Kritenberg,
do you--Kritenbrink, do you--sorry for mispronouncing your
name.
Mr. Kritenbrink. It is my life's burden, Congressman. It's
Kritenbrink.
Mr. Davidson. Kritenbrink, sorry about that. I get some
mispronunciations of Warren from time to time as well. My
apologies. Do you believe Huawei should be given licenses on
any U.S. origin technology? Where is that line?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Well, Congressman, thanks for raising this
very important question. I want to maybe just reiterate a
couple of points that I made to Chairman McCaul. We're
absolutely committed to taking the steps we need to protect
American national security, particularly in these high
technology areas. Somewhat difficult for me to speak to the
details of the licensing decisions on Huawei given that's a
Commerce department decision.
Mr. Davidson. You are a voting member. Do you have a
position? Is 1 percent the right amount to restrict 60 billion
is good?
Mr. Kritenbrink. The position that we take is we should do
whatever we need to do to defend American national security.
And we're committed----
Mr. Davidson. Are you doing it?
Mr. Kritenbrink. We have done that and, yes, we are, sir.
Mr. Davidson. Doing well? Sixty billion is the right
number? Things are going great?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I would say we've taken an unprecedented
number of actions against China including the----
Mr. Davidson. Huawei's growth is doing fine, supports what
State Department is trying to achieve there?
Mr. Kritenbrink. No, I would not say that, sir. I'll
reiterate. We are committed to doing whatever it takes to
defend American----
Mr. Davidson. I suggest----
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. National security.
Mr. Davidson [continuing]. You might not be doing it. So I
just want to highlight that. So even when the United States has
gotten commitments from the People's Republic of China, the
level of adherence to their commitments isn't great. So I'd
like to just get your views briefly, sir, on whether China is
keeping its commitment. Is China adhering to its commitments
under the World Trade Organization?
Mr. Kritenbrink. That's a very broad question, Congressman.
Mr. Davidson. The answer is no.
Mr. Kritenbrink. I could not say--I absolutely could not
say they are.
Mr. Davidson. It takes a long time to list all of them that
they're not keeping. But the answer is no. Did China adhere to
its commitments under the World Health Organization during
COVID on reporting and transparency?
Mr. Kritenbrink. No, we have deep concerns about----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Davidson. God bless you.
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. The lack of transparency.
Mr. Davidson. A simple no answer. Thank you. Did China
adhere to its commitment to not militarize the South China
Seas?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Sir, obviously, the militarization and
land reclamation, much of what's illegal is a deep concern to
the United States.
Mr. Davidson. So no. Did China adhere to its commitment not
to engage in cybertheft of intellectual property?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Obviously, sir, we have a range of
concerns on the cyber front as well.
Mr. Davidson. No, they're not doing that either. Can you
name one commitment that China is complying with?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Look, Congressman, I did not come here
today to defend the People's Republic of China. I'll let
counterparts in Beijing do that. What I did was come to defend
what this Administration has done. We have a clear eyed, tough,
realistic approach to the PRC. And particularly in this realm,
we've been talking about competitive actions.
Mr. Davidson. Well, look, I think that----
Mr. Kritenbrink. It's pretty extraordinary.
Mr. Davidson. I think you need to get your focus a little
bit because they're not coming closer to complying. They're
coming further away from complying.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Could I just add----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Davidson. Maybe part of the approach is NATO. Now
here's my problem. NATO is a defensive alliance that's supposed
to protect European countries from invasion.
Originally it was structured obviously to stop the Soviet
Union and in the aftermath, the Soviet Union, it's grown quite
a lot. But it's a defensive alliance. The charter is defensive,
yet there's power projection efforts underway from NATO in the
Pacific. What's the objective there?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, look, what we are focused on
and what I've tried to indicate in my testimony, we are focused
on the region. We're trying to shape the region----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Davidson. What's the role for NATO in the Pacific?
Mr. Kritenbrink. What I would say is if you read the NATO
summit documents, our partners in NATO recognize what we
recognize, that the Indo-Pacific is central to our future
security and prosperity and that many of China's actions
challenge the rules-based order.
Mr. Davidson. I would ask that you give me a written
response because I think it deserves more than that. What is
the strategy with power projection of NATO in the Pacific. And
I yield back.
Mr. Kritenbrink. I'm happy to----
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentleman's time is up. I now
recognize Representative Mills for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mills. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. Assistant
Secretary, you're very good at eating up time and playing
politics. So I'd really love if you can just try and give me
direct answers.
It's been a lot of skirting around. I've heard you talk
about America not pulling punches multiple times. That's
because we're not throwing any.
I want to talk about something that Chair McCaul brought up
which is failure of compliance. You keep talking about how the
State Department has been very compliant. But we've had to sign
multiple subpoenas in an effort to try and get things to
include the 23 members who signed the dissent cables that
you're very aware of.
So it's disingenuous to even make such a comment. And I
just want to go ahead and point that out for the record. I want
to ask about competitor versus adversary. Can you describe what
the difference between competition and adversary is?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Your question is what's the difference
between an adversary and a competitor?
Mr. Mills. Yes, I appreciate you eating up 30 seconds to
try and do that, yes.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Well, Congressman, that's not what I'm
trying to do. We spend every day on these issues. I spend----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Mills. Sir, I'm asking for the definition, please.
Mr. Kritenbrink. I did not come prepared to give you a
formal definition. But I'm happy to----
Mr. Mills. Do you consider China a competitor or an
adversary?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I would argue that they're both.
Mr. Mills. OK. And I would agree that they are an adversary
more than anything, especially if you look at the geopolitical
alignment between China, Russia, Iran, North Korea, and the
economic resource of sovereign-based warfare that's been
launched for 20-plus years against the west. I think we look at
the expansion, the Belt and Road Initiative. I think that we
look at the domination of rare earth mineral mines throughout
the continent of Africa.
I think that we recognize that China's adversarial actions
has led to a disruption of supply chain capability which is the
intent. That's why they want to expand Eurasian borders, take
Africa, take Oceania. Recreate Maritime Silk Route, if you
will, to choke off Westerners' supply chain.
But they're also utilizing economic coercion in our own
western hemisphere as we're seeing with Honduras and Panama
where they're trying to take over the canal for tariffs and
trade and other types of warfare. And then utilize that
marriage of convenience with Russia for the Chavez in Venezuela
and Pedro in Colombia, now building spy and joint training
bases 92 miles off of my State, the State of Florida, right
there in Cuba.
So I think that's adversarial actions more so than
competitive actions. I will go, though, and say that the day
after Secretary Blinken's trip to China, President Biden
referred to General Secretary Xi as a dictator. Do you agree
that General Xi is a dictator?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, I do not have anything
further to add. I think the President's words speak for
themselves.
Mr. Mills. So do you agree with the President's words?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I think the White House spokesperson and
the Secretary have already spoken to that. The President----
Mr. Mills. So do you agree with the President?
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. Speaks plainly. He speaks for
the American people.
Mr. Mills. Sir, do you agree with President Biden's
comments?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I stand by what I said, Congressman. I do
not have anything to add.
Mr. Mills. No, yes, no, no?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I do not have anything to add.
Mr. Mills. OK. Thanks so much for your non-answer.
Mr. Kritenbrink. I think, Congressman----
Mr. Mills. We're going to move on. Reclaiming my time, sir.
Secretary Blinken also Stated recently that the U.S. seeks to
coexist peacefully with China. Was it U.S. policy during the
cold war to seek peaceful coexistence with the Soviet Union who
we declared as having a dictator? Was it U.S. policy during
World War II to seek peaceful coexistence with Nazi Germany
which we called Hitler a dictator? Because both Soviet Union
and Nazi Germany were run by dictators, correct?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, I tried to lay out we have a
really consequential and complex relationship with China. We
have a long list of concerns, many of which you've already
outlined. We approached those in a resolute and realistic
manner. And we're absolutely committed to doing everything
possible to defend our interest and those of our allies. And--
--
Mr. Mills. Well, I can tell you one of those----
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. We're proud of what we've
done and we're confident in what we've done.
Mr. Mills. Secretary, I'd say that one of those would be to
recognize also the WHO and WEF is being weaponized and utilized
in an effort to also try to gain further, I guess, ingratiating
behaviors by China to try and create this hegemony, not to
mention the fact that they're cozying up to OPEC to try and
utilize that as an energy warfare against this. And meanwhile,
we just had Secretary--or sorry, former Secretary Kerry come in
here and talk about how the greatest existential threat is
climate change, not what we actually really are seeing which is
China as our greatest existential threat. I'm going to ask one
more thing which is in regards to Taiwan.
I just came back from the first and second chain of islands
a few weeks ago. And I can tell you that the over 19 billion
dollars that's being held up by the Director of Defense Trade
Control which does exist under the CivMil Poll for State
Department is still yet to actually approve and send the
materials that are necessary for Taiwan. Is there a reason for
this?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, I think it's realistic to
talk about holding up 19 billion dollars' worth of arms sales.
I think as you know this is a complicated process. It takes
time. We do recognize----
Mr. Mills. I'm very aware of----
Mr. Kritenbrink. We do recognize----
Mr. Mills [continuing]. Form 5, Form 2, DSP 83s, DSP 5s. I
understand the defense process mechanism. I've also seen where
companies like Northrop Grumman, Lockheed, and others have
gotten within 90 days an approval for the DSP 5 export
approvals to send to Iraq and Ukraine and other countries.
And yet this has been months and months and months of being
held up. And so, no, you obviously do not know the process for
the DSP 83 and DSP 5. If you did, then you'd also know the ATF
Form 2, Form 5, Form 9 process as well. This is something I'm
aware of.
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentleman's time is up.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, I'll just reiterate. We're
doing everything within our means to meet our commitments under
the Taiwan Relations Act. We've taken extraordinary steps.
We're also taking extraordinary steps to reduce some of the
delays that you've referred to.
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentleman's time is up. Let me
now recognize Representative Castro for 5 minutes.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairwoman. Mr. Kritenbrink, I
strongly support U.S. engagement with ASEAN and was glad to see
Secretary Blinken visit Southeast Asia last week and meet with
our ASEAN partners. I've been working with the Administration
to extend diplomatic privileges and immunities to ASEAN which
requires an act of Congress.
I'm hopeful that we can--or actually the House voted on the
Partner with ASEAN Act earlier this year. And Senator Menendez
introduced the bipartisan Senate counterpart. I'm hopeful that
we can get this legislation enacted before President Biden goes
to the ASEAN summit this September so he can announce this
important recognition of U.S. ASEAN ties.
So I wanted to ask, what would it mean for the United
States to extend diplomatic privileges and immunities to ASEAN?
And do you agree that'd be helpful if we can get this enacted
in time for the President to make an announcement at the ASEAN
summit this September?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes, it would, Congressman. Very grateful
to you and other Members of Congress for your support of this
Partner with ASEAN Act. As I think you recognized, ASEAN is
really central to our interests as well.
Collectively the ten countries of ASEAN form the world's
fifth largest economy. They're our fourth largest trading
partner. They're central to peace and stability and prosperity
in the region. And again, we support the act. And we would also
support under that act ASEAN sending a representative to
Washington.
Mr. Castro. Wonderful. I hope you'll work with us on
getting this done in time for that summit.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Thank you.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. And after the May 2022 ASEAN Special
Summit, the White House announced that the Administration will
double the Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative within 3
years. I led legislation in the House to strengthen and expand
this program.
And this announcement, of course, was welcome news. Yet the
Fiscal Year 2024 budget request for the State Department did
not include a request for additional funds in line with the
President's announcement in May 2022. How is the State
Department going to find funds to double the YSEALI program?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, maybe two comments. I think
I'll need to take back the specifics of exactly what moneys are
being used to fund YSEALI. But we're absolutely committed to
meeting that target, No. 1.
No. 2, again, having just traveled with the Secretary to
Jakarta for the ASEAN summit and having participated in a
YSEALI event there, this is one of the most effective programs
that we have in the world. As you know, ten countries of
Southeast Asia represent the youngest region in the world, the
fastest growing, most dynamic region in the world. More than
155,000 of these amazing young people are alumni of the YSEALI
program. It's really central to what we're achieving. But I'll
come back to you on the details----
Mr. Castro. Sure.
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. Of our funding.
Mr. Castro. Well, thank you for your work on that. Thank
you to the State Department for really deepening our engagement
with Southeast Asia. Ann Wagner, Republican from Missouri, and
I co-founded the U.S. ASEAN caucus in 2017 to deepen the
relationship between Members of Congress and members of the
legislative bodies of the ten Southeast Asian nations. So thank
you from the executive branch on the work that you're doing.
And then finally, the Administration has recently stepped
up efforts to engage with Pacific Island countries where the
PRC has been incredibly active. And that means that we need to
step up. I believe it's important for us to be good partners
with these countries and be responsive to their needs. So when
you engage with Pacific Island countries, how highly do you
think they rank the need for climate action?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, I think it's existential.
Again, we have worked very hard to step up our game across the
Pacific Islands. Again, we're a member of the Pacific community
there.
These are longstanding historical partners, incredibly
like-minded. And our whole approach is to meet them where they
live so to speak. If you look at our strategy for the Pacific
Islands, the work we've done on partners in the Blue Pacific,
it's all focused on meeting their top priorities. Climate is
probably No. 1. Illegal fishing, investment development, and
people-to-people ties, those would be a short list of their top
interests.
Mr. Castro. And so if we pursued almost 30 percent cuts to
the International Affairs budget that the current proposal in
the House calls for, how would that affect the United States'
ability to be responsive to the needs of Pacific Island
countries in combating climate change? And what does that mean
for U.S. China competition in the region?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Well, Congressman, I would just say as I
mentioned earlier, obviously dramatic cuts to what we're trying
to do in the region would undermine significantly our entire
approach to the region and to China and particularly in air of
strategic competition. I would argue this is not a time for
pulling back. It's a time for stepping forward and increasing
our investments.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, gentlemen, for your testimony today.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Castro. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I now recognize
Representative Barr for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Madam Chair. And Assistant Secretary
Kritenbrink, I am perplexed by the Biden Administration's
obsession with high level dialog with the CCP when Beijing is
clearly ramping up its hostility despite these talks. Did any
Chinese official ever condition or imply that rescheduling the
Secretary's trip to Beijing was conditioned on the FBI not
releasing its findings of the spy balloon report, yes or no?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Representative Barr, we never accepted any
conditions on the Secretary traveling to Beijing. And we made
clear that only after the Secretary visited would there be
other senior----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Barr. Does the Secretary understand and do you
understand that the American people were very dismayed when the
Secretary said that this chapter is simply closed?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Well, Representative Barr, I would say as
I mentioned to Chairman Kim a moment ago the flight of the
Chinese spy balloon over the United States was an outrageous
and unacceptable violation of our sovereignty----
Mr. Barr. Yes, but if I could interject.
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. And territorial integrity. We
took resolute steps and then we shot it down.
Mr. Barr. Assistant Secretary, though, when you say the
chapter is closed and there's no ramifications for the CCP for
them spying on our most sensitive military sites, the American
people are outraged by that.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Could I make one comment, sir?
Mr. Barr. What tangible--let me ask you this question,
Assistant Secretary. What tangible win did Secretary Blinken
come away with from Beijing? And do not give us maintaining
open channels of communication.
Mr. Kritenbrink. We're not chasing the Chinese, sir. We are
focused----
Mr. Barr. You look like you are.
Mr. Kritenbrink. We are absolutely not doing that.
Mr. Barr. I can tell you, you look like you are. My
constituents say you are. They say you are.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Well, sir, I'm sorry, but that view is
mistaken. We went to Beijing very confident in our approach to
the region and to China from a position of strength. We should
not underestimate the importance of trying to prevent----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Barr. Secretary, let's assess that, negotiating from a
position of strength. The last Congress, I authorized the AXIS
Act that required State to report on the PRC's assistance to
Russia with the invasion of Ukraine. The relationship between
General Secretary Xi and Putin is said to have no limits. But
we know China has supplied Russia with satellite imagery, gun
powder, body armor, rifles. Would you assess that the level of
PRC support or transactions to sanction Russian entities has
been significant?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, a couple of things. Again,
we're pursuing a realistic----
Mr. Barr. Is it significant or not?
Mr. Kritenbrink. When it comes to Chinese support for
Russia----
Mr. Barr. Yes.
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. We've expressed our deep
concern over the range of areas where they've provided support.
We've taken actions to sanction Chinese entities when they have
provided support to Russia. And we've continued to warn them
not to provide lethal assistance----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Barr. OK. There is consequences, warning them, tough
talk. Where's the action? Where's the sanctions----
Mr. Kritenbrink. We've taken----
Mr. Barr [continuing]. For material and lethal support by
China to Russia? Where is the action?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Sir, our assessment is they have not
provided lethal assistance to the Russian military. And we have
warned them----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Barr. And the media says you're wrong about that. There
are customs records. Just look at the Wall Street Journal. They
do a better job of uncovering material lethal assistance than
the State Department.
Mr. Kritenbrink. So we're confident----
Mr. Barr. Taiwan, Taiwan, Secretary.
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. In our assessment. And we've
taken steps against a number of Chinese entities already.
Mr. Barr. We need sanctions. On July 3----
Mr. Kritenbrink. We've already done that, sir.
Mr. Barr [continuing]. State Department pulled down a
proposed license for the export of defense articles to Taiwan.
The State Department pulled down a proposed license for the
export of defense articles to Taiwan. This happened the same
day Secretary Yellen's trip to Beijing was announced. Is the
State Department limiting arms sales and defense exports to
Taiwan in the hopes of placating Beijing?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Absolutely not, sir. And I spoke to this
earlier, and I'll need to take it back just to make sure we're
talking about the same case. But I'm aware of a case 2 weeks
ago, direct commercial sales case that was mistakenly notified.
It since been formally--it was withdrawn and then it's
already been notified. And it had nothing to do with anything
else. We do not pull our punches.
We've already provided more than five billion dollars'
worth of arms to our Taiwan partners in this Administration.
We're taking a range of other steps to meet our commitments.
Last year, I believe we approved 13 arms sales which is a
record in 1 year.
Mr. Barr. OK.
Mr. Kritenbrink. But we do not pull our punches----
Mr. Barr. Well----
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. And we will not.
Mr. Barr. OK. Has the State Department returned to its
policy of bundling arms in defense exports to Taiwan to not
anger China?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Absolutely not, sir. And I think the 13
arms sales last year prove that.
Mr. Barr. OK. Well, I think the State Department should be
less focused on pulling down licenses and more focused on
getting arms to Taiwan immediately. Let me ask you about the
competitive actions calendar in my remaining time. Since the
beginning of this year, multiple high level Biden
Administration officials have met with PRC officials or visited
the PRC itself, including yourself.
Through the course of this, the PRC has continued to commit
genocide, intimidate Taiwan, hack U.S. Government email
accounts. But there's reporting that the State Department is
intervening with other agencies to delay implementation of
sanctions and export controls. Have you or anyone at State
encouraged any other agency to delay implementation of a
sanction or export control, yes or no?
Mr. Kritenbrink. We do not pull our punches, and we are
committed to taking whatever steps we need to.
Mr. Barr. My time is expired. I do not think the Assistant
Secretary answered that question. I'd invite my colleagues to
followup. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Let me now recognize
Representative Sherman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. As we confront China and as we have
a budget hearing on the very bureaus that confront China in its
own area should point out that we cannot beat China on the
cheap. I wish it were true.
I wish we could brush them aside at no cost. But budgetary
proposals reflect values. And some budgetary proposals show
that they value the idea of losing because if we cut USAID
substantially, if we cut our diplomacy substantially, and if we
cut our public diplomacy substantially, we will lose.
We had the spy balloon, and we had another couple of other
possible balloons. Some people said that would just be a blip.
Now that we've had several months to examine the apparatus, has
your bureau received a classified briefing on what the major
spy balloon actually had on it?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, I have not. I'll just
reiterate what we said earlier. We took this very seriously.
Mr. Sherman. And I will point out that I have not and our
colleagues have not. And they have had months to figure out. We
deliberately did not shoot down the balloon over Alaska or
Montana because we wanted to see everything that was on it.
And we allowed the balloon to go over military bases. We
made sure to the best of our ability it did not gather any more
information, all in an effort to find out what was on the
balloon. And they have not told you and they have not told me
what was on the balloon. So I look forward to working with the
subcommittee and full committee to get a classified briefing on
that.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes, sir. And I'll be happy to take that
back.
Mr. Sherman. This one is marked the 70th anniversary of the
armistice concluded by President Eisenhower to end the war,
1953 in Korea. But we still do not have a peace treaty. Now I'm
not in favor of making unilateral concessions to the government
of Pyongyang. On the other hand, a confidence building measure
that does not do anything more for them than it does for us
would seem to be a step toward dealing with more difficult
issues. Does the Administration want to see a peace treaty
ending the war of 1953?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, thank you for your question.
I think candidly speaking rather than focusing on history, I
think we would rather focus on the immediate----
Mr. Sherman. You got a lot of people working. You can focus
on a lot of things.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Obviously, sir, we've Stated what our
long-term aspirations might be. But the immediate threat is the
growing threat from North Korea's missile and nuclear program
and their unprecedented number of launches. And we're focused
on two things. We continue----
Mr. Sherman. You do not think that taking some steps on
some other issues would build a framework or be a step forward
on dealing with the more significant issues?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Candidly speaking, right now, I do not,
sir. I think our focus right now is twofold. It's demonstrating
the strength of our deterrent capabilities, the strength of our
security treaty commitments to our Korean and Japanese allies
and/or resolve to make sure we----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Sherman. I would just point out your bureau is
relatively well funded. You can walk, chew gum, and shop on
Amazon all at the same time.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes, sir.
Mr. Sherman. And to have the 70th anniversary of a war come
up without concluding a formal peace treaty is just one of the
many irritants. Finally, and also focusing on the budget, are
you aware that--we're all concerned about immigration. But
we're particularly concerned about when the nuclear family is
separated.
It's one thing to say you cannot bring your adult brother
in. You cannot bring your cousin in. But when spouses are
separated, when minor children are separated from one or their
other parent, if any other country did that deliberate and for
months and years we would--DRL would write them up in the human
rights report. Do we sometimes have circumstances where the
spouse of an American citizen is not given a chance to come to
the United States for a period of over a year or even over 5
years?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, I'm not--so this is an
immigration policy question. I'm not----
Mr. Sherman. No, this is a State Department staffing
question. You've got your visa officers funded by the budget
you're here to testify.
Mr. Kritenbrink. I understand.
Mr. Sherman. Do we have enough people--and I realize it's
much more fun to talk about----
Mr. Kritenbrink. No, I understand.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. The great issues.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. But you're the bees office.
Mr. Kritenbrink. No, I----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Sherman. Do you have enough people to get it done
within a reasonable amount of time?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I think the responsible thing for me to do
is take that back to my colleague, Rena Bitter. This is the
Secretary for Consulate Affairs and come back to you----
Mr. Sherman. I would hope your budget----
Mr. Kritenbrink [continuing]. With a reasoned answer.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Request in the future would
adequately staff things so that spouses can be unified in
months and even weeks rather than years or decades. I yield
back.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Understood, sir. Thank you.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Let me now recognize
Representative Moran for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Madam Chair. Secretary Kritenbrink,
the last time you were before this committee, you refused to
answer Representative Huizenga's question regarding whether you
or Deputy Secretary Wendy Sherman ever delayed Uyghur Human
Rights Policy Act sanctions. Months following that hearing,
Reuters reported that the State Department was, in fact,
delaying human rights sanctions. So I want to revisit that line
of questions. Have Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act sanctions
ever been on the competitive action calendar?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, I'll reiterate what I've said
earlier. We've already taken a range of actions to hold Chinese
officials to account on Xinjiang.
Mr. Moran. But I'm not asking about a range of actions.
Mr. Kritenbrink. And we'll continue to do so.
Mr. Moran. I'm asking specifically about Uyghur Human
Rights Policy Act sanctions. Have they ever been on the
competitive action calendar?
Mr. Kritenbrink. As a matter of policy, we do not talk
about issues before they're decided. So issues that are pre-
decisional and deliberative are usually not matters that we
would engage in.
Mr. Moran. Well, how long does the competitive action
calendar process take typically?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Sir, I think I mentioned earlier in
response to the chairman's comment that this matter is now in
the investigatory and oversight process.
Mr. Moran. I'm not asking a substance----
Mr. Kritenbrink. No.
Mr. Moran [continuing]. Question. I'm asking a process
question. Because you said you do not want to talk about it
while it's ongoing. So I want to know how long does that
competitive action calendar process normally take?
Mr. Kritenbrink. We have an informal, deliberative, and
pre-decisional compilation of actions under consideration. But
we do not preview sanctions or share pre-decisional policy
discussions. So----
Mr. Moran. Well, I'm glad you read that answer. But I asked
you a process question.
Mr. Kritenbrink. No, that's the answer.
Mr. Moran. It's a process question. How long does that
calendar process take so that I know when I can come back and
ask you about the substance of that issue?
Mr. Kritenbrink. No, sir. What I would say is putting
together informal deliberative pre-decisional compilations of
ideas and pre-decisional potential actions that I cannot--
there's not a timeline. There's not a formal process.
Mr. Moran. So let's talk about then Uyghur Sanctions Act,
sanctions that have already been through the process. Do you
know of any that have been through the process and ended, have
completed that process? So it's not pre-decisional. It's post-
decisional.
Mr. Kritenbrink. Well, no, sir. What I would say here is
when we take steps such as I mentioned a moment ago, the dozens
of actions, the dozens of individuals and firms, I think it's
more than 50, 51 Chinese entities, almost 60, and at least 4
PRC----
Mr. Moran. I heard you say that earlier. I'm talking
about----
Mr. Kritenbrink. My point, sir, is once----
Mr. Moran [continuing]. The Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act
sanctions. Have any of them completed the process and have any
sanctions been issued? That's a post-decisional question, not a
pre-decisional question.
Mr. Kritenbrink. I want to make sure I understand. When we
impose sanctions on a Chinese official, my understanding is
those sanctions remain in place until in perpetuity or until we
would decide to withdraw.
Mr. Moran. True. But the decision has been made. Has a
decision been made to sanction anybody under the Uyghur Human
Rights Policy Act?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I do not believe that we have taken steps
specifically under that act, sir.
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Moran. Has anyone in the Administration--has anyone in
the Administration ever delayed any sanctions brought or
sanctions brought before the--under the competitive action
calendar through the Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act? Have
delayed any of that before?
Mr. Kritenbrink. I think I would say two things. Again, any
matter that's pre-decisional, I cannot really comment on. What
I would underscore and I did mention this last time I had the
honor being before the committee, we're committed to continuing
to carry out our responsibilities under U.S. law.
We will continue to hold Chines officials who are carrying
out these egregious policies to account. We will use all tools
at our disposal. And we've used a range of GloMag and other----
Mr. Moran. All right. So stepping outside of any specific
action, has anyone told you from the White House to you that
you should not move forward with any sanctions under the Uyghur
Human Rights Policy Act?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Sir, I'll just reiterate. We do not
comment on pre-decisional matters. But we are committed to
using all tools at our disposal. And we do intend to use all
tools including the act.
Mr. Moran. In my remaining time, let me switch gears.
Recently, Secretary Blinken went to the People's Republic of
China. When he came back, he said, quote, ``he did not support
Taiwan independence.''
In fact, that seems to diverge from the Taiwanese Relations
Act which takes no explicit position on the future of Taiwan
other than, quote, ``the expectation of the future of Taiwan
will be determined by peaceful means.'' It sounds like to me
that Secretary Blinken is changing U.S. policy as it relates to
the determination of Taiwan's future. Do you know why he would
make such a statement?
Mr. Kritenbrink. Congressman, respectfully, that's
absolutely incorrect. It's long been a matter of U.S. policy
for decades that we do not support Taiwan independence. And
again, it has been for decades.
Our One China Policy has not changed. It's based on the
Taiwan Relations Act, the three joint communiques and six
assurances to Taiwan. Again, we have Stated for decades that we
do not support Taiwan independence. We also State that we
absolutely oppose any attempts to change the cross-strait
status quo. We are committed to maintaining peace and security
and to deterring precipitous action by the PRC.
Mr. Moran. Madam Chair, my time has expired.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you.
Mr. Moran. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you very much. I would like
to thank the witnesses for engaging the members and answering
the questions. You can see we have a lot of concerns from the
questions that we asked and the responses.
Some of the responses, we did not get in full. So we hope
that we can continue this dialog so we can get that full
responses from you in a timely manner instead of saying that we
will come back and give you the full response in a different
setting. This is what the hearing is about.
We all know and recognize that CCP is also an existential
threat to the United States, to our partners, and the
international rules-based system. And we've heard over and over
the Biden Administration and the President himself and the
State Department officials such as yourself have verbally
recognized that sentiment. But we just do not feel that your
actions and the objectives do not--they just do not meet the
challenge at hand.
And your recent travels to China since the last time we
were supposed to have a hearing with you as a witness to the
time that we're having this hearing today, there have been to
my knowledge about four counts of high level officials from our
State Department traveling to China to meet with our
adversaries, your counterparts you would say. So I just wanted
to echo that our U.S. leadership in the region is critically
important to engage in the conversation to discuss the economic
security and human rights concerns that we have. While we
encourage diplomatic engagements with our allies, also with
allies and adversaries alike, I think it's critically important
and I hope you recognize that you need to engage Congress and
especially before you travel to the region.
I hope you will come and talk to us so you can carry our
congressional concerns as you meet and have a dialog with our
adversaries. In this case, we're talking about PRC. So we
shouldn't be holding back on standing up for our values, and
this is what you are trying to do as diplomats representing our
country.
So I look forward to getting more fulsome answers to our
questions about Taiwan and I mentioned in my questions about
the arms sales and competitive action calendar, in our
classified meeting later this week. So with that, I would like
to turn it over to my ranking member for closing comments you
have.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. First off, I
appreciate both the witnesses being here and being available to
us on a regular basis. Mr. Ronning, you probably have to buy
Mr. Kritenbrink lunch today since he took the bulk of the
questions.
We are in a strategic competition. The 75 years post-World
War II, I think we can be proud of what we did as a country
creating relative peace, stability, prosperity throughout the
world, rebuilding Europe, creating prosperity in Asia, and
lifting hundreds of thousands, millions out of poverty. It's
something we can be proud of.
But the world is different today. And I think we recognize
what that world looks like. And again, as I said in some of my
statements, I applaud the work that the Administration is doing
and that we're trying to do in a bipartisan way here and
Congress supporting that.
It is creating new alliances. It's creating value-based
alliances that value democracy, free markets, freedom of
navigation, and a rules-based order. It's looking at
modernizing mechanisms of conflict and dispute resolution.
It is rebuilding our presence around the world and staying
engaged in the world but in different ways with our allies. And
again, it's not a given what the next decade or two decades
look like. But I do think the foundational work in this region
has been seminal.
And again, I hope to continue to try to do this in a
bipartisan way. And it does require engagement. It does require
aid and development. It does not require presence with our
partners and allies.
So I am an optimist. It is not going to be easy work. It is
going to require engagement both with our allies and
adversaries. But I think the proof is in--when I hear the
rhetoric coming out of Beijing, I do think they're very worried
about the success that we're having creating these partnerships
and the economic engagement, the strength of our own economy
which is now the strongest in the world.
The fact that inflation is coming down, the fact that I
look at the economic indicators in China, and I think there are
a lot of red lights going off. And I applaud Secretary Yellen
for going there. We do not want China to go into the tank
because that pulls all of us down and can probably pull the
world into a global recession.
So again, I think we are operating from a place of
strength. I applaud where we are right now. It is going to take
all of us working together not as Democrats or Republicans but
as Americans and as folks that want to see a prosperous and
fair and open 21st century.
So again, Madam Chairwoman, thank you for holding this
hearing. Thank you to the witnesses for being here. And again,
I look forward to working together.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. And I echo the ranking
member's remarks for thanking you for being here. I do not know
about buying each other lunch, but the members also had some
quite good questions. But probably they would appreciate the
full response in writing if you may be able to have the time to
do so.
And pursuant to committee rules, all members may have 5
days to submit statements, questions, and extraneous materials
for the record subject to the length limitation. So without
objection, the committee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:39 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
