- GREAT POWER COMPETITION IMPLICATIONS IN AFRICA: THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND ITS PROXIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

GREAT POWER COMPETITION IMPLICATIONS IN AFRICA: THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
AND ITS PROXIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

July 18, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-39

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-291 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
DARRELL ISSA, California
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BRIAN MAST, Florida
KEN BUCK, Colorado
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
ANDY BARR, Kentucky
RONNY JACKSON, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
American Samoa
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
JIM BAIRD, Indiana
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York
CORY MILLS, Florida
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

BRAD SHERMAN, California
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
AMI BERA, California
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
DINA TITUS, Nevada
TED LIEU, California
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
COLIN ALLRED, Texas
ANDY KIM, New Jersey
SARA JACOBS, California
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
Florida
GREG STANTON, Arizona
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
JIM COSTA, California
JASON CROW, Colorado
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Africa

JOHN JAMES, Chair
CHRISTOPHER SMITH, New Jersey,       SARA JACOBS, California, Ranking
YOUNG KIM, California                    Member
JIM BAIRD, Indiana
THOMAS KEAN JR., New Jersey
CORY MILLS, Florida

SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
Florida
COLIN ALLRED, Texas
JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois

Joe Foltz, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Sany, Joseph, Vice President, Africa Center at the United States
Institute of Peace.............................................     6
Hudson, Cameron, Senior Associate, Africa Program at Center for
Strategic & International Studies..............................    16
Bax, Pauline, Deputy Program Director, Africa International
Crisis Group...................................................    24

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    49
Hearing Minutes..................................................    51
Hearing Attendance...............................................    52

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    53

GREAT POWER COMPETITION IMPLICATIONS IN
AFRICA: THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND
ITS PROXIES

Tuesday, July 18, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Africa,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:01 p.m., in
room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John James
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. James [presiding]. The Committee on Foreign Affairs
Subcommittee on Africa will come to order. The purpose of this
hearing is to analyze the strategic aims in Africa of the
Russian Federation and its proxies, and examine how the U.S.
can provide a positive set of alternative options that advance
the interests of Africans and Americans alike.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Next week Vladimir Putin will host an estimated 50 leaders
from African nations in St. Petersburg under the banner of the
Russia and Africa Economic and Humanitarian Forum. This forum
purports to demonstrate how Russia's experience in maintaining
domestic security is beneficial and worthy of being copied by
African countries.
The fallacy of these claims is clear, it is on display as
they hold this forum just 1 week after bringing the Black Sea
Grain Initiative to an end, and 1 month after the Wagner Group
exposed the Kremlin's multitude of internal problems with its
march on Moscow. With us today are three distinguished experts
on the subject to discuss the implications of the Russian
Federation and its proxies' influence throughout Africa.
Joseph Sany is the vice president of the Africa Center, and
the United States Institute for Peace. Cameron Hudson is a
senior associate in the Africa Program at the Center for
Strategic and International Studies. Pauline Bax is the Africa
Program deputy director at the International Crisis Group, I
thank each of you for being here today.
Russia primarily pursues four core national interests in
Africa. First, Moscow seeks to challenge western influence in
Africa at a relatively low cost. Second, Russia eyes financial
ties with African economies not tied to the U.S. dollar as a
part of an attempt to evade sanctions and finance its war on
Ukraine. Third, Russian military cooperation in Africa through
arms sales, defense cooperation agreements, and the Wagner
Group promotes its global footprint, and precious NATO southern
flank.
Fourth, its activities drive continued relevance on the
international stage, and demonstrate its ability to shape
global events. Russia seeks to rekindle its soviet era
historical ties with ruling parties such as the African
National Congress, ANC in South Africa, which Moscow, or more
appropriately, the USSR, supported during the Apartheid era.
Similarly, the rise of Putin coincides with renewed
engagement toward Sudan, which Moscow has courted since the
1970's, including breaking the arms embargo in Darfur. Moscow's
disinformation and political influence campaigns have been
dangerously effective. About thirty thousand students from
African students were studying in Russian universities as of
early 2023.
Russian State owned media outlets, notably Sputnik and RT,
broadcast widely in Africa, and promote narratives that support
Russian foreign policy aims and criticize major western powers,
particularly the United States. Russian backed influence
operations employ social media, and manipulation including by
troll farms, pseudo policy efficacy, and think tank proxies.
Russia is also the top arms dealing entity on the African
continent. Its security presence is bolstered by a growing
network of Wagner contracts. In the CAR it serves as a
Presidential bodyguard detachment for President Touadera, and a
Wagner employee even serves as national security advisor. In
Sudan, Wagner has backed General Hemedti's Janjaweed militias
now rebranded as the rapid support forces.
Simply put, Russia is a destabilizing force in Africa that
aspires to create power vacuums and exploit African countries
in order to weaken U.S. and western influence. I am principally
concerned that the agreements and commitments in next week's
summit, including in areas like critical and precious minerals,
will enable Russia to continue funding its war in Ukraine off
the backs of Africans, and continue to be a clear and present
danger to the United States of America.
I thank the witnesses for appearing today, and I look
forward to their testimony.
The chair now recognizes Ranking Members Rep. Jacobs. Ms.
Jacobs?
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here. This hearing is particularly timely.
We saw yesterday Russia pull out of the landmark Black Sea
Grain Initiative, which will likely worsen hunger and famine
around the world, especially in the Sahel, and the Horn of
Africa.
Many countries in Africa are already feeling the impact of
global inflation, the climate crisis, and conflict, and this
deal was really a lifeline to help bring down food prices, and
enabled agencies to get food to those who need it most. In
particular, East Africa has suffered from severe droughts, and
now extreme flooding, which has scorched, destroyed, or washed
away crops for millions of people.
About eighty percent of East Africa's grain is exported
from Russia and Ukraine, and over 50 million people across East
Africa face the risk of hunger now that this deal is suspended.
And just last month the Wagner Group attempted a mutiny on
Russia Federation that has left questions about the group's
future on the continent, particularly in Mali and the Central
African Republic where we have seen Russian mercenaries engage
in heinous human rights violations, and offered regimes
security.
It is not surprising that Russia and its proxies are
increasing their engagement on the continent. It has the
youngest population, and it is expected to outpace Asia as the
fastest growing region in the world with six out of the ten
fastest growing economies. The United States should continue to
increase its engagement on the continent as well, but while we
do so we also need to bear in mind lessons from the cold war.
The continent has already seen what happens when two powers
fight for influence and strategic alignment. African
populations lose, and we risk further instability. Too often in
the cold war the United States supported authoritarian actors
for short term alignment or influence, which had harmful
impacts all over the global south. Whether it was in Chad,
Angola, or the DRC, U.S. efforts to counter the Soviet Union
and its proxies often led to democratic back fighting,
violence, and left populations deeply suspicious of the United
States.
A Rand study confirmed this, and found that U.S. security
assistance in Africa during the cold war increased civil wars
and insurgencies because of this exact dynamic. The Biden
Administration has taken some of these lessons to heart. They
have been clear that they are not going to force African
countries to choose between the United States and other
strategic competitors. African leaders do not want to make zero
sum choices between the west and Russia because of some of
these lessons, and deep sensitivities over sovereignty and the
violent legacies of colonization.
And frankly, we shouldn't force African leaders to make
these choices because we could be on the wrong end of that
ultimatum. We also need to be mindful of the ripple effects of
how our policies, and how engagement on the continent is
perceived around the world. For example we have recently seen
calls to designate Wagner a foreign terrorist organization,
which could not only have unintended humanitarian consequences,
but likely not even be effective to counter the Wagner Group.
Additional I, and many of my colleagues, including Chairman
James, are huge supporters of Ukraine, and have approved
millions of dollars to support their fight against Russia's
invasion. But we know that this has caused some resentment
among some African States who are now severely affected by
global food insecurity, and are experiencing humanitarian
crises that have been severely underfunded.
This does not mean that we need to support Ukraine any
less, but it does mean that the United States and Congress need
to step up our commitments and engagement with the African
continent. In doing so we should ensure our policy tools are
properly calibrated and not going to exacerbate existing
grievances. So, I am looking forward to hearing from our expert
witnesses here today on their perspectives on these few
questions, and what they recommend for policymakers to address
these challenges on the continent.
I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you, madam. Other members of the committee
are reminded that opening statements may be submitted for the
record. We are pleased to have again as distinguished panel
witnesses before us here today, Dr. Joseph Sany is vice
president of the Africa Center at the United States Institute
for Peace. Again, Cameron Hudson is a senior associate in the
Africa Program at the Center for Strategic International
Studies.
Pauline Bax is the Africa Program deputy director at the
International Crisis Group. I thank each of you again for being
here today, and your full statements will be made a part of the
record.
Mr. James. And I will ask each of you to keep your spoken
remarks to about 5 minutes in order to allow time for member
questions.
I now recognize Dr. Sany for his opening statement. Dr.
Sany?

STATEMENT OF DR. JOSEPH SANY, VICE PRESIDENT, AFRICA CENTER AT
THE UNITED STATES INSTITUTE OF PEACE

Dr. Sany. Chairman James, Ranking Member Jacobs, and
distinguished committee members, I very much appreciate the
opportunity to discuss great power competition in Africa,
specifically how the actions of Russia and its proxies harm
both African and U.S. interests, and how African leaders can
better work together to counter Moscow's destructive activities
in Africa.
As noted, as a vice president at the United States
Institute of Peace, I direct the work of USIP's Africa Center,
although the views expressed here are my own. As part of Africa
work, USIP is engaging with countries in the Sahel, and Central
Africa to promote political stability, and counter violence,
extremism, and its threats to the U.S. national security.
I recently returned from the Sahel where Russia and its
proxies are quite active. I will discuss four key points from
my written testimony. The first, Russia and its proxies see
three main goals in Africa. I will not elaborate more, because
Chairman, you have clearly articulated those goals. I will not
repeat for the sake of time.
But the second point though, Russia's dark rule, often
through proxies such as the Wagner Group, deepens instability.
As demonstrated by the humiliating retreat in Cabo Delgado in
2020 in Mozambique, to human rights abuses and crimes in
Central African Republic and Mali, Russia's mercenaries mostly
engage in weapon sales, indiscriminate killing, and rape and
corruption, which erodes accountability and democracy, which
African value, and the United States makes considerable
investment in supporting.
There is a predictable pattern of engagement by Russia and
its proxies for their malign activities. By relying on such
factors as past relationship with Soviet Union, the
availability of critical natural resources, the backing by
corrupt political and military elites, and the geopolitical
opportunities of securing strategic military basis and maritime
routes, one can predict Russia's future targets for malign
activities, and U.S. policymakers should anticipate these
possibilities.
No. 4, Russia and its proxies hope that by deepening the
chaos in the Sahel and other places in Africa, they can
persuade the United States and other democracies to abandon the
region. The U.S. and its allies should stay engaged. The
engagement should include exposing Russian destructive
activities through supporting African media and investigative
journalism.
Strengthening Governors, strategic partnerships, and
economic growth through initiatives like the 2019 Global
Fragility Act, the African Group and Opportunity Act, and the
goals of the Prosper Africa Initiatives. Supporting Africa's
equal rule in multilateral institutions such as the G20, and
the U.N. Security Council, and promoting regional security
cooperation wherein African States lead. You do not just take
another western democracy acting as enablers.
In conclusion, it is worth asking why Americans should care
about competing in Africa, or investing in its stability. The
answer is clear, Africa is posed to shape the 21st century as
the world's fastest growing demographic and economic power.
Africa's trajectory will significantly shape the world in which
our children and grandchildren will live. Therefore, the U.S.
should not surrender the field to destructive Russian actors.
The good news is that thanks to your leadership and
support, we are improving our policy tools, and we have many
willing and able partners in Africa. Thank you for inviting me
to testify, I am looking forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Sany follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. James. Thank you for your statement, Dr. Sany.
I now recognize Mr. Hudson for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF CAMERON HUDSON, SENIOR ASSOCIATE, AFRICA PROGRAM
AT CENTER FOR STRATEGIC & INTERNATIONAL STUDIES

Mr. Hudson. Chairman James, Ranking Member Jacobs,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today regarding the impact of Russian
Federation activities in Africa and its impact on U.S. national
security interests there. While I am affiliated with the Center
for Strategic & International Studies, CSAS does not take
policy positions, and so the viewpoints I will be presenting
today are my own.
Next week, as you said, Mr. Chairman, Russia will convene
its second Russia Africa Summit in St. Petersburg. The first
time it convened such a summit in 2019 forty-three African
heads of State and government arrived, exceeding the attendance
of similar summits convened by the United Kingdom and France.
But this summit is merely a rare public measure of an extensive
set of policies Russia is pursuing in Africa in particular that
manifests itself as both opportunistic and strategic.
Like my colleague, I will skim over some of the strategic
objectives of the Russian Federation, because I think you
summarized them extremely well. But I do want to underline a
couple of elements that you raised, Mr. Chairman. These
strategic objectives are coupled with the set of tactics that
Russia employs to maximize the impact of this strategy. Here we
do not see Russia creating fault lines in societies, or
engineering anti-western sentiment.
Rather, Russia targets and exploits those countries where
these fault lines already exist. It then exacerbates and
weaponizes them through a potent mix of corruption,
disinformation, and propaganda. Coupled with its messaging,
Moscow's deployment of security forces like the Wagner Group
has afforded it the ability to manipulate everything from
public sentiment, to election outcomes, to the local security
environment, all under the guise of plausible deniability.
Specifically Moscow targets weak, unstable, and failing
States to seek their entry for influence. It has used this
formula in countries like Mali, the Central African Republic,
and Sudan, all of which were in the throes of violence,
instability, and political uncertainty, and possessing a dearth
of transparency or democratic institutions. This political and
security involvement often comes with a commercial component.
Under these arrangements, Russian security assistance,
political support, and financial interests become entirely
intertwined with those of host countries, making untangling
these relationships even more difficult than traditional
bilateral ties. Finally there is no ideology underpinning
Russia's inroads as during the cold war, this is transactional.
Under these terms African leaders get political cover from
Russia at the United Nations and other international fora. They
get security for themselves at home, a continued hold on power,
off book revenue streams, and a counter to western led reform
processes. In this scenario the costs are borne by Africans
themselves, who experience an uptick in violence, human rights
abuses, and social strife, along with a further hollowing out
of local governance institutions, extensions of illegitimate
governments, and decreasing levels of economic growth and
development.
There is no question that in deepening and expanding these
ties, U.S. national security interests are being impacted. From
the threat of spreading jihadist violence that Russia cannot
effectively contain in places where it is deployed, to
destabilizing new African States bordering these countries, to
establishing basing and military agreements along critical
global choke points, Russia's search for relevance on the
international stage and new sources of revenue undermine U.S.
interests and values around democracy, stability, and
transparency.
In response to these challenges, there are a number of
steps that Washington can and should be taking to counter this
malign influence. First, Washington is positioned to help
counteract false and misleading Russian narratives in African
States through their support to local level watch dogs, and
through online efforts to track and trace online
disinformation.
We must empower local partners to understand where the
propaganda is coming from, and who is spreading it. Second,
U.S. foreign assistance should be targeted and ramped up in
those African States where we know Russia is seeking new
inroads so that U.S. assistance is better aligned to help host
nations more effectively counter the nature and scope of the
threat posed to them.
Third, Washington must approve its own messaging toward
African nations, which have made clear, as the ranking member
suggested, that they do not want to be the subjects of a new
cold war competition. And last, in countries experiencing
democratic backsliding like Burkina Faso and Guinea, it would
be consistent with past practice to punish those States through
sanctions and isolation as an expression of our democratic
values.
But we should do so knowing that we risk ceding further
influence to Russia. Instead we must not concede these
setbacks, and be able to deepen our engagement out of our own
national interest without conferring praise, or legitimacy, or
excusing anti-democratic behavior in our partners. I thank you
for your attention, and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hudson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Hudson, for your testimony.
I now recognize Ms. Bax for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PAULINE BAX, DEPUTY PROGRAM DIRECTOR, AFRICA
INTERNATIONAL CRISIS GROUP

Ms. Bax. Thank you, Chairman James, thank you Member
Jacobs, distinguished members, thank you for the opportunity to
address the subcommittee. I'm the deputy director for Africa
International Crisis Group, a global nonprofit organization
that hopes to prevent, mitigate, and help these African
countries. I have spent the past 3 years researching Russia's
influence in Africa, and I have presided to its use on the
continent. I will start by highlighting three attitudes toward
Russia and the west----
Mr. James. Madam Bax, one moment please. Turn your
microphone on please.
Ms. Bax. Sorry.
Mr. James. Your words are very important, we want to make
sure we record them, thank you.
Ms. Bax. I will start by highlighting three attitudes
toward Russia and the west that are common in Africa since
Russia's full scale invasion of Ukraine. First, African leaders
are resentful of the intense focus of western countries on this
war, as they feel that the west is diverting its diplomatic,
financial, and military resources to Ukraine at the expense of
other places suffering insecurity and violence.
Second, some African countries have an endearing good will
toward Russia that is born from the Soviet Union's support for
African liberation movements during the cold war. More
generally there is also good will toward other nations that
advocate non-western governance models. Third, African
governments are unpersuaded by the west's push for them to
abandon their longstanding preference for non-alignment, and
join the campaign against Russia.
Such views aside, most African leaders remain acutely aware
that partnering with Russia could harm their relations with the
United States and other foreign powers that are prepared to
support democratically elected governments with financial,
technical, or military assistance. Their dominant focus is on
managing economic headwinds as ordinary people are struggling
to make ends meet.
Most African heads of State are uninterested in
strengthening political ties with Moscow today, especially if
doing so will compromise relations with Washington. When it
comes to the Wagner Group, which until recently was Russia's
main proxy, it does not have a good reputation on the
continent, and deservedly so. But it has thrived in a few
unstable places where leaders harbor grievances about the
west's perceived track record.
It has been effective in playing upon existing anti-western
sentiments, targeting France in particular, and exploiting the
resentment of Washington's historical inattention to African
politics. Unfortunately in Africa today there is an increasing
demand for military solutions. Countries that have hired Wagner
have been prepared to overlook the company's immoral behavior
because they value its flexibility, and its willingness to
engage in ground combat.
The Central African Republic is one such country. Wagner
was instrumental in securing the president's hold on power in
2020 when rebel forces threatened to overrun the capital. In
Mali, which has long struggled to quell an array of Islamist
insurgencies, Russia is now the main security partner. Mali's
military leadership has suspended its relationship with France
and the U.N. peacekeeping mission, and Wagner troops are now
patrolling alongside the Malian army.
Wagner is also active in Sudan, though mainly in gold
mining. So far it appears to have limited influence on the
country's spiral into civil war. In Libya, several hundred
Wagner fighters are reportedly guarding military basis and oil
facilities, and the group appears to be using the country as a
logistical hub for its activities elsewhere in Africa. Against
this backdrop, Washington would be best served by following two
approaches.
First, Washington could try to influence the circumstances
that have enabled Wagner's rise and relevance in Africa. And
these circumstances will remain at play regardless of how
Wagner evolves. Programming that seeks to maintain relations
and lines of communication while supporting good governance and
business practices align with this approach.
Second, the U.S. should avoid policies that could rupture
relations with governments that have hired the group, or are
considering doing so. We know that there is a conversation in
Washington about the prospect of designating Wagner a foreign
terrorist organization, an FTO listing would have this effect.
While Wagner deserves condemnation, this move would further
alienate governments who have contracted Wagner, jeopardize
diplomacy, and crisis response efforts in those countries, and
likely worsen humanitarian crisis given that aid groups and
businesses tend to de-risk in jurisdictions where FTO groups
operate. At the same time it is unlikely to significantly
restrict the group's operations, or that of its possible
successors.
Existing sanctions such as the transnational criminal
organization designation are bringing attention to Wagner's
profit driven behavior, while avoiding the specific pitfalls of
an FTO, and they should be enforced vigorously. Thank you for
your attention today, I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bax follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. James. Thank you, Ms. Bax.
I now recognize myself for questioning.
I want to piggy back on what you just said, enforcement.
Can you briefly outline maybe a few gaps in enforcement the
U.S. Government has shown, and some ways we can address those
gaps in enforcement? Specifics would be welcome.
Ms. Bax. Enforcement in terms of diplomatic engagement?
Mr. James. Yes, diplomatic engagement specific with the
terror organizations. If not designated a terror organization,
what current policies are we failing to implement that could
have more impact, more effect?
Ms. Bax. Well, as I just said in my oral statement, so we
advocate, or I advocate for a more rigorous application of
existing sanctions, which could for example restrict the
financial flows that go to the Wagner organization.
Mr. James. More rigorous, so more policies, or is somebody
not doing their job effectively here?
Ms. Bax. Doing the job effectively.
Mr. James. OK. So, do you know specifically what
organization we need to be working with to motivate them to do
their job more effectively, to use the policies we already have
on the books to get more peace and stability in the region?
Ms. Bax. I think this has been outlined in the sanctions as
they have been listed by the United States. So, those sanctions
are in place, I think they should be applied vigorously, and
some of the financial flows that are currently going, for
example through countries like the UAE, as we can assume, need
to be applied.
Mr. James. OK, so we need to do the job better. So, that
implies that we are not doing the job well now. So, the reason
we have experts here is so you can inform us where those gaps
are, and where we can apply that pressure, so that we can get
folks the resources that they require to execute well. African
countries have contracted with Wagner recently, and they
frequently State that in the face of powerful security threats
and no competitive alternative offer from the west, Wagner
remains their only security partner of choice.
If we agree that Russia and their proxies are bad choices,
I do not believe that we should allow it to be their only
choice. It defies logic, and invites instability. Do you agree
that this is the reason why CAR, and Mali turn to Wagner?
Specifically because Russia, bad choice in security, was their
only choice? All may answer.
Dr. Sany. I do not agree that they do not have choices. I
think what is happening is the transaction cost to start the
business with alternatives. In my conversation with some of
those leaders it is just difficult because we have conditions.
And so, Wagner does not, they do not care, and therefore Wagner
is willing to engage----
Mr. James. So, America has some conditions?
Dr. Sany. Yes, but----
Mr. James. And what are some of those conditions that may
preclude----
Dr. Sany. Human rights.
Mr. James. What is that?
Dr. Sany. Human rights, for example. We want to make sure
that our weapons are not used to massacre villages, and
communities. We have principles, freedom of expression, civic
space. So, we have those conditions that are linked to those
dealings. And for these leaders, it is just a high cost to pay.
And also----
Mr. James. Human rights is a high cost to pay.
Dr. Sany. For some of those corrupt leaders. For some of
those corrupt leaders, some of them, Wagner is offering them
the opportunity to pay under the table, corruption. Like I say,
collusion between some of those leaders and the Wagner
mercenaries. Remember, Wagner is a mercenary group, they are
there for business.
Mr. James. So, piggy backing on that, human rights and
corruption are never anything the United States will step away
from. We will never divorce our foreign policy from human
rights. So, given your statement about reality, help me out.
Are there any actions that the U.S. can take at this stage to
lay the groundwork for Wagner's removal from the African
countries, and for a western solution to be the best solution
rather than a Russian solution?
Dr. Sany. Yes. I think as I said in my oral statement, we
have to stay engaged. And therefore it means that we have to
enrich continued dialog with those leaders, not isolate them,
No. 1. And as we engage, we are guided by our principles, we
will not compromise our principles, but however we have to meet
them where they are. For example, in Burkina Faso it is a fact,
9 months ago the State, the government was controlling barely
forty percent of the territory.
This is the poorest count during the war, facing two brutal
and highly sophisticated terrorist groups, Al Qaeda, and the
Islamic State. So, they have that problem, we cannot just
sanction our way out of it. So, we have to engage with them.
Accompanying them in--of course without sacrificing our
principles, they want more engagement, not isolation. And I
think just pointing fingers will not help us in this case.
Mr. James. I totally agree with that statement. As you
mentioned Burkina Faso, I have said often that the finger
waving foreign policy is doing no one any good. We need more
engagement, not isolation. You know what? I am going to play
nice. I think that my wonderful, intelligence, and kind Ranking
Member would like to ask some questions.
Ms. Jacobs?
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Bax, I wanted to
followup on what you talked about with the Wagner FTO in your
opening statements. I wanted you to talk through in a little
more detail what you view as the potential impact of this
proposed policy.
Ms. Bax. To not designate Wagner?
Ms. Jacobs. To designate.
Ms. Bax. To designate, the impact that that would have. So,
we believe generally that it is a risky, it is a policy that
could have risks, and very limited benefits overall. We think
it is the wrong policy response in this case. Our main concern
would be that it can alienate African governments that work
with Wagner rather than bring them into the U.S. fold.
Right now these governments, I say Mali and CAR are not in
a position to just cut ties with Wagner right now, because that
would make them even more vulnerable to rebel attacks, or
jihadist violence. Even though we disagree with their choice to
employ Wagner, it makes sense from a military point of view.
Wagner has served to some extent as a deterrent to some of
these forces, mainly jihadist insurgencies.
And this would endanger already fragile security
arrangements. Again, as some of my fellow witnesses here have
said, I think we should also take into account that any U.S.
efforts to counter Wagner could be viewed by many African
governments as great power competition. And these governments
may feel that their preference for non-alignment is being
ignored, and I think this policy could backfire to some extent.
More importantly, right now for Mali specifically, we are
worried that it would create problems for humanitarians, and
maybe even for peacemakers further down the line as an FTO
designation would hinder the delivery of humanitarian aid, and
especially the material support restrictions that flow from
this designation would have a chilling effect on humanitarian
organizations, and businesses that work in the country.
And longer down the line, this is not an issue right now,
but a designation usually makes any future efforts to bring
parties together for dialog extremely difficult. So, last I
would like to emphasize that an FTO designation is very
unlikely to lead to a quick dismantling of Wagner, especially
now, after the revolt in Rostov.
There might be new judicial entities emerging under a
different name, under the Russian Defense Ministry might morph
into something else entirely, even if the activities continue.
Yes, I think those are my main points.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. And, you know, something that you
all brought up in your opening statements is making sure we are
taking into account the history of these countries, the
grievances, and so while the challenges Russia and its proxies
pose are real, and require a thoughtful and effective response,
we have to take these grievances into account.
So, for each of you, starting with Dr. Sany, can you please
share your views on how the United States can best do this, and
what lessons we can learn from the cold war, and how we apply
those to today's world?
Dr. Sany. Why there are historical ties, Russia, the Soviet
Union has a long relationship with the continent. The United
States has a couple of assets. We have a very rich diaspora,
African diaspora, none of our adversary has that, none, China,
Russia. And so, we could leverage that diaspora diplomatically,
economically, and even in our defense or militarily to show the
best of what we have.
That is one asset that we have not used optimally, and we
can do more of it. And as I said, none of our adversaries has
it, and no propaganda or misinformation can tear down that
asset. No. 2, I think it is important to continue the kind of
comprehensive engagement we have with this country. Unlike
China, or Russia, the United States engages with all--we have a
more official side approach.
We engage governments, civil society, youth, the media,
that is critical. We have to keep doing that comprehensive
engagement. And I think also it is important this time to flip
the script from aid to trade, that is what African countries
are looking for. And for that, they will also have to play
their part making the business environment attractive.
Meaning the rule of law, and accountability, and the
sanctity of contract. In that, the United States has a lot to
offer, we are known for that. And so, flipping the script from
aid to trade, and providing the kind of support that will make
this country more attractive for businesses will be, it is also
a competitive advantage.
Mr. Hudson. I guess maybe what I would say is we have to--
in the terms of this conversation, we need to remember we are
speaking about Africa as if it is monolithic, and we have 54
countries, all of which are at different levels of political,
social, and economic development, right? And so, not every
country that we are talking about is enticed by the Russia
model, or the Wagner model.
So, I think we need to be very clear eyed about how we
calibrate our approach to these countries. And we have been
spending a lot of time talking about really, the very hardest
cases. The cases where leaders are dedicated to their own
personal political survival and economic wellbeing. That is a
very small minority of the countries that are on this
continent.
And I think that one of the challenges is Africans are
going to be watching this hearing today, and they are going to
say you are painting with a very broad brush here. So, you have
for example the president of Ghana not long ago saying we want
closer security ties because we are fearful of the Wagner
presence in Burkina Faso, and we are fearful of the spreading,
the spillover effects of that.
And so, I think we need to be, as I said in my testimony,
we need to be very targeted and strategic in how we are
approaching these countries. So, countries that are bordering
States where there are high levels of insecurity, and where
there are already a Wagner presence, or the potential for a
Wagner presence, we really need to be upping our game in those
places. We need to be increasing our security assistance, we
need to be increasing our security dialog.
I do not know why AFRICOM isn't on the continent all the
time making the visits that they make, because it really does
build good will with African militaries. I think the other
thing that we need to be doing is engaging those African
militaries so that they are the alternative to Wagner.
Mr. James. Thank you.
I now recognize Rep. Kim for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Chairman, and Ranking Member, for
holding this hearing. The consequences of Russia's invasion in
Ukraine has been felt globally, but African countries in
particular have been affected by the disruptions to global food
supply chains as a result of the invasion, and there are 23
million people in the Horn of Africa that face severe hunger
due to the ongoing drought, and Ukraine is one of Africa's
largest wheat suppliers.
Russia just terminated, as the chair mentioned in his
opening, the Black Sea Grain Deal, and that sends global wheat
prices up immediately. What message is that sending to African
countries in the Horn of Africa just days before Putin is
scheduled to host nearly fifty African leaders at St.
Petersburg for the Russia African Summit? I want to hear your
thoughts, your reaction.
Ms. Bax. I have a brief comment to make on that. So, we
have just learned recently that Russia has some bilateral deals
for wheat, for example with Mali, so it has delivered wheat
below market prices to Mali. It is in talks with Ghana and
Senegal for delivery of wheat, or fuel below or at market
prices, which I think is a very clever move. My fellow witness,
Dr. Sany, also has a theory about the background to this whole
issue.
Again, I think most African leaders know the focus is less
on the Ukraine war, and is more about those fuel and food
prices that they are struggling with. So, I do not know at this
moment what their response will be to the deal that has fallen
through. And I think we will see some of it in the attendance
of the Russia Africa Summit that will happen in a couple of
weeks. But it of course will be on the agenda.
Mrs. Kim. I would like to hear the other two witnesses
briefly please.
Mr. Hudson. I would just say that Russia invests a lot more
time and energy in explaining themselves. Whether we call that
propaganda or disinformation, they spend a lot more time and
money trying to control the information environment on the
continent and globally than we do as a government. And I am not
suggesting that we get into the business of troll farms and
things like that.
But I do not think that we can restrain ourselves in trying
to shed light on what Russia is doing, and to disabuse the lies
that they are spreading. Again, I think in my testimony I say
that sunshine is the best disinfectant. And if we intend to
roll back the communications strategy that accompanies the
political and military strategies that Russia is employing,
then we have to combat it on the airwaves, and online, and in
places where we aren't.
We are not on, for example TikTok, this has become a very
controversial thing because of the Chinese control over TikTok,
but the fact is that is where a lot of disinformation is
spreading, and we have ceded that entire battlefield to Russia
and others on the continent. I will stop there.
Dr. Sany. I agree that this will have a devastating blow,
particularly in the Horn of Africa. But I also think that maybe
it is also a way for Putin to deflate on the Wagner mutiny,
because the Wagner mutiny has dominated the airwaves in Africa
for some time. And also a possibility is to hand Africans a
concrete outcome from the summit. To say they came, and then we
delivered the grains, because there is nothing to deliver for
this summit.
So, the grain could be one of the deals. So, again, who
knows what Putin wants, but it has real consequences on
people's lives.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. I do like to throw in another question
there. Russia's proliferation of mercenaries in Africa, notably
through the Wagner Group, has destabilized a number of
countries, including Sudan. And we know that the Wagner Group
is backing the rapid support forces in Sudan, and there is a
civil war broken out after efforts by civil society in Sudan to
transition the government to democracy under a civilian rule
collapsed.
So, the rapid support forces, that is a parliamentary group
that traces their lineage to Janjaweed militia accused by the
United States of genocide in Darfur. So, in this unclassified
setting that we are in today, can you describe the nature of
that support, its implication for U.S. interests, and how the
U.S. can best address the role of Wagner in Sudan? Go ahead,
please, anyone.
Mr. Hudson. I was just going to say the Wagner Group
entered Sudan in 2017, so it is not since the revolution, it is
preceding the revolution that the Wagner Group has been there
offering technical assistance and support on security matters.
We know that in 2019 when the military, when the rapid support
forces put down civilian protestors, that that was done with
the assistance, and the planning support of the Wagner Group.
I think one thing with respect to Sudan that is important
to keep in mind is that Russia and Wagner have worked really
hand in hand. So, you have seen the Russian military, the
Ministry of Defense going into Sudan trying to broker formally
kind of what I would say through the front door, a military
basing agreement on the Red Sea. And you have seen the Wagner
Group kind of engaging through the back door with the rapid
support forces.
And so, this is very clearly a very strategic move by
Russia to employ formal and informal ties with Sudan to try to
advance its strategic objectives. Right now the Wagner Group
has very clearly sided with the rapid support forces. The U.S.
Government announced 2 weeks ago in its sanctioning of Malian
officials that surface to air missiles were provided by the
Wagner Group in Central African Republic, and moved across the
border into Sudan to support the rapid support forces.
So, I think it is a very destabilizing situation, more so
than Sudan. Because if Wagner is using Central African Republic
as a base of operations, then it will be able to kind of have
its effects felt all across the continent.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, thanks for indulging.
Mr. James. Thank you, and I would remind anybody here, or
listening abroad that this is a hearing on the Russian
Federation and its proxies. Anyone concerned that we are
painting with a broad brush should also be cognizant of the
efforts we are making on AGOA, the efforts we are making on
PEPFAR, the efforts we are making on Power Africa, and Prosper
Africa.
So, for the topic of today we are staying focused on the
areas of Russia and their proxies affect the safety of African
nations, and where they apply, and cause a security threat for
Americans at home and abroad.
The chair now recognizes Rep. Cherfilus-McCormick for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Earlier
this year the Administration stated its intent to build on
commitments made during the U.S. African Leadership Summit last
December. One of the announcements was that the Agriculture
Productivity launched with USAID intends to provide 16 million
to launch an initiative to support Tanzanian farmers with a
focus on women and youth, and respond to the global food
security crisis worsened by Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Additionally, USAID's Food and Peace program helps mitigate
the global food insecurity crisis, but we cannot underestimate
the risk of not doing enough. Mr. Hudson, in your written
testimony you mention how U.S. foreign assistance should be
ramped up in States where we know that Russia is making
inroads. Can you describe how these types of investments can
help counter Russian influence in Africa?
Mr. Hudson. Sure. Well, I think that we need to consider
what the baseline is in the African countries that we are
talking to, and what the nature of the threat is in some of
those places. And so in a place like Ghana that I mentioned,
which is a well-established democratic State on the continent,
clearly there is a security threat on the northern border. So,
Ghana will present a kind of different set of needs from
Washington in terms of support from foreign assistance than say
a country like Benin just right next door, which has far weaker
institutions, less of a history of democratic progress, where
the mission is going to be more important to dial up democracy
programming around the transition there. As well as, I think
really contemplating how we approach our security posture with
them given the anti-democratic behavior that we have seen in
the country. It is a balance that we have to strike if what we
are interested in is shoring up these countries.
But there is no sort of one kind of cookie cutter approach
to it. I think we kind of have to meet these countries where
they are.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you. My next question is
for Dr. Sany. I want to first say that I agree with your
comments on leveraging the diaspora. Earlier this year I
traveled with the vice president, and that was one of our
biggest accomplishments, was to engage the diaspora. We
traveled with historically Black colleges, such as Howard
University, some of our most successful actors, and some of our
most successful businessmen.
Increasing that engagement, and moving away from just
looking at Africa as an aid situation, but more of an
investment, a partner, respectfully, which is a new age. And
the question I wanted to ask you, Dr. Sany, the Wagner Group's
attempted mutiny in Russia raised many concerns around the
world. While Russia's foreign ministry, Lavrov, have asserted
that global Wagner operations will continue, it is unclear what
their role will be.
What are the implications for Russia's ambitions in Africa
after the Wagner mutiny?
Dr. Sany. I think what the mutiny did was prove more than
the cosmetic structure here, because Wagner will not leave
Africa. They may change the name, it may be piloted owned by
the Minister of Defense, it may be something else. However, I
think their biggest impact was twofold. No. 1, it punctured a
hole in that brand, the Russia brand as a stable partner, a
provider of security, No. 1, that was a big one.
No. 2, forcing Lavrov to going around the world and sending
reassurance, demonstrating something most African Wagner
clients were hiding, that Wagner is sponsored by the Kremlin,
and therefore they take full ownership of Wagner's atrocities
around the world. They pulled themselves up to lead opposition.
So, those two things are more impactful than any cosmetic
change the Kremlin will do around Wagner.
For me, those are the two biggest lessons and implications
for Wagner moving forward. And I will also take the opportunity
of this to thank the chairman for mentioning other programs we
are doing as well. Because I think we have a full--our policy
mix is rich. And to add to what Cameron said in your previous
question, I think it may be up to the United States to know how
to massage all the dosage of those policy tools in every
country we operate in, and where Wagner is.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you, madam.
The chair now recognizes Rep. Baird for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member, and
thank our witnesses for being here. You know, I am very
interested in this attitude that some of the African countries
have toward Russia, and toward the United States. And I want to
start this conversation by saying I had the opportunity not too
long within the last month or two to go to Purdue, and welcome
twenty-five fellows they call them, but they were from various
African countries.
And they were entrepreneurs, they were young people, and
they were excited to be there. And they were going to take a
look at the economics, and financial management if they started
a business on their own. They were going to look at
manufacturing and processing techniques, and they were going to
look at research, and I am a strong advocate for research. One
example that one couple told me about was they were going to
make some sort of jerky as a product, like beef jerky, or
whatever.
But anyway, so my question to you is that seems to me to be
a very productive way to have an influence where you are really
getting together and working out a solution, rather than saying
this is bad, that is bad, all that. But here you are with young
people right in the community. So, I guess I want to ask each
one of you if you care to comment about that kind of process.
Ms. Bax. Yes, Congressman, I very much agree with you. I
think the U.S. has a huge soft power potential, it is already
using some of that, but it could use more of that. Generally I
think attitudes toward the U.S. are positive for U.S., young
people see the U.S. as a positive influence around the
continent. They generally prefer the U.S. style of governance
to a Russian model or a Chinese model.
China has good will because of its big infrastructure
projects, and its cheap consumer groups, but the U.S. has
enormous good will, also its education system, et cetera, and I
think that is something that the U.S. can really tap into.
Mr. Baird. I appreciate you saying that, because in your
testimony you were talking about during the cold war how Russia
helped with finances and so on, and that attitude still
lingered. So, I just wanted to know how far down we were, how
far down we had to go.
Dr. Sany. I agree completely with your statement. I think
to people diplomacy is powerful. And I think that that is an
asset for the United States. We have our Peace Corps, and my
first contact with an American was a Peace Corps back in my
village, a long time ago. But that is the power of this
country, and Peace Corps, Black, White, Hispanic, that power,
again, propaganda cannot tear it down.
And so, that people to people diplomacy is a powerful
thing, and if you can do more to also expose more frequently to
our culture and our institutions it will better them.
Mr. Hudson. I guess I would just offer a word of caution in
the sense that we have a great deal of soft power, but we
cannot sit back and expect that that soft power is going to not
be eroded. The countries that we are talking about today, not
just Russia and China, but Turkey, Saudi Arabia, European
partners, in the kind of globalized world that we are living in
where all Africans have a smart phone just like we do, or most
of them do, they are exposed to all sorts of new outside
influences in ways that they weren't 20 years ago.
And so, I agree that we have enormous soft power potential,
but when Huawei produces a hundred dollar smart phone, and
Apple produces a thousand dollar smart phone, then it is hard
to compete when we are not creating products and outreach
directly to service the African market. Whether that is in
consumer goods, or in education and research. And so, I think
that we have to continue to be a country that is open to
welcoming Africans here as the story you just presented does.
But I think increasingly there is a sentiment in Africa
that it is harder to come to the United States for those kinds
of educational opportunities. And so we have seen in the last
few years record numbers of Africans traveling to China,
traveling to Russia to pursue advanced degrees. And so, unless
we acknowledge, and do some things to try to stem that flow, I
think it is going to be difficult to maintain this kind of soft
power hegemony that we have had for so long I think.
Mr. Baird. Well, I see we have got 13 seconds left, so we
do not have much time, but I have got a lot more questions.
But anyway, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Baird.
I now recognize Rep. Allred for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allred. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate
our witnesses' testimony, and I appreciate your mentioning of
our other efforts and discussions around the continent of
Africa. It cannot be just a backdrop for great power
competition, it has to be a place where as we see it in the
global interest, I think to promote, and to use our values to
allow the continent to thrive. And as you said, Mr. Hudson,
this is not a monolith.
We are talking about so many different approaches within
the continent, so many different nations, and I am interested
in some of the discussion that Dr. Sany has been mentioning.
And I am glad you talked about the diaspora, the need for us to
flip the script from aid to trade, and also the African
responsibility to be attractive to foreign investment.
To me, a component of that of course is strengthening the
institutions that allow their democracies to thrive, that allow
them to self-govern, that make them resistant to malign actors
like Wagner. And so, I am interested in the upcoming election
in the Central African Republic, and they are going to be
holding a referendum at the end of the month to decide to do
away with term limits for their president.
There are reports from as recent as yesterday taking note
that Wagner forces returning to the Central African Republic
ahead of the referendum, and in the event that that passes, and
that Presidential term limits are removed, this is for you, Ms.
Bax, if you do not mind. What would you see the ramifications
being of that decision, and how should the U.S. be prepared to
respond?
Ms. Bax. Thank you for this question, it is a very
interesting question, and a very complicated one to answer at
this point in time, because the referendum is likely to go
through, and Touadera is likely to stay. And the question here
is what is the alternative? So, I think generally I advocate
for continued engagement on a diplomatic level as far as this
is possible from the U.S. side.
But there is really not much else the U.S. can do in
Central African Republic at the moment, except for diplomatic
engagement.
Mr. Allred. Well, I think, Dr. Sany, to go back to your
point on tapping into empowering economic opportunities for
impacted communities by Russia's actions, as I know you are
aware, the president plans to invest at least 55 billion
dollars over the next 3 years on the continent. That sounds
good, and I think it is the right thing to do. I have concerns
about some of the things that we are seeing from my colleagues
in terms of the budget that we are discussing right now in this
body, and what impact that would have.
But I am wondering how you have seen us implement those
funds already, or what pitfalls you think there would be in
terms of what are we not doing well with that money?
Dr. Sany. Thank you for your question. It is a deceptively
simple, but very complicated question, I have to admit.
Mr. Allred. I have a few ideas, but I will let you.
Dr. Sany. Yes. I think first we have to commend the
Administration for hosting the summit, and for having those
commitments, that is important. It was important for our
relationships with African countries. I think the investment
made in terms of the business and the commission of these are
critical for the continent, the need to see that we are
flipping the script, and that we are investing in trade.
There are new programs, I think the existing programs could
be strengthened, that is a fact, that would be helpful. We have
to think AGOA is one, the renewal of AGOA, because it has
lifted thousands, thousands of Africans out of poverty, it
should continue. The digital transformation element is
critical, not just from an economic perspective, even from aid.
It will lower costs for thousands, millions of Africans in
the continent if you combine the digital transformation with
PEPFAR, we have a win. So, the digital transformation will be
critical. Programs such as Adapt to help support transitions,
we were talking about Wagner being, I call it the vulture of
diplomacy, following the blood. And so, Adapt will help stem
that motion.
So, programs such as Adapt will also be critical, I think,
in my view. I think I will stop there.
Mr. Allred. That is great, thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. James. That was really good.
I now recognize Rep. Mills for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mills. Thank you. I realize that this is really about
the Russian great power competition, but I think that it is
naive of any of us to talk about Russia without talking about
the geopolitical alignment that China has with Russia with
regards to the ever growing approach to Africa. Africa is a
very key continent for China, especially as they look at their
Belt and Road Initiative.
Especially as they look at fulfilling their rare earth
mineral mined, and raw material good explorations that are
going to be necessary for them to take the economic resource,
and cyber based warfare campaign to its continuation. But in
knowing what Wagner Group's presence is throughout most of
African being mostly on the influence of politics, which we
know is utilized to various mechanisms of economic coercion, we
see where not only have they grown throughout the continent of
Africa.
But China has also grown throughout the continent of Africa
with regards to its populations. In many cases they come in
saying that they are going to provide all of these great
financial instruments, and capabilities, and new
infrastructure, but we all know that they never actually hire
from the local populace, or boost the economy in any way. They
actually just bring in more mainland Chinese to actually work
there, and try to continue to inhibit its lands.
But I want to focus on Wagner for a bit. In early 2023 the
U.S. Treasury Department had designated Wagner as a
transnational criminal organization, and they levied sanctions
on the group, and all of its affiliates. Do you think further
designation of Wagner as a foreign terrorist organization,
along with its corresponding sanctions would be effective, and
beneficial to curtail Wagner's operations in Africa, and cutoff
its extensive international network? We can start with you, Ms.
Bax.
Ms. Bax. So, I addressed this in my oral remarks,
Congressman, so at the Crisis Group, I believe that FTO
designation would be the wrong policy move, because it is
unlikely to lead to dismantling of Wagner, it will not prompt
governments to cut ties with the group, because they cannot
afford this at the moment in either Central African Republic or
Mali.
Whether we agree with it or not, you know. So, we think
that would be the wrong move, and it would also alienate other
governments that may be sitting on the fence, or that feel that
they actually are being pushed into some sort of great power
competition.
Mr. Mills. Mr. Sany, you noted in your written testimony
that Russia's pattern of engagement in Africa, namely
exploiting the instabilities, taking advantage of undemocratic
transitions, and profiting off volatile security situations
suggests that nations like Cameroon, the Republic of Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, and Uganda may be future targets. What can
the U.S. do outside of just aid, but perhaps trade to disrupt
this pattern of engagement, and prevent Russia, and Wagner from
taking hold of these other nations?
Dr. Sany. Thank you for the question. Yes, like I said,
there is a discernable pattern of behavior, and as you
mentioned, and I have written in the testimony, that they are
countries, the pipeline. And for that, I think we have to start
engaging now. We have to prepare, as I said, the institution.
Working with these leaders and the institutions.
There are a couple of democratic institutions that we not
disregard, but we have limited engagement with, like the
parliaments, for example, in those countries. We may say no,
they are prudemment as we say in French, but they are just
robust in parliament. But stepping up our engagement with
parliament, stepping up our engagement with the business
sector.
We talk of the sanctity of contracts, and the rule of law,
but the business sector, particularly business association
groups are key actors in promoting the rule of law. Because
what Wagner does, Wagner carves out, forces out local
entrepreneurs. And so, they did that in Central African
Republic, they are doing that. So, engaging with the business
sector in those countries, the parliament, youth, and media,
and civil society to buildup that immune system against
authoritarian regimes.
Against the instability that may follow the transition in
those countries. Because it is not a mistake, the four
countries mentioned have long serving leaders, average thirty-
five years.
Mr. Mills. Well, I absolutely agree with you. One of the
things that you have said, and I have noted this many times, I
have spent more than 12 years of my life working overseas in
the Middle East, and others, America thinks that one great
meeting can basically solve the issues. Where our adversaries
like China and Russia are there every single day and every
single week.
If America is going to be involved, we need to be involved.
If we are not going to, let's not make the mistake of thinking
one meeting means anything. Thank you so much.
Mr. James. Mr. Mills, I really appreciate your remarks,
thank you.
The chair now recognizes Rep. Kamlager-Dove for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for this
invitation again, and for really shepherding bipartisan dialog
on this issue, and thank you all for being here today. As you
all have shared in your opening testimoneys, and in your
responses, the challenge of the Kremlin's influence in Africa
reflects two enduring realities.
Democratic institutions, good governance, development, and
economic growth are necessary to combat the roots of countries'
vulnerability to Russia, and Russia thrives on fragility,
conflict, and elite capture. And then the second is our own
paternalistic and hypocritical legacy with the countries across
the continent compromises our attractiveness often times as
Africa's partner of choice, and how do we re-engage in a way
that is equal and mutually beneficial.
I have a few questions, I also want to say I agree on the
importance of soft power, and I think maybe another simple
example is just offering more Fulbright Scholarships, getting
more of our folks over there in dedicated, sustainable ways.
So, Mr. Hudson mentioned misinformation, and Ms. Bax, you
highlighted the importance of putting resources into improving
the quality of independent local media in Africa, and
recognizing the importance of African voices in speaking out
against Wagner abuses.
So, what do U.S. efforts to support local African media
look like, and what else can we do?
Ms. Bax. Thank you for your question, Congresswoman. Yes,
so logically supporting African media would be through
financial resources, but of course there is the risk to some
extent, this is also what Russia has been doing. For example
Kairwood(?) has bought a radio station which it is financing
where African voices are promoting the Russian narrative.
However, I think there is plenty of solid media networks in
Africa that could use technical, financial, maybe material
support to continue the work that they are doing at the moment.
Investigative journalism would be quite important, maybe
investigative journalists that expose the misinformation or
propaganda networks.
Support for civil society without telling people what to
say, I think it might be important to at least lend a hand
financially, or in terms of expertise in supporting those
networks, and maybe ensuring their survival, which are under
threat in some countries. I think those were the most immediate
things that come to mind.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you. And Mr. Hudson, in Africa, as
in Latin America, illicit economies like gold mining are a
lucrative vehicle to finance the operations, and entrench the
operations of bad actors. So, how effective has the U.S. been
to cutoff these streams of revenue, and what more can we do to
neutralize this kind of funding?
Mr. Hudson. Well, I think we have only been marginally
successful in recent years, primarily because some of our
partners and allies are benefiting from this trade. So, when
you look at illegal gold mining in places like Mali or Sudan,
virtually all of it is flowing through Dubai right now. And it
is moving through Dubai to Russia to global commodity markets.
And so, unless we are serious about cutting off that trade
through a partner like the United Arab Emirates, then I think
it is going to be very difficult for us to impact either the
supply side, or the demand side for those commodities.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you for that, my hair just went
woo when you said that. And so, Dr. Sany, if the U.S.
underestimates one thing to our detriment, it is the importance
of the African public's opinion in determining the influence of
foreign powers. So, we see Russia as parasitical, but there are
parts of their engagement that are viewed positively by African
people.
So, what is the U.S. doing to offer an alternative counter
to that perspective?
Dr. Sany. I think the United States is already offering a
lot compared to Russia by numbers. Our foreign aid compared to
Russia is quite high. Russia dwarfed us on security
cooperation, they sell weapons for Africans to kill each other.
But I think the United States can do more around what we
discussed already, the soft power aspect. We can do more
empowering local media so that they can tell the truth of who
we are.
We can also do more in terms of people to people diplomacy.
We can beef up, or streamline our visa process for example. I
mean, we want to engage in business with African local
entrepreneurs, but it is difficult for local entrepreneurs to
come to a fair, or workshop in Washington to see. It takes two
hundred days for a Nigerian local entrepreneur to have a visa
for example. So, those things, we can work around those things
to enable that exchange of people and influence.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you for those answers.
And thank you, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. James. I think the good doctor has been reading their
emails, excellent points. You are going to probably find a lot
of support up here. Seeing there are no further questions, we
are going to start a second question, are you all ready?
Burkina Faso remains under coup related aid restrictions.
Meanwhile the country has experienced one of the largest
growths of Al Qaeda aligned terrorism in the world, and many
experts speculate that a Wagner partnership could soon emerge.
How can the U.S. meet certain nations, particularly Burkina
Faso, where they are? How can we prevent a Wagner presence in
Burkina Faso?
Dr. Sany. Thank you for that question. As I said, I came
back from Burkina Faso a week ago, literally. I think they
appreciate the open dialog that exists between the United
States and their government. Staying engaged and discussing
issues of real concern with them, that is No. 1. Recognizing
their challenges, and finding ways together to support them.
But concretely it means help work reviewing how we can
support their security. Not providing lethal weapons, but we
can provide logistics, we can help encourage neighboring
countries to build with Burkina Faso a security architecture
that can help them address their security priorities.
Mr. James. What sort of cooperation can we have with the
military junta?
Dr. Sany. Yes. I think we are already investing a lot on
humanitarian assistance already, that eases the burden on the
government. We can also engage on the security cooperation in
terms of training some of their additional forces. However,
that engagement, because we will be in a dialog, can allow us
to influence what matters for us, the civic space and the
political process.
In my meeting with them, one of the things that came
constantly was yes, security is a priority, but it is not
exclusivity. Security gains should guarantee the openness of
the civic space and your human rights. We can only have that
conversation if we engage in a serious dialog with them. That
is the starting point. We cannot just isolate them, because
that will throw them in the hands of Wagner and the rest, not
just Wagner, but other malign actors.
Mr. James. Do you expect that certain conditions as those
might be repellent to those in Burkina Faso? As you mentioned
earlier, human rights and corruption are standards that many
rulers over there struggle with, and may not necessarily--and
align with Wagner and others specifically because they are not
held to those types of standards.
Dr. Sany. Burkina Faso is a specific case in this, they
have not signed with Wagner yet, and traditionally for many
years now, the Burkina Faso have hardly accepted any foreign
fighters in their country, so they have not. And based on
public discussions, they do not intend to.
Mr. James. Good. Any further comment?
Mr. Hudson. I would just add that a lot of these countries,
when they invite Wagner in, or more specifically when they kick
out the French or the United Nations, what they are saying to
their people is that we are taking back control over our own
security. Even though we see them as being dependent upon
Wagner forces that are coming in, they see it, and they are
selling it to their people as an act of sovereignty.
As a re-declaration of their own independence from foreign
interventionist forces, which have a very long history from
Europe, from the west, of occupying parts of Africa. And so, I
think we have to be sensitive to the fact that African
governments are not only benefiting from this, but they are
benefiting internally in their internal politics.
We have seen this in Mali already, and I think that is one
of the reasons why we haven't seen Wagner sign a formal
agreement yet. Because the Burkina, they are saying we can do
this on our own. These are governments that are having a
difficult time proving to their people that they can govern.
That there has been a breakdown of State institution and State
authority in many of these countries in the Sahel.
And so, they are trying to prove to their people that they
can in fact govern these countries. When they bring in, I was
in Mali not too long ago, and one of the security actors that I
met with said the Wagner Group, when they are here, they are
here to support us. When the French were here, the Malian
National Army was in support of the French. They decided
everything, and we were told what to do in our own country.
But now that Wagner is do, we tell them what to do. And so,
this is a reassertion of their sovereignty. Whether that is
true, that is how they are selling it to their people. And so,
I think when we talk about our security partnerships with these
countries, it has to be in a way that is not perceived by these
governments as simply us coming in and directing military
operations, but is acting in support of local government
efforts to govern the situation, and respond to the situation.
I think the challenge is, of course, that they haven't been
sufficiently trained around things like civilian protection,
human rights, and the like. And so, it creates a rupture in
whatever the partnership is that we are trying to create,
because they are not meeting our standards.
Mr. James. Do you see a role for western trained police
forces?
Mr. Hudson. Absolutely. But I see more of a role for other
African forces coming in. I do not understand for example, why
we are not working through ECOWAS in West Africa, or the
African Union more broadly. We have seen just in the last year,
for example Rwanda go in, and replace Wagner forces in
Mozambique. We have seen them be invited in to Benin as an
alternative to Wagner forces.
And so, I do think there is a possibility, and an
opportunity even for us to work with allied partner militaries
on the continent that we have trust and faith in to be able to
present an alternative to their African counterparts so it is
not western interventionism as it has been framed by Russia and
Wagner. But that it is African security for African problems.
Mr. James. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes Ms. Jacobs.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I actually want to
keep going on this same stream. I think all of you talked about
in your testimony sort of the relationship between Wagner, and
instability, erosion of democracy, poor governance. And I think
one of the challenges U.S. policy in Africa faces is how do we
balance the need to engage with the need to remain consistent?
And we also know that Russia has capitalized on this
inconsistency, Mr. Hudson, as you said.
So, Mr. Hudson, if you could start, and then I will ask the
rest of you to discuss this dynamic more. How should the United
States remain consistent in our values? And how do you think
supporting, whether that is through security assistance, or
appraising, or just showing up, or otherwise legitimizing
authoritarian governments in the name of competition or
countering Wagner impacts our long term strategic goals, and
how should we think about that balance?
Mr. Hudson. Sure. Well, I think that you have seen the
Biden Administration struggle to come up with a policy in the
Sahel that is both sensitive to the individual countries'
conditions, but also create some kind of consistent policy
across kind of governments that have seen undemocratic changes
in power. And so, it is not something that is particular easy,
or that I think we have done particularly well.
Obviously we have congressional requirements, that when you
have unconstitutional changes of government, there is a certain
automaticity of response that comes in. And I think in many
respects when you talk to colleagues at DOD, or when you talk
to others at State, as much as that is a reflection of our
values, and our prioritization of democratic principles, it can
also be a constraining factor in our diplomacy, and in our
engagement, right?
And we have seen that time and again across this region.
And so, I do think that how we strike a balance between--and
even I see talking to Africans recently, I mean I think the
Biden Administration has said publicly time and again that
democracy and human rights are sort of bedrocks of our foreign
policy, and I know that we all believe that. But Africans are
the ones who point to us to say well it is inconsistent how you
apply these values of yours.
Because you are in fact pursuing your security interests in
a lot of these countries, right? And so, I think one thing that
we can be is quite honest about how we view that balance
between our values and our interests. I think that one thing
that we can all agree on, and that we need to be reinforcing
time and again is our values and our interests overlap when it
comes to avoiding the erosion of rule of law, and democratic
principles across the continent and beyond.
And so, I think we have to kind of go back, and continue
going back to these first principles of ours. Again, I think I
said before, we have ceded a lot of the kind of public
diplomacy space, and communication space to Russia, and to
others on the continent. I do not think it is enough for us,
for example, through our Global Engagement Center that the
State Department has to kind of issue statements from on high
about what Russia is doing.
Russia is active in local languages, controlling the media
environment in local languages. We operate in French, and we
operate in English, we operate through Reuters, and Associated
Press, and we issue press statements. We are playing a
different communications game than Russia is online, and we are
losing because of it.
Ms. Bax. I think if we, specifically at the Sahel today,
and the coastal countries, the Gulf of Guinea countries, most
of these countries are now looking for military solutions. They
have economic crises, not all countries, but most, it is a
massive humanitarian crisis in the Sahel region. So, there are
several problems that overlap, and sometimes they do not.
I think the U.S. would be well served to ask some of those
countries how can we help, what do you need? And there are
different levels of assistance that the U.S. can give, or can
step up. And I think it is very important to listen to the
States that you are talking with, and to ask them what they
think is a good idea.
And again, I would like to stress that the coastal
countries are looking at what is happening Mali and Burkina
with great concern, and they are looking for solutions, and
they are looking for help, and they will be very much open to
increased engagement.
Dr. Sany. I think there are two categories here. We have
countries in transitions after a coup d'etat, frankly we do not
have clear formula to engage, to be honest, I think because of
all the constraints we have. But there are also countries
where, like coastal West Africa, where a prevention strategy is
needed. And, I mean I commend this body for the Global
Fragility Act, that will find we have a formula, and we hope to
see it implemented.
So, there are two differences here. I mean, the country in
transition, frankly we are building that plane as we fly it. On
prevention, yes, we may have mechanisms and tools.
Mr. James. Thank you.
I now recognize Rep. Baird for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am going to
continue on, I want to find out about this attitude so I can
see what it might be. Anyway, in recent months South Africa has
abstained from U.N. votes condemning Russia's aggression
against Ukraine, they have held joint exercises with Russia and
China in the Cape, and allowed U.S. sanctioned Russian ships to
stop at the port.
And then most recently our Ambassador accused South Africa
of loading arms onto the ship Lady R for use against Ukraine.
So, what do these actions suggest about South Africa's broader
foreign policy, and what actions might be appropriate to
address Pretoria's drift toward Russia and China?
Ms. Bax. Yes, Congressman, as you know, there will also be
a BRICS summit in South Africa, and we do not know what is
going to happen. I reside in South Africa, so thank you for
this question. The ruling party is divided on its support for
Russia, and its sympathies for the U.S. I think the older
generation of leaders still has a lingering affinity with
Russia based on outdated ideology.
This is actually not supported by, I would say, the younger
generation of South Africans who are very confused by all of
this. At the same time, the African National Congress knows
where its bread is buttered, the U.S. is a very important
investment partner, so they are trying to play both sides. It
has been very awkward, and very confusing.
I do think that is again, maybe a more--the statement by
the U.S. Ambassador, I think it was timely, and it was
important, but the way it was done created some diplomatic
hiccups, and I think it could have been done in a more quiet
manner. And I would really advocate for continued U.S.
engagement with South Africa.
Because the context is also that there will be elections
next year, the ruling party is very likely to be forced into a
coalition government, and the dynamics may change.
Mr. Hudson. I would just add that one topic, which I think
is relevant to your question, but has sort of been underpinning
a lot of the discussion today is the idea, and I think you hear
South Africa espouse this idea more than most African
countries, is the value of a multi polar world. And I think
that we see that through South Africa's foreign policy, it is a
stated aspect of their foreign policy, the creation of a multi
polar world.
Not a unipolar, not a bipolar world. And so, I think I at
least put in, I look through that prism when I see them
engaging with Russia, obviously for all the reasons that Ms.
Bax has already laid out. But I also think that one aspect of
what they are doing, and this goes back to their kind of non-
aligned position throughout the cold war, is this notion that
South Africa, and Africa in general, the African Union has this
as part of its Agenda 2063 kind of vision document.
Is kind of re-balancing the global world order, and that is
going to be beneficial to African countries. That if we can
increase our partnerships around the world, we are able to tap
into benefits. Whether they are trade, whether they are
political benefits. And so, I do look at some of South Africa's
engagement with Russia as part of this effort of its own
foreign policy to kind of re-balance the world order in a way
that it thinks is beneficial to its interests.
Dr. Sany. I have nothing to add to those reports. Northing
to add, sir.
Mr. Baird. Thank you for that. And you know, my background
is agriculture, and we have already talked about Russia pulling
out of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, so I have only got
thirty-six seconds left now, so I would like to have just a yea
or nay, what has your experience been, if you know, with
American grains, and products, and American grain?
Dr. Sany. No experience, sir.
Mr. Hudson. No, not in this context.
Ms. Bax. In the context of South Africa, or overall?
Mr. Baird. Of any of the African countries. And I guess we
only got 4 seconds, so I will just put a summary here. We
produce a lot of high quality commodities, and grains, and so
on, so keep that in mind. We can get it anywhere in the world,
so thank you.
Mr. James. Thank you. African nations have choices, as we
were just discussing South Africa, South Africans have choices,
and we will always respect the sovereignty. But the American
people have choice as well, and if communities around the world
expect the American taxpayer to help, then there should be some
sort of mutual benefit to include respect for the rule of law,
respect for democracy, and of course respect for the safety and
security of America and our interests abroad.
Specifically with South Africa, the Putin visit with the
Lady R situation, and also military exercises on the
anniversary of the Ukraine invasion are very problematic. And
in a recent meeting we expressed American concerns with the
situation of moving away from those stated values and
interests. I am confident that by increasing engagement and
communication, we can be the first choice of our allies and
potential friends around the world.
So, with that, I thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony, and members for their questions. The members of the
committee may have some additional questions for the witnesses,
and we ask that you respond to these in writing. And pursuant
to committee rules, all members may have 5 days to submit these
statements, questions, and extraneous materials for the record,
subject to the length of limitations.
Without objection the committee stands adjourned. Thank you
for your time.
[Whereupon, at 3:33 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
