- EXAMINING THE FISCAL YEAR 2024 STATE AND FOREIGN OPERATIONS BUDGET REQUEST FOR AFRICA

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE FISCAL YEAR 2024 STATE AND FOREIGN OPERATIONS BUDGET
REQUEST FOR AFRICA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

June 22, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-35

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,

or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-080PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa                   SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                       Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             JIM COSTA, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JASON CROW, Colorado
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              BRAD SCHNEIDER. Illino
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

is

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Africa

JOHN JAMES, Chair
CHRISTOPHER SMITH, New Jersey        SARA JACOBS, California, Ranking
YOUNG KIM, California                    Member
JIM BAIRD, Indiana
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey
CORY MILLS, Florida

SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
Florida
COLIN ALLRED, Texas
JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois

Joe Foltz, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Phee, Honorable Molly, Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of
African Affairs, U.S. Department of State......................     7
Muyangwa, Honorable Monde, Assistant Administrator, Bureau for
Africa, U.S. Agency for International Development..............    12

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    37
Hearing Minutes..................................................    39
Hearing Attendance...............................................    40

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    41

EXAMINING THE FISCAL YEAR 2024 STATE AND FOREIGN OPERATIONS BUDGET
REQUEST FOR AFRICA

Thursday, June 22, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Africa,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. John James (chairman of
the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. James. The Committee on Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on
Africa will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the Fiscal Year
2024 State and Foreign Operations budget request for Africa. I
now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Assistant Secretary Molly Phee, Assistant Administrator
Monde Muyangwa, it is my pleasure to welcome you before the
Subcommittee on Africa and this hearing examining the
President's budget request for Africa.
I'll be leading a congressional delegation to the DRC,
Tanzania, and Nigeria this summer and I look forward to this
morning's hearing to learn more about the Administration's
approach to the African continent.
The U.S. National Security Strategy emphasizes the role of
the strategic competition in foreign policy. Throughout Africa
the Chinese Communist Party uses the Belt and Road Initiative
as a Trojan horse to curtail freedoms and erode institutions,
while the Russian Federation and the Kremlin supported Wagner
Group create and perpetuate instability, profiting off the
backs of Africans.
Despite these realities, the U.S. strategy toward sub-
Saharan Africa does not once mention strategic competition. It
only mentions China once.
I am concerned that this dissonance at the top is reflected
in the lack of resolve to ensure that you have the necessary
resources in place to strengthen and deepen our partnerships on
the continent.
In today's resource-constrained environment it's imperative
that we prioritize our limited resources on Africa on programs
that most benefit U.S. national interests and that starts with
its people.
U.S. embassies throughout Africa have struggled to keep
pace with the profound transformations across the continent,
and while I commend the Foreign Service officers serving on the
front lines of diplomacy there are persistent and widespread
staffing gaps that have a material impact on diplomatic
capacity to engage compared to China's large and growing
presence on the continent.
I look forward to hearing how the department is looking at
making sure personnel are more efficiently allocated in global
Foreign Service system with the appropriate incentives to build
the American presence on the continent.
Switching to programs, the failed U.N. peacekeeping
missions in Mali, Central Africa, African Republic, and the DRC
cost the United States taxpayers $975 million dollars in the
last Fiscal Year alone.
Let me say that again. Nearly a billion dollars in the last
Fiscal Year alone. The purpose of these peacekeeping missions
is to prevent conflict and create the conditions for peace, and
yet by comparison the Global Fragility Act, which is intended
to be the U.S.' long-term strategy to stabilize conflict-
affected areas and prevent violence, is provided only $100
million annually for the entire coastal West Africa region, a
region that's at high risk of instability.
U.S. global health programs such as PEPFAR and the
President's malaria initiative have been unmitigated successes
and have saved millions of lives across Africa.
The successes of these decades-long investments in these
initiatives can be built upon and applied to other priorities
across the continent.
Advancing two-way trade rather than just aid and investment
between U.S. and African partners must be a key foreign policy
priority, not simply $55 billion commitment made without
followup.
I'm currently working on legislation relating to the DRC's
critical mineral sector specifically in creating a strategy to
balance our national security responsibility to ensure
continued access to key mineral commodities such as cobalt and
lithium with the appalling working conditions present in the
DRC mining sector and the extremely opaque business and climate
that exists throughout the country.
I look forward to working with you both as this legislative
progresses--legislative effort progresses and in hearing your
thoughts on how we can improve and get better in the U.S.
economic relationship.
Additionally, and if I can be frank, I'm concerned that
these limited resources for the African continent are being
used to force a social and climate agenda upon unwilling
African partners, and from what I've heard from representatives
of African nations it is further validating concerns that many
on the continent have.
Africans are not vassals. They are equals, and a finger
wagging we know it all and better than you foreign policy just
reinforces the stereotypes that are being pushed by the
Russians, the Chinese, and those who would hurt us.
It is perceived as highly hypocritical when we would
lecture when the Saudis also have problems with women's rights
and the Chinese leverage slave labor, and is perceived as
racist when they see billions going to Ukraine when areas in
Africa to include Sudan are worse.
What are we doing to mitigate this perception of hypocrisy
and racism in American foreign policy with Africa? In advance
of this hearing Congressman Mills, the vice chair of the
subcommittee, sent you both a letter detailing specific USAID
and State Department programs of concern throughout Africa and
I really look forward to hearing how you explain these programs
to secure U.S. interests in the face of African nations, many
of whom have complained on the methods of their employment.
In closing, the United States is a reliable and valued
partner to many on the African continent but more trust--excuse
me, more must be done to ensure that our limited government
must be more focused and funding the continent is used most
efficiently and effective to advance U.S. national interests
but not at the expense of our African partners.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member, the
Congresswoman from California, Ms. Jacobs, for any statement
she may have.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Assistant Secretary Phee and Assistant Administrator Muyangwa,
for testifying before this committee today on the Fiscal Year
1924 Africa budget and U.S. policy in Africa.
Today's hearing gives us an important opportunity to
examine the Biden Administration's Fiscal Year 1924 budget
request for Africa and to conduct oversight of U.S. policy in
sub-Saharan Africa.
The African continent plays a critical role on the world
stage. It has the youngest population and is expected to
outpace Asia as the fastest growing region in the world with
six out of the 10 fastest growing economies.
There is so much we can learn from African countries on
many of our shared goals like prioritizing climate resiliency,
being a leader on global health, and strengthening trade and
investment.
But like anywhere else the region is also facing challenges
like addressing democratic backsliding, political instability,
poverty, food insecurity, and the economic impacts of Russia's
invasion of Ukraine.
It's long overdue for the United States to truly prioritize
Africa in its broader foreign policy and it's why I've been so
encouraged by and focused on the Biden Administration's U.S.-
Africa Leaders Summit, the first of its kind since 2014.
With this summit the United States committed $55 billion to
the African continent over the next 3 years in human capital
infrastructure, agriculture, health systems, and securing
investments, including the Digital Transformation for Africa,
an initiative designed to expand digital access and literacy
across the continent that will invest over $350 million and
facilitate $450 million in financing--a really exciting effort
that helps bring our engagement to the 21st century; the new
president's advisory council on African diaspora engagement in
the United States to deepen the dialog between U.S. officials
and the African diaspora, a long overdue initiative that
leverages the huge African diaspora population and better
incorporates diaspora communities into U.S. policy; new
programs advancing democracy and good governance like the $100
million 3-year pilot program, the 21st Century Partnership for
African Security Initiative to support security sector reform
efforts, and the $75 million 3-year program, the African
Democratic Political Transitions Initiative to address
democratic backsliding; and so many other important and long
overdue initiatives that I hope we can hear more about today.
I particularly want to commend President Biden's
announcement of U.S. support for the African Union's bid to
join the G-20 as a permanent member where they are directly
impacted by the decisions made on the global stage.
Earlier this week I introduced a resolution supporting the
AU's bid to join the G-20 and this critical commitment by
President Biden with the support of the rest of my Democratic
colleagues on the Africa Subcommittee.
With all of these announcements we now need to ensure that
we're following through on our promises because the worst thing
we can do is have this summit, make all of these announcements,
make a big deal, and then not live up to what our commitments
promised.
So I'm glad we're addressing the budget today because we
all know that reduced funding will make implementation of these
commitments even harder.
Earlier this month House Republicans unveiled their
proposed international affairs budget, which cuts the budget by
nearly 31 percent, a total of $18.3 billion compared to last
year.
Slashing foreign assistance undermines our shared goals and
priorities with our African partners and undermines U.S.
leadership on the world stage. Specifically, this cut would
significantly impact our assistance supporting education
elections, the bipartisan Young African Leaders Initiative,
conflict mitigation, and trade and investment and so much more.
If funding for Power Africa, for instance, were cut by even
25 percent this result--would result in 2.8 million fewer
households connected to electricity and a thousand fewer MWs of
power supply, leaving an additional 2 million households
without power.
So I hope to hear today how the President's budget request
would help fulfill all of our goals. I also hope to cover
critical issues on the continent including the U.S. response to
the deteriorating situation in Sudan, the ongoing pursuit of
justice in Ethiopia, and ethnic cleansing in Western Tigray,
increasing conflict and violent extremism in Mozambique and
coastal West Africa, and so much more.
I once again thank the two witnesses for testifying before
the committee and look forward to digging into all of these
important issues.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you, madam. Other members of the committee
are reminded that opening statements may be submitted for the
record.
We are pleased to have a distinguished panel of witnesses
before us here today. The Honorable Molly Phee is the Assistant
Secretary in the Bureau of African Affairs at the Department of
State. Madam, if you would.

STATEMENT OF MOLLY PHEE, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE, BUREAU
OF AFRICAN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Phee. Good morning, and thank you to you both for your
opening statements. It's a pleasure to see you, Mr. Chairman
and Ranking Member.
I welcome the opportunity to discuss the Biden-Harris
Administration's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request. The planned
$55 billion investment in Africa announced by President Biden
at the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit in December builds on
existing programs with a proven track record and provides
funding for promising new initiatives.
Our African partners ask us what the funding announced at
the Leaders Summit means for them. Our answer is that the $8
billion in the Fiscal Year 2024 budget request, a portion of
our overall ALS investment, targets three categories of
activity: first, reinforcing programs that have benefited
African people and American interests; second, addressing
Africa's infrastructure deficit and accelerating economic
growth; and third, pioneering new initiatives to meet
entrenched challenges.
Fundamentally, the goal of the summit and its
implementation is to solidify a strategic partnership between
the United States and African countries, institutions, and
people.
In this effort, Ambassador Johnnie Carson in his role as
special representative for summit implementation, has been an
invaluable partner lending his expertise and insights.
Based on consultations with African leaders he will propose
a new architecture to ensure that the U.S. Government maintains
predictable and sustained engagement with the continent.
This budget request funds valued programs such as Power
Africa, the Young Africa Leaders Initiative, and the African
Women's Entrepreneurship Program. The request amplifies funding
for critically needed development financing in Africa,
especially the impactful work of the Millennium Challenge
Corporation, the EXIM Bank, and the Development Finance
Corporation.
It will also fund new initiatives, as the ranking member
said, the digital transformation with Africa to expand
affordable inclusive digital connectivity and the ADAPT, or
African Democratic and Political Transitions initiative to
support democratic transitions.
To elevate the voices of the more than 45 million
American--African members of the diaspora in America we are
also launching the President's Advisory Council on Africa
Diaspora Engagement this month.
The pandemic underscored the need for continued investment
in African health systems. To that end, we are requesting more
than $5 billion, which includes nearly $3.8 billion for the
President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, or PEPFAR, to end
the HIV/AIDS epidemic by 2030.
To achieve this goal we ask for strong bipartisan support
for a clean PEPFAR reauthorization before it expires at the end
of September.
We are also committed to addressing food insecurity
exacerbated by Russia's aggression in Ukraine. That is why we
requested $487 million for the U.S. government's flagship food
security program Feed the Future.
In addition, drawing on Fiscal Year 2023's supplemental
resources generously provided by Congress, Secretary Blinken's
envoy for global food security, Dr. Cary Fowler, worked with
USAID to design and launch a new initiative known as Vision for
Adapted Crops and Soils.
This innovative new program directs research funding to
develop climate-resistant staple crops and improve soil.
To promote political stability the budget request seeks
$436 million for democracy and good governance to counter
democratic backsliding and to secure gains made in fragile
democracies.
In the Sahel, we are requesting $388 million to support our
efforts to increase disaster resilience, empower youth
entrepreneurship, and reduce poverty. We are committed to
countering harmful Russian and People's Republic of China--or
PRC--activities.
We support additional resources in this space. We remain
heavily invested in diplomatic efforts to promote peace.
Enlisting the AU, Kenya, and South Africa, our diplomacy
contributed to the cessation of hostilities agreement between
the Ethiopian government and the Tigray People's Liberation
Front.
Our increased engagement in coastal West Africa and
Mozambique for the strategy to promote stability and prevent
conflict is making a difference. We are working closely with
newly elected leaders in Kenya and Nigeria to promote economic
development, inclusive governance, and State institutions
capable of meeting security threats.
We are responding to the outbreak of violence in Sudan by
seeking to protect civilians, advance their democratic
aspirations, and minimize threats to regional stability.
Our ability to execute on our goals and interests relies on
our dedicated public servants domestic and abroad. We have
requested additional positions for critical personnel needs and
are seeking incentives for posts that are difficult to staff.
In closing, let me reiterate my appreciation to this
committee. We greatly value your support in upholding our
shared goals for a strategic partnership in Africa.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Phee follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. James. Thank you for your opening statement and for
your work.
The Honorable Monde Muyangwa--forgive me, Muyangwa--is the
assistant administrator at the Bureau for Africa and the U.S.
Agency for International Development.
Again, forgive my mispronunciation. Your statement, please,
ma'am?

STATEMENT OF MONDE MUYANGWA, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU
FOR AFRICA, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Muyangwa. Thank you, Chairman James, Ranking Member
Jacobs, distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify about the President's Fiscal
Year 2024 budget request and its importance for USAID's
programming across sub-Saharan Africa.
I would like to extend a special thanks to the committee
whose bipartisan commitment to the people of Africa has
provided the foundation for USAID programs and their success.
Africa is home to some of the fastest growing markets in the
world.
It also has one of the world's fastest growing and youngest
population. By 2050 one in four people will be African. This is
a generation of young people who have the power to drive
economic growth and build a more equitable future.
Overall, the joint State-USAID Fiscal Year 1924 request of
$8 billion advances these peace and security efforts to build
more stable, inclusive economies, increases mutually beneficial
economic growth, revitalizes democracies and champions human
rights, and builds Africa's resilience.
The United States remains a key partner to Africa in
strengthening regional stability. Our support will address
humanitarian needs and human rights and advance women's
leadership in preventing and resolving conflict.
Africa plays a pivotal role in the global economy and U.S.
investments stimulate economic growth, reduce poverty and
hunger, create jobs, and expand markets and social services.
Looking ahead to the Fiscal Year 2024, the request of $100
million for Prosper Africa will amplify services that increase
two-way trade and investment between the United States and
Africa. Since Prosper Africa's launch in 2019 the U.S.
Government has helped close more than 1,100 deals across 49
countries for a total estimated value of $65 billion.
Turning to Power Africa, at its 10-year anniversary the
initiative has closed 145 transactions and facilitated access
to electricity for more than 179 million people.
The $100 million request for Power Africa will accelerate
efforts to increase electricity generation in sub-Saharan
Africa in support of the Electrify Africa Act. The President's
request prioritizes engagement with African partners to promote
democratic ideals and foster legitimate, transparent, and
inclusive political systems.
The $436.3 million democracy request will provide critical
resources to build on USAID's new Democracy Delivers
initiative, which bolsters countries experiencing windows of
democratic opportunity.
In countries such as Tanzania, Zambia, and Malawi this
support is vital to sustain democratic transitions and
consolidate gains.
The President's request also includes initiatives announced
during the December 2022 part of the U.S.-Africa Leaders
Summit. The first, the Africa Democratic and Political
Transitions Initiative, includes a request for $25 million to
enable the U.S. Government to more effectively partner with
regional bodies, governments, and civil societies to support
successful democratic transition.
The second, the Digital Transformation with Africa
Initiative, is a request of $50 million to help expand
affordable and inclusive digital connectivity, build digital
resilience, and improve livelihoods and economic well being of
Africans.
The President's Fiscal Year 1924 request prioritizes the
U.S. government's global hunger and food security initiative
Feed the Future. The request of $487.5 million for food
security increases funding support and aligns resources for the
eight new Feed the Future countries in Africa.
In addition, U.S. assistance will help African countries
adapt to severe weather and other shocks and conserve
biodiversity while growing their economies.
The President's request of more than $5 billion for global
health, including lifesaving PEPFAR programs in sub-Saharan
Africa, will build on partnerships including with the private
sector to strengthen health systems to provide essential
services, prevent, detect, and respond to infectious disease
outbreaks, and promote innovation and research.
The President's request of $20 million for the Young
African Leaders Initiative will scale training and expand
partner engagement.
We will continue to provide opportunities for YALI alumni
through transformational leadership training, networking, and
professional development.
In conclusion, the President's 1924 budget request
demonstrates our renewed commitment to partnerships between the
United States and Africa.
Again, I appreciate your long-standing bipartisan
commitment to the African continent and I thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Muyangwa follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. James. Thank you, Assistant Secretary--excuse me,
Assistant--you got your promotion right there. How about that?
Ms. Muyangwa. I did.
Mr. James. Thank you, Assistant Administrator Muyangwa. I
now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
A few weeks ago we had Secretary of State--Secretary Antony
Blinken here for a number of questions and I had the
opportunity to question the Secretary myself for a few minutes
and I asked for his commitment and support on solidifying
American supply chains and driving out slavery and human rights
violations, among many things.
And I'm currently working on legislation relating to the
DRC's critical mineral sector specifically in creating a
strategy to balance our national security responsibility to
ensure continued access to key mineral commodities such as
cobalt and lithium with the appalling working conditions
present in the DRC mining sector and the extremely opaque
business climate that exists throughout the country.
I look forward to working with the Secretary and with each
of you as we move forward with this legislative effort.
Assistant Secretary Phee, in addition to some of your
concerns that we discussed recently I've also been closely
following President Tshisikedi's recent visit to Beijing and
the negotiation between his government and the CCP--linked
mining companies.
A couple of questions for you. What is the department's
belief regarding the purpose and the outcome of President
Tshisikedi's visit to Beijing, and two, what is the
department's view regarding the current trajectory of the DRC--
China relationship?
Ms. Phee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As a leader of a large and complicated country we
anticipate and assess that President Tshisikedi likes to have
many options, as many leaders would, as he considers how to
develop his country's resources.
But we are confident that the United States is a better
partner and that that is his view, that we are a better partner
and one he would prefer to engage with.
So we are looking very seriously at opportunities for
development in the critical mineral sector. You may have seen
that the Development Finance Corporation recently announced a
project to build a transport corridor from Zambia through DRC
to Angola to help move resources from the DRC to export
markets.
Mr. James. Madam Assistant Secretary, do you have the
resources--do you have the heads to specifically focus on an
effort like that specific with critical minerals in the DRC? Do
you have that resource?
Ms. Phee. I would say the short answer to that is no. But I
would also like to share with you, if I might, how we got to
this position and what we need to do to get out of this
position.
Mr. James. Perfect.
Ms. Phee. So as you may be aware, in recent years there was
a hiring freeze at the State Department and we failed to hire
to respond to attrition.
The Secretary has included in his budget requests immense
requests, relatively speaking, to increase our staffing and
that hiring and training process is underway.
But there's a gap between where we need to go and where we
are so we're working on some creative solutions within the
department to identify talent to help us take advantage of
opportunities specifically in the DRC.
I would ask this committee to lend your support to the
budget requests that the Administration has made for the State
Department. Relatively speaking, in our grand national budget
it's a reasonable request and it will provide us with the
predictability and the stability to carry out our shared goals.
Mr. James. And the second question with the last minute or
so what's the Department's view regarding the current
trajectory of the DRC-China relationship?
Ms. Phee. Again, my understanding, based on my witness of
President Tshisikedi's engagement with President Biden and his
repeated engagement with Secretary Blinken, is that the United
States remains the preferred partner and it is our
responsibility to show up and ensure that we remain in that
privileged position.
Mr. James. I now recognize Ranking Member Jacobs for 5
minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you again,
both of you, for testifying.
I want to start this conversation by talking about not just
the Fiscal Year 1924 request but what level of funding Congress
is likely to pass. House Republicans have proposed cuts to the
international affairs budget of nearly 31 percent.
Assistant Secretary Phee and Assistant Administrator
Muyangwa, could you please provide the committee a brief
overview of what these kinds of cuts could mean for our work in
Africa and our ability to lead and do all the things that we
want you to be able to do?
Ms. Phee. Dr. Monde is a great partner to me so we never
know which one should speak first.
This is an exciting time to be involved in African affairs.
Finally, the United States is, as President Biden said in
December, all in on Africa. We have many opportunities, as we
have discussed, and, again, we believe our values, our
approach, our processes, our innovation, and our technologies,
everything you can imagine, makes us the best bet for our
African friends.
But to capitalize on this opportunity we need those
resources so we have sufficient funds to respond to the
programming needs, both building on the excellent programs we
have that are well appreciated and have a demonstrable impact
and to invest in new efforts such as the Global Fragility Act
to make sure that we can address what have been sort of
entrenched challenges and problems.
Ms. Muyangwa. Thank you so much for that question.
I'd add three other areas where we would see impact.
Obviously, it would impact our whole development agenda on the
African continent but let me focus on three specific areas.
If we cut the budget Power Africa would not be able to
deliver electricity to 2.8 million households across the
continent, and we know what an amplifier the access to energy
is in terms of development.
Similarly, with Prosper Africa if we were to cut the
request there we would not be able to really lean into the
plans that we have to advance two-way trade between the United
States and Africa to unlock the business potential that resides
on the continent and also to encourage more American businesses
to invest in Africa.
The third area I would focus on is on the education front.
If we were unable to--if we did not get the request that we
have put in the literacy rates in Africa had already taken a
downward trajectory due to COVID and other factors and we have
been working to build that up to try and raise those literacy
rates.
The implications for development, again, given education's
impact or link to development is huge, particularly on a
continent where one in four--in five will be African by 2050.
Ms. Jacobs. Yes. Thank you. And I hope my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle hear how detrimental the proposed cuts
would be for the things we all want to do on the African
continent.
Really quickly, in our last minute and a half I want to
talk about the Global Fragility Act. As you both know, you
know, Mozambique and coastal West Africa are priority countries
and this law is really about doing things differently, which
means coordinating across the interagency and realigning our
funding and empowering local partners.
And while we know that a different bureau is the lead at
the State Department, Congress expects the regional bureaus to
be part of this, too, and to prioritize the country strategies.
So, Assistant Secretary Phee, I just wanted you to discuss
how you plan to do this for Mozambique and coastal West Africa.
Ms. Phee. Thanks very much for your support for this
incredibly important program. I want you to know that I have
directed all of the Ambassadors in countries that are
benefiting from this program that this is the--should be their
number-one priority, that we need to have this program succeed
to demonstrate that the new authorities and resources you gave
us and the new way of thinking and approaching will work.
As you know, we're focused on three different types of
activities--social inclusion, government responsiveness, and
accountability of security forces.
I think we're already beginning to see the impact of the
initial funding, and the teams worked together closely and we
worked closely with the other bureau--the CSO Bureau--and I'm
confident you're going to see a good return on that investment.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. James. The chairman now recognizes Rep. Kim for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Chairman James and
Ranking Member Jacobs, for holding this hearing. I want to
thank our witnesses for joining us today.
The civil war in Sudan has only gotten worse since fighting
began on April 15, and without the U.S. leadership on the Sudan
crisis the humanitarian catastrophe will worsen and Moscow will
emerge as the victor.
The Wagner-backed Rapid Support Forces has already publicly
expressed openness to a Russian naval base at Port Sudan with
resurrecting its genocidal tactics in Darfur.
The Sudanese Armed Forces' reliance on imprecise airpower
and artillery has taken a very heavy civilian toll with little
military success.
Assistant Secretary Phee, I wanted to find out what is the
senior level task organization and roles and responsibilities
within the State Department for handling U.S. policy toward
Sudan.
And, you know, during the past periods of conflict in Sudan
the U.S. has utilized the role of a special envoy and I was
wondering if such an appointment would be constructive to
advance U.S. policy in Sudan.
Ms. Phee. Thank you very much for your question about such
a critical crisis at a--in a critical part of the continent.
The Secretary of State, Secretary Blinken, has been personally
and directly involved and we focused our efforts on three
prongs.
The first prong has been emergency diplomacy, working with
our partners, the Saudis, who have unique influence with both
sets of security actors. We have worked to try and achieve
cease-fires to reduce the level of violence and allow the
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Those cease-fires have not been fully effective, although
they have allowed the transmittal of important urgently needed
humanitarian assistance.
However, on Wednesday, yesterday, we adjourned those talks
to--because the format is not succeeding in the way that we
want.
The second important prong is our support, which is our
long-standing support for the Sudanese civilians against their
oppressive military, whether it's the SAF--the Sudanese Armed
Forces--or the Rapid Support Forces.
So we are working closely with Sudanese civilians and with
our partners in Africa, particularly at the African Union and
the regional organization IGAD as well as other interested
partners such as the EU, the United Nations, and the Arab
League, to see how we can lend our collective support to
promote Sudanese civilian leadership of Sudan.
As the security forces have demonstrated, they have no
right to have any role in governance.
And the third prong is humanitarian assistance, which I
might ask Dr. Monde to address, fulfilling our long-standing
role as the leading donor in the world as well as the leading
donor in Sudan.
Mrs. Kim of California. To the question that I just posed,
would a special envoy--would be able to carry out all of these
three-pronged solutions that you just mentioned? Because you
said the conversation started but it has not advanced to the
level that we can actually carry those out.
Ms. Phee. Yes. The Secretary is considering elevating the
role of Ambassador John Godfrey, who knows all the players. But
I want to emphasize that the entire U.S. Government is fully
engaged in addressing this crisis given its impact not only for
Sudan but for the region.
Mrs. Kim of California. Okay. I also wanted to ask if you
can describe the State Department's efforts to engage civilian
groups in Sudan. What is the department's plan to achieve that
long-term goal of a political transition toward a civilian role
in Khartoum?
Ms. Phee. We have been in daily contact with Sudanese
civilians, which has been somewhat challenging given the
collapse of the communications network and the fighting that
they are living under.
But there are also many Sudanese leaders outside of Sudan,
including the former civilian prime minister, Abdalla Hamdok.
Just last week, I, along with colleagues from USAID,
chaired a meeting under the support of the former Sudanese
Ambassador to the United States with key critical leaders to
talk to them about who should be involved in the process to
establish a civilian government, where should that process take
place, and when should that take place.
So we continue to be----
Mrs. Kim of California. Quickly, I wanted to ask--you know,
because I serve as the chairwoman with the Indo-Pacific
Subcommittee, too, so one of my priorities is finding ways to
incorporate more private sector initiatives into our foreign
policy to better equip our diplomats to compete with our PRC
counterparts.
So do you think our Ambassadors and the embassy staff are
sufficiently equipped in supporting and advocating for our
private sector throughout the African continent, especially
the--when contrasted with the high level of diplomatic support
afforded to the Chinese and European countries? Could you make
that comparison?
Ms. Phee. Sure. Well, first of all, we welcome your support
for that initiative, and in Vice President Harris' recent trip
to the continent she secured commitments from the private
sector in the billions to actually undergird the Digital
Transformation Initiative that we described to you. We also
have partners on the continent from the Development Finance
Corporation and from the Department of Commerce's Foreign
Commercial Service.
But if you ask me if we could use more the answer would be
yes.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I now recognize Rep. Cherfilus-McCormick for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Last year the USAID announced the Africa Localization
Initiative to direct more funding to local organizations in
sub-Saharan Africa. As part of its larger localization agenda
the Administration has not asked for additional funding to
implement this initiative.
My first question goes to Assistant Administrator Muyangwa.
Sorry about the pronunciation.
Can you elaborate on the status of the implementing--of
implementing this initiative including potential focus
countries?
Ms. Muyangwa. Thank you very much for that question. So
localization is very, very important to the success of USAID's
work on the continent and we are continuing to make progress on
that front.
We just issued USAID's localization report in March of this
year, which shows where we are, and some of our missions on the
African continent are doing quite well. But we continue to push
and to plan and to implement so we can make even more progress
in that end.
To that end we have 12 countries that are now participating
or 12 missions that are participating in the localization--
Africa Localization Initiative and we are working with them to
develop their plans and to implement, and we will take lessons
from those 12 missions and see what we can do to amplify our
localization efforts across the continent.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you. And how is the USAID
viewing this program in comparison to the Central America local
initiative?
Ms. Muyangwa. We learned a lot from the Central American
initiative and so we built some of those lessons learned to
inform how we are working on the African component of it,
obviously, contextualized to the African situation. But we work
together to share lessons learned and to figure out how we can
continue to amplify localization across the agency.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. To what extent are you thinking
about lessons learned on localization from PEPFAR on the
continent?
Ms. Muyangwa. I would say that those lessons learned have
been built into how we are thinking about localization. In
fact, our health sector had the highest percentage of
localization of all of our programming and so it is a very good
place for us to start in terms of figuring out how we embed
those lessons learned to our future efforts.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. And I wanted to ask specific
questions about health. What are the Administration's
priorities regarding PEPFAR programming in Africa as Congress
considers the potential reauthorization of the program this
year?
Ms. Muyangwa. So PEPFAR has been one of, if not the most,
transformative health program in the world. Its impact on the
continent has been absolutely transformative, starting out 20
years ago when very few Africans had access to life-saving
medications to today where we have 18 million Africans who are
able to access medications.
We have a number of countries that have really made a lot
of progress. We have reduced maternal deaths on the continent.
We have improved the number of children who are born HIV/AIDS
free. We have made significant progress in terms of addressing
the malaria.
So a lot of achievements on the African continent but we
still have a lot of work to do, and so as we look to 2030 when
we are looking to get to the 95/95/95 formula that has been put
out there for HIV/AIDS it's critically important that we
continue to support those efforts because our inability to
support those efforts will mean losing the gains that we have
made over the last few years and so that's critically
important.
The second area in terms of the President's budget has to
do with enhancing pandemic--sorry, pandemic support--the
response to pandemics and so building that capacity, as we saw
with COVID, it is critically important that we continue to
build those capacities because it impacts not just Africa but
the rest of the world as well.
So there's a lot of work to do and that request is
fundamentally important to the success of our engagement with
the continent.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. The Fiscal Year 2024 request will
reduce funding for water and sanitation programs by nearly 50
percent from 2022 levels though cholera and other waterborne
illnesses remained a threat in the region. What is the reason
behind that proposed decrease?
Ms. Muyangwa. I think it's--so it's looking broadly at all
of the issues and challenges that we are facing on the
continent and it's also looking at the opportunities that we
have to leverage other programs to achieve work in certain
areas.
So it's that shift of resources to still remain committed
to the continent, still remain committed to the health area but
also looking at areas where we can continue to do the work that
does not undermine our overall objectives in that sector. I
think that's one.
I think the second area for us, and the administrator has
been very strong on this, is figuring out how we crowd in
resources from other partners to enable us to continue doing
the work that we need to do in these other areas. So those are
two prongs that we would be pursuing.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you for your testimony. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you. I now recognize Rep. Baird for 5
minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank our
witnesses for being here.
My first question deals with the fact that last week the
House Foreign Affairs Committee--we held a hearing that the
U.S. doing to counter China's Belt and Road Initiative--BRI.
One of my questions pertained to the actions this
Administration is taking to counter Chinese involvement with
AGOA--approved countries that have duty-free access to U.S.
markets. The Communist Party--CCP--has leveraged large-scale
investments in many sub-Saharan AGOA countries--eligible
countries.
Many of these investments have tied aid approach that are
backed by unrepayable terms and burdensome collateral
commitments.
My concern is that the U.S. taxpayer dollars that are being
spent in Africa by the State Department and USAID are going
directly into the hands of the CCP in disguise as repayments by
those countries and Americans are footing the bill.
So my question gets down to what is USAID and the State
Department doing to oversee where these funds are being used
and that Chinese are not just using these funds to funnel U.S.
taxpayer dollars into their pocket.
So if you can give me any kind of a sense of what you're
doing in that area I would appreciate it either. Either one of
you.
Ms. Phee. Thank you very much for your question.
Of course, Chinese predatory practices in Africa, which
include the BRI investment that increases debt burden and also
unsavory practices with regard to the environment and labor,
are of major concern to the U.S. Government.
The kind of programming we're trying to offer as an
alternative, whether it be through Millennium Challenge
Corporation investment in, for example, regional
transportation, the Development Finance Corporation financing
for major investments to build transportation pipelines for
mineral export, or EXIM Bank financing all comes with built-in
protections to ensure that that funding is used properly and
transparently with accountability.
Separately, we are working with governments such as the new
leadership in Zambia where the previous leadership had incurred
a great Chinese debt burden at the Paris Club and other G-20
discussions to help reduce the debt loads. So those are two
examples of the way in which we're safeguarding U.S. investment
and resources and helping our African partners move away from
those predatory practices.
Mr. Baird. One more. To continue on with that, do you feel
that we're being successful in competing with China? I mean,
they fund everything in terms of ports and railroads and other
resources. And so are those African countries accepting our
offers?
Ms. Phee. We do different types of funding. As you heard
from Dr. Monde, for example, we invest in people and in
systems. So, for example, our impact on African health has
been, as she said, transformative.
But part of the reason it's been transformative is that
assistance has helped to build African health systems so that
they're going to be better able to respond and work with us for
pandemics whether they're COVID, Ebola, most recently, Marburg.
So we have not traditionally invested U.S. Government in
big infrastructure projects the way the Chinese have. Some of
those have been helpful to the continent, particularly roads,
but some we have concerns about and are taking actions about.
For example, we're keeping a close eye on investments in
ports to make sure that ports aren't developed that would
threaten the United States. So we have different ways of
engaging.
Our practices, of course, also are focused on anti-
corruption, unlike the Chinese, and, again, as I mentioned, on
labor standards and environmental standards.
So we believe in an open competition. Our processes and
approach, our technology, our ways of doing business will be
most attractive to our African partners.
Mr. Baird. Dr. Monde, we are out of time, I guess, so I
yield back. But I would like to have your comments on that,
too, at some point. Thank you.
Mr. James. I now recognize Rep. Jackson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you, Chairman James.
This is an open question. The AGOA--African Growth
Opportunity Act--is up for renewal in 2025. Please share with
us your insights on what that bill should look like, what we
should be asking for, to give us a sustainable competitive
advantage in Africa.
And let me parenthetically say I am glad that there is
renewed interest. We have had a long relationship with Africa
that we have chose not to invest in the continent. So what
should it look like, going forward?
Ms. Phee. Thanks very much for your interest and your
support.
You've rightly identified AGOA as a key component of our
economic partnership with Africa. One of the outcomes of the
Leaders Summit was to amplify our engagement to promote trade
and investment. That's our signature initiative, and first of
all, I would welcome congressional support for its renewal.
We're also engaged in discussions now about whether or not
the program should be adjusted. It's had a positive impact in
the 35 countries who have benefited from those trade privileges
but it has not been fully optimized.
So there's discussions underway with USTR and the State
Department's chief economist about possible ways we might
recommend you consider to update the bill.
I would say that, as the chairman noted in his opening
statement, it's a good bridge to doing more trade and less aid.
That was one of the original elements of the design to help
Africans climb out of poverty, help develop jobs, and help
improve their economies through trade rather than aid.
Ms. Muyangwa. And I would just add to that that throughout
its existence USAID has played a critical role in supporting
AGOA and we stand ready to continue to provide that support.
The support that we have provided includes helping member
countries develop national AGOA implementation plans and
helping them navigate the rules and regulations pertaining to
AGOA, helping them through the--meeting the standards of
participation in AGOA.
And so we would continue to provide that support to AGOA,
given its critical--it's a critical part of our larger trade
and investment infrastructure.
Mr. Jackson. Okay. I'd like to make one comment on that
before I ask a followup question. I find it remarkable that we
have had a 200-plus-year relationship with Africa and we did
not have an African trading policy officially until 2000--it's
rather reprehensible--and that we have seen a Marshall Plan.
We have seen the rebuilding of Japan. But we have never
forcefully said this is how we're going to invest across the
continent of Africa. And in the last 20 years we have seen the
Chinese talk about communications infrastructure.
We have seen them in 2010 talk about the Belt and Road
Initiative. It's been concrete plans and they have been
successful, although many African countries have not had an
alternative. They've been--had the opportunity to go to the IMF
and those programs did not work.
So when we talk about onerous conditions and expensive
funding we have not offered them many viable alternatives. So
I'm glad to see that we're talking about reciprocal trade.
In Sudan specifically the 2020 Congress appropriated $900
million for the Sudanese government before the 2021 coup. What
would you think--how much of that money was spent and is there
anything that we could have done different?
Ms. Phee. Thanks for that question. Although that subject
was handled prior to my confirmation as assistant secretary I
think there's a consensus that we did not move the money out
quickly enough to have the desired impact and, in fact, in my
confirmation hearing I committed to accelerating our
disbursement of those funds.
I started work in October and that's when the coup
happened. So we did not have time to mobilize.
That said, it's not uncommon in countries that have had
such difficult histories as Sudan has--30 years of an Islamist
dictatorship by a military leader--that the transition--we
might have expected that the transition would be bumpy.
But I think, if that was your question, sir, we did not
move the money fast enough.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you.
Ms. Muyangwa. I would agree with my colleague here, and the
only thing I would add to that that there is a request from
USAID for close to $50 million in the 1924 budget to support
Sudan and that is underpinned by our commitment to supporting
the people of Sudan in their democratic aspirations but also
our recognition that Sudan resides in a very restive region and
our ability to be able to provide the support is critically
important not just for Sudan but for the entire region and our
interests in that region.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you for your participation and coming
forward with us today. I yield my time, Chairman.
Mr. James. Thank you, Rep. Jackson. I now yield myself 5
minutes of questioning.
Assistant Secretary Phee, the Manono-Kitolo mine in the DRC
is one of the largest if not the largest in the world.
President Biden's climate change agenda is pretty aggressive by
all measures.
The automotive industry has been tagged with the obligation
to meet these greenhouse gas emissions targets lest they pay
fees.
According to NHTSA last year, could cost the industry $90
billion and another $9 billion in fees for noncompliance, and
that's not to mention any other penalties that could come from
any other agencies in the Administration.
Given these aggressive goals, I imagine that you support
the President's climate agenda. Is your department also given
metrics and are you also tracking the fact that President
Tshisikedi was in Beijing negotiating the sale and the control
of one of the largest lithium mines in the world--as it is
nearly impossible to currently make electric vehicles without
lithium--this past week in Beijing?
Ms. Phee. Mr. Chairman, again, I welcome your interest in
the DRC and in the role that DRC critical minerals will play
for the United States and globally.
We are working with his government to see what might be
possible and to----
Mr. James. Are you being measured by anything? We say that
there's transformational change. We say that there are
meetings. We say that there are--are there any goals that you
have to hit?
Are there any metrics that you are measuring to kind of
kind of define and be transparent with the success or not of
the American taxpayers' efforts and money and kind of tracking
our progress in the region?
Ms. Phee. In terms of the DRC----
Mr. James. The fact that the President has such aggressive
goals----
Ms. Phee. Yes.
Mr. James [continuing]. With EV transformation----
Ms. Phee. Yes.
Mr. James [continuing]. Yet the control for the largest
lithium mine in the world may have been negotiated to China. I
understand that if we have these goals, if we are putting
metrics and goals and having penalties in the automotive
industry then we in the government should also have metrics and
goals that we're following to facilitate the potential
penalties that we'd be imposing on American companies. Are you
aware and are you tracking any goals?
Ms. Phee. Yes. The interagency is focused very much on
critical minerals and identifying and pursuing opportunities to
ensure U.S. investment in that sector.
Mr. James. What are those goals? Are they--are they numbers
or are--can you share those goals?
Ms. Phee. Why do not I followup with you on----
Mr. James. I would appreciate that followup. Thank you very
much.
Ms. Phee. Okay. Thank you. Yes.
Mr. James. Another one. Is the Wagner Group a threat to
Africa?
Ms. Phee. The Wagner Group is a predatory group that
exploits existing challenges in Africa.
Mr. James. Is the Wagner Group a threat to the United
States of America and its allies?
Ms. Phee. I do not believe it's a threat to us but it's a
threat to the interests of our partners in Africa.
Mr. James. There are a lot of things that we're seeing in
Africa that are reminiscent to the Afghanistan and Pakistan
issues that we saw 20 years ago. Wagner Group is absolutely a
terrorist threat in Africa and it can absolutely hurt us in the
United States of America.
That is one of the biggest reasons that Africa is
important. I also have a question about Sudan.
Are you familiar with GSK, a security company in Sudan?
Ms. Phee. No, I'm not.
Mr. James. Okay. It's a small technology and security
company that's based in Sudan. The Tradive General Trading LLC
is used for funding the operations of Hemeti and the RSF.
Mohammed Edris is partnered with Ahmed Mousa, Dagalo's younger
brother and is in partisanship--a partnership with Wagner.
Edris moves all the money for Hemeti.
What I've heard--what I've heard is that these are things
that happened prior to your--to your stationing in your
position but the war in Sudan is currently being funded by
stealing the resources--the natural resources from the
Sudanese.
Are we doing anything to counteract these forces, the
funding of the Wagner Group and the continued violence in
Sudan?
Ms. Phee. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Earlier this month we imposed sanctions on two sets of
parastatals that are, respectively, affiliated with the
Sudanese Armed Forces and with the Rapid Support Forces. GSK--
--
Mr. James. To what effect? Are we noticing any effect at
all?
Ms. Phee. Well, it was--the action was just taken this
month. So we--so I just wanted to mention to you that GSK is a
subsidiary of Tradive, which is the--one of the RSF affiliated
parastatals that we sanctioned.
What we--what would be helpful, and I would welcome your
voice, is to encourage other governments to join us in our
sanctions.
The U.K. is considering doing so. The EU has been rather
slow in making a decision to pursue sanctions, and we're in
discussions with our Arab partners as well.
Mr. James. Thank you for your work here. I appreciate it
and look forward to working with you.
The chair now recognizes Rep. Kamlager-Dove for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It's always appreciated when you invite me to these
hearings, and Assistant Secretary Phee and Assistant
Administrator Muyangwa, it is so great to see you both again
after the Presidential delegation to Nigeria that I had the
privilege of participating in earlier this month with you.
As important as it is to bolster our programming and
funding commitments on the continent, this will yield little
advancement if we do not have the people to implement them.
So, Assistant Secretary Phee, what is the Administration
doing to address personnel gaps at U.S. diplomatic posts in the
region and also to increase the diversity of our Foreign
Service officers to reflect the population they are engaging
in? And then what can we do to help make that happen?
Ms. Phee. Thanks very much for that question, which
highlights the personal commitment of Secretary Blinken and all
of his key staff such as persons like myself to do both more in
getting staff for the State Department generally and to ensure
that we attract and retain diverse talent.
So on the first, as you are aware we had a few years where
there was a freeze on hiring and we failed to hire to replace
those who departed.
The Administration and all of its budget requests has put
forward large requests for additional staff. We would welcome
support for those staffing requests so we can do better but we
have a gap between those we lost and those that are now coming
online.
So that's a challenge, given that our renewed emphasis and
elevation of the Africa file. With regard to the challenge of
diversity, I think we're facing a challenge that many in the
private sector also face.
But there are concerted efforts from programs to personal
leadership, mentorship, to try and, again, address both the
issue of attracting the right talent and retaining the right
talent.
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you for that. I mean, I hate to
sound controversial but it is always odd when I go to the
continent of Africa and the only folks that are representing
the United States of America are white people. It just makes me
a little prickly. So, please, I hope you share those remarks
with the secretary.
I also had the privilege of traveling to Stockholm this
weekend as part of a congressional delegation to the
Transatlantic Legislators Dialogue to discuss mutual priorities
with counterparts in the EU, and I have to say that I was
dismayed by their level of dismissiveness when it came to
investing in the continent of Africa.
I cannot tell you how many people rolled their eyes at me.
I had to meditate. One shared interest that I believe needs to
be elevated is increasing our partners' attention and
investments in Africa because the United States can and should
not do this work alone.
So can you describe in what ways is State pressing our G-7
partners to bolster their development, financing, and business
investments in Africa? And if the assistant administrator would
like to add to that I would welcome.
Ms. Phee. Thank you for highlighting the important role of
our partners. So when we're united we can have maximum impact.
As you know, the President has led the way in the G-7 to
mobilize G-7 efforts to improve and increase investment in
Africa and also to leverage capital funds globally so that we
marry U.S. Government resources, other government resources,
particularly from the West, and some venture capital funds that
are available.
We also meet routinely at every level of the U.S.
Government with the Europeans and with G-7 partners. Africa is
always a topic of conversation, including in the most recent G-
7 meetings in Japan, and we fully agree with you that we need
the Europeans to do more with us in Africa.
Ms. Muyangwa. Thank you very much for that question, and
it's good to see you again.
So USAID approaches this from a number of--a number of
vantage points. Let me start with the recent pledging
conference on Sudan that just took place where the U.S.--the
United States has been the leading contributor to humanitarian
efforts in Sudan.
We got other partners to contribute to those efforts. We're
still putting in a sizable amount of money compared to the
others but others stepped up to the plate. So I think that's
really important.
A second area in which we do this is what the administrator
calls progress beyond programs where we try to crowd in
partners to add more resources to the areas of the work that we
already are working on.
And then Prosper Africa on the economic end also offers
services that really seek to demystify Africa both to our U.S.
partners and others who are working in the economic space.
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California [presiding]. Thank you.
I would like to recognize myself for questioning but I want
to continue this conversation with you, Assistant Secretary
Muyangwa, regarding the Prosper Africa.
The Fiscal Year 1924 budget request for Prosper Africa is
designed to be the one-stop shop for all two-way trade and
investment between the United States and Africa that is
currently $100.5 billion.
Currently, it is housed within USAID but where does Prosper
Africa fit into the agency's overall trade and investment
strategy with Africa?
Ms. Muyangwa. Thank you very much for that question.
So while USAID serves as the secretariat for Prosper
Africa, Prosper Africa is a 17-agency initiative.
So USAID is actually just the secretariat for that and it
is really at the center of economic engagement with the African
continent, offering a lot of services in terms of encouraging
U.S.-Africa trade and investment and a lot has been done.
We just had a great success story in terms of President
Ruto announcing $150 million worth of investment working with
Prosper Africa and others between the U.S. and Kenya. Prosper
Africa does a lot in terms of connecting U.S. and African
businesses.
We have a virtual deal room, for example, which curates
opportunities and facilitates U.S. companies and entrepreneurs
being able to connect with those opportunities in Africa.
We provide advisors to U.S. businesses and entrepreneurs
who are interested in doing business in Africa and those have--
all of these efforts pulled together have yielded quite
significant results, as both Assistant Secretary Phee and
myself mentioned in our written remarks.
Mrs. Kim of California. You know, I've noted that there is
no Prosper Africa coordinator within the State Department,
right?
Ms. Muyangwa. The Prosper Africa coordinator actually
resides at USAID----
Mrs. Kim of California. Or at USAID. Yes.
Ms. Muyangwa [continuing]. And I am happy to share that a
Prosper Africa coordinator will be coming on board imminently--
--
Mrs. Kim of California. Okay.
Ms. Muyangwa [continuing]. And we just sent a message out
to committee members this morning, I believe. But the
announcement----
Mrs. Kim of California. Given the importance I think it's
real important to have that coordinator to effectively navigate
and coordinate the--you know, across the interagency.
So I really support that and I believe that coordinator
position should be elevated and properly empowered. Wouldn't
you agree? That's also a sentiment that is shared by many
private sector representatives, both African and Americans.
One more question to you. Where will the Prosper Africa
coordinator fit into that USAID hierarchy and who would that
person report to?
Ms. Muyangwa. So the Prosper Africa coordinator has a line
to the assistant administrator, myself, and that is mostly on
coordination purposes. The Prosper Africa coordinator also has
a strong link with our agency front office as well as our
Administration.
And so the Prosper Africa coordinator really works across
all of the agencies--the 17 agencies that I talked about----
Mrs. Kim of California. Got it.
Ms. Muyangwa [continuing]. Coordinates with the Africa
Bureau because it's an Africa focused position, but also get
strategic guidance direction from the larger U.S.----
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I would like to put in
one more question in to Assistant Secretary Phee.
Ms. Muyangwa. Sure.
Mrs. Kim of California. Given Africa's economic potential
it's really especially important that we have a very high-level
commercial expertise in our embassies. Would you agree? Right.
But I've noted also from 2016 to 2020 there were on average
only 12 Foreign Commercial Service officers in the entirety
throughout the sub-Saharan Africa. So would the State
Department support more Foreign Commercial Service officers
being placed at embassies all throughout Africa?
Ms. Phee. Thank you for highlighting the need for more
Foreign Commercial Service officers, which, of course, is a
program run by the Department of Commerce.
You know, the President has an advisory council on doing
business in Africa and they recently completed a report which
included a dozen or so recommendations and that is one of their
key recommendations. So I think that's a consensus view.
Mrs. Kim of California. Perfect. And then we talked about
the African Leadership Summit. Since then--I think we addressed
it a little bit but can you tell us what instructions have been
sent to the embassies and consulates regarding that and, you
know, in order to advance commercial diplomacy goals, and when
were they sent?
Ms. Phee. Thanks very much. This is the 6-month anniversary
so we're doing--this is a great opportunity. We're doing a lot
of public diplomacy to identify all the work that has been done
in the past 6 months.
Specifically regarding the economic diplomacy we had an
Africa Business Forum day in which deals of $15.7 billion were
announced.
That number has now risen to $16.2 billion. One of our key
leaders who had served at the National Security Council to help
organize the summit is now working for the Chamber of Commerce
specifically to followup on implementation of those deals and
we are fully engaged with our embassies and pursuing the
economic levers I've outlined.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you so much. We went over
time but now I recognize Ranking Member Jacobs for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Assistant Secretary Phee, I was glad that we have talked a
lot about the U.S.-African Leaders Summit. I know you just
answered questions on the commercial piece.
I just wanted to make sure the State Department has sent
out guidance and materials on implementation other than what's
publicly available to the embassies and missions.
Ms. Phee. Yes. And also just to update you, we established
a website for the Leaders Summit in December and we're now
going to transfer all of the programs and activities.
We have at least 19 different departments and agencies who
are moving in many ways and we want to have points of contact
so we facilitate followup.
Ms. Jacobs. Okay. Wonderful. I'm so glad to hear that. I
know when I was traveling on the continent some of the
Ambassadors were still waiting for that guidance.
I know we have also talked about Sudan a few times already.
I'm particularly concerned by what we have seen in West Darfur,
ethnic-based killings against the non-Arab Masalit tribes
people by the RSF and we know that the highest risk of
atrocities and crimes against humanity and genocide is previous
atrocities and, obviously, unfortunately, this region has seen
decades of these kinds of killings.
What is the State Department doing to address these
killings, gather evidence, and proactively try to prevent
another genocide in the region?
Ms. Phee. Thanks for highlighting the horrific crimes that
are taking place in the Darfur region. We mobilized very
quickly following the outbreak of the conflict to work with our
colleagues in the bureau--CSO Bureau--to establish something
known as the Sudan Conflict Observatory, which has already
begun publishing photographs and other images and documents to
describe what's going on including in the Darfur region.
As you may have seen last week we issued a statement in
reaction to the assassination of the Governor of West Darfur
and we have spoken directly to these problems both publicly and
in Jeddah where we have been meeting with a delegation from the
RSF as well as through our engagement with the leadership of
the RSF.
So the initial attention focused on Khartoum because it was
unusual to have that kind of fighting in the Nation capital.
But as we feared, given the RSF base in Darfur the fighting has
spread there.
Ms. Jacobs. And I wanted to also ask you about U.S. policy
on Mali and specifically MINUSMA. Now that we're likely to see
a withdrawal of MINUSMA how is the U.S. working with the U.N.
to ensure an orderly and responsible withdrawal of troops and
how does this decision impact the new U.S. strategy toward
Mali?
Ms. Phee. This is a deeply regrettable decision, which is
one in a pattern of regrettable decisions by the transitional
government that will threaten the interests of the people of
Mali.
As you know well, once a government withdraws consent for a
peacekeeping mission it's not possible to keep the mission on
the ground.
But it's one of the largest missions in Africa and we will
need to work responsibly together with other members of the
Security Council as well as with the transitional authorities
to make sure that the draw down does not worsen the situation.
The choices that the transitional government has been
making are--have been the subject of concern and criticism by
the United States and other partners and to their partners in
the region who are also concerned about the impact the
deterioration of the situation will have on their interests.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
And, last, I mentioned in my opening remarks President
Biden's support for the AU to become part of the G-20. There's
wide range of support for that here in Congress and the
international community.
When do you expect this to happen?
Ms. Phee. It's our expectation that that should take place
this year, likely in the fall, and I'm glad you've raised that
point because one of the important outcomes of the Leaders
Summit was our effort to elevate Africa in the global
conversation so not only the G-20--and thank you for your
legislative reinforcement--also support for an African
permanent seat on the Security Council.
And I wanted to mention in response to an earlier question
that Secretary Yellen is undertaking an effort to update the
IFIs and the MDBs to make sure they're fit for purpose to meet
the challenges that African nations face.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, I'm really glad to hear that and please
count on us if you need anything in that regard, and we look
forward to working with you to make sure that Africans actually
get a say in the decisions that are often being made about
them.
So thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, and now I recognize
Representative Baird for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Madam Chair.
My question focuses on the contributions for the
international peacekeeping activities account. The U.S.
Government requested $1.31 billion for U.S. contributions to
international peacekeeping throughout the sub-Sahara Africa.
The request for these contributions to the failing U.N.
missions in Central Africa and the Democratic Republic of Congo
and Mali is $970 million. By contrast, the coastal West African
region receives only $100 million and they spread that through
the Global Fragility Act, and that's split between five
countries.
So my question, Assistant Secretary Phee, is in today's
resource constrained environment why does the department still
view these contributions to U.N. peacekeeping operations in
Africa as an effective use of resources that enhance U.S.
national security?
Ms. Phee. Thank you very much, Congressman, for
highlighting the challenges that these peacekeeping missions
face.
As I'm sure you know well, as a permanent member of the
Security Council dating to our--the founding of the Security
Council the United States pays an assessed contribution to
support peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council.
So that accounts for that funding request, and the
peacekeeping efforts in Africa are among if not the most
challenging in the world, given the degraded security
environments in which they operate, and the challenges that
troop-contributing countries face in dealing with terrorist
threats such as in Mali where they're dealing with threats from
ISIS and from AQ.
Also in the DRC they're dealing with threats from armed
militias as well as ISIS, and in CAR there is the historic
threat from insurgent groups there and now the presence of the
Wagner Group.
In both CAR and in Mali the Wagner Group has limited the
operations of those peacekeeping missions, calling into
question their utility, and I think it has led to the decision
by the transitional government to ask for the mission to leave
in Mali.
So they're a bit of apples and oranges in terms of the
funding as, again, assessed contributions rather than
initiatives by Congress such as through the GFA. So those are
questions that we need to consider collectively about what's
the best way to invest in Africa security and development.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. And, Assistant Administrator
Muyangwa, the Global Facility and Fragility Act sets a decade-
long time horizon on the address of political and social
drivers of conflict, a laudable goal but one insufficient to
address the immediacy of the security threat posed by the JNIM
and Islamic State--Islamic State in Greater Sahara.
So how does the department balance resourcing the long-term
goals of the GFA with the urgent need to improve security to
the northern areas of the coastal West Africa?
Ms. Muyangwa. Thank you so much for that question.
I would start by pointing out that the GFA is part of a
larger package of security support to the African continent
that the United States provides. Part of it resides with the
Department of Defense, and then there are programs by the
Department of State as well as USAID.
For USAID on the Global Fragility Act, as you know the
President approved those 10-year plans in March of this year
and we have started to implement in coastal West Africa where
we have 22 activities that are either being implemented or in
the planning process and we are focusing on the prevention side
of it, which speaks to the larger security environment.
So we have programs that are looking at border security,
programs that provide for livelihoods so that we can build
resilience in the communities that guards against potential
recruitment by extremist forces.
We are also looking at each country's contacts, and so the
10-year horizon actually gives us the certainty of being able
to build on over the long term rather than the single-year
funding.
So we're really, really grateful for that, that it will
continue to build on successes from this year going into the
future to help minimize the vulnerabilities to violent
extremism in the region and other sources of fragility.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I now recognize
Representative Cherfilus-McCormick for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you so much, Chairwoman.
Late last year as part of the U.S. Africa Leadership Summit
President Biden issued an executive order directing the
Secretary of State to establish the President's Advisory
Council on African Diaspora Engagement in the United States.
Assistant Secretary Phee, what is the status of
establishing this council and choosing members?
Ms. Phee. We're so excited about this council. We're really
thrilled to have the resources and talent of the American
diaspora--the African diaspora in America to help us.
Earlier this month we sent forward to the Hill the
regulatory framework that would guide the establishment of the
council and names have been selected through a conscientious
and thorough process. They're being vetted right now and our
hope is that we can announce the names this month.
Again, this is the 6-month anniversary of the summit so we
want to make sure that everyone sees what we're doing to act on
the President's commitments.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. And how do you envision the
council changing the way the U.S. engages with the diaspora
communities and related to U.S. policy?
Ms. Phee. I think the most important way it will change the
way and what we do--it's not as if we have been disengaged with
the diaspora communities but it will formalize and make
systematic our outreach and we can then depend on leaders who
have been tapped to support us to tap into their networks.
So I think by elevating it to a Presidential level, by
tapping some of the greatest leaders in America, and by working
with them formally we'll be able to improve our engagement with
them and their engagement with Africans.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you so much for your
testimony.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I now recognize
Representative Kamlager-Dove for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just want to say--I know this was discussed but Assistant
Administrator, I think USAID is doing important work and your
work with PEPFAR has been transformational and I certainly
support a clean reauthorization.
I also hope that we find ways to counter the recent policy
in Uganda and work to make sure that it does not infect and
affect the rest of the continent because, you know, hate kills.
Assistant Secretary, I would ask if you could find a way to
maybe give this committee a briefing on the status of Ethiopia.
I talked to some constituents last night and there are some
real concerns of a potential coup or deep unrest. And so hoping
that--I just think that that country cannot afford that kind of
instability.
And, last, I just want to say that I actually do believe
that there's a strong correlation between the countries who
were most brutal in their colonization and the perpetual
instability of those respective countries and I hope that we
can find ways to lean on those European countries who are our
allies to ask them to do better and to step up.
So now my questions are the Digital Transformation for
Africa Initiative, I believe, could be a game changer and I
would love to hear from both of you what metrics or goals are
you using to both monitor its implementation and also to track
its success.
Ms. Phee. She always makes me go first.
We're so excited you have highlighted that. This has the
potential to be impactful in a way that PEPFAR has been
impactful.
So we looked across the U.S. Government to find all the
different departments and agencies who in some way contributed
to this effort and we have identified $350 million in U.S.
Government funded programs and have tapped an additional $450
million in financing. So we're going to try and help expand
digital access, digital literacy, and a good enabling
environment.
When the Vice President was in Zambia building on work
she's done in Latin America she reached out to leaders in the
private sector and asked them to match the U.S. Government
investment. So we need to turn those commitments into reality.
But there's a lot of opportunity and interest there. We
talked about the work we have been doing over the past few
months to make real the commitments at the ALS.
So we have set up a digital policy council within the
government to sort of guide this investment and make sure we're
taking advantage of these resources to really make a difference
in this critical space.
You had an opportunity to go to Abuja. I hope you can go to
Lagos where there's an incredible creative industry which is
really engaged in this space. That's another area, for example,
where the diaspora council can help us.
So there's a lot of opportunities here. Everybody is
focused on making good use of these resources to have the kind
of impact that will make a difference in Africa.
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. Amen to the creative economy.
Ms. Muyangwa. I have nothing more to add to that--I thought
the assistant secretary covered that really well--except to say
we are in lockstep with the Department of State in terms of the
importance of Digital Transformation Africa to our future
efforts across the development, security, and governance
sectors.
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. So you have one extra minute of my time
so I would just like you to continue to talk about the vibrancy
and the potential of the creative economy in Africa. You can
talk about Lagos or you can go other places. But I think it's
incredibly important that we understand the power of this
industry and how we can leverage it.
Ms. Muyangwa. I would just say that one of the things I
particularly enjoy in my job is visiting the continent with the
young Africans and just seeing the creativity and the solutions
and ideas that they are bringing to many of the challenges that
their countries are facing in the security sector, in the
health sector, in the education sector.
And so creating an environment in which we can harness all
of that really not just centers African agency but also enables
us to spend less on the humanitarian, the security issues, over
the long term.
And so, for me, finding ways of amplifying these creatives
on the continent is absolutely critical to our success in terms
of our U.S.-Africa engagement.
Mrs. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, and I yield back, Madam
Chairwoman.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. And I want to thank both
of you for your testimony and answering the questions from our
members.
So, members, thank you so much for your engagement today.
The members of the committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses and we will ask you to respond to
those in writing.
And pursuant to committee rules, all members may have 5
days to submit statements, questions, and extraneous materials
for the record, subject to the length limitations.
So without objection, the committee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:33 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
