- CHILDREN ARE NOT FOR SALE--GLOBAL EFFORTS TO ADDRESS CHILD TRAFFICKING

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CHILDREN ARE NOT FOR SALE_GLOBAL EFFORTS TO ADDRESS CHILD TRAFFICKING

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GLOBAL HEALTH,
GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS, AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 14, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-116

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov
_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-816                      WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa                   SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK, Florida
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                GREG STANTON, Arizona
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
THOMAS KEAN, Jr., New Jersey         SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             JIM COSTA, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JASON CROW, Colorado
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director
Sophia A. Lafargue, Minority Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International
Organizations

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey, Chairman

MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania, Ranking
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,           Member
American Samoa                   AMI BERA, California
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                SARA JACOBS, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
JOHN JAMES, Michigan

Mary Vigil, Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

WITNESSES

Page
Tim Ballard, Senior Adviser, The SPEAR Fund......................    13
Jeanne Celestine Lakin, Survivor-Expert..........................    22
Jennifer Podkul, Vice President of Policy and Advocacy, Kids in
Need of Defense................................................    27

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    61
Hearing Minutes..................................................    63
Hearing Attendance...............................................    64

CHILDREN ARE NOT FOR SALE--GLOBAL EFFORTS TO ADDRESS CHILD TRAFFICKING

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 14, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Global Health, Global Human
Rights, and International Organizations,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 12:12 p.m., in
Room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Christopher H.
Smith [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Mr. Smith. Good morning or afternoon, I should say. This
hearing of the Subcommittee on Global Health, Global Human
Rights, and International Organizations will come to order.
Over 20 years ago, the U.S. Congress approved and the President
signed legislation, historic bipartisan legislation that I
authored, known as the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of
2000, a comprehensive whole of government initiative to combat
sex and labor trafficking in the United States as well as
around the world.
The TVPA created a bold domestic and international anti-
human trafficking strategy and established numerous, dozens and
dozens of new programs to protect victims, prosecute
traffickers, and to the extent possible, prevent human
trafficking in the first place, as we all know, the three Ps.
Though it's hard to believe now, my legislation was met with a
wall of skepticism and opposition, outright opposition,
dismissed by many as a solution in search of a problem. The
administration even argued in this room as well as in 2172 that
we didn't need a TIP Report which goes out every year.
We did not need to have any sanctions or naming of
countries with egregious records. It's all on the record. And
somehow all of that would be counterproductive. And I'm a great
believer that when you fight human rights and combat human
rights abuses for human rights and combat abuses, you've got to
name names.
You got to be specific if you hope to effectuate change.
And we pressed on again in a bipartisan way. And we were able
to get the legislation over the goal line and into law.
At the time too, many people thought when we said
trafficking, including a number of U.S. attorneys that I talked
to about what were they doing, they said, you're talking about
weapons, right? You're talking about drugs, right? And I said,
no, we're talking about human beings.
There was this sense that what's that, human trafficking?
It was kind of sad. I started working on this issue in 1995. It
wasn't until five years later that we actually got the bill
enacted into law.
Reports of vulnerable persons, especially women and
children, being reduced to commodities for sale were often met
with surprise, incredulity, or indifference. The bill was
signed into law on October 28th. And within a year, and I did a
number of oversight hearings as well, nobody was arguing that
the Trafficking Victims Protection Act and especially the three
Ps was flawed, unworkable, unnecessary, or especially
counterproductive. Everybody seemed to then be on board.
Today we will examine--again, examine child sex and labor
trafficking, a particularly devastating and egregious form of
human trafficking that targets the most vulnerable among us.
Tragically, this heinous crime has become more prevalent in
recent years. Child predators it turns out are everywhere on
the prowl, kidnaping, buying, or renting children to exploit.
The child predators never waste a crisis and are especially
skilled at taking advantage of conflict, poverty, lawlessness,
poor governance by governments, corrupt officials including at
the police level--especially at the police level. They take
advantage of IDPs, refugees, and migrants. During the COVID-19
pandemic, and we held a series of hearings in this committee on
this, we found the child predators found new and devious ways
via the internet and social media to groom and to sexually harm
children.
On any given day, over 27 million people around the world--
and there are varying estimates, but that's one of the
estimates given by the U.S. Department of State--are enslaved
in forced labor or sex trafficking. It is estimated nearly a
third of all trafficking victims are children. But we believe
that the true number is likely to much, much higher.
To combat child sex tourism in 2016, I authored the
International Megan's Law. After eight years of argument and
callous disregard for child victims, it passed the House three
times with huge bipartisan majorities but was blocked by the
Senate. International Megan's Law was finally adopted in the
Senate and signed into law.
International Megan's Law seeks to protect children from
sex tourism by notifying destination countries when convicted
pedophiles plan to travel. The penalty for failure to disclose
is identical to their failure to disclose to their local-state
law enforcement, up to ten years in prison. When they say, I'm
going to this country, X, Y, or Z, they have to tell us that.
If they lie, they could be prosecuted and, like I said, get
up to ten years in prison for it. So we're very serious. This
child sex tourism has got to be stopped, and one way of doing
is to say, you tell us where you're going. We inform the
country of destination.
We have the Angel Watch program that's doing a magnificent
job on that. And then they're free to say, you're not coming in
or you can come in and we'll watch you like a hawk. A number of
countries, there's been more than 20,000 notices made to other
countries.
We've asked that it be a sense of reciprocity. We wrote it
right into the law. We haven't gotten a lot of people telling
us in other countries, so-and-so is coming who we convicted as
a pedophile. I wish we could get that, and we're still pushing
for that so we can be on guard or making them inadmissible to
the United States.
Megan Kanka on who each and every one of our states has a
Megan's Law, she was a 7-year-old little girl who lived in my
old hometown of Hamilton. I know the parents very well. I
worked with them on Megan's Law as well as International
Megan's Law.
She was sexually assaulted and murdered in 1994 by a
convicted pedophile who lived across the street. Nobody, I say
again nobody knew who he was. He was actually handing out
fliers, have you seen Megan, as part of the search when she
went missing and he had brutally raped her and then buried her
in a shallow grave.
He's in prison and hopefully will never get out. But that
led to Megan's Laws everywhere. And I had a meeting about 12
years ago. I always meet with delegations when they come in and
we talk about trafficking.
This one was from Thailand. And I asked them, what would
you do if you knew a convicted pedophile who was coming to
Bangkok or Phuket or any of the other places where child sex
tourism is very, very prevalent. They said, we wouldn't let
them in.
That day, we started drafting the legislation. And again,
eight years later, we finally got it enacted into law. I just
have right here because we were very concerned that they would
lie and not get caught as to where they're going, they'll say
they're going to Narita, to Japan, and they're really going
somewhere else like Malaysia or to Cambodia or to Thailand.
We got the legislation to include that the passports will
have to have this inscription on it. The bearer was convicted
of a sex offense against a minor and is a covered sex offender
pursuant to the U.S. code. And we know that many of the people
at the border now are looking for that.
They see that, and they say, get out of here. You're not
coming in to abuse our children because we know that these are
very rampant. And very often these sex tourism things are just
horrible.
We also know and all of you know that, especially our very
distinguished witnesses, that refugees, migrants, and
internally displaced children are especially vulnerable to
trafficking. And then traffickers take advantage of conflict
and chaos to target young victims. We are seeing this in
Ukraine where it is estimated over 90 percent of the Ukrainians
fleeing Putin's war are women and children and that more than
half of Ukrainians children have been displaced by conflict.
Thousands of Ukrainian children have been forcibly removed
from their homes and from orphanages and taken to Russia in
mass abductions. Part of Putin's genocidal plan to erase the
Ukrainian culture. Tragically, the problems of child
trafficking is rampant right here in the United States, right
under our nose.
A lot of our law enforcement are working hard to combat it.
But it's happening right here with American children. Now we
know there's a serious family concern that unaccompanied minors
coming across our southern border, many of them from Central
America and South America, may be the new victims. According to
U.S. Customs and Border Protection, at least 345,000 children
from other countries have crossed the U.S. southern border
unaccompanied since 2021.
These unaccompanied minors are especially vulnerable to
traffickers. And shockingly, Department of Health and Human
Services has lost contact with at least 85,000 of these
children after placing them with sponsors in the United States.
I would note parenthetically and I work very closely
intercountry adoption as well as adoption domestically.
There's a great vetting process to ensure that who is
applying to be a parent of an adopted child gets a home study,
gets all kinds of due process, due diligence to ensure they are
who they say they are and the child will be in a good home
where he or she or they if it's a group of siblings will not be
hurt. What kind of due diligence is being done for these
children as they're handed off? I've heard so many anecdotal
stories that have just--were chilling about how low the bar is
in order to procure one of these children.
And that's the word that I use because I think some of this
obviously is human trafficking. The U.S. government has a
responsibility to protect these vulnerable children and to
fully vet the sponsors. Without any means to contact these
children, many of whom endured countless risks to reach the
U.S. border, I put in our last hearing that we had with
Ambassador at Large Dyer that the President of Guatemala told
me that about 80 percent of the women and young girls making
their way up the border--to our border are sexually assaulted,
80 percent.
Tim, you brought out, and I hope you bring out in your
testimony about these other Central American Presidents who are
speaking out and saying, these are our kids. Whether they're
ultra left or ultra right as Presidents, they're concerned that
their kids are being maltreated in the most ruinous ways as
they make their way to the U.S. Without any means of contact,
these children, many of whom endured countless risks to reach
the U.S. border could be in immediate grave danger and at risk
of death, child sex exploitation and abuse, severe forms of
trafficking and persons including forced labor and of course
sex trafficking.
Earlier this week joined by 22 sponsors, I introduced H.R.
5415, the Safeguarding Endangered Children, Unaccompanied and
at Risk of Exploitation Act or the SECURE Act to compel the
federal government to report our efforts to locate, establish
contact with, conduct wellness checks on, and investigate any
suspicion of human trafficking related to the approximately
85,000 unaccompanied minors where ORR has lost contact with. It
is imperative that the executive branch locate and assess the
well being of these minors. And we must inform our border
security policies--reform them so that this ends.
We are joined here today by an outstanding group of
witnesses. I'll give a proper introduction to each of you. You
are just amazing leaders, including a man whose life experience
provided the foundation for the recently released file, Sound
of Freedom, Tim Ballard. The Speaker of the House Kevin
McCarthy did a premiere for members of Congress, and many
members came.
And even though for my wife and I it was the second time
that we saw it, I had tears in my eyes about the heroic things
that Tim did and the kids, the plight of those kids, in this
case, kids from Colombia. On May 14, 2015 in this room, Tim
Ballard testified at one of my human rights committee hearings.
He told us how he had served for 12 years as a special agent
for the Department of Homeland Security's Internet Crimes
Against Children Task Force and the sex tourism [inaudible] and
worked as an undercover operative infiltrating organizations at
home and abroad that were abusing and trafficking children.
Tim told us, however, that he often felt helpless, his
word, ``by the fact that the vast majority of the child victims
that we would find fell outside of the purview of the United
States. And unless we could tie it to U.S. travel to the case,
I would not be able to rescue the children,'' close quote.
Working with the Colombians, for example, Tim pulled off one of
the largest rescue operations ever, more than 120 victims,
children as young as 11 in just one day.
An example of working with local law enforcement like in
Colombia and with many of our folks that were just absolutely
motivated to rescue children, 120 victims in just one day.
Tim's heroic lifesaving work--and it was very, very dangerous,
continues to be, rescuing children from the cruelty of sex
trafficking, almost always at great physical risk to himself
and his colleagues--is the stuff of legends. I said it the
other day, we often use the word, hero.
We use it too much I think sometimes in Congress. We're all
legends in our own mind after all. But this man is a hero. And
you ladies are heroes on the front line fighting so hard.
The Sound of Freedom tells his true story. It not only
informs and educates, it motivates and is going all around the
world motivating and informing people to take stronger action
and to be aware situationally. I would also like to extend a
very special thanks for Jeanne Celestine Lakin, a courageous
survivor expert who joined us today to share her very personal
perspective, what impact these crimes have on children, and
what more we should be doing to prevent them.
I've always considered it essential to listen to the voices
of survivors. We all believe that. And in the process of
developing the Trafficking Victims Protection Act, it was
survivors who moved the needle and convinced lawmakers that the
legislation was necessary.
Our bill was dead. The administration was against it. And
then we had victims come and testify, including two especially
persuasive women who have been forced into prostitution
trafficking in Moscow. And they told their stories.
I met with them in 1989 along with my wife. And it was just
mind boggling what they had been through. And you could've
heard a pin drop when they told their stories.
And people said, wait a minute. We need to do something
about this. So thank you. Thank you very much, Ms. Lakin. And
I'm so happy to welcome and we're deeply grateful that Jennifer
Podkul, Vice President of Policy and Advocacy of Kids in Need
of Defense will shortly testify as well.
And I will introduce her more robustly in a few moments.
But I want to thank you, all three of you for your leadership.
I'd like to yield to Ms. Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
so much to our witnesses. Coincidentally, the timing of this
hearing is occurring just as I've returned from Nepal with
several of my congressional colleagues where we had a number of
visits with young women in particular who were survivors of
trafficking as well as meeting with USAID employees and NGOs
who are working very hard to combat child trafficking in
particular but also trafficking of women.
And it was a very sobering trip and really just made me
realize how extensive the problem is around the world. Mr.
Chairman, you mentioned that trafficking often thrives in
places of conflict and chaos. I'd add to that, that trafficking
thrives in places with extreme poverty which is really tragic.
We spoke to people whose parents had essentially acquiesced
to their young daughters being taken away for what was
euphemistically called education or a job. We talked to one
young woman who had survived trafficking but had been taken
away from her village at age 8 and was injected with something
that caused her to go into early puberty. And it was really
just a terribly difficult thing to listen to.
So I feel incredibly strongly that combating the scourge of
human trafficking particularly among children but all of human
trafficking should never become a partisan issue. It's one of
those core priorities where we can and must continue to find
common ground. We can't let this tragic issue fall into the pit
where partisan divide causes important causes to be relegated
to the cutting room floor as we have seen all too often.
And I hope that we can all come together in the name of
humanity and decency and protection of children to cross that
divide. Addressing the root of this issue requires being
willing to engage in tough, robust, and effective diplomacy and
partnership with partners and allies bilaterally as well as in
international forums. And one of the things we have to be
prepared for is that often in countries where trafficking is
particularly prevalent, there will be great denial of that at
the governmental level, in very uncertain terms that it's not
happening there.
And we just need to be able to look past what we often do
in the name of diplomacy, accepting what a government official
in another country tells us to really look at what is happening
around the world. And it requires consistency in how we report
on countries regardless of geopolitical considerations. We
cannot show favoritism in this issue to countries that we may
have an allied relationship with because we're worried about
upsetting a balance of trade or some other issue.
It's absolutely too important. And this issue, in my view,
supercedes all other considerations. And it requires being
willing to take on powerful interests here at home quite
honestly particularly when it comes to some disturbing recent
reports that we have seen of the prevalence of child labor in
corporate supply chains, including among some very profitable
corporations doing business here in the United States.
And I don't mean to suggest that we are at the heart of the
problem. But I think it's very, very important that we not
close our eyes to any evidence of child trafficking in
particular, human trafficking in general. So to all the
advocates and the survivors who may be watching this hearing,
wherever you are, please know that you have an ally in me and
my office and this subcommittee.
With that, I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to
working together on this. And I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Ranking Member. I'd like to
yield such time as you may consume to Ms. Radewagen. And thank
you for being here.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also want to
thank the ranking member for holding this important hearing.
Mr. Ballard, I have several questions for you, but they're sort
of interwoven. But let's start by, can you tell us more about
what you learned about the crime of child trafficking as an
agent for the Department of Homeland--I'm sorry. Erase all
that.
But I wanted to just take the opportunity to thank the
chairman and the ranking member for holding this tremendously
important hearing. And I particularly want to thank the
witnesses for appearing here today to share all this very, very
important information with us.
Mr. Smith. I'd like to yield to Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to
Ranking Member Wild. Thank you for your remarkable words on
this critically important heartbreaking problem. And Chairman
Smith, I would just like to thank you for your many, many years
of tenacious work on this issue, more than 20 years of work.
And I just want to congratulate you on your achievements
because I think without your work, we would not have some of
the laws in place that are hopefully having an effect on
getting to this issue. So thank you for all of that. I guess I
want to start with Ms. Podkul. Can you talk to us about how has
human trafficking evolved--thank you. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Manning. And thank you, Ranking
Member Wild. Let me introduce our three distinguished witnesses
beginning first with Tim Ballard who is senior advisor to the
SPEAR Fund which combats all forms of human trafficking.
Mr. Ballard previously spent over a decade working as a
special agent on some of the background I already shared with
the committee and with the audience where he was assigned to
the Internet Crimes Against Children Task Force, an undercover
operative. And again, I would encourage people to watch Sound
of Freedom to get a sense of what it is really like to be on
the front line to plan, to do all of the intel that was
necessary how to best rescue those children with the greatest
possibility of them as well as the rescuers not getting hurt. I
mean, the traffickers did think nothing of committing murder.
They rape. They also murder. So I'm so grateful, but I hope
people will take the time to look at that and watch that very,
very powerful movie.
Now we'll hear from Jeanne Celestine Lakin, who is a
survivor of child trafficking and an expert on the
vulnerability of children to trafficking and the impact that it
has on their growth and development and what can be done to
protect and prevent this crime. Ms. Lakin serves as the chair
of the International Survivors of Trafficking Advisory Council,
for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe's
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights. And
parenthetically, I serve as the special representative for the
Parliamentary Assembly of Trafficking as the special rep.
So she's a colleague as well but working with ODIHR and
deeply appreciate that work. She's an award winning author of A
Voice in the Darkness, a memoir of a Rwandan genocide. And I
just got a copy and will read it, probably in October when we
have a break.
And she wrote, as a survivor of the genocide in Rwanda, we
all remember the Tutsis and Hutus and the horrible bloodletting
that may have been prevented but it wasn't by the international
community, the UN, and the United States. But she's a survivor.
So thank you for being here. She obtained her MA in public
administration and public policy from Eastern Washington
University. She founded the One Million Orphans initiative
dedicated to providing sustainable support to the world's most
vulnerable children.
And we'll hear from Jennifer Podkul what happened is an
international human rights lawyer and expert on child migration
in the United States. Prior to joining Kids in Need of Defense,
Jennifer was a senior program officer at the Women's Refugee
Commission where she researched issues facing vulnerable
migrants seeking protection in the United States and advocated
for improved treatment. She is a national expert on issues
affecting immigrant children, has published articles,
handbooks, and reports on U.S. immigration law, and she
presents regularly as an expert at various conferences,
briefings, and professional training and includes speaking to
us here on the subcommittee. Thank you. She co-authored Forced
from Home: The Lost Boys and Girls from Central America and was
a contributing author to Childhood Migration and Human Rights
in Central and North America: Causes, Policies, Practices, and
Challenges.
Thank you, each of you. Please take up to ten minutes. If
you need a little more, that's fine. And any additional
materials you want to be included in the record, without
objection will be so ordered.

STATEMENTS OF TIM BALLARD, SENIOR ADVISOR, THE SPEAR FUND;
JEANNE CELESTINE LAKIN, SURVIVOR-EXPERT; JENNIFER PODKUL, VICE
PRESIDENT OF POLICY AND ADVOCACY, KIDS IN NEED OF DEFENSE

STATEMENT OF TIM BALLARD

Mr. Ballard. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Wild, and
members of the Foreign Affairs Subcommittee, it's an honor to
present to you this statement. Human trafficking is real. It's
tragic. And I'm grateful this committee is willing to bring
attention to how human trafficking is the largest and fastest
growing criminal enterprise in the world, how United States
actors have played a role in that growth, and what we can do to
end trafficking in our time.
Human trafficking is a global humanitarian crisis with the
U.S. State Department estimating that there are over 27 million
global victims of human trafficking at any given time.
Tragically, some people in the media and in Washington, D.C.
have tried to minimize the impact of human trafficking and the
destruction it creates, especially in the lives of innocent
children. Regardless of ideology or party label, I believe
every member of this committee and good people everywhere can
agree that human trafficking is a plague and an evil that must
be eradicated.
Evidence of this can be seen in the response to the new
movie, Sound of Freedom, that has been a surprise box office
success and is sparking a national conversation on child sex
slavery and trafficking. American people on all sides of the
aisle are realizing that ending human trafficking is not a
political debate. It is the moral imperative of our time and
our nation is not alone in this mindset.
In my career, I've traveled extensively around the globe,
most recently for the international release of the film, Sound
of Freedom. I have met with heads of states and government
officials in countries we count as close allies who share with
great sadness the impact and the scourge that human trafficking
is having on their own borders. They understand the magnitude
of the evil that trafficking represents and share their strong
conviction to work with the United States in bringing powerful
solutions to the fight against human trafficking.
The conclusions I offer today in this testimony are based
on my professional experience as an anti-trafficking operator,
both as a U.S. federal agent and the leader of an anti-
trafficking NGO. After starting my professional career with the
CIA, I transferred to the Department of Homeland Security. At
DHS, I spent 12 years as a special agent and undercover
operator for Homeland Security investigations.
For 10 of those years, I combated sex trafficking on the
southern border and became one of the country's foremost
experts on the issue of trafficking through years of undercover
work and research and investigation. After leaving the federal
government, I've continued the fight against human trafficking,
first as the founder and CEO of the anti-trafficking
organization Operation Underground Railroad, also as the CEO of
the Nazarene Fund, and now as a senior advisor for the SPEAR
Fund which is an organization that funds and collaborates with
a coalition of experts, operators, organizations, and concerned
citizens around the globe to end human trafficking. Through my
experience as a federal agent, I'm working with several of
these NGOs.
I work closely with the heads of every U.S. agency whose
job it is to find and rescue children being trafficked across
our border as well as working with government officials and law
enforcement agencies from around the world. But our federal
agents and local law enforcement along with anti-trafficking
agents around the globe work with professionalism and
dedication. Their tireless efforts result in not just
disrupting the flow of human trafficking but rescuing those who
have become victims of human trafficking.
I would like to share two recent experiences that'll
highlight the role the U.S. currently shares in aiding human
trafficking in the world while also showing what is possible if
we redouble our efforts and lead other countries in the fight
against human trafficking. First, the United States is
generally understood to be the number one consumer of child
exploitation material in the world and a major contributor to
the abhorrent sex tourism agency around the globe. And policies
here at home have a ripple effect throughout the world.
Earlier this month, I had the heartbreaking conversations
with President Castro in Honduras and President Giammattei in
Guatemala. It was clear from my conversations with each
President that U.S. policies are forcing our neighbors into
crisis. The leadership in these pathway countries are working
hard to warn their people against the dangerous practice of
submitting to smugglers and traffickers.
However, contrary to their pleas, the current
administration's make it too alluring. And the smugglers or
traffickers who can make up the 14 million dollars a day are
way too convincing. So alluring and convincing in fact that the
Council on Foreign Relations reported that the northern
triangle countries of El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras
account for three-quarters of unaccompanied children
apprehended at the southern U.S. border in fiscal year 2022.
Sadly, U.S. government policy is currently reinforcing
those numbers, creating havoc and making the anti-trafficking
efforts of countries like Honduras and Guatemala more
difficult. In contrast of this, recent operation efforts not
covered widely in the news show it was possible with close
international cooperation between multiple governments and
NGOs. During the earlier days or the early days of the Russian
invasion, I was alerted about women and children who were being
victimized and being trafficked outside of Ukraine.
For human traffickers, geopolitical events like natural
disasters or like the war in Ukraine are sometimes and
sickeningly referred to as harvest time by the traffickers
because of their ability to easily prey upon vulnerable women
and children. After recognizing the need in Ukraine, I began
looking for an NGO that was on the ground in Ukraine that had
the legal right to be there and had strong working
relationships with the local government and proper authorities.
Little did I know at the time that leads uncovered during our
work in Ukraine and in eastern Europe would lead to a rescue
operation represented by several NGOs including Operation
Underground Railroad, Aerial Recovery, Free a Girl, and other
organizations which because of operational security can't be
named at this time.
I led this operation beginning in Ukraine. We went through
three continents, six countries, and we identified a pedophile
organization, actually a political organization of organized
pedophiles in Holland who were fugitives. And they were hiding
in Latin America while working to smuggle more victim children
into their arms and into the possibility of being trafficked in
these countries.
We were able to identify the leader of this group. And he
was hiding in Mexico City working with Mexican officials. He
was arrested last summer. And that led us to fund his
lieutenants, also fugitives from Holland for crimes against
children, who had stood up a sex hotel in a little village
called Canoa in Ecuador working with the National Police of
Ecuador and with the U.S. embassy, HSI, who supported greatly
in this operation.
We were able to dismantle that organization completely. And
both those pedophiles have been convicted and serving
significant prison sentences in Ecuador. We also identified two
other Dutch pedophiles as part of this group that we worked to
get them back to their country where they are facing the
charges there as well.
All this we did in four short months and was able to rescue
900 orphans out of Ukraine during the invasion. The only
reason, the only way we could do this was by private-public
partnerships, multiple NGOs, multiple government organizations,
government agencies all working together. That's how you move
fast. That's how you rapidly rescue and protect children.
But make no mistake, the war against human trafficking
cartels and their allies, it's going to be long. It's going to
be difficult. It's a hard fight, but I believe we can win if we
work together.
The first step in that fight is ensuring U.S. policies that
make human trafficking more difficult and not easier. I would
be remiss if I didn't mention the plight of 85,000
unaccompanied immigrant children that according to HHS were in
the government's care handed over to sponsors with minimal
vetting and now cannot be accounted for. We have in large part
thanks to the whistleblower at HHS, Ms. Rodas, who's here.
I was so happy and surprised to see her here. It's thanks
to her, her efforts and courage to stand up and sound the alarm
about what was happening, that these children were being
released way too rapidly and without the proper vetting.
Congressman Smith's the SECURE Act in particular will help find
these kids that this administration has claimed on record that
it's not their problem anymore despite these children being at
great risk of sexual abuse and other forms of exploitation.
Secondly, the U.S. can re-double our commitment in the
international enforcement efforts. The Presidents of Guatemala
and Honduras both share the value they see in policies like
International Megan's Law which allows the U.S. to alert our
allies when registered sex offenders are entering their
countries. In fact, I told both Presidents--I didn't bring it
up, Chairman. They brought it up.
And they said, that law, International Megan's Law, wow,
thank you. And I said, well, I know the person who wrote that
and sponsored that. In fact, I had the privilege to actually
testify before Congress.
And they were so proud and they gave me the numbers of how
many alerts they're getting from the U.S. government. And they
know it's preventing child sex abuse. And so from the
Presidents of both Honduras and Guatemala, they sent me to
thank you, Chairman Smith, and all those who sponsored that
bipartisan bill because it's saving lives.
And it taught me an important lesson. What you do in the
halls of Congress despite what others might say actually does
work, actually can do tremendous work in saving lives. And so
all the more reason to be here and to continue to support this
next piece of legislation, the SECURE Act.
As I shared earlier, the United States is generally
understood to be the number one consumer of child exploitation
material in the world and a major contributor to the abhorrent
sex tourism industry around the globe. Now it's up to us to
solve this problem. Too often people say in this country, this
is a problem far, far away. This is a problem that we have
nothing to do with.
Well, that's not true. Not only are we--according the State
Department, the TIP report, we're in the top three countries
for--destination countries for human trafficking. We create so
much of the demand.
We so often are the tourist abusing children, so it is our
problem. And we must solve that problem right here. Countries
around the world are in fact looking to us and looking to you
to solve this problem and end this horrific plague that really
is the slavery of children. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Ballard follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much, Mr. Ballard. I would
note parenthetically when you did testify in 2015, you gave our
bill a major, major boost. Given your background when you said
pass it because it had passed the House three times, it did
help over in the Senate. So thank you.
Mr. Ballard. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Ms. Lakin.

STATEMENT OF JEANNE CELESTINE LAKIN

Ms. Lakin. Chairman Chris Smith, Ranking Member Susan Wild,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for this
opportunity to testify before you here today. My name is Jeanne
Celestine Lakin, and I'm deeply honored to be here as a witness
in the subcommittee hearing on child trafficking. I'd like to
express my gratitude to the subcommittee for addressing this
critical issue on child trafficking and it's devastation impact
it has on children, particularly children of refugees.
I testify here before you today as a proud American, also
as a survivor of child trafficking and a survivor of Rwandan
genocide against Tutsis. I am one of the lucky ones who found
safety here in the United States. After losing my family and
also losing my home and experiencing the depth of inhumanity
and suffered unimaginable violence, I call on all of you to
ensure that children who are coming from armed conflict are
protected from human trafficking.
I also want to call on all of you to implement policies,
especially immigration reform, that really embodies humanity. I
believe that we all should protect our borders, yes, but also
to look at the people who are crossing the borders or people
who are fleeing the conflicts as we see it today. When I came
to the United States, I was a 14-year-old. But it took me about
14 years to actually become a U.S. citizen, and that is just
such a long time waiting.
A lot of people are exploited during that phase because
they wait without documentation and they're vulnerable. And
that's women and children. I come to you with true faith that
as decision makers in this room that you will do everything in
your power to ensure that children are protected from human
trafficking, not only here in the United States but all over
the world, especially again looking at the war torn countries,
looking at those countries where they have conflict where
children are fleeing, where women are fleeing and girls.
The Bible in Psalms 82:3-4 tells us, give justice to the
weak and the fatherless. Maintain the right of the afflicted
and the destitute. Rescue the weak and the needy. Deliver them
from the hands of the wicked.
I believe in this Bible verse. I live by it every day. And
that's why I'm sitting here today testifying. And that is why
chartered One Million Orphans.
Will you join me to create laws and implementing policies
to protect children, children who are scarred by the loss of
their mothers and children who have been scarred by the loss of
their fathers, and the children who traffickers seek to make
profit off their little bodies? I have faith that we can
restore their faith if we all come together in the sake of
humanity. And the best way to do it is really to have a place
or system to support people who have been victimized.
A lot of times people don't realize that me as a survivor,
not only was I raped but I was also traumatized from what I've
seen. So we need to find a system that supports, that addresses
mental health for the victims as well, also for the survivors.
UNODC, a 2020 Global Report on human trafficking estimated that
65 percent of trafficked were women and girls.
And 92 percent of those individuals were trafficked for the
purpose of sexual exploitation. And again, you're looking at
more women and girls. We know that in Rwanda, for example, rape
was used as a weapon of war.
It is the same thing that is happening in Congo right now.
It's the same thing that is happening in Ukraine. It's the same
thing that is happening is South Sudan.
More so to say when women are fleeing, they leave even--
when they're being trafficked, they're leaving behind those
vulnerable children. I had many opportunities to speak to women
who are fleeing Ukraine. And their bravery, their courage, they
speak about their husbands fighting in a way or their husbands
who have been killed. They talk about also the journey to
making to a safe place and how tough that's been, and those
women and girls are even more so vulnerable.
As a chair of OSCE, the Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights, International Survivors of Trafficking
Advisory Council, also known as ISTAC, I serve with 20 other
members, survivor members. And today I am here to represent all
of them. Those survivors have encountered inhumanity.
But they speak, they work to make sure that they make a
difference in the world. One of my suggestions for the group is
there was a book that was put together, the National Referral
Mechanism by survivors. And that book, I believe, that should
be in every single country really because it puts out a
framework and also ways to identify and a way to provide
resources to support survivors and victims.
I just want to bring this attention to OSCE region on child
trafficking. According to 2020 UNODC Global Report on Human
Trafficking in Persons, 40 percent of all global human
trafficking cases occurred in OSCE region. I want you to pay
attention to this number.
Out of the 40 percent, 27 percent were the cases on
children, human trafficked children, 27 percent. Girls
represented 16 percent and 11 percent represented the boys.
While human trafficking a lot of times we talk about labor
trafficking and also sexual exploitation, a lot of times we
miss that in this report, 10 percent of those that were
trafficked, 10 percent of those children were trafficked for
the sake of harvesting their organs. And many of them do not
survive.
So we see that children in institutions, children who are
in alternative care, runaway youth, unaccompanied children,
separated children, children with disabilities, children who
belong to national minorities such as Romas and Sintis, and
also children in armed conflict, all of these children become
very vulnerable. And we need to find a way to be united behind
them. I also want to bring this tragedy to--to highlight the
tragedy that I've seen coming from Ukraine, of course, that's
been forced deportation of Ukrainian children to Russia.
As a mother, I cannot fathom not seeing my boy again. Many
of these children have been indoctrinated against Ukraine and
some of them have had their document changed and have been
adopted by Russia. These children are not going to be able to
reunite with their families.
Before I share my lived experience, I would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate Chairman Smith for leading the
way in uniting OSCE States on protecting Ukrainian women and
children. Thank you for the work you do. Your unwavering
commitment and leadership in combating human trafficking here
in the United States and around the world is truly remarkable
and has made such an impact and it's going to continue to make
an impact.
So as survivors of human trafficking, we want to thank you,
Chairman Smith, for the work that you are doing today. I want
to share my story really quick. But I want you to know that my
story is not a unique story.
It is a story of a Ukrainian girl. It is a story of an
Afghan girl or a boy. It is a story of many children around the
world. It's story of refugee boys and girls fleeing from
different places like Ethiopia, South Sudan or boys fleeing
from Venezuela or a little girl fleeing from Myanmar.
I grew up in a Christian family. I had ten siblings. My
parents really served the community. They embodied the
humanity. They served tirelessly to the community.
But when 1994 genocide came knocking on our doors, my
parents were--I don't want to say it this way. But I believe
they were a bit naive. They didn't believe--because of the work
they've done in the community, they believed that we would be
safe.
The propaganda campaign were on radios. They were on
television, the ideology of hate. We went from being part of
the human family to being called things like cockroaches and
snakes and everything else except humans. We had been
dehumanized.
And one of the things, again, I advocate for in terms of
immigration reform, as I was filling out forms before I
received my U.S. citizenship, when you fill out forms that says
you're an alien, for me that was trigger because in my own
country, I was called the alien, the other. So as decision
makers, policy makers, I will call on all of you to changes
those forms. People should not be referred to as aliens.
But in the course of three months in 1994, my parents
divided us in groups of three children. I ended up with three-
year-old twin sisters. We lived in the bushes in the swamps. We
ate plants. We ate grass, drank red water.
All around us we heard killers, inciting things to kill us
because we were supposed snakes and cockroaches. At the end of
the genocide--actually, before the genocide, I had witnessed my
father being killed with machetes in the streets. My father was
my hero.
Before the end of the genocide, I had seen my mother's--
witnessed my mother's dead body and my three-week-old little
brother. Give me a moment. I'm sorry.
At the end of the genocide, I was captured by a man who not
only physically abused me but verbally and sexually raped me as
a nine-year-old. This man decided that he would actually
migrate to Congo with me. And it was in the Congo where he was
negotiating with adult men how much money I was worth, to be
sold into marriage. And at that time, I was ten-years-old.
I ran back from Congo, made it to Rwanda. I grew up in a
family where I had everything a child could've dreamed up. My
parents were business people.
By the end of the genocide, I was a homeless kid in the
street begging. So as you make policies, as you write laws,
keep in mind the human aspect. Keep that embodiment of humanity
as you make these decisions because girls like myself, children
like myself should not go through what I had to go through.
Came here to the United States. I was placed with a family
who also sexually abused me as well. So it wasn't once, I was,
like, God, how much more can I take? But I'm here because I
believe that we have to be the voice of the voiceless.
And Chairman Smith, I appreciate what you said about
vetting system. We need to have screening system to families
who are receiving migrant children are vetted just like
families that are adopting because it's easy to say you might
have the same DNA or somehow matching DNA or related to this
person. It doesn't mean that person is a safe place for a
child.
That's something that really people need to look into.
Another thing that I really would encourage you to do is to
really as you make these policies and these decisions to have
survivors like myself be in a room because I believe lived
experience speak volumes. And by giving me a platform today,
you have given a voice to countless survivors and victims
today. So thank you so much.
[The statement of Ms. Lakin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much, Ms. Lakin, for your
courage, for your wisdom, your resilience, your faith. You're
truly an inspiration. Thank you so much.
I'd like to yield to our final witness, and thank you for
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER PODKUL

Ms. Podkul. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Smith and
Ranking Member Wild. My name is Jennifer Podkul. I'm the vice
president for Policy and Advocacy at Kids in Need of Defense.
I'm grateful for the opportunity to speak to you about KIND's
mission, to ensure the protection of unaccompanied and
separated children.
Early in my legal career, I solely represented trafficked
children and their complex legal matters. My clients are from
around the world. They're from Mexico, Russia, Thailand. And
they had survived brutal exploitation as domestic servants, as
farm workers, and some in the sex industry.
All of these cases had one thing in common. Close
collaboration between experts was key to ensuring that these
children were safe, that they could begin their healing, and
that they could thrive in their communities. In my current role
at KIND, I have the honor of working with attorneys and social
workers around the world, implementing through partnerships a
child-focused iteration of the three Ps, the prevention,
prosecution, and protection that's outlined in Mr. Smith's
landmark bill, the Trafficking Victims Protection Act.
As you've seen in my written testimony, my colleagues are
doing tremendous work in Mexico and Europe to collaborate with
government officials, law enforcement officers, and child
protection professionals to prevent child trafficking and then
to serve survivors. Prevention of child trafficking is a
priority. By the time we have to intervene, children have
already experienced harm.
In KIND's experience, prevention work requires meaningful
relationship building to identify and then to work to reduce
children's vulnerabilities. We're conducting trainings and
partnering with community-based organizations in Central
America, Mexico, and Europe to provide children with
information about their rights and how to seek assistance if
ever necessary. Although we've made progress on many fronts,
there's more that needs to be done to protect children.
First is set forth in the TVPA. The U.S. government should
make every measure to ensure kids are connected to attorneys.
Having been the only trusted adult in a child's life when I
served as their attorney, I can tell you that counsel is a
crucial tool to identifying and helping a child that's being
exploited or who's at risk.
Second, the government should institute safe return and
reintegration programming that's outlined in the TVPA for
unaccompanied children who can safely return to their country's
of origin. Integration services can decrease the likelihood
that a child will be compelled to attempt another dangerous
journey to the United States. Third, to ensure unaccompanied
children are screened at the border for trafficking concerns,
the Department of Homeland Security should assign state
licensed child welfare professionals to help administer those
screenings.
I applaud Representative Salazar and Representative Jacobs
bipartisan leadership in ensuring that proper funding for child
welfare professionals is in the fiscal year 2024 budget.
Fourth, the administration should immediately ramp up and
Congress should provide the necessary resources for the Central
American minors program. This is in-country processing program.
It enables certain vulnerable children to apply for
potential relocation to the U.S. as refugees. This is a
lifeline for children who are in danger who may otherwise have
no choice but to make the hazardous trek to the U.S.-Mexico
border. Fifth and finally, the U.S. should increase funding for
programs that prioritize building capacity abroad.
As an example, KIND and its partners in Europe have
supported efforts to provide refugee children and family
services and coordinated support hubs, otherwise known as blue
dots. They've been created by government authorities in
partnership with UNICEF and UNHCR. At these sites, children can
register protection authorities and receive basic needs. They
get legal information and then they can get help with family
reunification.
This model should be replicated in other areas of the
world. This is a very difficult topic, and there are a lot of
very tragic stories that we all hear doing this work every day.
So I just want to end my testimony with a story.
A few years ago, I was in National Airport and I heard
somebody yell my name. So much to my surprise, a young woman
came running at me. And I realized it was a former client of
mine.
So this girl who had become a delightful woman had come
into my office seeking help when she was a child. And at the
time, she didn't even realize the horrors that she experienced
had a name. It was human trafficking.
So during our joyful reunion in the airport, I learned that
due to the hard work put in by my social work colleague, the
intrepid prosecutor who was willing to go after a diplomat who
was exploiting her, and this girl's bravery and tenacity, she
had been able to craft this life that was filled with formal
education, dignified work, and limitless possibilities. It's a
reminder that when children are given the chance at safety and
security, their resilience knows no bounds. Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Podkul follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much for your leadership and
for making such a difference. I'll begin some of the questions.
Ms. Lakin, you talked about the importance of faith.
I was visiting a shelter, a Christian shelter in Goma in
Congo where virtually every woman there had been raped, often
gang raped by these paramilitaries and by government troops.
And the transition within their hearts and souls, the trauma
doesn't go away. But the ability to cope and overcome and have
renewed hope and faith does when there's faith involved.
I met a number of the women. I spent hours talking to them,
almost all listening. I didn't ask questions. They just spoke
and I took notes.
And their lives were restored. But obviously with a huge,
huge trauma that, like I said, never goes away like you deal
with such agony as well. In the help that we do provide,
shelters, I've been in shelters all over the world in Bolivia,
in El Salvador, in Ethiopia, faith-based shelters.
In Peru, they have a number of shelters there. And I've
always been incredibly impressed and I often get into arguments
with some of the people at the OSCE, not you. They think that
having a faith-based component which psychologists can do great
work, psychiatrists can do great work, social workers, great
work.
But almost like with Alcoholics Anonymous, there is that
next step where faith in God certainly helps to overcome and to
find a new way forward. And the outcomes are so much better
when there's a faith-based component. And yet there's hostility
to that among many.
My counterpart in the OSCE years ago with the Parliamentary
Assembly for the OSCE, she was with the OSCE itself, was openly
hostile to a faith-based component. And I said whether it be
Judaism, Christianity, Islam, or any other faith, but having
that comfort that comes with it. So if you could maybe speak to
that as part of the healing process because what I've learned
from--every law we write and every bill, every initiative is
trauma informed.
And you are informing us again as you have been doing and
others. When you get to the healing process, it seems to me
without that next step doesn't happen. And I too love the
psalms. Psalm 82 is a great one and 73 and 37 are two of my
favorite.
And for those who have been so horrifically injured, even
David said that he almost lost his way until he came into the
sanctuary of the Lord. Then he learned what would happen to
them and that God does hold you in the palm of his hand, even
though it doesn't seem like it so often. So if you could speak
to that part of the healing ministry that's so needed for
trafficking.
Ms. Lakin. Thank you, Chairman Smith. That is very
important. It was also very important for me too. After the
genocide, the way I describe the way I walked out of that
genocide, I had survived but I was mentally dead like the
Walking Dead, the movie.
Literally, my soul was dead because everything that I had
witnessed. And I battled depression, PTSD, trauma, you name it.
I could've taken every pill on the market. Nothing would've
been able to help me except the way God saved me.
I grew up again in a Christian family with the value of
faith was very, very important. And I remember just having this
conversation with God because I was, like, God, you saved me.
But I feel like I am dead inside.
And I was, like, why would I have survived such tragedy to
be walking around with a dead spirit to the point I couldn't
feel. When you walk outside, you feel the sunshine and you feel
joy. There was no joy in my heart.
I felt like I had descended basically rock bottom after
surviving. And so I spent time praying and asking God to free
me. And that's why I feel like really shelters that are faith-
based are the most helpful.
Counseling is great, and I encourage people to seek
counseling for professional work. But having that touch with
our creator is so powerful beyond what most people can imagine.
When I prayed and I asked God to free me, he said directly
through the Holy Spirit. He said, forgive them, so clearly.
Forgive the people who have raped you, the people who have
done a number on me, the people who have killed my family.
Forgive them. And I said, God, I do not have the capability to
forgive such inhumane.
But if you want me to forgive, I want you to give me the
strength to be able to do that. And honestly when I said that
back to God, he gave me the strength where I said I forgive you
for raping me, forgive you for killing my family. I forgive you
for the reasons that I am an orphans, helpless in the streets.
And I felt, like, as if I was flying high in the sky. That
was the freedom. And so I do encourage to have faith-based
organizations supporting these people who have been broken to
where we cannot see.
I serve as a manager of disability services at the college
in Texas. When we don't see the physical disability, we assume
people are fine. But there's a lot of disability that we may
not be able to see. There's a lot of broken that only God can
heal. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. We will have votes around 1:40. I
understand I have a lot of questions. I'll just do one, now and
then yield to my colleagues. And this would be to Mr. Ballard.
We had Cindy Dyer, a master at large for trafficking. And
again, I wrote the law that created that position. And I have
great respect for her.
She gave tremendous testimony. But I did say before she
came in that I'm going to ask you about the 85,000
unaccompanied minors that have gone missing under the
administration's watch. And I asked her that question after--
I'm not a gotcha kind of chairman.
I want real answers. So I told her beforehand I was going
to ask it. And she didn't know. She said, call Homeland
Security.
We've called Homeland Security. We don't get any answers.
So we have this bill as you know. And you were very much a part
of helping to draft it--I thank you, Mr. Ballard--called the
SECURE Act which would penalize the FBI, Homeland Security, and
HHS for unobligated funds, money in their bank account, 100,000
dollars a day if they do not provide every 60 days a very
important report on exactly what they're doing to do the
welfare and whereabouts of these children.
And it seems to me that how dare we look the other way. I
mean, that was on May 12th we had that hearing. We've been
reaching out non-stop and it's crickets. And it drives me a
little bit crazy to think these kids could be sexually
exploited as we're meeting here or labor or sex trafficking. So
your thoughts on that.
Mr. Ballard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a lot of
thoughts on this. I first think of my--I have two adopted
children who are migrants from Haiti. I have seven biological
and two adopted.
These are two children that we rescued in February of 2014
from a trafficking organization. And we decided, my wife and I,
to bring them home and adopt these 2, 2 of the 28. I was
shocked and even a little frustrated though I shouldn't have
been at the process that the State Department put us through to
be vetted to receive two precious children.
I appreciated it. I thought, wow, the U.S. government
really cares. They really care to make sure--I saved them for
heaven sakes. And I didn't get any shortcuts.
Home studies, background checks, and I thought this is
wonderful how we as a nation value the lives of foreign
children even, even foreign children who are coming into our
homes. I think of what would happen having worked in law
enforcement in some capacity over 20 years. I can tell you if a
child unaccompanied showed up in New York City or Washington,
D.C. or you name the city and that child showed up
unaccompanied, alone, what would happen to that child once the
authorities were notified?
That child would be protected. I know this. I've watched
them do it. If someone comes and says, I'm the sponsor guardian
of this kid, they're not going to release that kid.
We're talking again background checks, DNA testing,
extensive research because this is a precious child of God. So
the question I have for the administration, why would you not
afford the same protections to a foreign child whose inside of
our country? I don't care how they got there.
Let's worry about that later if they're here. They're here
right now. Why on earth would you not afford the same
protections?
I've seen the process. I've been on the border. I was ten
years as a special agent there. I've been there since that time
watching what happens.
These children have to be released. And by the way, the
people I've talked to that where their uniform, the people at
HHS, they don't like it either. I've talked to them, talked to
Ms. Rodas about it. She works there.
They don't like it. They don't like that they are by
mandate, by policy, forced to pick up the phone and call a
number that's the sponsor. And they don't that they have to use
taxpayer dollars to then send that child to the unvetted
sponsor not knowing whether or not they are, in fact, part of
the final leg of a child trafficking experience.
Why is the suicide rate up higher than ever at Border
Patrol? Because they are being asked and even compelled to be
part of a child sex delivery service. That's where we're at
right now.
This needs to stop. And we can do it. The SECURE Act is the
best first step here. We need to do it and we need to do it
now.
I was with the President of Honduras last week, President
Castro, amazing woman. She wept as she told these stories. The
very next day I was with President Giammattei in Guatemala.
And here's what's interesting. Children over politics,
that's how it should be. I think in this country, it's politics
of children.
President Castro is a devout socialist. President
Giammattei is a devout conservative. And they said the same
thing to me. That didn't matter at all.
What mattered was the lives of children. President Castro
is heading up to the border in a few weeks. There's 3,000
children from Honduras that are in the care of HHS. She's
scared to death of their plight.
She wants us to find their families. I agree with her. I
don't care if the families are in the U.S. or outside of the
U.S. Reunite them with their families.
And she said, well, the administration is telling me, don't
worry. They're getting fed. They're getting educated. She's,
like, I want them to be with their moms and dads. That's where
I want them or find a loving home for them somewhere else if
there is no mom and dad.
She's coming up to the border. I was so proud of her. And
with tears, she said this to me. President Giammattei told me
about a program he's launched called [speaking foreign
language] which is to say making visible what is invisible.
And it's a warning to the people, don't go with the slick
salesmen coyotes. They give a good pitch. Oh, you can't pay
now? You can pay later. Yeah, with your body which we're not
going to tell you about until maybe you get to around Guatemala
or Mexico and close to the border.
And then after that, who knows what's going to happen to
you. But don't worry. There's a sponsor who will pick you up.
This s sick that we are participating as a country in this is
sick.
Mr. Smith. Ms. Wild. Thank you very much.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Podkul, I read your
testimony with great interest and listened to what you had to
say today, particularly your references to this blue dot
program that KIND has implemented along with, I understand,
partners in Europe have also assisted. And based on your
testimony, I understand that these sites are situated at
different border locations to best serve children who are
fleeing or displaced by the situation in Ukraine where they can
register with protection authorities, can receive some basic
necessities, medical aid, information counseling, and
assistance in locating and reunifying with family.
Can you quantify in any way how successful this program has
been in assisting vulnerable Ukrainian children? And it doesn't
have to be in terms of numbers. But give us an idea of how
effective this has been.
Ms. Podkul. Sure. Let me describe kind of what it looks
like because when I went to the Romanian border with Ukraine as
soon as the war broke out to see what was going on, we knew
women and children could leave and men could not. So we went to
see, are there separated children? We're talking to children on
the move.
So when I was there, you cross into the border into
Romania, this was a time of chaos, right? This was at the very
beginning of everything, lots of people leaving as quickly as
they could get out. There was a host of services that had been
set up.
So there were tents and it was all different kinds of
people and churches, individuals wanting to help, and a lot of
good hearted people, not necessarily official organizations, a
lot of good hearted people. Probably also a lot of nefarious
people there as well. And it was just a lot of chaos.
And so people coming out, they were tired, they were
hungry. The kids needed snacks. So it was important to get help
to them. And it was confusing. Who's the right person to go to?
Which tent do I go to?
There's all these people offering to help. So the blue dot
is intended to be kind of a physical something that people can
see easily and know that these are run by U.N. agencies. These
are trusted partners and entities, and it's a physical space.
It's, like, you can go inside so people aren't harassing you,
right?
You don't have people just walking up to you, hey, I can
help you. Hey, I can get you a hotel room, right? You're safe.
It's quiet. You can charge your phone. You can get oriented.
These are the rules and policies in this country. This is how
you would register the child protection agency. What do you
need?
Ms. Wild. And this is only unaccompanied----
Ms. Podkul. What questions do you have?
Ms. Wild [continuing]. Minors?
Ms. Podkul. It's for children and families.
Ms. Wild. Okay.
Ms. Podkul. So families can take advantage of this too. So
it's funded and supported by UNHCR, the refugee agency, and
UNICEF, the U.N. agency to protect children. So they do this
jointly and then they collaborate with groups. So for example,
we have colleagues who are working in those to provide the
legal assistance.
And so to give information, what is your right? The child
should have a guardianship. They're allowed to have temporary
protection right now throughout Europe.
They're allowed to enroll in schools. So they need to
understand what their options are. So these kinds of hubs, it's
a way to make sure that in a moment of chaos, somebody is very
clear who are the safe actors.
What are their rights? What's available to them? So that
they get put into the registration systems and referral systems
that these countries are setting up because we all know, right,
the exploitation that thrives in the shadows and in darkness.
And so getting kids into these official systems and channels is
going to be the best protection for them.
Ms. Wild. So my follow up to that is, is this blue dot
process being used elsewhere in the world?
Ms. Podkul. Yeah, so it actually started before----
Ms. Wild. Right, in 2008, right?
Ms. Podkul [continuing]. The Ukraine emergency. Exactly.
Later in 2000s, it's in different places in Europe. And I think
right now the question is where else could we be implementing
this knowing there's so many children on the move.
Ms. Wild. And so that was my question. Is it being used at
all in Central America?
Ms. Podkul. I don't know of any blue dot facilities that
are set up in Central America. There's a virtual version of it.
So people who have mobile phones can get at least some
information.
There are other entities and programs in which governments
are collaborating with service providers to do similar things.
I use this as an example because this was funded by U.N.
agencies. And so they have kind of a global perspective on best
practices which has been particularly useful.
Ms. Wild. And how critical has the role of UNICEF and UNHCR
been in this work?
Ms. Podkul. It's been incredibly important. I mean, they
are able to bring authority and work with governments to really
identify best practices. When you have entities, civil society
organizations and international organizations like these U.N.
organizations, they have an understanding of best practices and
also how to collaborate with each government, right?
Each system--each government is going to have their own
system and their own laws. So they're going to know in that
local context what are the available protections. It's very
important that they're able to expand their services to meet
the demand, right? We know the number of children on the move
is incredibly high all over the world. And so in order for them
to be fully resourced to do this in all places and respond to
children----
Ms. Wild. Well, that's what----
Ms. Podkul [continuing]. It's very important.
Ms. Wild [continuing]. I was asking you because I saw
evidence of the great work they were doing in Nepal also. And
it does occur to me that it would be very useful to have them
on the ground in Central America given what we know to be a
crisis there. And I'm very deeply concerned about reductions in
funding to those agencies which I think would greatly affect
their ability to provide these services from everything I
understand.
So I hope that we will continue to provide funding. I think
this hearing is a really good example of why certain forms of
foreign aid are so essential. I mean, we often have to justify
foreign aid to taxpayers and otherwise.
But I think that this kind of hearing sheds light on where
a lot of that foreign aid is going. So thank you very much.
With that, I'm going to yield back for the moment. I know we
have votes coming up.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. I'd like to yield to the chairwoman
of the Western Hemisphere Subcommittee, Maria Salazar.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I think it's
laudable, and I congratulate you for putting this hearing
together. And to Mr. Ballard, you were the guy. I watched the
movie three, four years ago, the first cut in Miami, Florida.
And you really caused a major impression. It's a thorn in
my back that I've had ever since I learned about this
phenomenon that we just do not know about. This movie has put
this issue in the forefront, and we have to thank you.
May the Lord pay it back to you in health, to your ten
children, because this is--there are no words to describe. And
I think Chairman Smith and myself, we are committed to do
something about it, whatever that is. And to you, Ms. Jeanne
Celestine, thank you for sharing your pain with us, Mrs.
Jennifer for wanting to help those kids.
So I have many questions. I know that we're going to be
called for votes at anytime. But I introduced an immigration
reform recently, the only immigration reform law that has been
presented in Congress this cycle.
And it's basically an immigration bill. And one of the main
topics that I addressed thanks to the movie is to impose a
minimum penalty of 25 years to those who are convicted of child
sex trafficking. That's one thing.
The other one is to give a better, more rigorous training
to the Border Patrol agents in trying to spot where those child
sex traffickers are, specifically including what you said about
that just because they give you a phone number, you're giving
the child back to the trafficker. We are, the United States of
America. What?
So not only that, taking care of our own agents but then
going to the transnational criminals, the smugglers, back where
it starts and creating processing centers to weed out and come
to the conclusion whether that's the uncle or the father. So
basically, the Dignity Act, I just want you to remember it. I
want to work with you because everyone talks about the mess of
the border and that we're having all these illegals and
fentanyl and everything coming in.
But not everyone mentions the child sex traffickers. And
unfortunately, no one says either that we're the number one
market. So that means that we have--the consumers are here
among us. That's another--that's--no words to describe it in a
public hearing of the United States Congress. So I would like
to ask you what do you think we could do now? What's the number
one step we could take as legislators to help this issue?
Mr. Ballard. When we passed the SECURE Act which holds
accountable the agencies. So no longer can they lose the
children. And no longer could they say not our problem. It's
devastating to hear that Chairman Smith had to call multiple
times and he heard nothing back from these agencies.
The other thing is we need to enforce our border. There's
been this myth that somehow it's a mutually exclusive
proposition to be for border enforcement and pro-migration. I
don't understand that. I'm very pro-both. I'm for big walls. I
know walls is a cuss word these days because somehow this got
political.
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Ballard. It wasn't political, by the way----
Ms. Salazar. Structures and cameras and drones.
Mr. Ballard. It's everything. It's virtual walls.
Ms. Salazar. It's technology. It's technology.
Mr. Ballard. It's technology. I worked under two different
administrations of two different parties on that border. And
they all built more border protection, and everyone was thumbs
up about it because it rescues children.
We have to explain the concept of it forces the flow of
movement, children being trafficked or drugs to a single place
where dedicated women and men in uniform are trained to
identify the child. Why is this so controversial? We use it
everywhere we go, museums, amusement parks, concerts.
It's okay for everybody else to do it. But all of a sudden,
it's somehow bad or racist. I don't understand it. We're
rescuing children from foreign countries.
That's our goal. For ten years as an anti-trafficking
operator undercover on that border, that was my goal, to rescue
children from foreign countries so they wouldn't get into the
hands of our pedophiles. And so I never understood----
Ms. Salazar. Also, those kids are from Latin America.
Mr. Ballard. Correct.
Ms. Salazar. They belong to my region. They're Latin
American kids that are being trafficked into the United States.
Mr. Ballard. Correct. So let's give them the hope of one
last window of opportunity before they're stuck into a very
dangerous situation in that port of entry.
Ms. Salazar. Give me an example, a regular example of what
happens with that child that is let's say it's stolen from
Honduras, from Colombia.
Mr. Ballard. Sure.
Ms. Salazar. It winds up at our border. And then what
happens when they come into the United States?
Mr. Ballard. Okay. So this is an important point. I learned
this from the President of Honduras last week. These kids are
coming--the families are coming through. A lot of them passed
through the Darien gap. And it's a jungle. It's horrible.
And by the time they get out and land in Honduras, the
families leave their kids. They can't stand watching their kids
suffer anymore. They put them in some kind of a very insecure
kind of arrangement with a foster situation or something.
And that's what makes them so exposed and available, the
coyotes and traffickers, who say, oh, it's so easy to get them
at this point. They bring them up. Oftentimes, they'll use
these kids once they get there.
And the abuse is extensive by the way on the way up. And
once they get there, sometimes they're used as pawns. There's
something called the Flores Settlement which was well
intentioned, but the traffickers are always looking to exploit
even well intentioned--in this case, it's a court decision.
A child with a family member must be permitted within 72
hours inside the United States. I get that. It sounds great.
Except they start using these kids as pawns and pairing up
false families, pairing up a child with the clients. Call this
woman mom, call him dad, and you're going to get right in.
Well, Border Patrol is sort of noticing the same kids were
coming in with different parents.
Ms. Salazar. And no DNA testing anymore at this hour.
Mr. Ballard. At the time, it was implemented. My
understanding was that it was taken away. The ranking member
Thompson from the hearing yesterday at Homeland Security said
it is actually still there. So I'm investigating what's true.
But it has to be implemented if it's not. And so then the
child whether they're used as a pawn in that strange loophole,
eventually at any point during this process a sponsor can call
in or show up. And it's very minimal----
Ms. Salazar. And they're picked up by the trafficker. Then
what happens next?
Mr. Ballard. Well, and I'll say this before that. It's more
difficult to adopt a cat from a shelter in my opinion than
getting a child out of HHS into our country. And then after
that, we don't know because they won't pick the phones up.
But I'll tell you what. In a country that probably has more
pedophiles than any other country in terms of just shear
numbers, based on the fact that we consume more child
exploitation material than any other country, it's very
concerning. There's a case recently where 100 children were
sent to the same address by HHS in San Antonio or Austin, I
believe.
One hundred kids to an address, I don't think that was a
well intentioned sponsor. They're going to do something with
those children, whether it's slave labor, whether it's sexual
exploitation. But here's the problem. Now these kids are
identityless.
They don't speak the language. They don't have a name. They
don't have any way to identify, and they're gone. And so this
is our responsibility to protect these children just like we
were protecting the other children.
Ms. Salazar. The American news media, have they been
receptive to your statements? Have they called you to do
interviews and put this out there----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Ballard. No, no. In fact, they just like to say things
like, Mr. Ballard is wrong headed thinking that there's any
kind of trafficking going on at the border. They make a
statement like this without backing it up with anything. I
don't know why they don't want to have the conversation.
These are children. This is not partisan. It shouldn't be
partisan. And I can't figure out why they don't want to talk
about it.
Ms. Salazar. These are Latin American kids.
Mr. Ballard. They're Latin American children. And the
reason I left the government frankly was because as Congressman
Smith knows is because I didn't care. Human trafficking, child
trafficking knows no borders and bounders.
Unfortunately, bureaucracies do. And that's why I left. I
couldn't handle the bureaucracy. I couldn't handle the fact
that I was told, you can save this kid but not that kid. And so
that's why I left, so that I wouldn't have any jurisdictional
or bureaucratic limitations. And I wish our policies conformed
to that way of thinking as well.
Ms. Salazar. Of course. Human rights is across the board.
Mr. Ballard. Correct.
Ms. Salazar. Not only for some and not for others. Thank
you very much. We are going to regroup and try to--we've
created this bill to find where those 85,000 kids are at.
Because according to your information, it was in the first 30
days of the Biden administration when the border was more
opened. That happened during----
Mr. Ballard. That's correct.
Ms. Salazar [continuing]. A 30 day period.
Mr. Ballard. That's a correct. And I like the idea of
streamlining our immigration laws. Make it easier. I want more
asylum. I want more immigrants. I suggest long term can we not
put our asylum and immigration courts--this may sound like a
logistical nightmare.
But if we can get those as an attachment to our embassies
in these Central American countries. Imagine you deincentivize
the traffickers. You stop the wind out of the sails of their
criminal networks.
And the honest and good people who want and need to come to
the United States, make it quick. Make it fast. Don't make them
take a 3,000-mile journey.
Let them go to the embassy and get asylum immediately. And
we can help them with passage. I love this idea what I just
learned about called the Central American minors program. How
amazing.
Let's help these children. Let's help them get safety. Let
them have the American dream. I agree with that. I mean, I'll
look into that. And thank you for bringing that up. I didn't
know about this. So there's so many things we can do.
Ms. Salazar. Thanks to you, sir. Yield back.
Mr. Smith. I yield to the chairman of the Africa Committee,
Mr. James.
Mr. James. I seem to think that the administration would
care more about these kids if they weren't Black and Brown.
Maybe they can prove it to us.
Ms. Salazar. Yes.
Mr. James. Prove me wrong. As the chairman of the Africa
subcommittee, I've made ending child slave labor a top
priority. In fact, my BRIDGE to DRC Act supports efforts to
remove child slave labor from U.S. supply chains.
In addition to my amendment to H.R. 1 which would reshore
critical mineral mining and refining back to the United States,
the BRIDGE to DRC Act also goes a long way in ending child
slave labor and sex trafficking. In March, I asked Secretary
Blinken directly for his commitment to work with me on efforts
to address the issue of slave labor during his testimony before
the House Foreign Affairs Committee, and we are still working
with the administration on their compliance with his agreement.
This is a matter of morality and critical importance
regardless of where a child happens to be born. America wants
to be the shining city on the hill. They want to be the beacon
of hope for the world.
We have to start acting, and I need your help. Can you
share your assessment of the current administration's national
action plan to combat human trafficking for all children
regardless of whether or not they're Ukrainian, South Sudanese,
North Sudanese, Guatemalan, Venezuelan, all children. Can you
give your assessment?
Mr. Ballard. Well, I don't hear it very often coming out of
the administration. The agencies continue to do their wonderful
work. They want more resources. I spent the last ten years
trying to get resources to law enforcement offices, state
mostly because the federal government won't take our grants. So
we send them to task forces.
There's not enough resources, and that's been a problem in
every administration, by the way. I don't think it's a new
problem. But I would love to see the President talk about it
all the time.
Mr. James. Not enough resources. So that might be an
indication that resources we do have are spread too thin. What
are the initiatives or organizations that are doing a good job
that should get more resources? And in your opinion, what are
some organizations that seem to be a waste of time and money?
Mr. Ballard. Well, I'll tell you that in my opinion the
solution is going to be a private-public partnership. I've
worked on both sides of that fence. I've been a government
agent. I've worked as a private citizen.
There's so many things that NGOs can do that governments
can't do. And of course, there's many things, of course, that
governments can do that NGOs can't do. Together, we can pretty
much do everything.
That was the example I gave with the operation I led out of
Ukraine last year. We had, I think, five, six NGOs working with
six different agencies of different governments. It's amazing
in four months we were able to do that many rescues.
We need a better partnership. We need to get funding. Even
more to the government agencies, to NGOs, NGOs are miracle
workers. I'm telling. The NGOs are the ones----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. James. What are the barriers? Is the State Department
getting in the way of the effectiveness of NGOs?
Mr. Ballard. I don't know because I'm not qualified to
answer that question. I've never dealt with the State
Department in terms of funding anything. But I wish they would
send a lot more funding to NGOs.
Mr. James. This question is for the entire panel. What
areas are you seeing of government inefficiency and what areas
is the American government, most notably the administration,
erecting barriers to saving children? Where can Congress help
tear down barriers to saving children?
Mr. Ballard. Well, I mean, first and foremost, I'm going to
go to the border. I'll go out to the border first. The barriers
are horrifying in my opinion right now simply to rescue
children, meaning not enough resources are being sent to take
care of those kids.
We've talked about that at length I think already today. So
that's the first thing, and that's where my focus is. My
expertise isn't as much inside the United States or on the
aftercare side in terms of getting grants, getting money.
But I do know this, that the NGOs that I work with, that
I'm most impressed with are way underfunded, especially because
of the inflation and economic problems. Donations are down. I
wish the U.S. government would rely more on private groups and
NGOs who in my opinion have probably the most expertise in
them.
And there's so many organizations now over the last ten
years that I've been so impressed with. And I just wish we
could--that's the SPEAR Fund's whole model that I advise on is
finding organizations, aftercare, and rescue intervention. And
get them the resources they need. And I think the U.S.
government should put more faith in NGOs.
Mr. James. Agreed. Mr. Chairman, I am a father first. I'm
an elected official second. And when I think of child
trafficking, only two words come to mind: pure evil.
It's unconscionable and I think that we all agree that
someone could do this to a child. We talk about demon
possession being relegated to the past, most notably our Bible
stories. But I'll tell you the battle is not in the physical
world and these people who perpetrate this evil on children are
demon possessed.
And we must make sure that we eradicate to the best of our
ability any barrier that comes between saving children's lives
and the platform that we have today. So I know my time is
limited. I wish we could get to more questions. But I
appreciate you all being here today, sharing your personal
stories. And please count on me as an ally to support any way
that we possibly can.
Ms. Podkul. If I may, Representative----
Mr. James. Yes, please.
Ms. Podkul [continuing]. James respond to your question
too. I think thinking about when we do give aid to other
countries and the programs that Department of State or USAID
are implementing, I really think focusing them on youth
protection, right, and gender-based violence. Those have been
key drivers and root causes of what we've seen, both children
having to flee in the first place and also areas where there
could be a lot of prevention and protection for children.
So I think when we are looking at the programs that we're
funding, making sure that there's a real eye to youth
protection centering it on those principles, and also on
gender-based violence, I think we can go a long way to
prevention which is what we all want in the first place. So no
child ever has to experience any of these harms. Thank you.
Ms. Lakin. Thank you. I think really [inaudible] is the
screening process when you have children who show up on our
borders and there's no tracking system from origin country to
the destination country. As you talked about, this is where we
miss many children because if they're not being tracked, if
there's a screening system where that says you're from this
place and you're being placed from this place.
One thing I can share with you really quick is that right
after the genocide, my siblings were given to random people who
have never been vetted with no social workers to follow up.
They could've been dead. Nobody would've asked questions.
When I was a 10-year-old, I was put into a place. I had my
first job as a 10-year-old. The woman abused me at every level.
Nobody would've asked questions.
But if there was that tracking system that this child, this
orphan is placed in this home and this person has gone through
the background check, I think that would be great. The other
thing that I believe that we need to really have a place and a
platform for survivors to be part of decision-making because I
think those voices are lacking. I think we have survivors come
and maybe give a talk and so forth.
But I think they need to be part of the decision-making as
well to be hired in the decision-making. Also trauma informed
is something that most people don't talk about. Not anybody
could just deal with somebody who has survived this kind of
trauma.
People need to be trained and trauma informed on how to
address these issues. My last request would be really to have
businesses, schools, and airport to have where there's a poster
says--gives information on how to report human trafficking
because individuals who are coming in and do not have
information, that really puts them at a higher risk. Thank you.
Mr. James. Okay. I think that we are going to try to show a
video quickly of an example that we got from--this is later?
All right. Well, I'll just say this. Whether or not--we're
dealing with votes right now. I think we need to get going.
But from what I'm hearing, very helpful. NGOs are extremely
impactful because they have the accountability, transparency,
and focus on outcomes that it does not seem the federal
government is acquainted with. And we should support those
initiatives, also trauma informed treatment and processes for
lessons learned and gender-based violence and a focus there.
That's extremely helpful and I appreciate your feedback. Thank
you for your time today.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. James. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As we leave,
we are late for a vote. And I think we'll make it. Just very
briefly, thank you, Ms. Lakin, for bringing up the issue of
organ harvesting.
For three years, I tried to get a bill passed to stop organ
harvesting. It was bipartisan. As a matter of fact, Ms. Manning
is one of the co-sponsors on the bill.
It passed 413 to 2. It's sitting over in the Senate now for
six months and I can't get it out on the floor for a vote. And
it has real penalties for those who with intent procure forced
organ harvesting organs.
It focuses absolutely on China, but the rest of the world
would be covered by this legislation. And we can't get it out
of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. I thank you again
for your extraordinary testimonies, and we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:49 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
