- LASERS AND WATER CANNONS: EXPOSING THE. CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY'S HARASSMENT IN THE. SOUTH CHINA SEA

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LASERS AND WATER CANNONS: EXPOSING THE
CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY'S HARASSMENT
IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE INDO-PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

September 28, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-52

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-646PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. MCCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey      GREGORY MEEKS, New Yok, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina                Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania   BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
KEN BUCK, Colorado AMI BERA, California
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANDY BARR, Kentucky TED LIEU, California
RONNY JACKSON, Texas SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
YOUNG KIM, California DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida COLIN ALLRED, Texas
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan ANDY KIM, New Jersey
AMATA COLEMAN-RADEWAGEN, American SARA JACOBS, California
Samoa KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio   Florida
JIM BAIRD, Indiana GREG STANTON, Arizona
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
TOM KEAN, JR., New Jersey JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MIKE LAWLER, New York JONATHAN JACOBS, Illinois
CORY MILLS, Florida SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
RICH MCCORMICK, Georgia JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas JASON CROW, Colorado
JOHN JAMES, Michigan BRAD SCHNEIDER. Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas
Brendan Shields, Staff Director
Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on INDO-PACIFIC

YOUNG KIM, California, Chair ANDY KIM, New Jersey
ANN WAGNER, Missouri BRAD SHERMAN, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia
MARK GREEN, Tennessee WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
ANDY BARR, Kentucky JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
AMATA RADAWAGEN, American Samoa
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
AMI BERA, California, Ranking
Member
Daniel Markus , Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Ford, Lindsey, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for South
and Southeast Asia, Department of Defense......................     7
Pak, Dr. Jung, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Multilateral
Affairs, Department of State...................................    15
Tiongson, Vice Admiral Andrew, Commander, Pacific Area, U.S.
Coast Guard....................................................    20

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    41
Hearing Minutes..................................................    43
Hearing Attendance...............................................    44

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

Statement for the record from Representative Connolly............    45

ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Additional materials submitted for the record....................    47

LASERS AND WATER CANNONS: EXPOSING THE.
CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY'S HARASSMENT IN THE.
SOUTH CHINA SEA

Thursday, September 28, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Indo-Pacific,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:02 p.m., in
room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Young Kim (chair
of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mrs. Kim of California. Hello, everyone. Thanks for being
here. I ask unanimous consent that the following members be
allowed to sit on the dais and participate in today's hearing:
Representative James Moylan of Guam. Welcome. Thanks for
joining us. Without objection, so ordered.
The subcommittee on the Indo-Pacific of the House Foreign
Affairs Committee will come to order. The purpose of this
hearing is to examine the Chinese Communist Party's increasing
aggression in the South China Sea. I now recognize myself for
an opening statement.
Again, welcome to the Indo-Pacific Subcommittee hearing
entitled Lasers and Water Cannons: Exposing the CCP's
Harassment in the South China Sea. The South China Sea is an
area of critical strategic importance for the United States and
its allies and partners. It is one of the busiest shipping
lanes in the world with an estimated 5.3 trillion dollars in
annual trade flowing through its waters.
The Philippines, Brunei, Malaysia, Indonesia, Vietnam,
China, and Taiwan all have territorial claims. The waters are
rich with natural resources including seafood and large
reserves of natural gas and oil. The Chinese Communist Party
has long maintained illegal claims in the South China Sea,
spreading propaganda about its notorious nine-dash line which
is now ten dashes because they added a dash around Taiwan.
Across the South China Sea, China has illegally dredged
nearly 3,200 acres of new land, some of which Service military
outposts that have runways for military aircraft and isolated
research platforms that can port military-grade vessels. These
artificial islands allow the CCP's Coast Guard to maintain a
permanent presence in the exclusive economic zones of our
allies and partners. Further, illegal and unregulated fishing
activities destroying the environment and depleting fishing
stocks.
I led a bipartisan CODEL with Representatives Andy Barr,
Jonathan Jackson, Jasmine Crockett last month to Thailand,
Philippines, and Indonesia so that we can assess the CCP's
buildup in the South China Sea. Just a week before our trip,
the CCP's Coast Guard used lasers to temporarily blind
Philippine sailors and water cannons to stop Philippine Coast
Guard ships from re-supplying the Sierra Madre, a Philippine's
ship permanently stationed in the South China Sea to protect
the Philippine's claims to Spratly Islands. My delegation also
flew on a mission with the U.S. Navy over the South China Sea
and we saw as congestion.
Instead of open water, we saw civilian fishing fleets from
South Asian countries, patrols from the Philippine Coast Guard,
and vessels from the People's Liberation Army, Navy, and CCP
Coast Guard. By far, the largest and the most common vessels in
the seas all vying for the same water between rifts and islets.
When flying near the Sierra Madre post, the CCP Navy radioed
into our aircraft asking who we were and demanding that our
plane turn around, claiming that we were flying over the
Chinese territorial waters.
This was clearly a bullying tactic, intimidation tactic.
Our partners in the region need our help, and our allies are
questioning if the U.S. will be there to help if the CCP
escalates aggression in the South China Sea. We have willing
partners and allies ready to hold firm against the CCP's
aggression.
But they need reassurances about the U.S.' commitment to
peace and security in the region. Just this month for the first
time ever, ASEAN countries held joint maritime patrols. The
U.S. must encourage and support these activities in the South
China Sea.
Congress must take the CCP's aggression in the South China
Sea seriously and ensure that our allied nations are getting
the assurances from the Administration that they need. This
starts with ensuring our military supporting these countries'
maritime domain awareness missions. The U.S. must also
strengthen its economic relationships with countries in the
region as the CCP seeks to use its economic influence as a
means to achieve political goals.
The Administration's rhetoric about trade in the region has
been positive but has not been met with deliverables. Finally,
the Administration must stop sidelining Congress on its
fruitless engagements with the CCP. A number of senior
officials have met with the CCP in recent months while the CCP
continues to double down on militarizing the South China Sea
and acting aggressively toward the U.S. allies and partners.
For the U.S. to be taken seriously in the South China Sea,
discussions with the CCP on this matter must be held from a
position of strength. So I look forward to hearing the
witnesses' testimoneys, and I yield the balance of my time. And
now the chair recognizes the ranking member, the gentleman from
California, Mr. Bera, for your opening statements.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And I want to thank
the witnesses for being here and appreciate the importance of
the recent delegation that you led and unfortunately was not
able to make it. But over the last several years, I've been
able to visit each of those countries and assure that the
concern about what we're seeing in the South China Sea and also
share some of the issues that you raised in terms of what our
strategy is, how we stand with our allies in the region.
I want to applaud the Biden Administration actually for
early engagement, early two-by-two high-level meetings, not
just in Vietnam, Indonesia, the Philippines, but also within
all the ASEAN countries. The President's recent visit to the
G20 followed by a stop in Vietnam and the announcement of what
really is a historic agreement, the comprehensive strategic
partnership with Vietnam is exactly what we should be doing.
And again, I think that's incredibly important.
When I was in the Philippines just before the pandemic, it
was a very different environment in terms of what the
relationship was like with the United States under the prior
Administration. But I applaud the Biden Administration's
engagement with the Marcos Administration, Secretary Austin's
engagement and visits there, and the fact that we are going to
be back in the Philippines. And with the harassment that the
chairwoman has outlined in terms of Filipino fishing vessels,
Coast Guard, et cetera, the reiteration that we do an alliance
with the Philippines.
And if there is aggression against Filipino vessels that
the U.S. will uphold our mutual defense commitments to the
Philippines in the face of an armed attack by the PRC. I think
the present was very strong in his announcement. And I think
our friends an allies in the Philippines understand that this
an important strategic relationship.
I also agree with--as much as I wish we had gotten TPP
across the finish line, yet that's not where we are today. But
the importance of economic engagement with the countries there,
you see a lot of U.S. investment and support from the
Administration in terms of supply chain resiliency, redundancy,
and the opportunities there. Indonesia is a hugely important
country. It's one of the largest democracies in the world.
And I think this is also a place where having visited
Indonesia, understanding what's happening around the chain of
islands and so forth is another place where I think we can work
in a bipartisan manner to support our friends there as well
support the Administration. Again, I do not think this should
be a partisan issue. It should be a long-term strategy that we
execute on because the Chinese are playing a long game.
So it shouldn't matter whether there's a Democratic or
Republican Administration or Democratic or Republican majority
in the House. I think this is an area where I look forward to
working with the chairwoman and hopefully 1 day being chairman
again.
Mrs. Kim of California. I'm not going to let----
Mr. Bera. But again, I think this is a place where my
friends and colleagues on the subcommittee but also across the
full committee, there's great agreement on. And just one or two
last comments. I'm really happy that the Coast Guard is here.
And I think the Coast Guard will be critical in helping
work with and buildup the infrastructure. When I was in
Vietnam, we had those conversations certainly in the
Philippines because the Coast Guard mission is not a military
mission. But it's a law enforcement mission.
And in that capacity as a law enforcement mission, it is
about protecting the territorial integrity, the territorial
sovereignty, the exclusive economic zones. The Chinese operate
in the gray zones. And working to help build that Coast Guard
capacity, having our Coast Guard make additional rotations
through there, and then helping the countries in that region
buildup their own ability and providing maritime domain
awareness, et cetera.
I think those are all incredibly important strategies. And
I see the Biden Administration executing them. I certainly
think Congress should be very supportive in providing assets
and others as necessary.
And again, I know in the comprehensive strategic
partnership with Vietnam, hopefully some of those will be
forthcoming. So again, thank you for holding this incredibly
important topic. Appreciate the prior hearing on the Indian
Ocean region which is also an area that we do not pay enough
attention to and we ought to pay attention to so we do not find
ourselves 4 years from now having these same issues there. So
with that, I'll yield back. And again, thank you.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Ranking Member. Other
members of the committee are reminded that opening statements
may be submitted for the record. We are pleased to have a
distinguished panel of witnesses before us today on this very
important topic. Let me introduce our witnesses.
First, Ms. Lindsey Ford is the Deputy Assistant Secretary
of Defense for South and Southeast Asia at the Department of
Defense. Thank you for joining us. Dr. Jung Pak is the Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Multilateral Affairs at the Department
of State. Thank you for being with us. Vice Admiral Andrew
Tiongson is the Commander, Pacific area of the U.S. Coast
Guard. Thank you for being with us.
Thank you for being here, and your full statements will be
made part of the record. And I'll ask each of your to keep your
spoken remarks to 5 minutes in order to allow time for member
questions. So let me now recognize our first witness, Ms. Ford,
for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF LINDSEY FORD, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR SOUTH AND SOUTHEAST ASIA, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Ms. Ford. Well, Chairwoman Kim, Ranker Member Bera, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you very much for
the opportunity to come today and discuss how the Department of
Defense is working with allies and partners to strengthen our
common vision for peace and stability in the South China Sea.
And I should say at the top, thank you all as well for the time
that you have taken to go visit the region, to understand the
challenges that our allies and partners are facing there. I
will say in my engagements with them, I consistently hear that
they not only want to see members of the executive branch.
But knowing that they also have support from the
legislative branch in the United States makes a huge
difference. So thank you. You have heard from leaders across
the Department of Defense that our network of allies and
partners is one of America's greatest strategic advantages and
the center of gravity for the Department's 2022 National
Defense Strategy.
As the NDS clearly States, close collaboration with our
allies and partners is foundational to sustaining and
strengthening deterrence in the Indo-Pacific region including
in the South China Sea. We cannot confront complex and
interconnected challenges alone, and the South China Sea is not
exception. Over the last decade as you mentioned, the People's
Republic of China has increased the scope, the scale, and the
pace of its approach to assert control over the entirety of the
South China Sea.
They've constructed multiple military outposts on occupied
and reclaimed features in the Spratly Islands and steadily
equipped these outposts with an increasing array of advanced
military capabilities. The PLA has sharply increased coercive
and risky operational behavior in the air and at sea,
threatening lawfully operating American, allied, and partner
forces. This includes sinking Vietnamese fishing vessels using
military aircraft to harass Malaysian offshore energy
exploration, flying within 20 feet of U.S. military aircraft,
and deploying water cannons and military grade lasers to block
and target Philippine resupply boats headed toward Second
Thomas Shoal.
Despite these attempts to assert further control of the
South China Sea, there is another better vision, one that is
shared by both the United States and the region. And over the
past year, we've seen an unprecedented number of States enhance
efforts to support rule of law in the South China Sea which is
a very encouraging development. As you saw earlier, this week,
the Philippine Coast Guard took a bold step in defending their
own sovereignty by removing a floating barrier installed by the
PRC Coast Guard near Scarborough Shoal.
And in the face of PRC threats and intimidation, we've seen
Indonesian, Malaysia, and Vietnam continue to expand their
offshore energy exploration efforts and challenge PRC
encroachment. We've seen partners across Southeast Asia and
beyond the region come together to condemn PRC behavior in the
South China Sea, including in August Australia, Japan, Canada,
the United Kingdom, and the EU all protested to the aggressive
PRC maneuvers that we saw against the Philippine at Second
Thomas Shoal. In the recent Camp David summit that President
Biden convened with Japan and South Korea, all three nations
strongly condemned the PRC's aggressive behavior in the South
China Sea.
And just days ago, members of the G7 opposed the PRC's
militarization of the South China Sea and called on them to
uphold the principles of the law of the sea. While our allies
and partners have taken great steps to stand up for our shared
vision, DOD is also taking an increasingly proactive approach
to counter PRC coercion. A key element of this approach is
building asymmetric advantages for our allies and partners.
Since 2016, the Department has allocated over 475 million
dollars in capabilities that enables Southeast Asian partners
to sense, share, and contribute to regional maritime security.
And we are laser focused on identifying new and cost effective
emerging technologies that will bring greater capability to our
allies and partners more quickly. Beyond the investments we're
making in ally and partner capabilities, we have enhanced the
complexity of our military operations in and around the South
China Sea to ensure deterrence is strong.
Earlier this year, the Nimitz Carrier Strike Group and the
USS Ronald Reagan conducted multi-carrier, multi-domain
operations in the South China Sea. And in June, Canada, France,
and Japan all joined us for a large multi-national exercise in
the South China Sea. Just this past month, we are very proud to
have conducted our first joint bilateral sail since 2016 with
the Philippines, an important step in our alliance.
We've expanded the scope, the scale of our annual exercises
with partners, including Garuda Shield which is one of the
largest multi-national exercises in the region and Exercise
Balikatan with the Philippines which this year for the first
time included high end coastal defense, cyber defense elements,
again, showing how we are strengthening and modernizing our
relationship. We are diversifying U.S. force posture to remain
prepared for any crisis or contingency. That includes regular
rotational deployments of U.S. P-8s and littoral combat ships
with Singapore and in the Philippines recently agreeing to four
new enhanced defense cooperationsites that U.S. forces will
have access to.
Finally, we are making a concerted effort to support to
support multi-and mini-lateral coalitions of allies and
partners, supporting network security architecture of like-
minded nations. In May, India and Singapore hosted their
inaugural India-ASEAN maritime----
Mrs. Kim of California. Ms. Ford, can you wrap up, please?
Ms. Ford. Yes, maritime exercise in the South China Sea and
Australia and the Philippines also conducted their first
exercise in the South China Sea as well. So let me thank you
very much, say we remain clear eyed about the challenges that
we face, and we look forward to working with you on this
problem.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ford follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Ms. Ford. I now
recognize Dr. Pak for your opening 5 minute statement.

STATEMENT OF DR. JUNG PAK, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
MULTILATERAL AFFAIRS, DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Dr. Pak. Chair Kim, Ranking Member Bera, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the honor and the
privilege of speaking with you today on the South China Sea. We
have seen a clear and upward trend of PRC provocations in the
South China Sea, including efforts to exercise its expansive
and unlawful maritime claims. The PRC routinely harasses
vessels lawfully operating in their respective EEZs and on
their continental shelves. Further, the PRC uses intimidation,
harassment, and unprofessional maneuvers at sea in areas where
it has failed to put forth lawful maritime claims.
For example, PRC aircraft have increasingly engaged in
unsafe intercepts of U.S. and other military aircraft in
international airspace over the South China Sea. The PRC
likewise has interfered with our ally the Philippines' exercise
of high seas freedoms in conducting routine resupply missions
of the Philippine marines stationed aboard the BRP Sierra Madre
at Second Thomas Shoal, a low tide elevation located on the
Philippines' continental shelf, and well within it's exclusive
economic zone. The world witnessed the PRC's dangerous and
provocative conduct on August 5 when the China Coast Guard used
water cannons and--along with PRC maritime militia vessels--
employed unsafe blocking maneuvers against Philippine vessels.
We saw similar behavior during later resupply missions on
August 22 and September 8 and again most recently when the PRC
reportedly installed a barrier to prevent Philippines fishing
vessels from entering Scarborough Reef. We have made clear that
we stand with our Philippine allies and have reaffirmed that an
armed attack on the Philippines public vessel, aircraft, and
armed forces--including those of its Coast Guard in the South
China Sea--would invoke the U.S. mutual defense commitment
sunder Article IV of the 1951 U.S.-Philippines Mutual Defense
Treaty. We have seen similarly dangerous PRC conduct against a
Vietnamese fishing board on August 28 that resulted in injuries
to Vietnamese fishermen.
And open and accessible South China Sea is vital not only
to global peace and stability, but also to the global economy.
Nearly one third of global trade runs through the South China
Sea, worth about three trillion U.S. dollars. We therefore have
a strategic interest in upholding the rights of all countries
to exercise freedom of navigation and overflight.
Indeed, all nations have a vital interest in preserving the
international law of the sea from maritime claims that do not
comply with international law. In keeping with our longstanding
policy on this vitally important waterway, we take a strong and
principled position that all States, including those with
competing claims to parts of the South China Sea, should
comport their maritime claims with international law, as
reflected in the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention. The
Administration's approach to protecting this critical maritime
domain falls into three key lines of effort: one, diplomatic
outreach to promote respect for international law and the
rules-based order, emphasizing the need for peaceful settlement
of disputes; two, maritime capacity building programs for the
region's maritime law enforcement agencies and militaries; and
three, finally, our own operations, including Freedom of
Navigation Operations and routine presence operations, to
demonstrate that all countries have the right to fly, sail, and
operate anywhere that international law allows.
First, on diplomacy, we have consistently prioritized
multilateral engagement through ASEAN and other dialog
mechanisms. And we have called on our ASEAN and other like-
minded partners to call out the PRC's egregious behavior.
Second, on capacity building, the U.S. Government has provided
over 1.6 billion dollars in military and law enforcement
assistance to Southeast Asian countries over the past 5 years,
with a focus on building maritime capabilities and enhancing
maritime domain awareness.
Through the Quad-supported Indo-Pacific Partnership for
Maritime Domain Awareness, we are also enabling Southeast Asian
nations to monitor their maritime areas and international sea
lanes via low-Earth-orbit satellites that identify ships by
their radio traffic and automated tracking systems. Last, we
maintain a longstanding program to uphold freedom of the seas
for all nations under international law. The United States
conducts regular FONOPs in the South China Sea to demonstrate
our commitment to these rights and our firm opposition to the
PRC's and other claimants' unlawful maritime claims.
In summary, maintaining peace and stability, and freedom of
navigation and overflight in the South China Sea, is part of
our larger vision for a free and open Pacific. We will continue
to work with you and we will continue to work with our allies
and partners on this critical issues. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Pak follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Dr. Pak. I now recognize
Vice Admiral Tiongson for your opening statement. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL ANDREW TIONGSON, COMMANDER, PACIFIC
AREA, U.S. COAST GUARD

Vice Admiral Tiongson. Good afternoon, Chairwoman Kim,
Ranking Member Bera, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee. I am honored to appear before you today to
discuss how the United States Coast Guard words, to be a
trusted partner throughout the Indo-Pacific. Chairwoman and
members of the subcommittee, every day the Coast Guard, a key
component of the Department of Homeland Security, provides a
distinct value proposition, maritime governance.
We protect, defense, and save those who live and work on
the sea. We protect the sea itself, and we support the rule of
law. At all times, a branch of the Armed Forces, a law
enforcement agency, the Coast Guard protects, defends, and
regulates more than 100,000 miles of U.S. coastline and inland
waterways and 4.5 million square miles of exclusive economic
zone.
Our white ships with orange racing stripes demonstrate
maritime governance wherever we sail. The Coast Guard's
specific area encompasses 74 million square miles of ocean,
more than half of the world's population in 77 countries.
Throughout the region, the Coast Guard serves as a vital link
between our Nation's diplomatic and military options with
unique expertise and authorities to support partner objectives.
The Indo-Pacific is experiencing increasing challenges
across the maritime domain. Malign actors exploit gaps and
seams in maritime governance that generate destabilizing
effects. For example, illegal, unreported, and unregulated
fishing threatens global fish stocks, an existential issue for
some Pacific Island nations as well as the world's protein
security.
Impacts to the global marine transportation system pose
risk to trillions of dollars and economic activity. Also, the
increasing frequency and magnitude of natural disasters
combined with sea level rise endangers fragile economies and
ecosystems. Chairwoman, I understand you recently returned from
a trip to the Indo-Pacific region where you learned how
maligned actors exert influence, leveraging approaches to shift
conditions to their advantage.
Aggressive fishing practices and natural resource
exploitation undermine territorial sovereignty and economic
prosperity of Indo-Pacific countries. As a counter to these
malign activities, the United States Coast Guard has been and
is now operating and engaging throughout the region to promote
maritime governance. We are trusted to support partners as they
deter, disrupt, and defeat threats and challenges.
In doing so, together we strengthen the rules-based
international order. A robust network of partnerships is the
cornerstone of a free, open, connected, prosperous, secure, and
resilient maritime domain. Together we bolster maritime
governance through combined operations, sharing of best
practices, and leveraging collective expertise.
The key aspect of our approach in the region is to always
meet partners where they are with what they need, always seeing
threats and challenges through their eyes. These engagements
may look like a small team deploying in support of a major oil
spill or embedding members with partners in Asia to improve
maritime demand awareness or even conducting operations with a
partner in Asia's maritime forces. In coordination with the
U.S. interagency, the Coast Guard has deployed maritime law
enforcement training teams and National Security Cutters to
support partners, building regional interoperability in
cooperation to uphold maritime governance.
So the Coast Guard is well positioned to continue to work
in the region, to promote maritime governance, to contribute to
efforts so that a rules-based international order is upheld
throughout the Indo-Pacific. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today and for Congress' continued support
for the Coast Guard. I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Vice Admiral Tiongson follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, all of our witnesses.
Now we'll go into the Q&A session from the members. And let me
recognize myself first for 5 minutes.
The CCP continues to ignore the 2016 permanent court of
arbitration ruling that its nine-dash line has no legal basis
and these artificial islands do not create its own exclusive
economic zones, yet they continue to deploy the vessels to
patrol the sea, intimidate our allies and partners. Dr. Pak,
right? Will the CCP ever resolve their disputes in the South
China Sea through a rule of law approach which I think we know
what the answer may be? But will they always resort to might
makes right?
Dr. Pak. Thank you, Chair Kim. And that's exactly what
we're trying to push back against and to make sure that our
allies and partners are 100 percent resilient to those
challenges. We continue to say out loud and to all who will
hear and to grow that chorus of condemnation against the PRC's
unlawful and expansive maritime claims that have no basis in
international law.
And so we will continue to support our allies and partners.
I will leave it up to the PRC to speak for themselves. But I
think what our assessment is that the PRC sees this as a long
game, and they're using a variety of tactics across multiple
domains.
And that includes economic. It includes security. It
includes just outright harassment and coercion through might.
And we're looking to tackle those issues in a multidimensional
way.
Mrs. Kim of California. So considering the CCP isn't
abiding by the 2016 ruling or Xi Jinping's 2015 commitment to
President Obama not to militarize the South China Sea, what
prospects does that raise for peaceful, orderly resolution of
the disputed claims?
Dr. Pak. Thank you. One of the things that we're working
with our allies and partners on is globalizing the South China
Sea issue. As you have mentioned here today and in other venues
that so much of the global economy runs through the South China
Sea, and it's a vital economic throughway.
And so this is not just about China. This is not just about
the countries in the region. It's vital for Europe. It's vital
for us, the United States and Indo-Pacific nation. And it's
vital for all that are dependent on their economic--the economy
that runs through this.
So one, we're looking to globalize. And so we were very
happy to have ginned up support among 11 countries across the
globe that rejected and condemned the PRC's unlawful
reclamation activities. And so we're trying to globalize and
making sure that we have a common understanding of the threats.
Mrs. Kim of California. Got it. Thank you. As was
mentioned, the U.S. and Philippines has our mutual defense
treaty. And we are pursuing more cooperation through the
multilateral or additional sites under the enhanced defense
cooperation arrangement. So I want to ask you, Ms. Ford, is the
U.S. prepared to back up its mutual defense treaty with
military force? And what message would it send to other
questions in the region if the U.S. does not respond forcefully
enough to an event that triggers that treaty?
Ms. Ford. Thank you so much. I think the credibility of our
alliances is the bedrock part of U.S. security in the Indo-
Pacific region and globally. And that's one reason that the
Department has been incredibly clear that when it comes to our
treaty commitments to the Philippines, we believe an armed
attacks against Philippine armed forces, public vessels,
aircraft apply to the South China Sea. That includes the
Philippine Coast Guard. And we have said repeatedly and will
continue to say that we stand by those commitments absolutely.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Our delegation also
visited the Subic Bay. And I just wanted to ask you, what
lessons did we learn from Subic Bay to ensure that we do not
lose the critical infrastructure to the CCP and that region?
Would you be able to answer that?
Ms. Ford. I'd be happy to chime in here. I actually had the
opportunity to visit Subic earlier this year. I think we're
very pleased to see that an American company is now helping
with the Administration of the Hanjin shipyard.
I walked that shipyard. It's one of the largest shipyards
in the world. It is critical strategic infrastructure. And the
fact that U.S. companies are cooperating and helping to build
jobs and make sure that strategic area stays in friendly hands
I think is incredibly important.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you very, very much. At the
time we visited, we weren't allowed to name the company name.
But I guess it's becoming very clear that it is becoming final,
Hanjin.
Ms. Ford. The Hanjin shipyard is currently being
administered by an American company.
Mrs. Kim of California. Great, thank you. All right. Let me
now recognize Ranking Member Bera for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I'm going to yield 5
minutes to Representative Jackson who I know accompanied you on
the CODEL. And unfortunately, it has a time commitment. So I'd
love to yield him that time.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you. Very kind of you, Congressman Bera.
Congresswomen Kim, Congressman Bera, thank you for inviting me
on the trip. It was fascinating to see the front lines of
what's going on there. Specifically, I want to talk about the
looming, impending shutdown opportunities or challenges that
we're going to face. First, to the vice admiral, could you
please share with us what was the effect of the 2019 shutdown
on the 35-day shutdown in the military in 2019?
Vice Admiral Tiongson. In 2019, the United States Coast
Guard was not funded. It was the first time ever that one of
the armed services was not funded as a result of a lapse in
appropriation. What we saw is that you had people--Coast Guard
people that were deployed in different parts of the world,
maybe side by side with their DOD counterparts who were getting
paid but they were not getting paid. And devastating effects
back home to families as well as future recruiting and
retention still loom.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you very much. To our Deputy Secretary
Pak, the question I would have is what's the impact of the
diplomatic initiatives that will be impacted by a shutdown?
Dr. Pak. Thank you for that question, Representative
Jackson. It would have a huge impact on how we do business in
Southeast Asia. As many of you know from visiting the region,
showing up matters.
And I want to foot stomp what DASD Ford said about your
engagement in the region. And we also in the State Department
hear great things about the level of engagement that they have
from Congress and that it's in a bipartisan way. So they see
it, our partners and like-minded see it and they send us kudos
for it.
So I wanted to really foot stomp what DASD Ford had said
about your engagement. I'll note that 91 representatives or
Members of Congress visited the region in the past year alone.
And I know that we've seen each other in various ASEAN
committee Washington events together. So showing up matters,
and a government shutdown would affect that showing up those
personal relationships, especially in matters like the South
China Sea which are pretty sensitive conversations.
Mr. Jackson. Will this give a greater opening or
opportunity for the Chinese government to strengthen its
relations?
Dr. Pak. I would argue that it would fuel the PRC's false
narrative that we are not committed, that we are inward
looking, that this engagement with the Southeast Asian
countries are just a blip, and that ultimately our default
position is looking inward and looking at domestic issues. So I
think that would fuel that false narrative and feed Chinese
disinformation on U.S. commitment to the region.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you very much. Deputy Secretary Ford, I
cannot call you assistant and all that. You're what I've got to
work with, and I'm honored to be here. How will this deal with
our readiness, the looming shutdown, and preparedness in the
region?
Ms. Ford. Thanks very much. I think the impact of a
shutdown would be significant for the Department of Defense.
For one thing, there is a tremendous amount of momentum
underway that I've already spoken about regarding to what we
are doing to strengthen deterrence with our allies and
partners.
So certainly from a budgetary perspective and how we
implement our strategy, there's an enormous impact. We're
seeking 40 percent increase in Pacific deterrence initiative
funding. If we have a shutdown, if we have a CR, we cannot
actually have that funding to implement that strategy.
For U.S. forces, for civilians, the work that we undertake
in the Department of Defense on a daily basis to oversee the
planning of our exercises and everything else, we will not be
able to implement anymore. And you will have personnel across
the Department of Defense who do not know when they're getting
their next paycheck. They're focused on that rather than
focusing on all the things that we ought to be doing to
maintain deterrence on a daily basis.
Mr. Jackson. I thank you all for your Service. Thank you,
Chairwoman Kim, for inviting me and letting me have this
opportunity. Thank you again, Congressman Bera and Mr. Barr. I
yield back my time.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Rep. Jackson. It was
really good to have you. I'll now recognize Representative Barr
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Chair Kim and thank you for your
leadership and leading us on the CODEL. It was great to be with
Congressman Jackson and Congresswoman Crockett. And I do think,
Dr. Pak, to your point and hopefully our State Department
diplomats who are deployed over there saw the bipartisan unity
that we expressed to our partners and allies and counterparts
over there.
Let me start with Admiral Tiongson because we met when we
were in Manila with our Filipino Coast Guard leaders there. And
it was apparent in our conversation with the Filipino Coast
Guard that they do not currently have enough assets to
adequately confront the well funded Chinese Coast Guard and
grey-zone operations. And they asked for help, and they
specifically asked for more assets and ships.
How is the United States Coast Guard working with the
Filipinos to expand the capabilities of their Coast Guard? Do
we have enough assets, Cutters and whatnot, that could be
deployed to the South China Sea to assist in those law
enforcement operations?
Vice Admiral Tiongson. We have a very strong relationship
as you observed with the Philippine Coast Guard. In fact, the
Philippine Coast Guard, we have our largest security sector
assistance program with them. In fact, when you talk assets, we
through the interagency partnerships built an entire training
center to help them with operations as well as maintenance of
the vessels that they do have that they are in a ribbon
cutting. It was just in the last couple of weeks for that.
We have helped them grow their Coast Guard from 5,000 to
their goal of about 35,000. They're still working on that, but
they're well into that right now. And we have assigned a
maritime advisor to them to help along that growth projection.
In addition to that, we do work with them with our ships. In
fact, just recently, we had our first trilateral underway
exercise between Japan Coast Guard, Philippine Coast Guard, and
U.S. Coast Guard.
Mr. Barr. No, you all are doing a great job. To Deputy
Assistant Secretary Pak, you did note in your testimony about
how we are doing. And one of the main objectives is maritime
capacity building programs for the region's maritime law
enforcement agencies and military. But the Filipino Coast Guard
is specifically asking for more ships. Is that included in your
plans as assistance to the Filipino Coast Guard, Navy and Coast
Guard?
Dr. Pak. And thank you----
Mr. Barr. They cannot confront the PLN with what they've
got is what they're telling us.
Dr. Pak. Right. The admiral has mentioned the Japan
relationship. And that's part of our efforts to knit together
groupings of like-minded countries together. And so I just
hosted in July a maritime dialog with the Philippines, and they
brought a sizable contingent to talk about these and other
issues. And part of the State Department's goals there is to
make sure that we're consulting frequently and in depth to talk
about exactly what the Philippines need, Coast Guard
capabilities, and otherwise----
Mr. Barr. That's great. And I'm running out of time. So my
last two questions are to Deputy Assistant Secretary Ford. The
Sierra Madre is falling apart. It's not a permanent solution to
the Second Thomas Shoal issue.
As Chair Kim pointed out, we flew over and PA over the
Chinese Coast Guard vessel there that's right off of the shore.
They clearly want to--they want to militarize that just like
they've done with Fiery Reef and Mischief Reef and all these
others. What is the long-term plan to help the Filipinos defend
their exclusive economic zone beyond a temporary Sierra Madre
situation there?
And then last question, the EDCA sites in the Philippines,
this is a big, important development. What are we going to do
at those EDCA sites? What does INDOPACOM want?
And why not make--and I know we met with Ambassador
Carlson, I know there's some internal diplomatic changes. But
why not make Subic an EDCA site? And can we not work with the
Filipino government to reestablish a U.S. naval presence beyond
just the ship building activity? There, it's Subic.
Ms. Ford. Thanks very much, Representative. We are in
regular conversations with our Philippine allies about how we
help them modernize their capabilities. And so we're doing a
number of things.
We are in the process of negotiating a multi-year security
sector assistance road map that will enable us to bring more
maritime capability more quickly to them. We have committed to
negotiate just only by the end of this year that will enhance
our information and intelligence sharing that enables them to
have a better understanding of what's going on. And we recently
concluded defense guidelines that talk about how we will
actually enhance our operational planning to enable them to be
more effective in what they do on the water and in the air in
the South China Sea.
When it comes to EDCA, we are really thrilled how EDCA is
moving forward. The Department has already allocated over 100
million dollars for infrastructure investments that you'll
continue to see over the next few years coming online. In
response to your question about Subic, what I would say is
anything that is designated that is designated as an EDCA site
is done in partnership and in coordination with the Philippines
and only when the Philippines is looking for that EDCA
designation. Thank you.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I now recognize--your
time is up. Sorry.
Mr. Barr. Yes, I know.
Mrs. Kim of California. I'm going to recognize Ranking
Member Bera for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. DAS Ford, in your
opening comments, you referenced UNCLOS, the Law of the Sea,
which on our side of Congress, we do not get a chance to ratify
it. But obviously, it has not been ratified by the Senate. And
the PRC uses that sometimes against us when we try to say,
there's a ruling. From your perspective, how important is it
that we--I've talked to other colleagues like Congressman
Courtney and others that we really ought to make a push to
ratify that and it would strengthen our hands in upholding the
rule of law particularly in the South China Sea?
Ms. Ford. Thanks very much. And I'm sure the admiral has
thoughts here as well. I would say it's incredibly important.
You will hear no one speak more loudly than the Department of
Defense and the U.S. Navy about how much upholding UNCLOS
matters and that we think ratification is important.
The reality is the U.S. Navy continues to operate in
accordance with UNCLOS everywhere we go. But operationally
maintaining the freedoms that we are allowed under UNCLOS is
incredibly important. It is only one leg of the stool, though.
And seeing that legal recognition as well, we think it matters
a lot.
Mr. Bera. So we already held ourselves to that standard. So
if my colleagues over on the other side of Congress are
watching, I would hope the Senate would take that up and it
would be important. Vice Admiral, if you want to add anything
to that.
But I'd also--Congressman Barr touched on--as I've traveled
around the region, obviously Vietnam, Philippines, others would
love additional Coast Guard assets. Mexico would love
additional help as well. Knowing we've got limitations, knowing
that we have transferred some assets there, and knowing that
we're doing some joint training and maritime domain awareness,
and that the Coast Guard will really be vitally important in
protecting territorial sovereignty and the maritime governance
mission in that region. What are some things that we should be
thinking about from the congressional side?
Vice Admiral Tiongson. Just to add to that piece, I
mentioned earlier our value proposition is maritime governance.
And exactly as DASD Ford was saying, we live by the rule of law
all the time. We agreed to the internationally accepted norms
and standards.
We follow professional maritime behaviors everywhere we go
without a doubt. That is part of maritime governance. To your
points about--I'm going to say excess defense articles in many
ways.
So as you were tracking, I believe, in Vietnam, we've
provided two high endurance Cutters or 378-foot ships. There's
a third one that could be there through help with the
interagency partners. We've provided 25 response boats also to
the Vietnam Coast Guard, and we have a maritime advisor there
as well.
So we have a footprint in the Philippines I described
earlier as well as in Vietnam. The key for us is right now we
are episodic in our presence. What we need to be is a little
bit more persistent in our presence.
We thank the Administration and Congress for this Indo-
Pacific support Cutter that I hope to receive here very soon in
the winter timeframe and then get it operational in the early
spring, probably in the Oceania region first. A second one of
those would do great wonders in different parts of the Indo-
Pacific as well as on our unfunded priorities list that has
been forwarded up to Congress. We have four fast response
Cutters that allow us to provide more presence in the Indo-
Pacific.
Mr. Bera. DAS Pak or Vice Admiral, you also talk about
stretching our resources by working with our partners and
allies, whether that's Australia, New Zealand, Japan. Others,
could you just, in the brief time I have left, touch on the
importance and what our strategy is in terms of kind of that
coalition building?
Dr. Pak. Sure, we work through ASEAN as you know to make
sure that ASEAN itself as an organization also calls out PRC's
activities in the South China Sea. You'll note in the U.S.-
ASEAN summit statement in which the Vice President
participated, there was a strong statement about the South
China Sea. We also work through AUKUS.
We work through dialogs with the EU. We work through the
Japan-Philippines-U.S. relationship. In the Camp David--the
unprecedented Camp David summit with Korea and Japan, South
China Sea was a key part of that and the three countries,
prioritization of Southeast Asia and to make that part of the
world more resilient. And so there are a variety of groupings
and ways and dialog mechanism. And that's not to mention the
bilateral mechanisms as well.
Mr. Bera. I'll yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentleman's time is up. Now I
recognize Representative Sherman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. I think the meetings with high
Chinese officials make a lot of sense. Ronald Reagan who's
memory and Administration was commemorated yesterday at the
Republican debate of course met with Kruschev--Gorbachev rather
at a time when the Soviet Union had many thousands of nuclear
weapons aimed at the United States far more than China has.
We are not approaching this from a position of strength.
The trade deficit is enormous. Every dollar we ship to China
empowers then and weakens us. In addition, we provide a capital
gains allowance, an incentive at the cost of the U.S. Treasury
for those who invest in Chinese stocks.
The purpose of the capital gains allowance is to encourage
investment to build an economy. You can argue that it's a good
investment in the American economy when we invest in American
stocks. Why do we provide that? And I look forward to perhaps
having some co-sponsors for a bill to say no capital gains
allowance for investment in Chinese stocks.
And finally, I think our military is strong. But this
shutdown is making us weaker, both militarily and in terms of
diplomacy as well. We look like the Keystone Cops. Those Asian
leaders who have studied history will note that empires fall
and great nations fall when they're unable to pay their troops
on time.
We're doing that to ourselves. Now we have up until this
Administration had a deliberately ambiguous position as to how
would we react militarily if Taiwan were blockaded or invaded.
Dr. Pak, is it now clear that the Biden Administration would
respond militarily in the case of such a military attack on
Taiwan?
Dr. Pak. Thank you, Representative Sherman. I just wanted
to just touch on the----
Mr. Sherman. I'm sorry. I have limited time.
Dr. Pak. Sure.
Mr. Sherman. Can you say yes or no?
Dr. Pak. Yes. For over four decades, we have abided by the
One China policy that's been guided by the----
Mr. Sherman. Is it our policy----
Dr. Pak [continuing]. Taiwan's Relations Act.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. To respond military if Taiwan is
invaded?
Dr. Pak. Well, we will make--the United States will make
available Taiwan defense articles and services necessary to
enable----
Mr. Sherman. So our response----
Dr. Pak [continuing]. It to maintain sufficient self-
defense capability.
Mr. Sherman. Our response may not include putting American
lives at risk?
Dr. Pak. I do not really want to go into hypotheticals.
Mr. Sherman. I thought Biden said, we will defend Taiwan.
Are you saying that's just his----
Dr. Pak. And we do so in multiple----
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Policy and not the policy----
Dr. Pak [continuing]. Ways in terms of increasing
Taiwan's----
Mr. Sherman. Defending Taiwan usually means--OK.
Dr. Pak [continuing]. International space. Taiwan has a lot
to offer, its democratic----
Mr. Sherman. So we----
Dr. Pak [continuing]. Governance, its economy.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Continue to be ambiguous as to
whether that would involve deployment of American troops?
Dr. Pak. We continue to assert and make sure that we have a
peaceful resolution of the cross-strait.
Mr. Sherman. Well, obviously, everybody wants peace. I'm
asking the more difficult question. How do we respond if China
wages war? And You're not willing to answer or even tell me
that you want to be ambiguous. There's nothing more ambiguous
than refusing to tell me whether You're going to be ambiguous.
Dr. Pak. I think our policy speaks for itself. And I won't
put words into the President's----
Mr. Sherman. What You're saying is that I'm stupid for
asking the question because the answer is obvious.
Dr. Pak. I won't put words into the President's mouth. But
for four decades, we believe that our One China policy has----
Mr. Sherman. OK. I'm going to go----
Dr. Pak [continuing]. Been successful in maintaining cross-
strait stability.
Mr. Sherman. Well, what's been successful is that the
Chinese military hasn't been powerful enough to invade Taiwan.
They're getting closer every day. Forty years ago, China
couldn't have invaded Taiwan.
I would point out that we continue--we were in an area
where we should not be ambiguous is we should make it clear
that if Taiwan is invaded or blockaded, that ends most favored
nation status for China. Not because I want to see that happen,
but because that's the way to put China on notice with
something other than ambiguity.
Now I know at the State Department, a large percentage of
your people will be furloughed if we have a government
shutdown. Admiral, do your people get paid September 30th? And
I assume they have to keep working. When is their first
interrupted paycheck?
Vice Admiral Tiongson. The first interrupted paycheck would
come at the fiscal--at the change of the fiscal year. That's
about 38,000 active duty members.
Mr. Sherman. So they get paid September--do they get a
check September 30th and have to wait for the next one? When's
the next one?
Vice Admiral Tiongson. It would be on the 15th, halfway
through the month.
Mr. Sherman. Fifteenth. So if we shut down the government,
your people have to work. They do not get paid. That may apply
to the military or maybe we would pass a military defense bill.
What would that do to the morale in the Coast Guard if they
have to work and they do not get paid?
Vice Admiral Tiongson. Well will continue to focus on----
Mr. Sherman. What would it do to the morale?
Vice Admiral Tiongson. Morale-wise, as experienced in 2019,
it is hard.
Mrs. Kim of California. The gentleman's time is up.
Mr. Sherman. It impairs American security. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Let me now recognize
Representative Moylan for your questioning.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to all
the panel members here today for allowing me to weigh in for
this hearing. I appreciate the chance to hear from the
witnesses, panels, and a chance to speak about the importance
of working to counter China's continued illegal actions in the
South China Sea and the Pacific at large. It is essential that
we in Washington show our allies in the Pacific that we do not
accept rogue nations flaunting their disrespect for
international borders and instead work with our regional allies
to ensure a safe and secure Pacific.
Over 3.4 trillion dollars in trade pass through the South
China Sea every year. If we continue to appease China and allow
them to build artificial rates throughout the region, it is
only going to be a matter of time before they seek to disrupt
this crucial trade corridor. Last month, I wrote an op-ed that
was published on the Hill speaking on this very issue. Madam
Chair, I ask unanimous consent that the op-ed titled the U.S.
must send a strong message in the face of China's harassment of
the Philippines to be entered into the record.
Mrs. Kim of California. Without objection.
Mr. Moylan. This op-ed, I call for the increase of joint
patrols with our regional allies, an inclusion of the
Philippines and future Quad-plus as well. My first question for
Assistant Secretaries Pak and Ford, do you think we should seek
to include the Philippines in future Quad-plus discussions? And
when will we begin to seek more bi-and multilateral
arrangements in the Indo-Pacific involving one of our closest
regional allies?
Ms. Ford. Thank you very much, Representative. Those are
great questions. I'm really thrilled to hear you advocating for
joint patrols which as I mentioned is something that we just
engaged in with the Philippines.
I know in the recent engagement between the Philippines and
Australia, this is conversations that they're having as well.
So from our perspective, we are strongly supportive of not just
bilateral patrols but exploring opportunities for multilateral
patrols with the Philippines and with other partners as well.
When it comes to the Quad or other kinds of minilateral
settings, what I would say is over the last year, we
inaugurated a new U.S.-Japan-Philippines defense dialog.
So we are looking trilaterally along with other interagency
partners on what more we can do to network the Philippines with
our partners. The Secretary also convened the first ever
meeting of U.S., Japan, Australia, and Philippine defense
ministers. So we have been networking the Philippines into many
of our other alliances much more proactively. It's the central
part of our strategy.
Dr. Pak. And from State Department's perspective, in
addition to working with DOD on all of those--on those
groupings, we've worked very hard to rally support for the
Philippines and the Philippines' ability to lawfully exercise,
operate, fly in their region. And so we've been very focused on
making sure that the Philippines have the support, not just of
the United States but on a global scale.
Mr. Moylan. I appreciate all that, working together and the
networking. But I think the Quad would also be an addition to
that. That would be very helpful. But thank you for your
statements.
Vice Admiral, last week, the Chinese Coast Guard laid a
1,000-foot long barrier to block Scarborough Shoal which is
well within the Philippines' exclusive economic zone.
Nonetheless, China claims that the shoal belongs to them thanks
in part to their ten-dash line map which is an increase of
maritime area from the previous nine-dash line. That included
contested areas that extends well beyond international agreed
upon borders, both on land and sea.
This follows other prerogative actions by the Chinese Coast
Guard in August when they attempted to interrupt routine
resupply of Philippine base in Second Thomas Shoal. These
actions are totally illegal in the current international law
and fly in the face of the 2016 discussion by the Permanent
Court of Arbitration in Hague. My question is, what more can
our Coast Guard do to help support our allies as they attempt
to deal with these constant assaults on their sovereignty? If
asked by the Philippine Coast Guard, would the U.S. Coast Guard
be inclined in joining our allies to deter bad faith action by
the CCP?
Vice Admiral Tiongson. We will continue to help build their
capacity and capability to deter and defend their sovereign
rights. We will continue to share with them our tactics,
techniques, and procedures to make sure that they are ready for
those types of events.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. We have a consensus that
we're going to go for a second round of questioning. So let me
ask a couple questions very quickly.
When we were out in the region, we spoke to our allies and
we talked a lot about dangerous PRC behavior in South China
Sea. And we did the flyover as was mentioned. And we were
actually witnessing the Chinese military conducting in an
unprofessional and unsafe ways, radioing in and asking
questions, like, how many of us are there, why are we there,
that type of thing.
So we want to know what is the contingency plan if there is
an accident. And could an incident spark a conflict there? And
when we were talking to the Philippine Coast Guard and our
counterparts with the Philippine officials, they were talking
about, yes, there is the hotline.
The problem is they do not even pick up the hotline. So how
confident are we that they are going to pick up since they have
shown not to be responsive to other flashpoints in our
relationship such as when we had the spy balloon incident
flying over our continent. So what is our plan?
Ms. Ford. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. We share your
concern about the unsafe PRC operational behavior that we've
seen not just in the South China Sea to be honest with you,
through the Taiwan Strait across the Indo-Pacific region. The
Department, the Secretary have spoken out on this repeatedly.
And you are exactly right. Unplanned incidents have real
escalatory potential. And that's something that deeply concerns
us. It is why we have continued to say that we believe that
communication channels between the United States and the PRC,
defense and military channels is incredibly important. And we
are trying to keep that channel of communication open so that
we can avoid those kinds of unplanned incidents.
Mrs. Kim of California. The probably is they do not pick up
those lines.
Ms. Ford. It certainly is a problem. We certainly can
continue to say as much as possible that that needs to be in
place. And other than that, we do everything possible to
closely coordinate with our allies like the Philippines to make
sure that we're prepared for any potential crises.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. What will we need to
establish that with PRC? And what actions will we need to see
from PRC to actually avoid miscalculation and accidental
escalation?
Ms. Ford. I think the admiral can chime in here as well.
But what I would say is they are well known, especially for
naval vessels. We have a code for unplanned encounters at sea.
There are clear rules that define what safe operational
behavior looks like in the maritime domain. China has said in
the past that it is willing and had signed up to abide by
those. It has not. So how to behave safely is not actually that
complicated. It's simply that you actually need to stand by
what you said you'll do.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I'm going to turn it
over to Ranking Member Bera for your questions.
Mr. Bera. Great, thank you. This has been a great hearing
and certainly a super important topic. We've talked a lot about
the Philippines and Vietnam. I'd love to give any of the
witnesses an opportunity to talk about what we might be seeing
around Indonesia and so forth and get their perspective on
that, maybe starting with DAS Ford.
Ms. Ford. Sure. Thank you so much. Indonesia is a
critically important partner for us. The Secretary has seen
Minister Prabowo whose counterpart twice this past year
already. I expect we will again.
Certainly in every conversation that we have with our
Indonesian partners, maritime security is an important part of
what we talk about. It's one reason why as a department we have
been working with Indonesia to provide them with ISR, Air,
Maritime Capabilities. And as I mention in my opening
statement, we have been actively working with them to identify
new and emerging capabilities that also may help them police
their EEZs more effectively. Over 17,000 islands, a tremendous
amount of water that they have to police. So this is something
we're very focused on with them.
Mr. Bera. Vice Admiral, if you'd like to add anything from
the Coast Guard perspective.
Vice Admiral Tiongson. I just would totally agree with DAS
Ford in that piece. Maritime domain awareness is huge there,
particularly because of all of those islands that were just
discussed.
Mr. Bera. Great, thank you. Madam Chairwoman, I'm going to
have to leave. But again, my deep appreciation to the witnesses
here, to you for holding this hearings. And again, I think the
scenario where we can work in a bipartisan, bicameral way with
the Administration. Again, applaud----
Mr. Sherman. Will the gentleman----
Mr. Bera [continuing]. The strong work of the
Administration.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Yield his time?
Mr. Bera. Of course.
Mr. Sherman. I want to resume with Dr. Pak. Back in last
year, the President appeared on 60 Minutes. And I realize you
work with the President--for the President you have, not the
President you might wish we had.
And he made it--he said--and they wanted to clarify. He
clarified that--and this is a Reuters story, and I'll ask
unanimous consent to put this Reuters article of September 19,
2022 on the record. In that story, the President was asked
whether we would commit American men and women to fight if
Taiwan were invaded and he said yes. Are you saying that the
President's words are not the words of Administration policy?
Dr. Pak. Thank you, Representative Sherman. I will--I'm not
going to interpret the President's statements. What we do----
Mr. Sherman. Well, what is our policy?
Dr. Pak [continuing]. From our--what we do from----
Mr. Sherman. Is our policy an unambiguous commitment of
American forces to fight against an invasion of Taiwan? Is our
policy the policy we had under prior Administrations where we
were intentionally ambiguous? Or you simply do not know the
policy?
Dr. Pak. From State Department's perspective--and I'm not
going to interpret--I think the President speaks for--I'll let
his words stand.
Mr. Sherman. I know the President speaks for----
Dr. Pak. But I--but I just----
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Himself. Does he speak for the
Administration?
Dr. Pak. I want to say that what we're doing very intensely
is to make sure that there is no conflict----
Mr. Sherman. OK. We both want peace.
Dr. Pak [continuing]. In the Taiwan Strait given that----
Mr. Sherman. I'm asking you a question. How do we react if
there's an invasion? And your response is, we do not want an
invasion.
Dr. Pak. Well, I think I do not want to go into the
hypotheticals of how that might happen.
Mr. Sherman. That's not a response. That's a refusal to
answer. If you want to refuse to answer, just say you refuse to
answer. Don't pretend to answer.
Dr. Pak. I cannot answer that right now.
Mr. Sherman. OK. So----
Dr. Pak. But we can certainly get back to you on that.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. The President makes statements.
The State Department may or may not decide that is our policy.
Ms. Ford, we have a situation where it appears to be our policy
that the Defense Department's men and women would be deployed
to defend Taiwan. But we do not have an explicit policy to end
MFN for China if we're fighting.
What would the effect on morale be if American marines and
troops and sailors are dying fighting the Chinese on the one
hand but Walmart is importing things from China and making big
profits on the same day? Would that have a good effect on
American morale? Should we ask our troops to die while our
corporations make money and our consumers by Chinese goods?
Would that make sense?
Ms. Ford. I cannot tell you what the effect specifically a
most favored nation status or not would be. I would say----
Mr. Sherman. I'm not asking for most favored nation status.
I'm asking if----
Ms. Ford [continuing]. The Department of Defense takes very
seriously the morale of our troops, the well being of our
troops. We never want to see them in harms way.
Mr. Sherman. I asked you what effect it would have on our
troops----
Ms. Ford. And I think that's why we're very----
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. If corporations are making
billions importing goods from China on the same day when
marines and sailors are dying in the Taiwan Strait. Would that
have an effect on morale, yes or no, you do not know?
Ms. Ford. Sir, my job is to make sure they're never in
harms way. And that's why we're focused on deterrence.
Mr. Sherman. So we do not need to have a hearing about how
to react if Taiwan is invaded because we just hope that it
won't happen.
Ms. Ford. I do not think we hope. I think--we're laser
focused on deterrence. And there are a number of things we're
doing to enhance our posturing capabilities to make sure the
deterrence remains strong.
Mr. Sherman. And are you 100 percent sure that those
efforts will be successful?
Ms. Ford. I am very confident the deterrence is strong
today, and we're doing what we----
Mr. Sherman. But You're confident--You're not 100 percent
sure----
Ms. Ford [continuing]. Need to do to make sure it remains
strong.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. That the deterrence will be
successful. And you refuse to respond how we will react if the
deterrence is unsuccessful. The most important part of
deterrence is to identify for the Chinese what our response
would be.
And you won't even tell me that it's illogical and harmful
to morale to make billions in trade on the same day when our
troops are dying in the Taiwan Straits. It sounds like other
than telling me that you do not want Taiwan invaded, you do not
want to answer any questions. And that's fine if you would just
be honest enough to say you do not want to answer any
questions.
Although why you would come here and testify is up in the
air. Admiral, I do have one question for you and this is on the
dovish side. We have the right to sail our military ships right
up to the 12 miles off the coast of China and we do it from
time to time. Does China operate with significant naval force
12, 13 miles off the U.S. coast on a regular basis?
Vice Admiral Tiongson. I have not come across any
incursions of that to our territorial seas.
Mr. Sherman. But we do it to them. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. The gentleman's time is
up. Let me now recognize Representative Barr for your
questions.
Mr. Barr. I think my colleague, Mr. Sherman, does make a
good point that Congress needs to maybe make a policy decision
here with respect to the economic ramifications of cross-strait
invasion. And we could clarify what the policy of the United
States would be in that case. And I'd offer to work with the
gentleman on that, including the most favored nation suggestion
and certainly powerful sanctions in that case.
And to telegraph that frankly to Beijing that there will be
repercussions and it will be very painful. Let me go back to
Dr. Pak on the nine-dash line, ten-dash line issue. I know that
and I applaud the Administration's policy of trying to bring
more international consensus on this question that really is--
it should not be a subject to debate given the U.N. tribunal
2016 unanimous determination that this is a violation of
international law.
But what can we do with the United Nations and these allies
and partners to delegitimize China's claims on the nine-dash
line? How can we amplify the international court ruling from
the U.N.? I'll give you one suggestion from our Filipino
partners which was to have a resolution in Congress referring
to this body of water as the West Philippine Sea as opposed to
the South China Sea. Now I know Vietnam has some claims there
which could complicate matters. But what is the State
Department's position on a renaming of that as the West
Philippine Sea?
Dr. Pak. I do not have a technical answer to that,
Representative Barr. But over and over again, we foot stomp
this on the legally binding nature of the 2016 award. We do
that bilaterally with the PRC and we do it in multilateral fora
when the PRC is also in that room. And that's echoed by all of
our like-minded allies and partners.
Mr. Barr. Xi Jinping lied to President Obama. He lied to
President Obama. I can say it. Maybe you cannot. But that's
what he did.
Dr. Pak. And you will hear us say that loud and clear from
the hilltops and the mountaintops about the 2016 award being
legally binding on all parties. As you know from your trips and
your conversations, the PRC has been trying to erode that and
trying to delegitimize that 2016 ruling. But we will continue
to keep yelling it from the mountaintops----
Mr. Barr. Keep it up. Thank you. Keep it up. And to DAS
Ford, what are the solutions to pushing back and preventing
further PRC buildup and militarization of the reefs in the
South China Sea or West Philippine Sea? And the reason I say
that is the militarized island outposts are a threat to U.S.
forces in the Taiwan scenario.
So preventing further militarization or artificial island
building is important for the Taiwan scenario for U.S. forces
moving in that 440 nautical miles north but to have China on
the south end of that. But what do we need to do to eject the
Chinese or at least limit further militarization? I think
that's really important for the Defense Department.
Ms. Ford. Thank you. I agree with you very much,
Representative. So what I would say is the first thing that we
need to do and are doing is to bring more awareness and
transparency about what the PLA is actually doing in the South
China Sea, including on its outposts. So that's one reason for
us. We are very focused on information sharing and we are
working with allies and partners to make sure that it is more
publicly known what is taking place in the South China Sea.
Mr. Barr. And let's emphasize your testimony: advanced
anti-ship cruise missiles, long range surface to air missile
systems, J-20 stealth fighter jets, laser and jamming
equipment, military radar and signals intelligence
capabilities. Not just in the South China Sea, in the exclusive
economic zone of the Philippines. This is preparing for war.
They do not do this other than that purpose. And that's
what the American people need to understand there. I'm running
out of time, but let me just ask one final question to Dr. Pak.
And I promised the foreign minister of Indonesia Marsudi
that I would communicate back to Secretary Blinken on this and
to the State Department. The Indonesian government was very
disappointed that Vice President Kamala Harris was dispatched
as opposed to the President when he was right there at the G-20
and went to Vietnam. Yes a partner but a communist country.
They are the fourth largest population country in the world in
a democracy. If we want to send a signal that Indonesia is our
friend, we need the President there.
Dr. Pak. Thank you. The Vice President attended and she was
hugely successful. She had great meetings with YSEALI. She had
great meetings with Indonesian officials. As you might be
tracking the President Jokowi will be in Washington sometime in
November. And so we look forward to welcoming the Indonesian
government.
Mr. Barr. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I want to thank all the
witnesses for your valuable testimony and engaging with our
members and answering tough questions too, at times pretty
feisty engagement. Thank you so much.
The members of the committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses. And in that case, we ask you to
submit those answers in writing. And let me now recognize
myself some closing remarks.
As the witnesses noted, as you noted, the PRC is ramping up
their aggression and military footprint in the South China Sea.
And since those waters are of critical importance to global
shipping, the U.S. national security and our commitment to
Indo-Pacific, the U.S. must respond to that aggression. And
from each of the countries that we visited in August, I heard
the same thing, that the PRC is doing this because they can.
And they have received little or no pushback. And every
single one of the people that we met, they said that. And it is
thus critical that the U.S. respond to every single act of
aggression by the PRC in the South China Sea.
In Indonesia, I was glad to give remark at Ambassador Sung
Kim. He hosted a reception for Super Garuda Shield. The day
after we had that reception, they were doing the multilateral
exercises.
And spoke with servicemen and women from our allies and
partners around the world that were gathered. I believe there
were 19 nations present. And I saw the energy and the
commitment to protecting our shared interest in the region.
And so I hope we can work together to get these folks the
capabilities, the training, and the support they need to
protect those shared interests. And I echo Dr. Pak's comments
about the U.S.' need to show up in the region. As Congressman
Barr mentioned, when we were Indonesia, we met with the foreign
minister.
And she clearly told us. I mean, she did not mince her
words. She told us how disappointed she was that President
Biden was not able to attend the ASEAN summit where we tried to
explain that there was some scheduling conflict and Vice
President was coming. But it was very, very apparent that the
disappointment was not lost on them.
And while I support the engagement with Vietnam, it's
important. But it is more important that we show up and court
democracies in the region too and obviously the largest
democracy in Indonesia that it is. That's why it was important
for me to ensure that my first CODEL as chairwoman of this
Indo-Pacific Subcommittee was to visit with our two key allies,
Thailand, Philippines, and of course the largest democracy in
Southeast Asia, Indonesia.
So our trip was a show of commitment and reassurance. And
we demonstrated bipartisan congressional support for those
important relationships. And last, many Americans may be
wondering why we're talking about South China Sea today.
Yet we rely on the South China Sea for much of our
shipping, including to and from the four of our top ten trading
partners. And it is a bellwether for our U.S. commitment to the
region. So I say if we let China aggressively bully its way
through the South China Sea, we could see large scale supply
chain disruptions and a complete breakdown of the rules based
international order.
And that will affect every American who enjoys the level of
commerce and the freedom that we enjoy today. So let me once
again repeat how grateful we are for your time, spending your
afternoon with us, answering our questions. And I look forward
to continuing our work together with each and every one of you
on this very, very important issue.
So pursuant to committee rules, all members may have five
additional days to submit statements, questions, and extraneous
materials for the record subject to the length limitations. So
without objection, the committee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:22 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
