- THE DIRE STATE OF RELIGIOUS FREEDOM AROUND THE WORLD

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE DIRE STATE OF RELIGIOUS FREEDOM
AROUND THE WORLD

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GLOBAL HEALTH,
GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS, AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 18, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-40

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-739                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa                   SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                    Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, Jr., New Jersey         JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director
Sophia A. Lafargue, Minority Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International
Organizations

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey, Chairman

MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania, Ranking
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,           Member
American Samoa                   AMI BERA, California
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                SARA JACOBS, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
JOHN JAMES, Michigan

Mary Vigil, Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

WITNESSES

Page
Panel I:
Rabbi Abraham Cooper, Chair, U.S. Commission on International
Religious Freedom..............................................    10
Eric Patterson, Ph.D., President, Religious Freedom Institute....    21
Reverend Susan Hayward, Associate Director, Harvard Divinity
School's Religion and Public Life Program......................    39
Panel II:
The Honorable Rashad Hussain, Ambassador-at-Large for
International Religious Freedom, U.S. Department of State......    79

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................   101
Hearing Minutes..................................................   103
Hearing Attendance...............................................   104

MATERIAL FOR THE RECORD

Material for the record: Statement from His Excellency Wilfred
Chikpa Anagbe..................................................   105
Material for the Record Submitted by Representative Smith........   108

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions for the record from Ambassador Hussain to
Representative Smith...........................................   110
Responses to questions for the record from Rabbi Abraham Cooper
to Representative Smith........................................   153
Responses to questions for the record from Mr. Eric Patterson to
Representative Smith...........................................   158

THE DIRE STATE OF RELIGIOUS FREEDOM AROUND THE WORLD

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 18, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Global Health, Global Human
Rights, and International Organizations,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:35 a.m., in
Room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Christopher H.
Smith [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Mr. Smith. The subcommittee will come to order and good
morning to everyone, my good friend and colleague, Ranking
Member Wild. This hearing of the Subcommittee on Global Health,
Global Human Rights and International Organizations on the dire
state of the religious people around the world will come to
order.
Today we will examine religious freedom around the world or
the lack thereof, and we will focus on several countries where
religious freedom is under serious assault.
I point out that on June 22, our subcommittee focused on
anti-Semitism and anti-Israeli bias in the United Nations,
Palestinian authority in the NGO community.
We heard from the heroic human rights champion, the man who
was in a league of his own, Natan Sharansky, and an amazing
panel of leaders. I point out that the rising tide of anti-
Semitism worldwide is cause for serious alarm with no sign of
abating. Jewish men, women, and children continue to suffer
bias, hate, and violence simply because they are Jewish. And
that this pernicious manifestation of evil needs to be exposed
and more effectively combated. The purveyors of anti-Semitism
never take a holiday, nor should we.
Today we continue to focus on anti-Semitism and the dire
state of religious freedom around the world. Tragically,
billions of people around the world, half of the world's
population, are not able to practice their faith freely. Many
are persecuted by oppressive governments or extremist groups,
literally attacked, tortured, jailed, and even slaughtered for
their beliefs.
I have chaired over 40 Congressional hearings and authored
four major laws on religious freedom. I led human rights trips
to many countries to meet with the oppressed and to advance
their cause with the oppressor.
Today I am more concerned than ever about the further
deterioration of religious freedom. Religious liberty, as we
all know, is one of America's founding ideals, a cornerstone of
our democracy, and it is internationally recognized as a
fundamental human right. It is the right to practice one's
religion according to the dictates of one's own conscience.
This God given right, like all fundamental human rights,
flows from the dignity and value of every human being, and it
deserves to be protected everywhere without exception.
Promoting religious freedom remains the pillar of the U.S.
foreign policy. Assaults on religious freedom are a major
threat to U.S. national security, and they are intensifying.
The worst violators of religious freedom globally are often the
biggest threats to our nation and that is no coincidence.
Authoritarianism is on the rise. Oppressive governments are
cracking down on religious minorities that are seen as a
challenge to power. The Chinese Communist Party has undertaken
the most comprehensive attempt to manipulate and control or
destroy religious communities since Chairman Mao Zedong made
the eradication of religion a goal of his disastrous cultural
revolution more than a century ago.
Now Xi Jinping, apparently feeling the power of independent
religious belief as a challenge to the Communist party's
legitimacy, is trying to radically transform religion into the
party's servant, employing a Draconian policy known as
Sinicization. Under Sinicization, all religions and believers
must comport with and aggressively promote Communist ideology
or else.
To drive home the point, religious believers of every
persuasion are harassed, arrested, jailed, or tortured. Bibles
are burned, churches destroyed, crosses set ablaze atop church
steeples. Now under Xi Jinping, religious leaders are required
to install facial recognition cameras in their places of
worship.
New regulations have expanded restrictions on religious
expressions online and prohibit those under the age of 18 from
attending services. Just the other day, we had the leader of
the Mayflower Church here in Washington who, thankfully along
with his church, escaped this tyranny. One of the driving
forces was this whole terrible concept that you cannot mentor
or talk to a child about faith.
The Chinese Communist Party has committed horrific crimes
against believers, including genocide against Uyghur Muslims
and other religious and ethnic minorities in Xinjiang. At a
hearing that I chaired along with Marco Rubio from the China
Commission, which I also chair, we heard from a woman who had
been forced to try to renounce her faith. She was a Uyghur.
And while she was being tortured horrifically, she asked
her torturer, why are you doing this? And he gave two answers,
one you're a Uyghur, the other, you're a Muslim. I mean, it
couldn't be clearer. I mean, she prayed to God. That's how
horrible the torture was. Thankfully, she got out eventually
and made it to our hearing room to tell a horrible tale of
torture under Xi Jinping.
In Vietnam, the Communist government's crackdown on
religions, including the Catholic Church, has worsened in
recent years. I'm glad to see they are now placed on the State
Department's special watch list in 2022, although I strongly
believe that Vietnam needs to be designated as a country of
particular concern.
In May of this year, I reintroduced the Vietnam Human
Rights Act, which parenthetically passed the House four times
in the past, only to die in the Senate. And one of the
provisions talks about re-establishing the CPC designation for
Vietnam.
Do you remember why they got lifted from that? During the
Bush Administration, in order to facilitate the trade,
bilateral trade agreement, they lifted the CPC designation of
Vietnam, I thought prematurely. And then it never went back,
even though the tyranny continued unabated.
In Afghanistan, religious freedom has severely deteriorated
under the Taliban's brutal regime. Christians live in fear of
persecution as Taliban foes go door-to-door trying to discover
them. A Taliban spokesman has even claimed, there are no
Christians in Afghanistan, which is demonstrably false but
points to the Taliban's efforts to erase the faith completely.
Other religious minorities like Sikhs, Hindus, Hazara Shia,
and other Shia Muslims are also unable to freely practice their
faith in the aftermath of the Taliban's takeover.
While the State Department designated the Taliban as an
entity of particular concern in the 2022, I urge the Department
to do more to hold the Taliban accountable for its gross
violations of human rights, including religious freedom.
In Nigeria, I see firsthand the aftermath of Boko Haram's
destruction of churches in Moscow. I visited Archbishop Kagame
in Jos several years ago. We went from church to church that
had been fire bombed by Boko Haram terrorists. This
unbelievably holy leader of the Catholic Church had nothing but
concern for his people who had been killed or the survivors,
but he also prayed for the oppressors. It was, really,
absolutely remarkable.
Extremist groups like Boko Haram and ISIS, West Africa,
commit indiscriminate violence against those they consider to
be infidels. In the Middle Belt, Fulani Muslim extremists
targeted and killed predominantly Christian farmers, also in
brutal raids.
I am alarmed to say that the government's deliberate
Fulanization of Nigerian institutions, encouraging ethno-
religious supremacy, and I cannot overstate the amount of
respect ethno-religious supremacy has in that country. I was
shocked that the State Department failed to designate Nigeria
as a country of particular concern in 2022 and was shocked when
Secretary of State Blinken removed Nigeria as a CPC country in
November of 2021.
There was a chorus of criticism by the faith community in
Nigeria and from the diaspora here and from members of Congress
on both sides of the aisle. So, hopefully, they will get that
right and designate Nigeria as a CPC.
I would be remiss not to mention the threat to religious
freedom in our own hemisphere, including the Ortega regime, who
promoted persecution of the church in Nigeria. In fact, the
very first hearing of this subcommittee was titled, The Ortega
Morello Regime's War Against the Catholic Church in Civil
Society in Nicaragua.
Bishop Alvarez, political prisoners and prisoners of
conscience. I remain deeply concerned, along with my colleagues
for Bishop Alvarez, who was recently released, only to be
rearrested for bravely refusing to leave his country. The
Ortega regime has attempted to silence the Catholic Church as
the single most important independent institution remaining in
Nicaragua, but it will not succeed. I and my colleagues are
committed to doing everything possible to urge the release of
all Nicaraguans imprisoned for their faith or for their
political beliefs.
I am convinced that there is more the United States can do
to protect and promote the freedom of religion worldwide. That
is why I offered the Frank R. Wolf International Religious
Freedom Act, which was enacted in 2016 into law to strengthen
our government's efforts.
And I want to pay special, special tribute to Frank Wolf,
who wrote the original 1998 International Religious Freedom
Act, IRFA, which created the entirety of what we are building
on now, and he is surely a champion.
That is also why I authored the Special Envoy to Monitor
and Combat Antisemitism led so effectively by Ambassador
Deborah Lipstadt. Unfortunately, I am concerned that the U.S.
State Department is not using all of the tools provided to hold
guilty parties accountable.
Time and again, violators of religious freedom are given a
pass in the Department's country of some particular concern, a
designation that just, reasonable people can disagree on. But
UCRIF does seem to get it right in pointing to problems with
countries and no diplomacy or to get in the way of calling it
for what it is.
When a country is engaging in serious religious
persecution, they need to be designated CPC. And what follows
after that in terms of sanctioning, that is exclusively up to
the Administration, but call it the way it truly is. I am very
happy that Ambassador-at-Large for the Office of Religious
Freedom Rashad Hussain will be part of our second panel. And
I'm looking forward to his testimony and again before we
introduce this great panel, I would like to turn it over to my
good friend and colleague, Congresswoman Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and a special thank you
for convening this hearing. Thank you to our distinguished
witnesses for being here today and thank you to all of the
interested observers who are here in our audience showing us
just how important this issue is across cultures, across
ethnicities, across religions so thank you all.
In his 1941 State of the Union address, President Franklin
D. Roosevelt articulated a powerful vision, anchored around
what he described as the four freedoms, freedom of speech and
assembly, freedom of religion, freedom from want and freedom
from fear.
Understanding that these rights are inextricably linked,
Roosevelt gave rise to an aspiration for universal rights and
dignity here at home and around the world that remains far from
realized but as urgently needed as ever before.
The challenge we face today is clear, to protect and expand
freedom of conscience, the ability to freely believe or not to
believe in the face of the forces of authoritarianism and
exclusion that have gained momentum in far too many corners of
the world, including right here at home.
I am convinced that people of all faiths and backgrounds
can find common ground in our most precious common resource,
our democracy. Together let us understand that foundational
principle, the separation of church and state.
The protection of all religious communities and non-
believers alike offers a way forward toward a future in which
every person has fundamental rights, and dignity. And when
authoritarian forces attempt to use religion as a weapon to
target specific groups of people or to target our multiracial,
multicultural democracy itself, let us reject those forces with
one voice across religious, political and social lines.
I look forward to a constructive hearing, Mr. Chairman, and
with that I thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so much. Ms. Jacobs. Ms. Manning.
Thank you, ladies. It is my privilege now to introduce our
distinguished panel, beginning first with Rabbi Abraham Cooper,
who is the chair of the U.S. Commission on International
Religious Freedom. He was appointed by Senate Minority leader
Mitch McConnell and is Associate Dean and Director of Global
Social Action for the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a leading Jewish
human rights organization with more than 400,000 family members
and a true force. He is a force, but so is the Wiesenthal
Center.
We have turned to them countless times asking for insight,
information, and actionable plans as to what we should be doing
to combat religious persecution including antisemitism. So, I
want to thank him for that leadership.
He has been a long time leader. As I said he is a force for
Jewish causes and human rights causes. In 1977, he went to Los
Angeles to help Rabbi Marvin Hier find the Wiesenthal Center.
Together with Rabbi Hier, Rabbi Cooper regularly meets with
world leaders including Pope Francis, Presidents, Foreign
Ministers to defend the rights of the Jewish people to combat
terrorism and promote multifaith relations worldwide. Thank you
for being here.
We then will hear from Dr. Eric Patterson, who serves as
president of the Religious Freedom Institute. Dr. Patterson is
past dean of the Robertson School of Government at Regent
University and a research fellow at Georgetown University's
Berkley Center for Religion, Peace and World Affairs, where he
previously served full-time.
He holds a PhD in clinic science from the University of
California at Santa Barbara. Dr. Patterson's interest in the
intersection of religion, ethics, and foreign policy is
informed by the U.S. Department of State's Bureau of Political
and Military Affairs with work in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Congo,
Angola and elsewhere. He has significant government service,
including over 20 years as an officer and commander in the Air
National Guard and serving as a White House fellow working for
the director of the U.S. Office of Personnel and Management.
We will then hear from the Rev. Susan Hayward, who is the
associate director for Religious Literacy and Professions
Institute in the Religion and Public Life Program at Harvard
Divinity School. In this role, Rev. Hayward developed and runs
the Certificate and Religion and Public Life Program for the
Harvard Divinity School and graduate schools, for careers in
public life including government, organizing media and
humanitarianism.
Prior to joining Harvard, Rev. Hayward spent 14 years with
the Religion and Inclusive Societies Program at U.S. Institute
of Peace, leading efforts to understand religious dimensions of
conflict and advanced efforts engaging religious actors and
organizations and peace building.
Her former work for the U.S. Institute of Peace focused on
Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Colombia, and Iraq. She holds a bachelor's
degree in comparative religions from Tufts University and a
master's degree from the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy
and Harvard Divinity School.
She is currently pursuing her doctorate in theology and
religious studies--I don't know where you get the time--and
religious studies at Georgetown University focusing on Buddhist
and Christian responses to authoritarianism and conflict in
Myanmar.
I would like to now turn the floor to Rabbi Cooper. And I
know the clock says five minutes, but all of your testimonies
are so important, please feel free to go a little longer If you
like.

STATEMENT OF RABBI ABRAHAM COOPER, CHAIR, U.S. COMMISSION ON
INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM; DR. ERIC PATTERSON, PRESIDENT,
RELIGIOUS FREEDOM INSTITUTE; AND, REV. SUSAN HAYWARD, ASSOCIATE
DIRECTOR, RELIGION AND PUBLIC LIFE, HARVARD DIVINITY SCHOOL

STATEMENT OF RABBI ABRAHAM COOPER

Rabbi Cooper. That's a very dangerous suggestion to members
of the clergy.
Ms. Wild. As someone who sits on the subcommittee, trust
me, these are often long hearings because of the courtesies of
our chair.
Rabbi Cooper. Well, Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Wild,
and distinguished members of the Committee, my name is Abraham
Cooper.
Thank you for inviting me to speak on behalf of the United
States Commission on International Religious Freedom, or
USCIRF, where I currently serve as chair.
Before I get to my remarks, allow me just one personal
comment. In Judaism, the term for teacher and mentor is rebbi.
Chris Smith has been the rebbi for people like me in human
rights for a long, long time. I think I had hair when we first
met. It goes back a long way. He continues to be an amazing
mentor and inspiration to all of us and it is a special
privilege to be here this morning.
USCIRF is an independent, bipartisan U.S. advisory body
that monitors and reports on religious freedom abroad. Under
USCIRF's mandate in the International Religious Freedom Act of
1998, or IRFA, the commission issues a report by May 1st each
year, with recommendations to the President of the United
States, the U.S. Secretary of State, and the U.S. Congress.
These recommendations include our assessment regarding
which countries merit the State Department's designation as a
Country of Particular Concern, or CPC, for inclusion on its
Special Watch List.
The standards for such designations are clear under IRFA.
CPCs are countries whose governments engage in or tolerate
``systematic, ongoing, and egregious'' violations of religious
freedom. The SWL is for countries where the violations meet
two, but not all three, of those CPC standards.
USCIRF uses our annual report to make a compelling case for
each country which we determine is deserving of CPC or Special
Watch List status. We supplement it with publications and
events throughout the year that provide nuanced analyses of
religious freedom conditions, and trends.
Before I go into some of the details, I want to bring to
the attention of this committee a development from today in
Egypt. USCIRF maintains a Crucial Victims List of those
imprisoned for their beliefs or advocacy on behalf of religious
freedom worldwide.
Unfortunately, that list has now surpassed 2,000 entries
and in fact we just received word this morning that a court in
Egypt has cruelly sentenced one of those victims, Patrick
George Zaki, Z-a-k-i, three years in prison for an article he
wrote in 2019 about the challenges that many Coptic Christians
face in that country.
We called at USCIRF for his immediate release just as we do
for all victims of such religious freedom and human rights
violations. And I know we're in the right location to first
bring this to the attention of the American people.
In this year's 2023 Annual Report, USCIRF recommended 17
countries for CPC status, of which 12 were designated by the
State Department in November 2022, Burma, China, Cuba, Eritrea,
Iran, Nicaragua, North Korea, Pakistan, Russia, Saudi Arabia,
Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan.
The five countries we recommended for CPC which were not
designated include Afghanistan, India, Nigeria, Syria, and
Vietnam.
We further recommended that the State Department maintain
on its Special Watch List Algeria and the Central African
Republic, while adding nine other countries, including
Azerbaijan, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Sri
Lanka, Turkey, and Uzbekistan.
My purpose today is not to reiterate these lists. Instead,
I'd like to highlight key areas of both discrepancy and
alignment between USCIRF's recommendations and the State
Department's ultimate designations.
Allow me to first turn to the discrepancies, best
represented by two countries which USCIRF profoundly disagrees
with the State Department, Nigeria, and India.
First to Nigeria, I had the honor of visiting Nigeria just
before COVID where together with my colleague and friend,
Reverend Johnny Moore, we debriefed some 90 survivors of
Islamic terrorism in that country, including a nine-year-old
girl.
In Nigeria, religious freedom conditions have remained
abysmal, with state and nonstate actors committing particularly
severe violations against both Christians and Muslims. While
some officials have worked to address drivers of religious
freedom violations, others actively infringe on the religious
freedom rights of Nigerians, including by enforcing blasphemy
laws. Criminal activity and violent armed group incidents
impacting religious freedom have continued to worsen.
Sadly, Nigeria has become a country steeped in religious
freedom violations, where people of faith, and those of no
faith at all, increasingly live in fear of harassment,
imprisonment, and violence. It meets clearly the CPC standard
under IRFA--as evident in the State Department's own IRF
report, released in May.
It is also why USCIRF recommended the appointment of a
Special Envoy for Nigeria and the Lake Chad Basin to maximize
U.S. diplomatic efforts to address the atrocity risk and
religious freedom violations.
Our recommendations are supported by Members of Congress in
H. Resolution 82 introduced by you, Mr. Chair, Chris Smith,
earlier this year.
Meanwhile, India, the world's largest democracy and long
one of its most vibrant, has continued its descent into
discriminatory religious nationalism and worsening religious
freedom. Government actions, including the passage and
enforcement of discriminatory policies such as hijab bans,
anti-conversion laws, and anti-cow slaughter laws, have created
a culture of impunity for threats and violence by vigilante
groups, especially against Muslims and Christians. Meanwhile,
the government has increasingly repressed critical voices,
especially religious minorities and those advocating for them,
through surveillance, harassment, and prosecution.
Like Nigeria, the State Department's own reporting
corroborates these worsening conditions, setting in stark
relief its failure to name India as a CPC or Special Watch List
country.
Despite these obvious oversights, USCIRF appreciates the
State Department's naming two key countries where we have also
identified worsening religious freedom conditions, Nicaragua
and Vietnam.
In Nicaragua, the State Department's recent reporting has
closely followed our own, including its designation as a CPC in
2022. We agree that the Government of President Daniel Ortega
has escalated its campaign of harassment and severe persecution
against the Catholic Church by targeting clergy, eliminating
church-affiliated organizations, placing restrictions on
religious observances, and engaging in anti-Catholic hate
speech.
Regarding Vietnam, which USCIRF has long recommended for
CPC designation, the State Department acknowledged recent
backsliding by naming it to the Special Watch List in 2022.
While we maintain that Vietnam merits a CPC designation, we
appreciate recognition that religious freedom conditions there
have been trending in an alarming direction.
And our own engagement in Vietnam, including a constructive
delegation visit there in May, demonstrates that U.S. IRF
policy makes a real impact and, we hope, leading to positive
change when we present a united front, including Congress where
Chair Smith introduced the Vietnam Human Rights Act, H.R. 3001,
in calling out bad behavior and urging substantive improvement.
All of these challenges come, of course, in addition to the
myriad of other vulnerable communities around the world who
face religious persecution of the most severe order,
Ahmadiyyahs in Pakistan, Uyghurs in China, Rohingyas in Burma,
Yazidis in Iraq, Baha'is in Iran, and sadly many others.
As I said before, USCIRF maintains a Crucial Victims List
of those imprisoned for their belief or advocacy on behalf of
religious freedom. And we will do everything we can in the
future to put a human face on each of the 2,000 of those
entries.
The plight of these individuals and communities remains an
important point of agreement in reporting and advocacy between
USCIRF and the State Department, and we are grateful for its
partnership in working to bring greater religious freedom to
those individuals, families, and communities.
On behalf of all of our, all nine commissioners of USCIRF,
thank you for this opportunity to appear before the Committee
this morning. And I look forward to your questions and
comments. God bless.
[The statement of Rabbi Cooper follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Rabbi Cooper, thank you so much for that
tremendous work that you are doing and for your testimony
today. It's deeply appreciated. And, again, we need to follow
up on that Egyptian--can you say that name again just so it's--
--
Rabbi Cooper. The name is Patrick George Zaki, Z-a-k-i.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Dr. Patterson.

STATEMENT OF DR. ERIC PATTERSON

Dr. Patterson. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Wild, and
members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
represent the Religious Freedom Institute and testify about the
ongoing global crisis of religious freedom and what can be done
about it.
My testimony here focuses attention on Vietnam and India
with a few comments based on a recent trip to Africa. In the
written testimony, there is additional material on Nigeria and
some specific recommendations for U.S. religious freedom policy
more generally.
As we look at the testimony today, are the ones who
couldn't be with us in person, like Bishop Anagbe. These are
people who face persecution and violent threats day in and day
out. Hopefully, my testimony will honor those who cannot be
with us today.
Let's turn to Vietnam. A country such as China and Vietnam
espouse a common ideology that is often intertwined with a
nationalistic or racial hierarchy, whether it's Han Nationalism
in China or Viet Nationalism in Vietnam.
The result is a totalitarian society where the government
demands ultimate loyalty in all things. And that's why
totalitarian governments like these view religion, religious
people and especially ethno-religious minorities as threats
that must be controlled, contained, or even eliminated.
Although Vietnam's Constitution guarantees robust religious
freedom, and although Vietnam is a party to the internationally
binding International Covenant of Civil and Political rights,
it restricts and controls religious liberty. Here are a few
examples.
Hanoi surveils and cyber monitors religious people. It
deports Muslim leaders back to China at the request of Beijing.
It bans and arrests unregistered or unauthorized religious
celebrations of more than five persons.
It harasses and discriminates against ethno-religious
minorities such as the largely Christian in the Hmong in the
mountain yards to the north.
It imprisons prominent civil society and religious actors
on the pretext that they violated tax laws or on abusing
Democratic freedom. You know, despite all of this, Vietnam is a
mixed case study. As Congressman Smith mentioned earlier,
almost every year USCIRF has called for it to be a country of
particular concern. And it was labeled one in 2004 and 2005.
What happened is that the State Department came up with a
written agreement with Vietnam with benchmarks on religious
freedom. And it came off the list.
Now Vietnam quickly back slid as Representative Smith
mentioned earlier. And the U.S. has not responded in kind. We
need to. We strongly recommend that the Secretary of State
reconsider designating Vietnam as a CPC and that Congress
carefully consider and support Congressman Smith's Vietnam
human rights legislation.
Let me turn briefly to Africa. I recently returned from a
trip to East Africa, Nairobi, and elsewhere. Many Africans I
met with are deeply disturbed by what they understood to be
threats to humanitarian assistance, particularly the U.S.
President's emergency fund for Aids Relief for what we call
PEPFAR and other vital assistance should their governments
refuse to concede to new demands from the U.S. and other
Western governments to expand abortion, redefine marriage, and
enable transgender procedures.
When the U.S. or unelected UN agencies promote these
ideological agendas, they are attacking the deeply held
religious convictions of the majority of the people in these
societies as well as their legal structures and mechanisms.
This is a form of Western cultural imperialism, and it is
detrimental to U.S. national security.
Now let me be clear. The U.S. should tirelessly advance and
defend internationally recognized human rights around the
world, and this includes the right of everyone not to be
subject to violence or unjust imprisonment, whatever they
ascribed to themselves about their sex or sexuality.
But a robust U.S. freedom agenda led in the Department of
State's International Religious Freedom Office under IRFA, a
wise foreign policy in general, should generally respect the
sincerely held religious convictions of foreign societies and
focus attention on persecution and violations of legally
binding international covenants rather than attempting to
threaten and force changes in matters of faith.
Let me turn briefly to India. India is a land of tremendous
religious diversity. Following partition in 1947, India's early
leaders developed a constitutional order that was largely
religion neutral, treating all citizens and all faiths equally.
Of course, and unfortunately at times, violence along ethnic
and religious lines has broken out.
Particularly in the last decade, an exclusivist ethno-
religious nationalism has targeted religious minorities with
vitriol and with violence. To be clear, among others, the
reigning BJP party and other Hindu nationalist organizations,
notably the RSS have revived and exacerbated into religious
tensions.
Worryingly, this type of prejudicial rhetoric and activity
can result in beleaguered minorities turning to violence in
self-defense or out of revenge. And that creates a downward
spiral of instability, not just for India but for its region.
Human rights activists report recurring instances of
violence against religious minorities, particularly Christians
and Muslims. There are state laws that contravene India's
Constitution banning offensive religious speech and conversion.
There is impunity and lack of law enforcement activity in cases
of Hindu violence on religious minorities.
We all saw last month or in late May violence that broke
with Christians and Hindus in the northeastern state of
Manipur. Reports indicate that at least 100 people were killed,
300 injured and 26,000 displaced from their homes. Over 3,000
homes were destroyed, close to 300 churches were burned or
damaged.
USCIRF has recommended designating India as a CPC in its
past four annual reports. And we at RFI agree, the U.S. should
reconsider the CPC designation out of consideration for the
health and the safety of all Indians regardless of their
ethnicity or their faith tradition.
A vibrantly religious India can be a peaceful, pluralistic
democracy and a force for good in its region.
In closing, the United States should be proud of its long
record of bipartisan commitment to international religious
freedom as a common good for everyone around the globe. In
general, U.S. laws compel U.S. foreign policy to be a good
neighbor by calling on foreign governments to hold their
commitments under their own national Constitutions and under
their international treaty obligations.
The International Religious Freedom Act, the Frank Wolf Act
and other U.S. efforts to promote religious liberty are a force
for good in our world. Thank you.
[The statement of Dr. Patterson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much, Dr. Patterson. I would
like to now recognize Rev. Hayward for such time as she may
need.

STATEMENT OF REV. SUSAN HAYWARD

Rev. Hayward. Good morning and thank you to Chairman Smith
and to Ranking Member Wild for the invitation to speak and
thank also to Rabbi Cooper and to Dr. Patterson for your
remarks.
My name is Susan Hayward, and as Chairman Smith said at the
top, I am from Harvard Divinity School's Religion and Public
Life Program. Prior to that I spent 14 years with the U.S.
Institute of Peace here in DC.
So my remarks are drawn from my experience as a
peacebuilder working worldwide with diverse communities as well
as my research into the religious factors and actors that shape
peace, conflict, and human rights. My remarks do not represent
the position of my places of employment, past or present.
I want to start by thanking the thousands of U.S. foreign
service officers who regularly monitor the status of the
fundamental right to freedom of religion or belief and who
compiled the 2022 annual report and the staff of USCIRF who do
similarly.
As the report and the title of this hearing convey, there
are many concerning and discriminatory trends worldwide related
to religious freedom, reflecting broader threats to democracy
globally. It is critical the U.S. support vulnerable
communities, many of which have been mentioned already, Uyghurs
in China, atheists in Pakistan and Baha and Iran for example.
In my remarks today, rather than focusing on individual
cases, and I'm grateful to my co-panelists for focusing on
individual cases. I am, instead, going to step back and seek to
address the U.S. approach to religious freedom advocacy broadly
and offer three recommendations that I believe can help
strengthen it.
First, U.S. advocacy for religious freedom must be
conflict-sensitive manner so as not to render already
vulnerable communities more vulnerable nor exacerbate religious
dimensions of conflict.
Second, approaches to religious freedom must reinforce
overlapping human rights and governance concerns in order to be
sustainable.
And third, the U.S. government must ensure its approach to
religious freedom is wildly, comprehensively inclusive.
On this first point regarding conflict-sensitive approaches
to religious freedom, in my work as a peacebuilder worldwide, I
have seen firsthand how the U.S. approach to religious freedom
promotion has sometimes heightened inter-communal tensions
local, making already vulnerable communities more vulnerable
while obscuring other critical power dynamics and factors that
are driving violence and oppression against particular groups.
The result can be policy prescriptions that are limited at best
and counter-productive at worst.
Religious freedom violations often occur in a complex
context of political and social conflict where political and
movement leaders may use religious identity and language to
mobilize communities and legitimate unjust policy, a whole
gamut of unjust policies.
As outsiders, by defining and responding to these dynamics
solely through the lens of religious freedom, we may reinforce
religious competition, contribute to the hardening of religious
identity divides and amplify religious power dynamics. We may
even introduce trans-national religious currents that fuel
these kinds of competition on the ground.
And this can make vulnerable communities even more
vulnerable to hard line extremists in their country who accuse
them of foreign sympathies.
Meanwhile, diagnosing complex issues narrowly as religious
freedom issues may distract us from addressing salient economic
and political drivers of religious discrimination.
I'm going to offer one example. There were several more in
my written statement. If we interpret the genocide of the
Rohingya Muslim community in Burma, primarily through the lens
of religious freedom, we fail to take account for the economic
issues, particularly the interest in building an oil pipeline
that China had that drove their displacement and land grabbing
by the military.
We fail to see how the Rohingya were a tragic casualty of
growing and fierce competition between the National League of
Democracy and the military that foreshadowed the 2021 coup. And
we create greater competition among ethnic and religious
minorities in Burma vying for attention and support from the
international community, rather than promoting solidarity among
them.
The solution is absolutely not to ignore the targeting of
these groups based in part on their religious identity nor
their restricted ability to practice their religions, or not,
in alignment with their conscience. Rather, and particularly in
places of complex violence, what I am arguing for is to place
specific religious freedom concerns within the broader context
in order to develop sustainable, conflict-sensitive, and
effective policy response that can enhance and support larger
peace efforts.
My second point is that religious freedom cannot be
addressed in isolation from other human rights concerns and
challenges to democracy more broadly that we are seeing around
the world. The rise in religious freedom violations we have
seen comes at a time when there has been a concurrent rise in
human rights violations and threats to democracy and that is no
coincidence.
For this reason, I believe that an approach that frames
religious freedom as the first right, or one primary to other
human rights, is unhelpful. An approach to addressing religious
freedom must recognize threats to it as part of larger and
interrelated threats to other human rights in order to ensure
civic strengthening as a broader outcome of religious freedom
promotion.
I believe this interconnected approach will be more
successful ultimately in promoting sustainable religious
freedom for all people. It can also better ensure that
religious freedom efforts are framed and addressed in ways that
will be locally meaningful, rooted in recognition of their
manifestation within a complex context where multiple rights
are likely to be under simultaneous attack.
Our policy approaches to religious freedom advocacy,
including who we partner with or amplify in this work, should
not inadvertently fuel the suppression of other human rights
and freedoms, which is often motivated by the same power
calculations and interests that fuel violence against religious
minorities or free-thinkers.
And third, our approach to religious freedom advocacy must
be as inclusive as possible. So let me describe two ways that I
think the U.S. can do this better.
First, the government's definition of religion has
sometimes been limited to what is popularly known as the world
religions. In our foreign policy, the religious freedom needs
of the approximately 475 million Indigenous people have often
not been sufficiently recognized. This fuels criticism of the
U.S. privileging certain groups over others in its religious
freedom advocacy. It weakens our moral authority.
Let me offer one example to consider. If we decry the
destruction of great places of worship as a religious freedom
violation, which we should and we do. In their Earth 2022
Report it criticizes the military for so doing, the churches
and mosques in Burma for example.
And should we not consider President Bolsonaro's
destruction of Amazonian Rain Forests that are considered
sacred to Brazilian Indigenous communities, like the Yanomami
and necessary for their land-based ceremonies, a violation of
their religious freedom as well. And yet I did not see this
mentioned in the report.
Similar violations are occurring worldwide from the
Philippines to Tanzania to Canada where Indigenous sacred lands
and burial grounds are being confiscated or destroyed, often
due to destructive industry or economic interests thereby
undermining this group's ability to practice their land-based
ceremonies and to transmit traditional knowledge to future
generations. This is a religious freedom issue that deserves
greater attention from the United States.
Second, religious minorities face particular and serious
vulnerabilities as we have heard today. It is unhelpful to
speak of religious freedom as synonymous with minority rights,
I think. Religious freedom and minority rights are very
overlapping but separate issues. And I feel our completion of
them has done a disservice to understanding how best to protect
all minorities, both religious, racial, ethnic as well as
sexual and gender minorities while sometimes keeping us from
highlighting or advocating equally for the needs of those
within the majority communities who face oppression or violence
as a result of their particular religious or non-religious
beliefs and practices.
Ultimately, you must remember that religious freedom is
meant to protect all individuals. Religious minorities who face
particular vulnerabilities, those within majority communities
who believe and practice outside what is considered orthodox or
in a way considered a threat to the political and social order
and non-believers and the unaffiliated seeking freedom from
religious imposition by the state.
As such, the right to free belief and practice extends to
Christian sexual and gender majorities in Uganda prevented them
from creating worship spaces where they feel safe to practice a
theology that affirms their dignity.
It extends to humanists in Nigeria like Mubarak Bara who is
now in his third year of imprisonment. It extends to young
Buddhists in Burma who criticize their religious leadership for
colluding with military elites and who are then arrested for
supposedly defaming Buddhism. It extends to Jewish women in
Israel who seek to pray at the Western Wall and are prevented
from doing so by state security forces. It extends to Iranian
women who don't want to be forced to wear the veil, French
women who want the freedom to do so, and the Bhikkunis or
ordained nuns from Sri Lanka who are denied national identity
cards, passports and bank accounts.
We must surely recognize the plurality of interpretations
and practices within any religious tradition, those both
majority and minority, and ensure the pre-exercise of these
plural interpretations in our advocacy without privileging any
one of them.
So as I conclude, allow me to summarize these points with
reference to a particular idea I believe helpful, the idea of
right-sizing with our understanding of religious freedom issues
and our approach to addressing them in any given context.
Specifically, religious freedom cases, we must right-size
our understanding of what religious identity or interests
specifically have to do with the violence or oppression taking
place, and we must right-size for this freedom promotion in a
diplomatic response by not under nor overemphasizing it and by
ensuring we did not address it in isolation from broader
challenges to democracy and human rights.
In so doing, I believe we can be even more successful as a
global leader of efforts to protect and advance the freedom of
religion or belief for all people.
Again, I want to thank my panelists and the House Foreign
Affairs Subcommittee members and staff for the invitation to
speak today. Thank you.
[The statement of Rev. Hayward follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. I would now like to just begin the questioning.
First to Rabbi Cooper, thank you for this tremendous report
which I have now read. And it's just filled with information,
recommendations, insights. And I think it is particularly
fitting that you have dedicated the cover to Mahsa Amini, this
unbelievably brave woman in Iran who was arrested, beaten, and
mortally wounded because of her visible hair that violated the
government's religiously head scarf law.
As we all know, that sparked so many women and girls taking
to the streets to protest her unbelievably horrible and cruel
mistreatment. And it is so fitting, I think, that USCIRF has
dedicated and honored her in such a way in this important book.
So thank you for that. I think we need to do more on that
ourselves. It's just really laid out so well. So thank you.
Rabbi Cooper. Chair, I just want to use this opportunity to
thank people who don't usually get thanked. We have a
tremendous staff of young scholars who have chosen a path, a
professional, personal path to make sure that we know the
truth, put it into the appropriate context, and hopefully be
able to work on it.
And so far as the modern woman on the front of the cover,
we also need to be honest with ourselves. Right now basically
the Iranian authorities are back to harassing women on the
streets of that country. And unfortunately, the world's
democracies, led by the United States, have failed the women of
Iran. That's just the truth.
Mr. Smith. I couldn't agree more. And we need to do more as
well. Let me ask about some of the target areas. How often do
you interface with the people over at the International
Religious Freedom Office, including Ambassador Hussain? I mean,
you make recommendations that are absolutely based on
tremendous scholarship, and investigations. I mean, when Frank
Wolf, and I held all the hearings for his bill. And I was
shocked myself at the attitude taken by the U.S. Department of
State at the time, that would be 1997 and 1998 that they didn't
want this bill, his bill, his landmark historic law. They said
it would create a hierarchy of human rights, which it never
did.
I said I was for combating apartheid in the 1980s and for a
while, at least, it put me at odds with the Reagan
Administration, but I felt that egregious violation of human
rights was so horrible that we needed to really single out and
sanction South Africa. But those laws did not impair or impact.
It was only value-added to all of our other human rights law.
And I argued the same thing for the IRF, the Intentional
Religious Freedom Act of 1998.
And yet they persisted. They almost killed the bill. It
almost died in the Senate. We found that many of our very
distinguished and very highly educated foreign service officers
had literally no training in religious freedom issues. And we
remedied that. And my bill reauthorized his bill and expanded
law put a greater emphasis on that as well so we have a very
much enlightened and informed, and I hope motivated group of
foreign service officers.
So do you get to talk to them? Do they reach out? I mean,
you present a great report, and I hope it's taken seriously. We
do know that the State Department, and they do this with
trafficking because I wrote the trafficking laws of the United
States, TVPA of 2000. And I was shocked and dismayed when--and
there were problems with all administrations in terms of
implementing, but 14 countries were falsely given passing
grades purely for political reasons by the Obama
Administration.
I held two hearings on it. And it was Reuters that broke
that story. You know, they did an investigative report and
found out that they falsified in order to incur favor with
Cuba, incur favor with Oman, which helped with the Iran talks.
So I say that, you know, we shouldn't mince words or get it
wrong with CPC designations. And as you had pointed out, and I
couldn't agree more, Nigeria, Afghanistan, Vietnam, Syria, and
India have earned that terrible label which has sanctions
attached to it if they are motivated enough to impose it. So
what kind of interface do you----
Rabbi Cooper. So two quick comments. First of all, we are
very lucky that we were able to install as our moral GPS Frank
Wolf, who is one of the commissioners to help guide us. He has
not lost a step, thank God, and really is an amazing American
icon, really, in terms of human rights.
Secondly, Ambassador Hussain is here. He is a friend. He
will be grilled in the second session. To speak bluntly, he's
not the problem. The buck stops above him. And that's with the
Secretary of State.
I think we have a colleague here who is available to us. He
knows what it is that we've suggested. You would have to ask
him if he--his internal conversations, part of the supply chain
within the State Department, whether his recommendations
parallel those of ours.
I don't think communication is the problem. I just think
that there are working assumptions that somehow we can't pursue
our national security interests, our foreign policy and
economic interests and human rights interests.
I think the distinguished members of this panel and many
other elected officials know that's not the truth. It just
means it's more difficult, it's more challenging, but that's
one of the center pieces of American life.
So the way I approach this is I'm not sure we can change
the culture at the State Department. And certainly speaking for
you, sir, if we are going to increase our interaction with the
535 members of the Senate and the Congress who were more
directly elected and, you know, try to replicate this morning's
proceedings in many different and relevant ways.
I think the fact that this is a sold out hearing is also an
indication that this might be one of the few areas, maybe the
only one right now in which a bipartisan sense of commitment,
whether Democrat or Republican really does exist across
religious, political, and social lines.
We should take full advantage of it in order to promote
freedom of religion, human rights here at home and abroad.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. The countries that were not included,
and I have it raised it with Secretary of State Blinken on at
least two occasions at hearings, and, again, without any
evidence whatsoever, gave Buhari a pass then got rid of CPC
designation for Nigeria. And now with the new president,
Tinubu, who has risen to power, won the election, he needs to
be told and admonished that we take religious freedom
seriously. So, I hope, again, the message to the administration
is: just go where the facts take you and, with regards to
Nigeria, it is to be a CPC----
Rabbi Cooper. Our vice chair, Reverend Fred Davey, myself,
and other members, other commissioners, have been, in various
times, in Nigeria. It is one of the most frustrating
experiences because what we see is a democracy structurally.
They have got courts, vibrant free press, well-trained police,
military; and, yet, when it comes to the fundamental
protections of life and limb and religious liberty, there is
always an excuse that leads to death, destruction, and mayhem.
It is simply not acceptable. And I think If we reject the idea
that we can't fully pursue our security concerns in Africa, and
they're significant, while also insisting that the citizens of
Nigeria be protected and that freedom of religion is instituted
under their laws, actually be a fact of life. Right now, it is
not.
Mr. Smith. I am especially grateful you put India on the
list of countries that ought to be CPC. You point out the
Christians, the Muslims, the Dalits, and others are seriously,
seriously harmed because of their faith. The anti-conversion
laws are an anathema to all things about religious freedom,
punishing people If they change their faith.
And you raise, you point out that religious freedom issues
should be raised by Congress and everyone else in the U.S.-
India bilateral relations. Modi was just here. I don't think
anybody--I had no chance to talk to him; I would have. I would
point out that he is the only person under IRFA that was
sanctioned because of serious allegations of killing Muslims
before he became the head of the state who was denied a visa,
and it was President Obama who reversed that, but there should
be some additional conditionality, certainly a CPC designation.
We just looked the other way, and I think that is outrageous.
Rabbi Cooper. Well, we're friends of India. It is the
largest democracy in the world. And, you know, friends have to
be honest with friends. India has done better in the past and
has to change course because the cycle downward, the spiral, a
country of that importance and the number of people who are
involved, it is frightening.
So we are hoping that, now that the trip has taken place
and the victory lap has been earned and taken, there will be a
serious review. And, certainly, USCIRF, and myself included, on
a personal level, I consider myself a friend of India, we are
continuing to lobby with our friends over there that this is
not, the idea of religious discrimination should not be a
matter of national pride.
Mr. Smith. Just to underscore that this is as non-partisan
as it can be, on the Vietnam issue, when the Ambassador-at-
Large for Religious Freedom told me, and I met with him several
times, that there were deliverables from Vietnam, that they had
promises it would happen, and just get rid of CPC, let the
bilateral trade agreement go through which would not have gone
through if the CPC was still there. And the day after the vote,
the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry put out very strong statements
about there is no linkage whatsoever to religious freedom and
human rights, we are going to do whatever we want, but we just
want to trade. And I went right back to the White House, right
back to George W. Bush's administration, and said reimpose it,
you have got to do it, and they wouldn't do it and we haven't
had it since.
So, it is very discouraging because, you know, forced
conversions, all the things that they have done against the
churches, the faith people there, including the Buddhists. I
met with The Venerable Thich Quang Do in his pagoda, and here
is a man who is the real leader of the Buddhists, as opposed to
those that have been put up by the government, and he told me
as I was leaving, as we were walking out of his place, he says
that is as far as I can go; If I take another step, all those
secret service, he didn't call them secret service, those
police will be on me pushing me back in. That is how repressive
it is. And these people are so strong and heroic; they don't
complain; I wish they would more. And it hasn't changed; it has
only gotten worse.
So, again, to the administration, please, and I would just
say that, you know, my good friend and colleague, Ms. Jacobs,
who is the prime democratic co-sponsor of our resolution on
Vietnam, my hope is--on the one on Nigeria; I'm sorry, Zoe
Lofgren is the co-sponsor of the Vietnam Human Rights Act. So,
this is bipartisan, and I just hope, again, we speak truth to
power.
I have a lot of questions, but I will yield to my
colleague, Ms. Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Before I start
with the questions I already had prepared, I wanted to follow-
up, Rabbi Cooper, on what you said a few minutes ago about
democracies, including the United States, have failed the women
of Iran. My question to you is, because I was often asked by
people what more could be done to help the protesters and
specifically the women in Iran, what more could have been done
and should have been done?
Rabbi Cooper. If you are asking me what should have been
done in realtime when the women, teenage girls, led the way for
such a sustained period of time, we needed the voices from the
top of the United States, our president, our secretary of
state, our influencers, to be explicit in their realtime
backing for the heroism of the women of Iran. I think it is
pretty clear that the overriding concern of the administration
for negotiations over a potential nuclear deal quieted, tamped
down, and maybe even eliminated those discussions. And when we
are talking about the Iranian regime, they understand one
thing: sanctions. Their goal was, and they have achieved most
of it to get billions in terms of oil and others release so
they can pursue their own agenda. We never played that card,
and we didn't play it, Britain didn't play it, Berlin hasn't
done it, and the Iranians basically not only got away with it
then but, the fact that we are now seeing public reverting of
going after the women on the street now by the authorities,
they feel that they won the day, they can act with impunity,
and we have probably, I mean, failed a generation of Iranians
and, I think, endangered a significant number of people who
were hoping against hope that the U.S. would lead the way as a
voice of freedom and also to put some teeth behind it. And the
truth is it simply did not emerge as a priority. The Iranian
regime understood that, and that is where we are today.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. It was a very upsetting event, and I
felt, I will tell you that I felt somewhat helpless in the face
of watching it unfold in terms of what could be done. But I
understand what you are saying.
While I am with you, Rabbi, I want to switch to Hungary
where Prime Minister Viktor Orban has cultivated his political
base by depicting the country and so-called Christian values as
being under attack. That is a tactic that we have seen
throughout history. Can you tell us has Orban's rhetoric and
political project contributed to antisemitism in Hungary, and
can you describe whether that has been on an upward trajectory,
as it is in many places?
Rabbi Cooper. So for one thing, in terms of USCIRF's work,
Hungary is not, per se, on our radar screen. So speaking on
behalf of the Simon Wiesenthal Center for a moment, obviously,
one of the key issues across Europe is the question of
migration, economic and refugees, the kind of overwhelming and
kind of lightning rod for all sorts of political ideologies,
including some in power and extremists who are looking to take
advantage of the dislocation.
Orban has been someone who has been consistent. Our and
others have pushed back early on when he was initially allowing
for the rehabilitation of World War II figures who were not
just antisemitic but aiding and abetting the mass murder of
Jews. I think, overall, what we have seen is that, when there
is a consistent pushback, there is a muting of that kind of
activity. But at its base, you know, he is a populist, and I
don't see that that is going to change any time soon,
especially If there isn't a broader, let's say, resolution
insofar as the refugee impact across the countries in Europe
and, of course, you also have Erdogan playing his card, as
well, from Turkey.
So as long as those dynamics are in place, the Viktor
Orbans of the world are going to continue to, I think, increase
their base of support.
Ms. Wild. Well, speaking only for myself, I will tell you
that I was dismayed that CPAC decided to have its conference in
Hungary for all of these reasons. And I would note that Orban
recently earned international condemnation for his comment that
we do not want to become peoples of mixed race and has said
that multiracial societies are no longer nations, they are
nothing more than a conglomeration of people, which, of course,
reflects his concern about economic migration and so forth.
Rabbi Cooper. Right. Well, and the echoes of the past of
the 1920s and 1930s of racial purity, whether we are talking
about Naziism or Mussolini's fascism, to see that kind of
language put back in the main stream is extremely
disconcerting, obviously, not only for Jews but for the whole
identity of Europe and European nations going forward.
Ms. Wild. It certainly takes us back to our darkest
moments. And he doesn't restrict his comments or his actions
just to multiracial situations. He has advanced many autocratic
measures: stifling Hungary's judiciary, restricting freedom of
the press, limiting LGBT rights, and curtailing academic
freedom.
At that CPAC conference I referenced before in 2022, he
said, in order to win, it is not enough to know what you are
fighting for, you also have to know how you should fight. My
answer is play by your own rules, which I find to be deeply
distressing words from a head of state and I see a real
connection between the rejection of democracy in these kinds of
words. Would you agree?
Rabbi Cooper. Well, of course I agree 100 percent,
especially now representing USCIRF. The way that we look at the
world is we look at human rights and its promotion through the
lens of religious freedom, and the kinds of rhetoric that you
just invoked and quoted flies in the face of everything that
our democracy stands for and, you know, should not be a
political football in debate or discussions in our own society.
Ms. Wild. I would hope.
Rabbi Cooper. When you have leaders who talk that way, they
make very clear which camp they fall in when it comes to the
question of democratic values.
Ms. Wild. And that is our aim, I think, as I said in my
opening remarks, to fight that sort of approach or attitude
with one voice.
I would like to direct my next question to Reverend Hayward
and pick up on Mahsa Amini and the young Iranian woman who was
arrested and killed because her visible hair violated the
regime's head scarf law. You heard my question to Rabbi Cooper.
From your perspective, is there something more that democracies
around the world should have done when those protests, those
very brave protests were taking place?
Rev. Hayward. I mean, 100 percent, I agree with what Rabbi
Cooper said in ensuring there was a strong diplomatic response
in support of the women, the very brave women in Iran. A couple
of the points that I would add on to that. One, part of what
the Iranian regime did was to present these women as anti-
religion or anti-Islamic, and we need to reject those false
binaries presenting support for a secular state and a non-
government enforcement of a particular theological
interpretation or jurisprudential school against a position
against that kind of government imposition of theological
interpretation as anti-religious.
A lot of those women who were a part of that movement would
identify as deeply religious themselves, and it was very much
their Muslim faith and beliefs in justice and mercy and care
that led them to make those brave statements. So we need to be
very careful with the U.S. government and, as others seeking to
support these women and others around the world, not to
reinforce that very dynamic that the regime is trying to use to
discredit these women as then being anti-religious, which gets,
as well, to my larger point that I was making in my statement
that the government, the U.S. government needs to be careful
not to only recognize one religious interpretation as an
authentic representation of deeply-held religious beliefs,
recognizing that there's always a plurality of contested
dynamic going on on the ground within any religious transition.
There is no one religious position in any religious tradition,
so we need to reject that kind of presentation as one authentic
religious position in all cases.
Ms. Wild. Well, thank you for saying that. In so doing, you
have answered the question that I was going to ask, which was
about the concerns of protecting freedom of conscience in its
entirety, the freedom to adhere to religious customs and
traditions, as well as the freedom not to. So thank you very
much.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. The Chair recognizes French Hill.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this long overdue hearing on an important topic, and
thank you for channeling those who have gone before us and the
good work of Tom Lantos and Frank Wolf over the years. Thank
you for being an outstanding champion for religious freedom. It
is something that has been important to me over the past eight
years I've served in the House and glad to now sit on this
important committee and be able to advocate more formally as a
member of this committee. And no matter how lucky we are to be
able to talk about these issues today, we still are in the
shadow of the daily atrocities that are happening in Ukraine
and, as the Rabbi noted, pervasive antisemitism, not only in
the halls of the United Nations but right here in the halls of
Congress, and, obviously, dealing with the daily imprisonment,
indoctrination, and genocide in China, the resurgence of
religious extremism in Afghanistan, and, as we've discussed
today, the attacks by terrorists on innocent Christians in
Nigeria where truly a rot of religious intolerance is deep and
growing.
I am very disappointed that Bishop Anagbe couldn't be with
us today. I regret that. I did have the opportunity to visit
with him a couple of weeks ago.
Reverend Hayward, I really appreciated your description of
the complexity of this issue and that it is a multifaceted
responsibility that the ambassador and the State Department
have in advocating, but that is why we have the independent
commission approach, to try to take into account all those
facets and deliver a view. And I remind so many of my
colleagues that are single-minded about their definitions in
this areas that, even in our own First Amendment, we have the
freedom of religion, but nobody ever remembers the second part,
which is the free exercise thereof. And I was recently in
Kurdistan in the north of Iraq a few weeks ago listening to a
State Department official lecture a person of religious faith
there about the importance of same-sex marriage as critical to
the future of the north of Iraq, and it made me think about the
points you made and the points that all three of you addressed
that, that we need to keep our perspective here, whether we're
in Uganda or Iraq or maybe even right here in the United
States.
Rabbi Cooper, my staff and I have tracked USCIRF's annual
report for years. I want to thank you for continuing your
excellent research and also taking your personal time to serve
as chair of this bipartisan commission. Do the commissioners
often disagree among themselves on the finding and
determinations that appear in the annual report?
Rabbi Cooper. Well, you know, there is a saying about the
Jewish people: you have two Jews and three views and four
synagogues. Well, we have a great representation across the
board, multi-faith, imams, rabbis, and everything about the
meetings reflects what is greatest about the United States. It
is an internal democracy. But I will say, in the founding
document upon which we are here, we mandated to act in a
bipartisan fashion.
So what I found to be tremendously empowering is you have
nine commissioners, none of whom needs the well-paying job of
no dollars and no sense, for the two or four years that they
serve, we're brought together as Americans. We don't have to
park our religion or philosophies at the door. But for
starters, If you have over 2,000 innocent people rotting in
jails because of their religion around the world, that, for me,
is enough of a motivation. Let's figure out how do we tap into
the best of what America is and how can we impact in a positive
way and in a global way.
And, frankly, this is a time also of increased hate crimes
in the United States, a tsunami of violent hate crimes against
Jews here. I already know when I go to visit an ambassador or
go overseas their first question: you guys are coming here to
lecture us about religious violence or religious freedom, what
about what's going on right in the United States? And the
answer is show us whether you have an August body like this
committee and the robust NGO world in your country so that when
we have these terrible challenges we can confront them, we can
deal with them, and we can defeat them.
So we have to be honest with ourselves. It is not a great
time to go around lecturing people overseas when a lot of those
same problems are impacting here. But we do act on a bipartisan
basis, and we are very much committed to try to get, you know,
practical solutions and strategies out there in the field. And
I think it is, you know, with a few million more dollars, it
has been a long time since we ever got a raise.
You mentioned Vietnam, but we were able to send a number of
commissioners there a few months ago. We would be able to do a
better job on behalf of the American people if we had the
budget to send commissioners to different countries so Vietnam
right now, as far as I can see, is somewhere, it can go one of
two ways. In some ways, we are worried they are beginning to
take the China model of complete state control of religious
expression as possibly the path they are going to go. On the
other hand, they were extremely welcoming our commissioners who
were well prepared for these meetings. So the U.S.'s continuing
concern and pressure can have realtime impact.
So, you know, we are ready to do our share. We could use a
little bit more help. And I think, overall, with the help of
someone like Frank Wolf and Chairman Smith, we are on a good
path. We know what we are doing, and we try to make the right
people nervous at the right time, even in the administration.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Rev, for that. And I think you are
right: the proper dollars to advance this mission is important
and the use of sense, so dollars and sense in your remarks are
put in perspective in that regard. We need the good sense of
the commissioners in making these recommendations.
You referenced Patrick George Zaki in Egypt was in Minya
Province the 1st of May following up on your recommendations
that Minya Province is one of the most egregious forms where
Coptic Christians are in deep trouble there. There is six
million people that live in that province in Egypt, and two
million of them are Coptic Christians. But I was informed by
the governorate there, the governorate leadership, the deputy
governor, that there is no religious freedom problem in Minya
Province and that all members of religions are tolerant there,
that all religious festivals are carefully protected, and that
it is just working well. How is Egypt doing in this report?
Rabbi Cooper. Well, I would say, insofar as Egypt is
concerned, when you have the president of Egypt who goes to a
Coptic church, you know, for Christmas services, that is a
great thing. That sends a very powerful message. The disconnect
between that kind of an event and any criticism of the
government and others insofar as Coptic Christians leading to
the three-year sentence of an article that has just been
written, there is obviously a disconnect there.
And the Egyptian government has made overtures to some
religious minorities, and those promoted, quote-unquote,
religious tolerance as part of its five-year national strategy
for human rights, systematic and ongoing obstacles to religious
freedom remain unchanged.
So I am sure you are not shocked that when you come to a
location and meet with the authorities, they are going to say
what problem, but I can also assure you, Congressman, that your
presence does make, it does make and did make a difference.
Mr. Hill. We want to continue that advocacy, and, Mr.
Chairman, I hope that we will pursue this investigation of
Patrick George Zaki and consider the right approach on that in
regard to communication with the State Department.
Finally, Nigeria's lack of designation is of deep concern
to me and I think everybody in this committee, and the State
Department's most recent report stated banditry and other
criminality, not animosity, between particular religious groups
on the basis of religion were the primary drivers of inter-
communal violence. You know, in my research and study on this,
in talking to researchers both in the Untied Kingdom and here,
I just don't find that to be an accurate statement. I would
like your perspective.
And then to Reverend Hayward's complexity of multifaceted
responsibility of the government, this administration and the
United Nations' passion of the secular religion of a single
focus on climate change, no matter how important climate change
is, that has to be addressed uniquely in each country and each
specific area. And in Nigeria, to destroy their economy, which,
for the most part, is based on fossil fuels, is going to send
200 million Nigerians heading to Europe, and I think that ought
to be taken into consideration by the State Department, as
well.
But give me your view about this issue that it is banditry
and criminality is causing priests and parishioners to be
murdered in the south of Nigeria.
Rabbi Cooper. When I visited Nigeria and met with our
ambassador a few years ago, that is pretty much what we heard
from the top that this was a matter of tribal conflict, et
cetera, which no doubt contributes in many of the areas. But
without a doubt, the targeting of Christians, usually around
the time and including the time of their holy days, Christmas
and Easter, the kidnappings that take place, the recent murder
of a Christian pastor who was burned to death, and the use of
Allah Akbar and other kinds of religious exclamations by
criminals who are using theology in order to pursue their game
plan, I think that the many, many people in this country,
including people in positions of responsibility, have
difficulty in coming to grips with the fact that religion and
theology does play a strong role. And continuing, the
Christians of Nigeria are understandably deeply worried about
their future and deeply concerned about their physical safety.
And as I said, I mean, what I saw there, and I have
traveled extensively around the world, it is kind of like a
slow-motion genocide. And when you look around, it doesn't
really seem to compute because all of the right institutions
are in place. But in the meantime, people are being killed,
mayhem, are dislocated, and we should be doing a lot more. We
have got a lot of leverage with----
Mr. Hill. Thank you, thank you, Rabbi. Thank you for your
leadership. Thank you for that compelling testimony. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Rabbi Cooper. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Hill. We should follow
up perhaps with a letter, a bipartisan letter on behalf of
Patrick Zaki and also invite Ambassador Zahran to the Hill or
we will go see him. Thank you for flagging this for us.
I would like to now yield to Ms. Jacobs.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Wild,
and thank you to everyone here. You know, as the proud sister
of a trans brother and a gender-nonconforming sibling, another
freedom that is really important to me is the freedom for
everyone to be and the freedom to love. And, Dr. Patterson, I
know you talked about the recently-enacted law in Uganda. I
think we are recently seeing a real backsliding in LGBTQ+
freedoms both here at home and abroad.
Reverend Hayward, you very plainly said in your testimony
that, when the focus on religious freedom advocacy comes at the
expense of other human rights, this can undermine our broader
efforts to support democracy and justice. Can you expand upon
this point? What correlations, If any, do you see between
challenges to respect for religious freedom and challenges to
human rights more broadly and how this interplays with LGBTQ+
rights?
Rev. Hayward. Thank you for the question. I think there is
always going to be times when human rights come into tension
with one another, whatever the human rights issues are. And
those are the times that we precisely need to have more rich
engagement and dialogue to ensure that, at the end of the day,
we are protecting the rights of individuals across the board.
That's essentially what human rights are supposed to do, right?
Protect individuals from government enforcement of policies or
practices that are violent, that impinge on full liberty and
freedoms, and so on.
So when it comes specifically to the issue of religious
freedom and gender equality or the rights of sexual and gender
minorities, there has been some great reports that have been
put out by the former UN Special Envoy on Freedom of Religion
or Belief, Ahmed Shaheed, I think last year or the year before,
as well as when it recently came out for the Independent Expert
on freedom from discrimination and violence for sexual and
gender minorities in the intersection of freedom of religion
belief that just came out a month or so ago. So I encourage you
to take a look at those. I think both of those reports engage
legalistically but also very thoughtfully about this.
One of the things that comes out in both of those reports
that, again, amplifies or reinforces what I was saying earlier
to Ranking Member Wild is that I think in our own advocacy we
cannot privilege one religious position over another. So
oftentimes, just like those women activists in Iran who are
framed by the Iranian regime as anti-religion, oftentimes,
sexual and gender minorities are framed as anti-religious or as
sort of secular enemies of religious positions. And we need to
recognize that the vast majority of sexual and gender
minorities are themselves religious and have particular
religious views and religious practices that we need to honor
and protect them as individuals and, at the same time, hold
that the government should not be enforcing religious practices
on those who hold different views, more conservative views, on
gender and sexuality. The government should not be enforcing
particular religious practices on them that would go against
their conscience, as well. The rights of individuals need to be
what come out of that, not requires a rich engagement, but we
should not compromise with an assumption that there is one
religious position and one deeply-held sincere religious belief
on positions related to sexuality, reproductive rights, and
gender more broadly.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. And, Rabbi Cooper, the Commission's
report discusses a number of violations of LGBTQ+ rights. Can
you discuss how basic human rights have been impinged upon in
the name of religious freedom and how actions in the name of
religious freedom have been used to persecute and attack the
LGBTQ+ community?
Rabbi Cooper. I'm not exactly sure. Can you maybe give me
another shot at the question? I'm not quite sure where you are
going with this. I just need to frame it appropriately.
Ms. Jacobs. Sure. In the Commission's report, there were a
number of violations of LGBTQ+ rights that were discussed.
Rabbi Cooper. Listed. Correct.
Ms. Jacobs. Yes. I want to hear from you how you feel like
this intersects with religious freedom.
Rabbi Cooper. So I think, in this case, I would agree with
Reverend Hayward and with something Dr. Patterson said, both
speakers, meaning we are representing American U.S.
commissions, U.S. law, U.S. practices. We don't apologize for
that. We have our own social mores, and we go forward
projecting those ideals.
There are certain locations, certain countries where, If
you come in and say we think you need to adhere specifically to
our rules, we probably wouldn't even have a chance to get our
points of view across. I think, once we have those meetings, we
should do our best to reflect what those mores are. Again, for
USCIRF, and you said correctly that it is mentioned a number of
times, we look at human rights through the lens of religious
freedom, and when those lines are crossed, when it involves
LBGTQ, they will be in our reports, they will be in our
interactions.
To the broader question of are we in a universal position
with 192 countries to get them to adopt where the United States
currently is and where our society is at insofar as this
important social issue, I think anyone who says that is not
based in reality. And I think human rights activism and those
who are promoting freedom and religious freedom, we need to
also be realistic. I hope that helps.
Ms. Jacobs. A little bit. I also want to note that it is
important that the U.S., and it is actually in the law, that
U.S. supports both theists and nontheists alike, and that, you
know, in line with the Frank Wolf Religious Freedom Act. So,
Reverend Hayward, how would you assess the U.S. government's
support for nontheists, and is it on par with the support for
followers of theistic faiths?
Rev. Hayward. Thanks. And I appreciate you saying that
because it also allows me to give the opportunity to say that
we shouldn't just be advocating for the rights of sexual and
gender minorities who are of faith but also those who have been
driven away from their religious traditions, often because
those religious traditions or institutions have been non-
affirming of their dignity.
I think that, If you read through the report that the State
Department put out that was published in May 2022, you will see
plenty of examples of cases in which nontheists and atheists
and free thinkers have been persecuted, have been politically
imprisoned, and so on. So I think it is there in the reports.
I would say that there is a perception that I think is
based on some reality that, generally, we tend in our rhetoric
and in our diplomatic policies and so on to kind of make the
nod to nonbelievers and the freedom from religious imposition
by the government, but we don't necessarily do as much of a
visible or vigorous campaigning on behalf of nontheists,
atheists, and free thinkers, and so on. So I think that's a
place where we could make some moves to be more inclusive, as I
was saying, in our approach to FoRB.
Rabbi Cooper. Representative, can I add a point here? Can I
say something positive about the State Department? Is that
okay? [Laughter.]
So exactly on this point, so what is quite interesting is
that the State Department signed an MOU with Bahrain. Bahrain
has its own list of challenges, but if you visited there, and I
have, what is really interesting, when you go through downtown
Manama, there is a 200-year-old Hindu temple. The day I
happened to be there, 10,000 Hindus were praying not far, you
know, from the Shia mosque and the Christian.
Seeing that kind of interplay, meaning taking the examples
that do exist around the world, I wish there were many, many
more of them, but when you see that kind of multi-faith,
including theistic faiths, et cetera, especially in this case
in the Arab world, in the Muslim world, I commend the State
Department for sort of developing that relationship, creating
an MOU. And I think everywhere those of us who carry the banner
of religious freedom can point to examples around the world of
other societies maybe getting that piece of it right. That
helps us, you know, promote the ideals that we believe, of
course, are fundamentally American.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. And, you know, I represent San
Diego, which, as you probably know, has a very large Chaldean
community, religious minority group, refugees from Iraq. So
thank you for all the work that you do. I know it is very
meaningful to my constituents. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Dr. McCormick.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair. It is interesting,
just an observation, how many people think they are victims. I
mean, and it is to different accounts. I will give you a
perfect example. White Anglo-Saxon males right now in America
think they are victims, and think about that. Let that sink in
for a second. Everybody has their own perspective. I have yet
to meet anybody who thinks they didn't have a tough childhood,
and I'm seeing smiles from the audience right now, like
everybody is like, yes, I had a tough childhood. Everybody
thinks they had a tough childhood. But not all discrimination
is equal. I think we can agree on that. There is a big
difference between being called a name or being denied a
service by a billion dollar industry or being hunted down and
killed because of your faith.
Now, ironically, in my faith at least, I found that my
faith propagates and multiplies when it is persecuted because
it kind of weeds people out and it leaves only the most zealous
people to spread and propagate. That said, I don't want to see
that. I don't think that should ever be our goal. But when we
are addressing the bias in society, whether it be something as,
and I don't want to devalue that we take as offense, but a
crazy person in society now can get on the internet and ruin
the whole day for everybody because they are one person out of
330 million people that calls me a name and everybody is like,
oh, my gosh, this a horrible country, versus countries that
literally have people hiding in the woods at nighttime to avoid
being kidnaped and killed that may have something to do with
their faith or somebody who has a faith that believes that they
are going to kidnap these children and put them in that faith.
That is what we are dealing with.
And whether it be talking about the Congo or Nigeria or
places in Africa where you can see massive shifts in religious,
not only their freedoms but also in the way that they are
believing, or where you are seeing developments in different
countries around the world, my question is, when we have
governments that we are dealing with overseas that don't see
the same world the same way as I or you, that don't want to
change. Like in our country, I believe that most people, not
all people, most people condemn bigotry and hatred. Most
people. We have our people. Every country does. But most
people, when we see hatred, we push back and we say that is not
right. I think most people in America are fairly moral and get
it.
But you have certain countries, like, the government
sponsors it, condones it, funds it, and participates in the
hunting down of people who don't see the way the way they want
to. How do we bring our force to bear the way we are? You say
we are not doing enough. I don't now how we legislate that, and
I don't know how we fight that in a way that is meaningful when
we literally still do business with these people and buy lots
of products from them, when they do things that are in
direction violation of our principles. I throw that out to the
panel.
Mr. Patterson. Maybe I can say one thing as a principle,
and thank you for that. So a fundamental principle about
religious freedom is that it is usually a check, first and
foremost, on state power. And one of the things where there is
large agreement on the panel today, whether we are talking
about the Iranian women who are making a religious symbolic
statement, they are contesting a religious set of symbols, as
faithful Muslims against tyranny or many, many of the other
examples that we have talked about.
You know, one of the real keys is to recognize that the
U.S. government, in its relationship with other governments,
can be the champion of the fundamental rights of the majority
of the population in that country. I mean, that is really the
story of Nigeria, corrupt government. But it is not that we are
against the government, it is that we pro the people of the
country. Now, that is not a tactical level action, but it is a
founding principle for thinking about how religious freedom
becomes a national security lens or foreign policy lens is what
we are going to do is be looking for opportunities to champion
the fundamental rights and the freedoms and that nest of
liberty, starting with religious freedom, but speech,
conscience, assembly, the right to convert, the right to change
religions, the right to have freedom of thought. All of that
package, it really starts with the recognition that the U.S.
national interest is best served by being a champion for the
rights of the citizens in those countries and not falling into
a false foreign policy dichotomy that says, well, there is kind
of high politics and low politics, and these human rights and
religious freedom considerations, they are secondary, so it is
not going to interfere in that trade relationship.
You know, it may mean that we do something differently when
it comes to trade with countries like China. Honestly, it is
about time for that. Thanks.
Mr. McCormick. A follow-on question. This is an open-ended
question also. We want to have freedom of religion. We want to
have recognition of people seeing things. And the ultimate
minority is the individual. In America, we value that very
much. It may be one of the fundamental things that we all agree
on. But what about when, as a society, frown upon--I'll give
you a perfect example. There are certain religions that may
condone circumcision of a female as a baby. That is a religious
belief, and it is a true belief for whatever reason. And I am
not condoning it, I'm not condoning or vilifying it. I am
merely stating when society says, no, I don't think that is a
good idea for that little baby, how do we reconcile that
freedom of religion from society's standard in America? Tough
one, right?
Rev. Hayward. It is. There is two things I would say to
that. Well, first of all, let me just say, in response to your
first question, one thing I would humbly suggest is that we
don't invite leaders who are violating religious freedom in
their own countries to offer addresses to joint sessions of
Congress.
But, secondly, this particular issue, I think that, again,
this is a place where there can be, one, a plurality of
different religious interpretations. So even in those places
where you might, where some might argue, some religious
authorities might argue that this is allowed and permitted and
endorsed within my religious tradition, you will find other
voices who say the complete opposite, right? And so, as the
U.S. government, we shouldn't be endorsing one theological
interpretation over the other. We shouldn't, in general, be
engaging in theological debates of that sort and endorsing one
theological position.
So I think lifting up the fact that there is plural
positions. Oftentimes, you also see on that particular issue
that there is a complex intersection of cultural issues and
religious issues and that sometimes they get conflated between
the two. So it is also needing to be conscious of the ways in
which sometimes cultural practices are being presented as
religious practices and then being legitimated and argued for
on the basis of religious freedom. We shouldn't fall into that
trap.
Mr. McCormick. You have a great future in politics the way
you stated that. [Laughter.]
Rev. Hayward. Which part?
Mr. McCormick. Comprehensive but understanding it is a
complex, it not an easy thing to answer, right? I mean, we get
that. This is where the crux of the issue is, though. On an
individual basis of religious freedom, when one person has a
strong belief and another person has an opposition to that or
society has, there is no easy answer. With that, I yield.
Rabbi Cooper. Congressman, If I could just quickly go to
two points. You mentioned something about that we do business
with a lot of the countries. The responsibility for human
rights is not just government's responsibility. We live in a
free society, and there is a lot that individuals and
communities can do when they are upset about a particular
business or going about and pursuing certain relationships with
supply chains with China for example. You know, it is not a
good idea to raise generations of Americans and say you just
wait, Congress or the government or the president will deal
with it. It is a democracy, and democracy means that everyone
should be putting their shoulder to whichever wheel they are
behind.
The other point I would like to make, it is not about
United States but an incident that I had about eight-nine years
ago in Germany when I met with the justice minister in Germany
because, in one of the states, they actually started to bar the
circumcision of eight-day-old Jewish babies, the boys. And the
end of the meeting, she said to me, Rabbi, don't be worried,
the German state will give the right to German Jews to
circumcise their boys. And I said, with all due respect, Madam
Minister, you don't have the right, God gave us the right. You
are there to protect our rights. It is not from the state. The
state is there to protect our religious freedoms and the other
God-given freedoms that we have here in the United States that
allow us to speak this way with each other. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you very much, Chairman Smith. And thank
you, Ranking Member Wild. Thank you to all our witnesses today.
I am very glad that our committee is considering the state of
freedom of religion or belief around the world. And I would
also like to take a moment to recognize and congratulate my
good friend Susie Gelman on her appointment by President Biden
to the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom. She
is a great leader. I know she will make an excellent addition
to the commission.
We have serious issues of religious freedom today in our
own country, and I refer specifically to the rise of violent
and hateful antisemitism, which was documented in the FBI's
amended 2021 hate crimes report and in the 2022 statistics
presented by the ADL. Now, the difference, of course, between
issues of religious freedom in the countries listed in your
reports and in the United States is that here the issue of
violent antisemitism is not state sponsored or state sanctions.
And I want to thank Chairman Smith for his opening remarks
about this issue, and I want to say how honored I am to co-
chair with you the House Bipartisan Task Force to Combat
Antisemitism.
I also want to acknowledge and thank the Biden
administration for issuing the first ever U.S. National
Strategy to Combat Antisemitism. And for those of us who have
read it, it is a lengthy and a comprehensive strategy with more
than a hundred action steps, a time line, and accountability.
And I am particularly pleased to see that the U.S. Commission
on International Religious Freedom includes, as a
recommendation to Congress on page six of your report, that
members of Congress should join our Bipartisan Task Force to
Combat Antisemitism, so we should be ready, Chris, for many
more members to come on our caucus. And I just want to note
that I am endeavoring to address the specific steps that are
listed for Congress to take in that national strategy. So we
are taking the strategy seriously, and we are going to try to
enact all of the legislation that is suggested that Congress
should enact.
Rabbi Cooper, one of the laws that Congress enacted decades
ago to help those fleeing antisemitism and other forms of
religious persecution was the Lautenberg Amendment. It served
as a lifeline for Jews, Christians, and other religious
minorities fleeing persecution, and I know that USCIRF has long
been a strong supporter of this program. So I was surprised
that the House Appropriations Committee's report did not
include language extending the Lautenberg Amendment in order to
allow the Committee of Jurisdiction to consider this extension.
So I would like to ask you, Rabbi Cooper, and If the others
want to join in, would you support extending the Lautenberg
Amendment?
Rabbi Cooper. Thank you, Representative Manning. And we are
looking forward with bated breath to have Susie Gelman with us
not just by Zoom. She will be a fantastic addition to a really
great group of commissioners.
Two comments. Number one is the big game changer called
social media because we can wind up doing everything right on a
particular problem, we are not necessarily there yet, and find
that that is not enough. Social media has destroyed boundaries
and borders. That is the good news. It is also the bad news.
And that kind of hate speech, as we know, inspires individuals
like the shooter in Pittsburgh to go out and do heinous deeds.
So I am glad that you raised the issue within the context
of the United States, our own society here, because it is not
only a standalone in a multi-headed hive of antisemitism and
hate here, but it is connected globally to rhetoric and other
organizational pieces.
Insofar as the Lautenberg initiative is concerned, If I
understood, Chairman Smith, you had the Mayflower Church here
the other day. So there are a lot of people, including at the
State Department, who really went out of their way to try to
make sure that the members of this church wouldn't be
repatriated back to China where God knows what would have
happened to them. It was very, very close. The reason why you
had all these extraordinary efforts being made by different
individuals, I think, in particular, is because the Lautenberg
Amendment has not been extended, to my knowledge. And this
would be a perfect example in which you have a group of people
whose lives hang in the balance. And If they can't get to the
United States, you know, we might be talking about them in the
past tense.
So, unfortunately, these kinds of situations do come up.
America has always taken the lead in these areas. And just
speaking as a taxpayer, I absolutely endorse its extension.
Ms. Manning. Do our other witnesses have comments on that?
Would you also support the extension of the Lautenberg
Amendment?
Mr. Patterson. In this form or in a revised form? This type
of opportunity for the most persecuted people to come here is
something that is part of America's greatness and its
generosity in the past. You think back to the 70s with Soviet
Jews and Soviet Pentecostals coming to the United States which
were these very, very similar dire situations. Our organization
worked with many others on the Mayflower Church and just really
rejoiced that this was a win; but these wins shouldn't be so
hard and having that organizing framework is very, very
important so it is not ad hoc.
Ms. Manning. Rabbi Hayward. I mean Reverend Hayward.
Rev. Hayward. Thank you for the elevation. I absolutely
will endorse any legislation that is going to support offering
sanctuary to those who are facing persecution and violence.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. And I am going to ask one more
quick question. I don't know if we will have a chance for a
second round. But, Rabbi Cooper, you mentioned Bahrain, which,
of course, brought to mind the Abraham Accords. And we have all
been asking what more can we be doing to promote religious
tolerance around the world, and I am wondering if you believe
the Abraham Accords, which I think has the potential to be
transformational in the Middle East, if the Abraham Accords
could be used to promote religious tolerance in that
particularly difficult region of the world.
Rabbi Cooper. Well, I think people who want to invest in
peace have to take the long view. Our first visit to the UAE
was around 2010, and our first meeting with His Majesty in
Bahrain was 2017.
I would say two things. First, soft power counts. The truth
is that religious groups, cultural outreach, humanitarian
efforts from hospitals and others, that is really where the
real DNA of peace is going to take root, no matter whatever
happens in terms of the geopolitical reality.
As far as business is a concern, when you meet a business
person, they just want government to get out of the way so they
can go and make money.
So that leaves, of course, the geopolitical considerations,
and I think what the Abraham Accords proved is that, A, peace
is possible and sustainable and, B, it has to be nurtured. And,
again, this is one of the issues that I believe that many
Americans don't view as a Democrat or a Republican issue. They
just see if there is a way to improve peace and expand that
peace, we should endorse it. Republicans, Democrats,
independents, for better, for worse, people around the world,
especially in that region, still look to the United States as
the global leader. So what we say and don't say, what we do and
don't do, impacts in realtime what is going on there.
But, again, I would just point to a tiny little country,
about a million people, of Bahrain. I felt their most important
contribution was just by virtue of how, going back a couple of
hundred years, you had an Arab society in which people of
different religions were able to live in peace and interact
with each other. Having that kind of an example there in the
region makes a huge difference. It is not just a matter of, you
know, American imperialism importing its model. It is a matter
of holding up existing models that maybe most people didn't
know about.
But there is a lot of work to be done, not just by Congress
but by your constituents, to get involved in expanding the DNA
of peace.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Schneider.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. And, Rabbi, I appreciate your
comments. I am going to touch on and, actually, I have to
leave, so I am not going to be able to stay for the second
panel. I am going to touch on the second panel and come back to
this panel, but you gave me the segue.
Before I do that, I want to associate myself with the
remarks of my colleague both in welcoming Susie Gelman to the
commission and thank her for her leadership on the Combating
Antisemitism Task Force, which I am proud to be a part of.
You mentioned Bahrain. I have the privilege of being one of
the co-chairs of the Abraham Accords Caucus here in the House.
Rabbi Cooper. Thank you.
Mr. Schneider. A region that not often do you get to see
glimmers of hope. I think the Abraham Accords, Mr. Patterson,
you used the term rejoice, I'll use that here. It is something
that we can all rejoice in.
Earlier this year, in Abu Dhabi, they inaugurated Abrahamic
Family House. To your point, hosting the St. Francis Church,
the Imam Al-Tayeb Mosque, and the Moses Ben Maimon Synagogue.
It is part of a larger process of the normalization we are
seeing between Israel, Bahrain, UAE, Morocco, and hopefully
other countries soon, which make up the Abraham Accords.
One line in the declaration of these countries' sign reads
we encourage efforts to promote interfaith and intercultural
dialogue to advance a culture of peace among the three
Abrahamic religions in our community. Moreover, within the
Abraham Accords, one of the six working groups of the Negev
Forum dedicated to furthering the accords is focused on
education and coexistence. We have already seen impressive
strides in removing hate from schools and promoting existence,
and I hope that Ambassador Hussain will discuss this in the
next panel.
But I want to go back to rejoicing because I think over my
lifetime, 60-plus years, there have been moments we have
rejoiced religious freedom around the world. I think of the
work, Rabbi, you were probably involved, as well, of trying to
save Soviet Jewry and the refuseniks and their ability to hold
on to their faith in really dire consequences. But for all of
the successes, I also know that we have seen far more
challenges, and you have touched on them in this hearing.
And, Rabbi, you mentioned a couple of words, phrases that I
think really resonate for me, the idea that it is incumbent
upon us to protect religious freedom. Religious freedom is not
something that is granted. It is something that we need to
protect and project that protection through, again, what you
said, Rabbi, soft power counts, and the soft power of the
United States is unparalleled and something that we should
jealously protect and not be afraid to use. And I think that is
what we are doing here.
What we created in 1998 with legislation, early 80s with
legislation, we strive, I know there is so much more to do. So
maybe in my two minutes left here, I will ask the panel, giving
counsel to us on this committee and Congress as a whole, what
should be the things that we most focus on in the near term and
even into the medium term to work to protect religious freedom
around the world and advance the rights of people who are
otherwise severely oppressed. Rabbi.
Rabbi Cooper. I see you mentioned Soviet Jewry, and it is
true I grew up in the Soviet Jewry movement a long time ago,
another century. But what we need to reclaim, and this not just
can be done by fiat, but we need to reclaim, when it comes to
human rights and these precious freedoms, a sense of
bipartisanship in Washington. We have to recreate it and, going
forward on these core issues, whatever our political
orientation is, we need to start projecting again across the
board, not just through the State Department but through
Congress, that kind of across-the-board firm commitment in
terms of human rights. That is something I mentioned earlier.
When you look at the history of USCIRF, of our group, which is
about to, believe it or not, 25 years, I think its moral power
comes from the fact that we are actually mandated by Congress
to act in a bipartisan way. That's, to me, the most attractive
element of all----
Mr. Schneider. I couldn't agree more.
Rabbi Cooper [continuing]. Is getting great people
accomplished. And if we went out for a beer afterwards and
started arguing, we can go long into the night----
Mr. Schneider. I just want to watch the time, so I want to
give Dr. Patterson----
Rabbi Cooper. So that would be the key thing.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. Dr. Patterson.
Mr. Patterson. Sure. Two things,--what are the concrete
steps--I'd say first is continue being a witness in the places
where there's no one else to be a witness about how terrible it
is. Places like North Korea--important role in being the one to
continue doing these reports, continue bringing pressure to
bear. If the U.S. isn't leading in that, then our allies don't
follow in that. There is not a next leader in this movement.
I think the second thing is to be really thoughtful about
targets of opportunity. Targets of opportunity are often
smaller countries or middle-range countries that are tottering.
Tunisia is one of those such countries right now. I would say
that Iran, when President Obama first became president, was in
a different place than it is now. Remember the street protests,
the summer of '09, and the president in June gave that Cairo
speech, an open hand to the Middle East calling on all these
rights. I will say that the Iranian people felt that then what?
Zero from that administration at the time. Why? Because the
administration was really focused on a nuclear deal no matter
what. That was a moment of opportunity lost to side with the
people of Iran.
I think about Nicaragua in our own hemisphere, a terrible
actor in the Ortega, a little country with people who are
suffering. A place like that or Venezuela in the previous
decade are places where the U.S. should use all the tools of
sanctions and friendly and coercive diplomacy to push them in
the right direction, not only looking at the Chinas, looking at
those smaller powers where we can wield positive influence.
Mr. Schneider. Great. Thank you. Reverend.
Rev. Hayward. I will second the recommendation to ensure
that this policy issue does not become partisanized or any more
partisanized than it is on the international religious freedom
front. That is one of the strengths of the approach to it on
the Hill.
In addition to what I have in my written statement for
recommendations, namely an inclusive approach to it, I just
want to double down on the need to ensure that religious
freedom is not addressed as a niche issue and ensuring that it
is considered as part of larger economic policies, larger
development issues, and so it kind of mainstreamed into
consideration of larger policies because, at the end of the
day, it is not just about sort of personal prejudice, it is
about state institutions and structures that are unjust and are
fueling this kind of violence. And so there needs to be
transformation of some of those larger, political, and economic
structures in order to ensure the human rights more generally
but also religious freedom, particularly for all people in each
country.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. If I summarize it into three Bs,
it is bipartisan, it is broad, and it is bold. And, hopefully,
we can do all three. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much and thanks for joining
us. I really appreciate that. We do have a hard stop at 1:30,
so I do have other questions, as do other members, so we are
going to ask if you could respond in writing to those.
[The information follows:]
Mr. Smith. I was wondering, Reverend Hayward, you mentioned
not inviting heads of state. Are you talking about Modi, Prime
Minister Modi? I appreciate that. Thank you. I didn't go either
for that reason.
And I would just underscore, before inviting our next
distinguished witness to come forward. You know, we meet at a
time when there is an actual genocide taking place. We all know
it, we all speak out against it. We have had several hearings
in the China commission, which I also chair, and the
administration has to do more. We have to do more, but the
administration has to do more, as well. I mean, a genocide in
2023 against Muslims. We have got to speak out, and we have got
to stop it. And I hope the UN and everyone else joins in that
effort. No more slaps on the wrist for Xi Jinping. He needs to
be held to account, and I think severe economic sanctions is
the only tangible way to do it. I introduced the bill that
would reimpose conditionality on most favored nation status,
now called normal trade relations. In other words, they get a
break on any tariffs. And to make it, there needs to be serious
and sustained progress in the area of human rights, or they
lose it.
Bill Clinton had it right in 1983, but then he reversed it
in 1984 when he separated trade from human rights. It was a
terrible, terrible mistake, but we need to rectify it in the
current day to say we are not going to enable a dictatorship
that is committing every kind of human rights abuse imaginable,
forced organ harvesting, which is an atrocity that is
reminiscent of the Nazis. Josef Mengele didn't even do that,
and he did horrible things to his victims. And it is happening
tens of thousands of times every year, killing 28 years old on
average. I have a bill that passed, it is pending in the
Senate, we don't know if it will ever get out of the committee
that would go after that supply chain for organs, because they
are being so terribly procured by killing young people. Falun
Gong practitioners, Uyghurs, some Christians, and Buddhists in
Tibet, but primarily Uyghurs and Falun Gong. They are targeted
because they are hated, and they are hated because of their
religious beliefs, and that's the consequence that they face.
So thank you for your testimonies. I deeply appreciate it,
the Committee does. And I now would ask for our next panelist,
a panel of one, if he would make his way to the witness table.
We are pleased to welcome Ambassador Rashad Hussain before
our subcommittee today. Ambassador Hussain serves as principal
advisor to the secretary and advisor to the president on
religious freedom conditions and policy. He leads the
department's efforts to monitor religious freedom abuses,
persecution, and discrimination worldwide. He also oversees
policies and programs to address these concerns and works to
build diverse and dynamic partnerships with the broadest range
of civil society with equitable and meaningful inclusion of all
faith actors globally.
Prior to his appointment, Ambassador Hussain was director
at the National Security Council's Partnership in Global
Engagement Directorate. In 2015 and 2021, he served as senior
counsel to the Department of Justice's National Security
Division.
President Obama appointed Ambassador Hussain to serve as
Special Envoy to the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, or
the OIC; U.S. Special Envoy for Strategic Counterterrorism
Communications; and deputy associate White House counsel. In
his role as envoy, Ambassador Hussain advised on foreign policy
issues and worked with multilateral organizations to expand
partnerships and education, entrepreneurship, health,
international security, science, technology, and other areas.
He also spearheaded efforts on countering antisemitism and
protected Christians and other religious minorities in Muslim
majority countries.
He received his JD from Yale Law School where he served as
an editor of the Yale Law Journal and master's degrees in
public administration and Arabic and Islamic studies from
Harvard University.
Welcome, Mr. Ambassador. The floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RASHAD HUSSAIN, AMBASSADOR-AT-LARGE
FOR INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ambassador Hussain. Thank you so much. Good afternoon,
Chairman Smith. I want to thank Ranking Member Wild and the
members of the subcommittee. It has been an honor to serve as
Ambassador-at-Large for International Religious Freedom for the
past 18 months, and it really is a privilege to appear before
you today to talk about my work and the work of our office, the
Office of International Religious Freedom. I am grateful to
President Biden, to Vice President Harris, and to Secretary
Blinken for continuing to place their trust in me to pursue
this work on behalf of the American people, and I am also
grateful for the longstanding bipartisan collaboration that we
have spoken so much about this morning for protecting religious
freedom globally.
I want to thank you in particular, Chairman Smith, for your
decades-long really sincere commitment to standing up for those
who are persecuted on account of their faith and for your
strong collaboration not just with our office now but over the
25 years since the passage of the International Religious
Freedom Act.
Ever since Congress passed IRFA 25 years ago, we have
greatly benefitted from both ongoing and consistent engagement,
advocacy, and support from both Republicans and Democrats. The
cooperation is crucial not only to support the work of the
office that I now lead, it also sends a message to both
oppressors and to the oppressed that no matter which party has
the majority in Congress or holds the White House, we stand
united as Americans for the sake of those who suffer due to
their religion or beliefs.
I have now spent 15 years as a public servant working in
all three branches of our government in both Republican and
Democratic administrations, upholding our Constitution,
including as a national security attorney in law enforcement
and as a diplomat. Collaborating with civil society from across
the political spectrum to protect religious freedom around the
world continues to be among the most rewarding work of my life.
This year marks the 25th anniversary of the original
signing of the International Religious Freedom Act, 25 years of
protecting a human right that is fundamental to the history of
the United States, integral to our national identity and
governance as expressed in the First Amendment and a core
component of our foreign policy. I continue to work closely
with my predecessors, Ambassador Sam Brownback and Ambassador
David Saperstein and others, and I believe that it sends a
powerful signal around the world that the United States has
been represented by Jewish, Christian, and Muslim Americans in
our efforts to promote religious freedom.
Using the resources that Congress has allocated to us, we
work toward this goal in three related ways to expose, counter,
and prevent restrictions on the fundamental human right of
religious freedom. First, we seek to shape a foreign policy
that protects U.S. interest and security by engaging civil
society and faith communities and addressing laws and policies
that impact religious freedom around the world. We work closely
with civil society, what the diaspora communities, and leaders
in our government and foreign governments and multilateral
institutions, including on educational efforts and prevention
efforts.
We work on individual cases of oppression. We often get
notified in the late hours of the night or the early morning
that there are individuals who are being persecuted or who have
been arrested or wrongly detained, and we realize that every
minute that we wait to make our first call or to make our first
move in that case can cost someone their life. We train foreign
and civil service officers and locally-employed staff, and we
do this work wherever it is needed and whenever it is needed.
This year, the International Religious Freedom office
worked extensively with the Shenzhen Holy Reformed Church or
with the Mayflower Church, as we have been discussing this
morning, to protect their members' right to freedom of religion
or belief in the face of relentless pressure from the Chinese
Community Party, even after they fled China. On April 7th, as a
result of our efforts in the IRF office and broader department
efforts, in coordination with Congress and other U.S.
government agencies and NGOs, I was honored to welcome members
of this church as they arrived to the United States at DFW
Airport and was pleased that they celebrated Easter at a Texas
church in safety.
On May 16th, following an IRF-coordinated diplomatic and
social media pressure campaign with civil society, UN, and
USCIRF partners, we welcomed the release of Shamil Khakimov, an
ailing Jehovah's Witness wrongly imprisoned in Tajikistan. We
have been deeply involved in working to address the Ortega-
Murillo regime's increasing repression of Christians and
churches in Nicaragua. On February 9th, when the United States
welcomed 222 individuals that had been imprisoned by the
government of Nicaragua for exercising their human rights and
endured lengthy unjust detentions, our staff were on hand when
they landed in the United States and provided interpretation
and support.
We also continue to address the scourge of antisemitism and
the rise in anti-Muslim hatred. Earlier this year, I traveled
with Second Gentleman Douglas Emhoff and with Ambassador
Deborah Lipstadt to the Holocaust site for International
Holocaust Remembrance Day. And earlier in my career, I've made
similar trips to the Holocaust sites with Imams from the United
States and from around the world. And whenever we have the
opportunity to do so, we raise our concerns regarding the
increase in antisemitism, which, unfortunately, we are seeing
globally.
The two most recently-designated genocides, as we address
anti-Muslim sentiment, as you know, involve Muslim majority
populations, the Uyghur and Rohingya, and we continue our work,
which I hope to discuss more today during our hearing.
Second, we cast a light on persecution around the world
with our international religious freedom reports, globally
recognized as a gold standard on reporting on religious
freedom. If anyone in the world ever wonders whether the
religious persecution of any group in any part of the world
escapes our attention, the reports are our answer. The country-
by-country reports go through the religious freedom conditions
in every country in the world in a very detailed manner.
Our government and civil society partners also deploy the
IRF reports in critical ways. As an example, in April, the FBI
arrested two individuals in connection with opening and
operating an illegal overseas police station in Manhattan which
targeted Falun Gong practitioners and other members of the
Chinese community on U.S. soil. In building its case, the FBI's
indictment specifically cited a 2021 IRF report noting the
Chinese Communist Party maintains an extralegal party-run
security apparatus to eliminate the Falun Gong movements, using
methods ranging from harassment to imprisonment.
Third, we provide information and expertise on the status
of international religious freedom and related policy to the
secretary as he makes the determination which countries and
entities meet the threshold to be designated as countries of
particular concern, special watch lists, or entities of
particular concern.
Under the IRF Act, the secretary also takes recommendations
from the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom. We
work very closely with Chairman Cooper and other members of the
commission, and we also consider other sources when making the
administration's formal designations.
Later this year, we will celebrate the 25th anniversary of
the International Religious Freedom Act and its impact. And we
will also be celebrating the legacy of our country's conviction
that everyone should be free to follow the religion that they
choose.
As we do this work of advocating for people around the
world, we are sometimes asked who are you, as the United States
or as Americans, to speak to other countries about their human
rights conditions and to get involved in what they often refer
to as their internal matters. Well, I believe that we are
uniquely situated to stand up for religion freedom around the
world for a number of reasons. We are ourselves a country that
was founded on religious freedom and by individuals fleeing
religious persecution themselves. Our founders felt so strongly
about this fundamental right that they enshrined in the First
Amendment in our Constitution's Bill of Rights. And we are a
country of immigrants. People come here from all around the
world, from every corner of the planet, and demand that their
elected representatives and government officials promote our
values in their homelands. They would have it no other way.
So who are we to stand up for religious freedom around the
world? In many ways, we are representatives of the rest of the
world gathered right here in the United States. We are
motivated by the unshakeable commitment to the idea that saving
even one person or even improving one life is well worth our
effort, and we continue to follow that conviction with the same
uncompromising determination Congress showed in passing the law
in 1998. And we will be sure to include Congress in our 25th
anniversary celebration.
I thank you again for your attention and guidance and for
allowing me to speak with you today.
[The statement of Ambassador Hussain follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Ambassador, so much for your
testimony and for your leadership. I just want to touch on a
few issues, and one of them, you know, after the passage of a
bill that I introduced on forced organ harvesting, the Chinese
embassy here in Washington sent an email to us, to me, saying
that China fully protects the rights and interests of all
ethnic minorities, including Uyghurs in Xinjiang. They went on
to say they were against it, they said there is no such thing
as forced organ harvesting, which is an absolute lie. But they
said, to my shock, that the people in the foreign ministry, Mao
Nine, said that they, too, feel there is nothing to hide in
Xinjiang and that people are welcome to come there to visit.
So I wrote a letter to Xi Jinping on April 14th, I would
ask for unanimous consent it be made part of the record, asking
to visit Xinjiang, to go there, to go to the concentration
camps, to visit, and it's not without precedent, that Frank
Wolf and I, right after Tiananmen Square, got into Beijing
prison number 1, which had 40 Tiananmen Square activists with
shaved heads who were making jelly shoes for export, which was
all the rage back then being sold in our department stores, and
socks. And we got an import ban on it, thankfully, but they
closed it up and moved it somewhere else in terms of its
operations.
But it pointed out to me that, you know, if they're going
to say it's completely open, come see us, we have nothing to
hide, I want to go. Now, I would hope maybe we could go
together. It would be a tremendous opportunity. You're saying
you've got nothing to hide, we want to go. I have written them.
We have called over to the embassy. We are going to write them
again saying we still haven't heard.
But I would hope that, you know, you might want to speak
now, especially to this ongoing atrocity personally fermented
and led by Xi Jinping. We know from the materials that were
garnered from a consortium of journalists, as well as the New
York Times, that he said show no mercy towards the Muslim
Uyghurs and the other people in that region but primarily the
Uyghurs, and they have shown no mercy whatsoever.
What are your thoughts? Are we doing enough? We have passed
the Uyghur Forced Labor Act, which needs some amending and some
changes because it has not been, you know, despite good will
efforts, they are breaching our ability to stop those imports
from coming in from Xinjiang. So, if you could, speak to this
ongoing atrocity, a modern-day crime against humanity the likes
of which we have not seen since World War II.
Ambassador Hussain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
for your leadership on confronting the genocide that is
ongoing. I also want to express my appreciation for Congressman
Wolf who we continue to work with closely. We worked with him
on the Mayflower Church and, of course, continue to work with
him on China and so many other issues. You may also know the
previous chairman of the International Religious Freedom
Commission, Nury Turkel, his family was directly impacted, and
we have been working very closely with him. The Secretary of
State has raised cases involving his family directly with the
Chinese government, and we continue to raise a number of those
cases, including by making strong statements. From time to
time, we even post the pictures of those that have been
detained, and we meet with their family members here in the
United States to let them know that they're not forgotten and
we'll continue to be relentless in our effort to bring those
cases to justice and to make sure that they can be free and
they can be reunited with their families.
China continues to be one of the worst abusers of human
rights in the world. The statement that was sent to you the
email statement, is patently false. We have, for that reason,
continued to designate China as a country of particular concern
since 1999, and we have determined that China's treatment of
Uyghurs constitutes genocide and crimes against humanity.
You mentioned a Uyghur Forced Labor Act. We are continuing
to evaluate the impact, but we believe that it is making
inroads. It has economic teeth to it, which is what I think is
partly what is needed to make sure that we're showing strength
as we use our whole range of tools to address the situation of
China, whether it is our diplomatic tools, whether it is visa
restrictions, financial sanctions, the report that we use to
expose what is happening there. And it's not just our report.
There is international consensus, you may have seen the report
of Michelle Bachelet, the long delayed report, which also
called out the abuses that are occurring in China. There has
been so much evidence that has been generated, including
satellite imagery of what is taking place there.
I myself had the opportunity to travel around 2012 when I
was Special Envoy to the OIC, and we could see even at that
time what was beginning to take shape. And the Chinese
government, of course, was very particular in ensuring that we
only went to particular places and saw certain things, but our
team managed to go to other places, as well, within Xinjiang
and to see what was taking place, and we had the opportunity to
speak to people there that were already starting to bear the
brunt, whether it is restrictions even on things like fasting
during Ramadan, which they told us that they were being
pressured not to do. And some of them were completely
disallowed from doing so.
So I would very much welcome the opportunity to travel with
you, Mr. Chairman, to China and to see firsthand and to express
our concerns directly to the government----
Mr. Smith. In follow up to this hearing, perhaps we could
do a joint letter because, again, this is what Mao Ning, a
foreign ministry spokesman, said on March 27th of this year:
The door to Xinjiang is always open. People from all countries
are welcome to visit.
Ambassador Hussain. Let's take him up on that.
Mr. Smith. Let's take him up on it. Exactly. So, I look
forward to traveling with you. I hope we get permission.
Let me ask you, if I could, in regard to the five countries
that were not designated as CPC countries, Nigeria,
Afghanistan, Vietnam, Syria, and India. I think each one of
them, the evidence clearly suggests they ought to be CPC, and
not just designated but there needs to be the application of
the myriad of sanctions that were put into the law, about 18 of
them, starting with a simple demarche but to go far beyond
that.
With regards to Nigeria, I did raise with Secretary Blinken
my profound disappointment that he took them off as a CPC
country when he visited Abuja. I think it was a very, very
serious mistake. You know, the faith community reacted with
horror about that. Afghanistan, it should be a no-brainer
because, you know, the Taliban were an entity of particular
concern and, certainly, now the government is the Taliban.
Vietnam, it is time to jettison the mistake that was made
by the Bush administration to lift CPC status from them. They
have only gotten worse. You have heard testimony today. Syria,
in like manner. India.
If you could, tell us you or your office, have you
recommended that those five countries be added as CPC
countries.
Ambassador Hussain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me be as
specific as I possibly can be in addressing your question.
First of all, I share your concerns. I don't think we have much
disagreement in terms of the substance of what's happening on
the ground. We share USCIRF's concerns. As the Chairman of
USCIRF, Rabbi Cooper, mentioned, we work with them very
closely.
Our annual report, which goes through every single country,
had a very detailed section of each of the five countries you
mentioned, ranging from 18 pages to 49 pages for those five
countries. So our concerns are clearly outlined in the report
and in numerous other publicly-available interviews, remarks,
and other materials that we have issued.
We are beginning our process for determining designations
this year. We just issued our report in May, and we will be
making our designations later this year. And I am happy to be
in close communication with your office.
I want you to know that I have directly engaged with the
governments or civil society in all of these five countries at
a high level, including a meeting with former President Buhari,
including a delegation that we had to Vietnam, we took to
Vietnam to engage in a human rights dialogue where we raised
our concerns very directly, including individual cases which we
discussed directly with the government of Vietnam, and in our
conversations with the Indian government, as well.
I also want to be clear about the fact that the CPC
designation is one of the tools that we have. There is a myriad
of tools that we are using to address the situation, and we
will continue to do so because we continue to be concerned
about the religious freedom conditions in all of these
countries.
First of all, of course, I mentioned the report a number of
times which exposes the challenges that we are seeing, exposes
the oppression that so many people face. We have the diplomatic
tool that we use of speaking directly to governments. We do
that at a bilateral level and at a multilateral level,
sometimes openly, sometimes in private, whatever we think is
the most strategic approach in a particular situation. We work
very closely with civil society leaders, including we have a
unit in our office called Strategic Religious Engagement Unit
whose job is to deal directly with the religious actors in
countries around the world and that includes Nigeria. I have
had a chance to visit Nigeria a number of times throughout my
career. We plan to be visiting again later this year, and we
would welcome again the opportunity to travel with you or your
team to Nigeria to see the situation firsthand on the ground.
So that work with civil society is very important, as is the
programming funds that we have to deal directly with civil
society, primarily in a number of these countries.
Another tool that we use is we work in multilateral fora,
and we have an international religious freedom or belief
alliance now, which started under my predecessor, Ambassador
Brownback. We have continued that, and we are right up to
around 45 countries now in terms of membership. And they have
issued statements on Nigeria, on Vietnam, on the situation
facing Christians around the world. We continue to work
actively with them.
Of course, there are other parts of our government that I
believe have had the opportunity to testify here and in other
settings, as well, in terms of our military approaches, our
humanitarian approaches, what the U.S. Agency for International
Development is doing.
So all of that is a part of our whole-of-government effort
to address the situation there, but we continue to take it very
seriously. I have focused a significant portion of my human
rights work in my career on the use of blasphemy laws, the use
of apostasy laws. We have seen how they have been applied in
Nigeria, for example. And when I met with President Buhari, I
specifically asked him, since he was getting ready to leave
office, that he use that opportune time as an opportunity to
pardon some of those individuals. And we asked him about those
cases, Mubarak Bala's case, Yahaya Sharif-Aminu for example. We
talked about the murder of Deborah Samuel and others through
mob killings that we believe were facilitated, in part, by the
mood created by tools that are used in Nigeria, such as
blasphemy laws, and we continue to follow up with his national
security team later in the year.
These are efforts that we will continue in Nigeria and
around the world, regardless of the designation status. But as
I mentioned to you, we are now in the process of looking at the
designations, again, after issuing the report----
Mr. Smith. And when do you think those designations will be
made?
Ambassador Hussain. If I had to estimate, last year it was
around November, so around the same time line this year.
Mr. Smith. And just for the record, because I was there
when Frank wrote the original law, any time you think facts
warrant it, you can designate a country to be CPC. Yes, it is
done normally on an annual basis, but it can also be done based
on the record. So, I would hope, you know, with those five
countries, it would be an accelerated effort to try to get that
done. And I think it would send a clear message to President
Tinubu that we mean business. Maybe you could tell us why they
were taken off the list as Secretary Blinken made his way to
Abuja. I can't figure it out.
Ambassador Hussain. Yes, there is a process that is used
and our office, this was at a time before I came into the
position 18 months ago, but it remains true today that there is
a process in which our office feeds all of the information that
we have. As you said, we instruct our team to follow the facts,
and so, based on the facts, we provide our inputs into the
process. And as that process considers a number of factors, we
come to a final decision on that. So I would be happy to try to
get a little bit more information for you on the specifics of
that particular determination, but we are going to be going
through that process again just to learn more about all the
details----
Mr. Smith. And before I yield to my good friend, Ms.
Salazar, the issue of Bishop Alvarez.
Ambassador Hussain. Absolutely.
Mr. Smith. Could you really speak to that? I mean, we are
all--we had two hearings in this committee at which we heard
from two of the political prisoners, first their wives a couple
of years ago and then two of them who got out. But, obviously,
I remember that so well. It was a joint hearing with my good
friend and colleague of the Western Hemisphere chairwoman, and
I'm wondering, you know, we can't let up the pressure. I mean,
this man is an incredibly brave man of God, and he is being
persecuted horribly.
Ambassador Hussain. We call for the unconditional and
immediate release of Bishop Alvarez, and he has been unjustly
sentenced to more than 26 years. And we believe that he should
be allowed to do his work as a prominent and respected
religious leader with a huge following in Nicaragua. And last
November, the secretary designated Nicaragua as a CPC, a
country of particular concern, for the first time, and we are
deeply concerned about the increase in the repression of the
Catholic Church there and its followers, unjust detentions,
forced exile, spurious charges and harassment. So we will
continue to call for his immediate release.
When we traveled to the Summit of Americas in Los Angeles
last year, we had the opportunity to meet with diaspora
communities and leaders from Nicaragua and hear firsthand the
situation there, and that was part of what led to the
designation, hearing directly from those communities, the CPC
designation. We will continue to work on this.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Chairwoman Salazar.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity
to be here in your subcommittee, and thank you, Mr. Hussain,
for your leadership in wanting to help those who are dedicating
their lives to promote the faith, their faith, whether it is
Christian or otherwise.
So you are the Ambassador-at-Large for Religious Freedom,
and you are the top official in the United States government
for monitoring religious persecution around the world, and we
thank you for that. On the map, I have a map out here just to
put things into context, that shows the Catholic Church itself,
a report indicating religious persecution in the Western
Hemisphere. Unfortunately, Nicaragua isn't red, is one of those
countries that isn't red. And as we were talking, Monsignor
Alvarez, the Bishop of Matagalpa, he has been in jail for one
full year, and, recently, when they wanted to kick him out, he
decided to stay because his honor tells him to stay in his
country and not go into exile because he knew that he cannot
come back.
Unfortunately, we know that Nicaragua and Chile are two of
the most religious or most Catholic countries or closer to the
Catholic faith in Latin America, and we do not understand how
come the Ortega regime has dared to do things that no other
regime and before have dared, including the dictatorship of
Somoza or other authoritarian regimes in Nicaragua have dared
to do. So that is very, very dangerous.
And my first question would be do you know about the
condition, the physical condition, the mental condition of
Monsignor? Have you been able to have any type of access, you
meaning the United States government?
Ambassador Hussain. Yes. We are in touch with those close
to him. If we are able to have a conversation in a more closed
setting, we can give you a little bit more details. I just want
to make sure that we are protecting the information that allows
for our efforts to do as much good as possible.
But we are very concerned about his well being, and we have
called for that reason for his unconditional release. And
because of his case and other cases, we have designated
Nicaragua as a CPC.
Ms. Salazar. Okay. So nothing that you can share with us in
public, so we would have to do that in private. All right. So
as you were saying, when you say CPC, for those that don't
understand, the State Department has two blacklists: countries
and entities. And Nicaragua has been placed on the countries
blacklist, which you called countries of interest or something
like that. But for the average American, you are on the
blacklist as a country when you are persecuting people of
faith.
So my question is would you consider putting the Frente
Sandinista de Liberacion, meaning the political party
established by the Ortegas, would you consider putting that
organization on the blacklist of entities? Because we know that
Rosario Murillo, who happens to be the vice president of
Nicaragua, who happens to be the wife of Dictator Ortega, is
satanic. She is a woman that everyone knows that she belongs to
the world of Satan. So is there anyway that this country can
send a message and put Frente Sandinista on that list?
Ambassador Hussain. We have had close to a dozen entities
or so around the world that we have designated as entities of
particular concern. We would be happy to take that information
from you and work with your team. I will, myself, look into
this particular party, as you mentioned----
Ms. Salazar. But have you considered that possibility
before?
Ambassador Hussain. I am not aware that we have considered
it before, but that is something that going into----
Ms. Salazar. And would you be prone to consider the
possibility of putting Frente Sandinista on the list of those
entities that are on the blacklist of the United States, not
politically, not economically, but religiously speaking?
Ambassador Hussain. We are always following the facts, and
if that is what the facts are, and it sounds like from what you
are saying that there is a very strong case to be made, then we
will follow the facts and make that very serious consideration.
Ms. Salazar. And what needs to happen in order for the
State Department to determine, yes, we are going to put Frente
Sandinista on the list of the entities that we have
blacklisted? What needs to happen?
Ambassador Hussain. Well, we take a look at all of the
available information, the data. We talk to civil society on
the ground. We look at the press reports, we look at the
reporting from civil society organizations. We would love to be
in further communication with you and your team----
Ms. Salazar. Let me just tell you three things that the
Sandinistas have done in the last few years. In 2018, the
Sandinista police locked protestors in a parish in Managua and
fired on them while they were inside the church. I think that
is pretty steep.
Not only that, in '22, Ortega expelled 18 nuns from the
Mother Theresa organization, the Missionaries of Charity. These
nuns were saints, and they were helping all over Nicaragua.
Kicked out. Something that no one would have ever thought
because the nuns, you know, those nuns, who do they harm? On
the contrary, they help.
So those are just two, and there have been over 400 attacks
on the Catholic Church in Nicaragua in the last four years. So
I am saying, so I, once again, would like to have you on record
saying that you would consider strongly to put Frente
Sandinista on the list of entities that are on the blacklist
for the State Department because, you know, that the United
States, it is still the beacon of hope for this hemisphere and
sending that very strong message will be recorded by other
countries not to mess with those people who are dedicating
their lives to the faith. I mean, what else can be more noble
to give your life to serve the Lord Almighty?
Ambassador Hussain. Absolutely. And for the same reasons
why we designated Nicaragua as a country of particular concern,
we will take a close look. And this is another example of why
we cherish our collaboration with Congress so much because we
take very, very seriously those types of recommendations, and I
pledge to you today that we will take a look at that very
closely. And any information that you can continue to share
with us, in addition to the very compelling facts that you have
provided, which are very, very disturbing, today, we will take
those into consideration.
Ms. Salazar. And I would send a message today to the Ortega
and Murillo regime that If they were to release Monsignor
Alvarez right now, we would then consider the possibility of
not putting them on the list. But everything is predicated upon
the freedom of this Monsignor Alvarez from Matagalpa. Do you
like that idea?
Ambassador Hussain. That is a very significant step that
could be taken. And, of course, when we are making those
determinations, it is not just based on one particular case,
but that is a very significant case and we would definitely
take that----
Ms. Salazar. So I want to send that message to them in
Spanish, If you allow me.
[Speaking foreign language.]
Ms. Salazar. Thank you very much, Mr. Hussain. And we will
definitely be in touch with you because we know that what is
happening in Nicaragua in every front, politically,
religiously, economically, human rights, it is despicable. And,
unfortunately, the United States is not responding and your
administration is not responding with the force that it should
to send the message to the Rosario Murillo and the Ortega
regime that they cannot play with human rights and with
religious rights. And I thank you very much once again for
wanting to work with us.
Ambassador Hussain. Absolutely.
Ms. Salazar. Very grateful.
Ambassador Hussain. We will continue to raise----
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Chairwoman Salazar. Let me just, you
know, with regards to Ortega, back in 1984, Frank Wolf, Bob
McCue, and Tony Hall, and I visited Ortega on a human rights
mission. We met with him for about two hours. We raised the use
of torture. Tomas Borge, who was a minister of interior, and so
many others were using torture to extract information but, more
importantly, just to be cruel. And we raised all those issues
with him. We had documentation about everything we were talking
about. And he served us tea. One person didn't drink it, three
of us who did, we all got very sick. I mean, very sick, like
two weeks of--I mean, he did that to the students, you might
recall, and they sent in food, they sent in food that was
poisoned. We didn't die, obviously, but we got very sick. I
will never forget it, and, you know, Tony Hall didn't drink it
and he didn't get sick.
So, we are talking about a guy that stoops to a lot of bad
levels. And for the people of Nicaragua, including Bishop
Alvarez, life is just awful.
I wrote to President Ortega and asked if I could visit with
Bishop Alvarez. We haven't heard back. Not to overstay my
welcome with you, but if we could ever get a meeting to go
there and visit with him together, I think that would be a
very, very useful meeting. So, it is something to take back and
to give some consideration to because, you know, I have gotten
into gulags all over the world. People say how do you get in.
We got into Perm Camp 35 in the Ural Mountains in the Soviet
Union back in the 1980s. Everyone said it was impossible, it
took two years. And, again, the ICRC is not visiting him,
independent human rights monitors are not seeing him. We just
need to do everything we can to make sure that he is okay and,
hopefully, ASAP, is free.
So thank you, and thank you, Chairwoman Salazar, for your
work and your comments just a moment ago.
Just let me ask you one question about providing funding to
atheist groups in South Asia. We understand something on the
order of 494,000 has gone to Nepal and some to Sri Lanka. Are
we funding atheist groups?
Ambassador Hussain. Our office is relentless in protecting
and fighting to protect the religious freedom of people of all
backgrounds all around the world. I think you have seen that
from the over a dozen countries that I have traveled to so far
in this role, in our activity in multilateral institutions, in
the cases that we are raising of persecuted Christians and the
work that we are doing on antisemitism and addressing anti-
Muslim hatred, in addressing attacks against Hindu communities
for example, Buddhists, Sikh communities. I was just speaking
this week at a large gathering of six.
So all our work is characterized by a level of consistency
that we are very proud of. And as you know from being the
architect of the 2016 act, we do have an obligation also to
protect those people who don't have any particular faith. And
so we have been active. I have spoken at the Humanist
International events. I have spoken with a number of people who
are facing persecution because of the lack of their faith, and
one of the dozens of programs that we have that is designed to
protect against persecution, people that don't have faith, is
the one that you mentioned.
So in no way are we doing anything to promote one form of
belief over any other belief, but it is consistent with our
longstanding practice in our office. And, incidentally, this
was also a program that was initiated prior to my arrival in
this role. It's an ongoing program, but it is a consistent part
of what we do to protect people and their right to freedom of
religion or belief around the world, and we are happy to
continue to stay in touch with you----
Mr. Smith. Could you provide us with a breakdown on those
grants?
Ambassador Hussain. Yes. We will definitely send you--we
sent a letter also to the committee, to Chairman McCaul, as
well going in great detail. So I would also point you to that
letter, as well.
Mr. Smith. I mean, did any of these groups that we are
funding cross the line of demarcation between saying somebody
is being persecuted because they won't believe, or they then
turn and say religion is a farce and they attack----
Ambassador Hussain. Well, that is not consistent, that type
of advocacy is not consistent----
Mr. Smith. Because I wrote the language into the bill that
you have a right to believe or not to believe. It was in the
findings section, but, you know----
Ambassador Hussain. Of course.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. I didn't anticipate that this would
be, and I am sure.
Ambassador Hussain. And that type of advocacy would be
inconsistent with what----
Mr. Smith. Is that being monitored----
Ambassador Hussain. Yes, it is. That would bear on whether
or not the grant could continue going forward because, as I
understand, the conditions of the grant do not allow for the
attempt to establish a particular religion. So our----
Mr. Smith. Well, I just say because the American Humanist
Association branded all those who went to National Prayer
Breakfast, and that's a totally bipartisan, every religion
under the sun is there, as Christian nationalists.
Ambassador Hussain. Right.
Mr. Smith. I mean, you know----
Ambassador Hussain. That is not an assessment that I would
agree with.
Mr. Smith. Okay. If you could let us know further how that
is being monitored to ensure that they are not, you know, that
antagonism. I mean, I have gone to that many times. Presidents
go to it and give remarks of both parties.
Ambassador Hussain. We are happy to continue to share
information on that. Again, the letter that we sent, we really
try to be as detailed as possible, and I will make it my
personal commitment to make sure that, if there is any lines
being crossed in the administration of that grant money, that
we take appropriate action.
Mr. Smith. Anything else you would like to add?
Ambassador Hussain. We just greatly appreciate a
bipartisan----
Mr. Smith. I do have one final question, if I could. With
Deborah Lipstadt, who is, of course, our Ambassador-at-Large
for Combating Antisemitism, and with Rabbi Cooper who just
testified, and thank you for listening to that panel. Not
everyone does that. They come late, and you came and heard it
all. How often do you meet? Do you have roundtables and with
other, you know, players? Because I read the reports. I haven't
read all of yours. I have read certain countries, you know.
That is as far as I got, but it is pretty far. And I did read
the USCIRF report. But to read it is great, you had good
summaries, but the interaction, I think, could be very helpful.
Do you meet?
Ambassador Hussain. So I just came back a few days ago from
a trip to Bosnia and Herzegovina to commemorate, to mark the
massacre at Srebrenica with Ambassador Lipstadt. So we were
there together for three days. We traveled together to the
Holocaust sites. And we are in regular communication on a whole
range of issues, along with a number of other senior officials.
And I do want to specifically thank and commend the Second
Gentleman, Douglas Emhoff, who has really taken a strong and
leading role in combating antisemitism. We did an event
together at the Kennedy Center, the Kennedy Presidential
Library up in Boston, and we did an event together at the USIP,
I mentioned the trip that we took to the Holocaust sites. And
so we continue to collaborate very closely with him and his
office. He has been a very strong champion.
And with regard to the commission, I mean, we have a
meeting on the books tomorrow with Rabbi Cooper. We have met
all together with the commissioners, with the Secretary of
State, and we are in touch very closely with them. We have
monthly meetings, and I often participate in those meetings,
and it has been a very collaborative partnership with them and
very open. You know, I got to know Nury Turkel very well, I am
getting to know the Rabbi very well, and it is a very
productive relationship and partnership and we are looking
forward to continuing it.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. I, too, have spoken at the Srebrenica
remembrance, and I went with the president of Bosnia 20 years
ago and what a moving experience. And a lot of the women who
lost their husbands were there for that. They actually had a
reinterment ceremony. It was frightening. That was a genocide
committed by the Bosnian Serbs.
Anything else you would like to add before we close?
Ambassador Hussain. I greatly appreciate your cooperation.
We will be in touch with you on all of the important topics
that we discussed today, and we will provide more information
on the 25th anniversary celebration that we have coming up in
October.
Mr. Smith. I look forward to traveling with you to
Xinjiang.
Ambassador Hussain. All right. Thank you so much.
Mr. Smith. The hearing is adjourned. Before we adjourn,
members have five legislative days to provide statements for
the record, and we probably will have a few members who want to
ask additional questions, if both our first panel and you could
respond to those in a timely fashion.
Ambassador Hussain. Absolutely.
Mr. Smith. The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:21 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
