- MANAGEMENT SUCCESSES AND FAILURES: ASSESSING THE U.S. AGENCY FOR GLOBAL MEDIA

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MANAGEMENT SUCCESSES AND FAILURES:
ASSESSING THE U.S. AGENCY FOR GLOBAL MEDIA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 9, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-110

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-596PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania      BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California      GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida      AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee      TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas      DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa      SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas          Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio      GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida      JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey      JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida      JIM COSTA, California
RICH MCCORMICK, Georgia      JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      BRAD SCHNEIDER. Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan      KWEISI MFUME, Maryland
KEITH SELF, Texas
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sajit Gandhi, Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on Oversight and Accountability

BRIAN MAST, Florida, Chair

SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JASON CROW, Colorado, Ranking
DARRELL ISSA, California                 Member
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
CORY MILLS, Florida      SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK, Florida
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania

Parker Chapman, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Bennett, Hon. Amanda, Chief Executive Officer, U.S. Agency for
Global Media...................................................     9
Abramowitz, Honorable Michael, Director, Voice of America........    18
Capus, Honorable Stephen, President, Radio Free Europe/Radio
Liberty........................................................    28

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    48
Hearing Minutes..................................................    49
Hearing Attendance...............................................    50

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    51

MANAGEMENT SUCCESSES AND FAILURES:
ASSESSING THE U.S. AGENCY FOR GLOBAL MEDIA

Tuesday, July 9, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and
Accountability,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:21 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell Issa
[member of the subcommittee] presiding.
Mr. Issa. The committee will come to order. The purpose of
this hearing is to conduct oversight over the U.S. Agency for
Global Media and two of its broadcasters, Voice of America and
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. I want to thank the chairman,
Chairman Mast, for calling this hearing and, of course, the
full committee chairman for being here.
USAGM's network chain of audience numbers over 420 million
weekly viewers. With this large audience, a proud legacy, a
mission to share America's story and report news to closed
society, USAGM and its broadcasters should not be controversial
as part of government in any way, shape, or form. It should be
a consensus cause that brings the country together and shares
our voice with the world. To put it simply, under current
management and leadership, that may not be happening.
USAGM's leadership has allowed the agency, particularly
VOA, to drift into becoming another mainstream media news
organization, indistinguishable from NPR and others. That is
clearly not the mission we pay for.
Let me be clear: merely modeling journalist best practices
is an insufficient justification for an agency that consumes
$800 billion-plus taxpayer dollars per year. Worse, as a recent
report from Chairman McCaul makes clear, USAGM's senior
leadership has focused not on its critical challenges but on
protecting its favored staff. USAGM is the only organization
where you can blatantly lie on your resume and get a pass as a
Voice of America's Persian News Network did. We would like to
know why, and that is part of the reason for the hearing today.
Another issue I have personally engaged with Voice of
America in its Middle East coverage of the October 7th murders
in Gaza. Specifically, its refusal to call Hamas terrorists
what they are: Hamas terrorists. Here are the facts: After
October 7th, VOA reporters were instructed to do, and I'm
quoting, avoid calling Hamas and its members terrorists, except
in quotes. When my office and others brought this to light, VOA
claimed it clarified its response, but it clearly did not. We
have the opportunity to faithfully and truthfully report brutal
attacks by terrorists, and we squandered that opportunity to
reach millions of people who may have been receptive to that
message.
Now, Mr. Abramowitz, this happened before you took offer at
VOA, and so I understand that your job is one of taking on
responsibility for things you did not cause, but you now have
the job to change it, which brings me to a larger point. VOA
needs to re-engage with its charter, which says, and this one
is in quotes, ``We will respect America, not any single segment
of American society,'' unquote and, quote, ``We will present
the policies of the United States clearly and effective, and we
will also present responsible discussions and opinions on those
policies.'' It is the policy of successive Administrations and
it is the unanimous position across all acceptable corners of
U.S. political spectrum that Hamas is a terrorist organization,
and they have been recognized so before their terrorist attack
on October 7th, and its members are terrorists. VOA did not
take that stance and violated its charter.
It also has been reliably informed that a senior VOA editor
took reporters to use attribution because opinion in Moscow,
Tehran, and Beijing did not see it that way. I do not spend
$800 million of the taxpayers' money to represent Tehran,
Moscow, or Beijing. In fact, these are all adversary states.
Your job is to have the people of Russia, Tehran, Beijing, and
other countries that repress free speech know what the truth
is, not the other way around. You are the voice of America, not
the voice of Russia, the voice of Iran, or the voice of China.
When confronted with these failures I have discussed with
senior leadership at USAGM and VOA, you've doubled down and
mocked congressional oversight. It is a classic leadership
failure, one that can bring down entire agencies.
Ms. Bennett, your written statement focuses a lot on
successes. Undoubtedly, there have been many successes. I was a
soldier in the cold war, and the radio that went across the
Czech border kept us out of a war in no small part and kept the
hope alive in the Eastern Bloc, but we cannot address USAGM's
failures without working to address its current shortcomings.
At a time when American people are demanding to know what value
they get from each agency, we must work together to make needed
reforms and to root out waste, fraud, and clearly be
accountable for the words you use pursuant to your mandate from
Congress.
And with that, I recognize the full committee chairman.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also want to thank
Chairman Mast for his work on this issue, and I also send my
condolences to him. His father just passed away. So to Brian
and his family, you are in our thoughts and prayers.
The U.S. Agency for Global Media is a critical pillar of
America's soft power. It is and will continue to be a beacon of
freedom, supplying the truth to those living under tyranny and
oppression. USAGM funds critical entities, including the Voice
of America, Radio Free Europe, and Radio Free Asia, as well as
the Middle East Broadcasting Network. These are the radio
stations and news outlets that fight propaganda pushed by
state-controlled media under the iron fist of dictators and
despots like Putin, the ayatollah, and Chairman Xi. They shine
a spotlight on the war crimes of Putin. They have even
broadcast this committee's work. And like our report on the
origins of COVID in China, they played a critical role in
translating that report into Mandarin and sending it all across
mainland China.
But for all the good USAGM is capable of, there remains
serious problems with how it is being managed. In early 2021,
whistleblowers contacted Congress regarding the reinstatement
of Ms. Setareh Sieg, then director of Voice of America's
Persian News Network. The whistleblowers reached out to
congressional democrats first, but they were ignored. And when
they came to me, the ranking member of the committee at that
time, I immediately opened an investigation into the claims of
misconduct. The whistleblowers allege wide-ranging abuses,
including that Ms. Sieg frequently berated staff, used taxpayer
funds for personal travel, awarded government contracts to
friends, falsified her education credentials, and engaged in a
pattern of favoritism.
Additionally, this committee worked very closely with the
French embassy which informed this committee back in 2021 that
Ms. Sieg did not attend the prestigious Sorbonne, as she had
claimed, and she does not hold a Ph.D. or an equivalent. Also,
this was established 3 years ago. The USAGM still refuses to
accept these facts, but the evidence was clear: the
whistleblowers were right. And in light of this investigation,
I have serious concerns about employee vetting at this agency
since this episode represents a continuation of a troubling
pattern.
But I want to be clear: poor H.R. decisionmaking by senior
officials does not overshadow the important work being done by
their subordinates, nor does it cast doubt on the important
mission of this agency. Look no further than Radio Free Europe.
Radio Liberty is a shining example of how these outlets should
function.
I would also like to commend Mr. Steve Capus, who is here
today, on the work that you have been doing, sir. Journalists
working for these outlets are incredibly brave. Some have
served time in prison for simply telling the truth. Many of
them have fled the oppression of their homeland to report on
the tyranny of governments. They cannot tell their family where
they are or what they are doing for free of reprisal.
What the Sieg investigation has shown is that these
journalists' courage is undermined by internal dysfunction at
the agency. The U.S. Agency for Global Media must serve as a
voice of what Ronald Reagan called the shining city on a hill;
but, for that mission to be realized, USAGM leadership needs to
reestablish its credibility with the Congress. There is nothing
more powerful than the truth. When people have the freedom to
choose their own destiny, they will always choose freedom. The
world is on fire, and, now more than ever, they need that
beacon of truth from the shining city on the hill.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. We now recognize the
ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Meeks, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am so pleased to see
each and every one of you here today, and I am pleased to join
this hearing so that we can receive an update about the
important work that is being done by the U.S. Agency for Global
Media and the two of the independent broadcasting networks it
supports: the Voice of America and Radio Free Europe. Thank you
for all you are doing, for each and every one of you, and for
being here today. It is so good to see you and the work that
you are doing.
Now, I must say that this is in stark contrast to the
agency's former CEO, Michael Pack, who defied a lawful subpoena
to appear before this committee for a hearing about his tenure
in September 2020. And at that time, I was the chair, and
Ranking Member McCaul's concerns were articulated at that
hearing about the problematic leadership of the agency under
Mr. Pack, and I agreed with him. And that's why I am so glad to
see the new leadership, to see all of you here today to discuss
the work of these important agencies.
We all know that the global information space is more
active and more contested than it has ever been before. Around
the world, we see anti-democratic regimes suppressing the free
exchange of ideas and information, intimidate journalists into
self censoring, and control new media technologies and online
spaces. And we see our adversaries increasingly working to
shape the information space with mis-and disinformation that
intentionally twists and obscures facts, including about the
United States of America, our people, and our policies. And
that is why your work remains critical to our national
security. You and all of your colleagues are on the front
lines. You are helping people around the world to push back
against lies with the truth, to counter malign influence with
open and democratic debate, to protect against the undermining
of independent journalism, as well as promote the U.S. values
and interests. Our values.
As the global information landscape evolves, your agencies
have to meet this critical moment by expanding your reach in
emerging media landscapes in places like Africa and the Western
Hemisphere, to counter harmful Chinese and Russian narratives
that threaten to take root, by advocating for your journalists
and strangers who have come under threat simply for their
reporting and, in some cases, have been jailed for it. And by
modernizing your work to ensure that the U.S.-supported
broadcasters are amplifying independent news in more languages
across more platforms to nourish audiences' hunger for unbiased
facts and information. When I travel, we can see that they are
looking for unabashed and unbiased facts and information.
So I look forward to hearing about such efforts today and
about the resources and authorities you need from us in
Congress to be successful. We know you cannot be successful
without Congress working with you. It is unfortunate, in my
opinion, that I have to worry at times across by my colleagues
across the aisle will engage you in a narrower conversation
today. The Republican majority has seemed set on obscuring the
history of Mr. Pack's problematic tenure, including by
reopening an investigation into a VOA employee that Pack
lieutenants had once tried to remove. And they tried to do that
until Federal watchdogs paused the firing and later described
as prosecuted due to animus.
So let me be clear: If there are ongoing problems or
management challenges at any of your agencies, it is your
responsibility to deal with them. And I believe you are doing
so, and we want to hear more about that. But your role and our
oversight of your work should never be to simply peddle a
partisan narrative or settle personal vendettas. If our
Republican colleagues are serious about the investigation they
have undertaken on USAGM and its broadcasters, then they should
be transparent and let the facts speak for themselves,
including by publicly releasing the transcripts from hours of
closed-door interviews with USAGM and VOA officials from which
they have repeatedly cherry-picked.
So I close this by saying let's get back to focus on real
problems and real facts. The independent journalists you all
support around the world risk their safety to report unbiased
information, and they deserve no less than our concerted
supported. So let's get to the facts. And I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. We now recognize the
ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Crow, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman. And thank you to the
witnesses for being here today. The work you and your teams do,
often in hostile and dangerous environments, is essential to
supporting independent journalism, access to objective
reporting, and amplifying American values abroad. That work is
as important now as ever in this era of renewed Great Power
Competition against Russia and China, a competition that is put
into sharp focus this week as our NATO allies gather in
Washington to discuss the plan for the threats that we all
collectively face.
I would like to start by laying out what I hope today's
hearing will highlight today. The first is a point I have
already alluded to, and that is the United States Agency for
Global Media and the broadcasters and grantees it supports are
critical to promoting freedom of the press and countering
authoritarian disinformation. Voice of America and Radio Free
Europe, as well as other USAGM-supported broadcasters and
grantees, provide objective reporting on global news stories
and undertake independent journalism in places around the world
where that information is hard or impossible to come by.
And the fact that it is objective and independent is
actually what makes it so strong and effective and what
contrasts it with the disinformation and misinformation coming
from our adversaries. So I want to be very clear that it is not
the role of this committee to tell you all what to report and
how to report it because that act alone would undermine the
credibility, the veracity, and the effectiveness of that
information. It would make it just like what our adversaries
do. We report the facts. That is an American value, and that is
what we are here to talk about.
The second issue is the question of resources. I would like
you to help us understand just how important it is for us in
Congress to invest in you and give you the tools you need.
While malign actors, like Russia, China, and Iran, are cracking
down on independent journalism and are flooding the airwaves
with propaganda in their own countries and around the world, we
must give you more tools and more resources to combat their
malign activities, not fewer. And, yet, just a few weeks ago,
the majority passed our annual State and foreign operations
budget bill that made deep cuts to USAGM funding. I would like
to understand the risks, as you see them, of such a dangerous
and ill-advised decision. So, again, I look forward to
discussing with our witnesses the important work that you all
do and having a fact-based discussion.
Actually, one other thing I want to point out is that, in
any large organization, there are always H.R. issues, and it is
your job, as both the chairman and the ranking member alluded
to, of making sure you run your organizations and you address
H.R. problems. But it is also not the role of this committee to
serve as an H.R. office. We will look at systematic issues, we
will look at systematic problems if there are any, but to take
up individual cases based on prior grievance or to settle
scores of the prior Administration is not the role of this
committee, and we will not tolerate it.
So with that, I look forward to having a conversation with
all of you, and I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. It is now my pleasure to
introduce our distinguished witnesses before us today on this
important topic.
First, Hon. Amanda Bennett. She is the Chief Executive
Officer of the U.S. Agency for Global Media. Welcome. Next, Mr.
Michael Abramowitz, who is the Director of VOA, or Voice of
America. And, last, Mr. Steve Capus, the President of Radio
Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
Thank you for being here today. As you know from watching
C-SPAN, your full statements will be placed in the record,
including not only your written statements but any additional
collateral information you would like to bring to us.
And with that, I would ask to try to limit to 5 minutes. I
won't cut you off exactly at 5 minutes, but I will begin
tapping the gavel if it goes beyond that, so we can get to
questioning.
And with that, Ms. Bennett.

STATEMENT OF HON. AMANDA BENNETT, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, U.S.
AGENCY FOR GLOBAL MEDIA

Ms. Bennett. Thank you very much. I would like to thank
Chairman McCaul for his statement and Ranking Member Meeks for
his statement. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Crow, members of
the subcommittee, thank you all for the opportunity to be here.
I would first just like to reference the photograph that we
have here, and we will be referring to her quite a bit during
our testimony, all three of us here, because she represents the
dangers that are facing our journalists today. Her two teenaged
daughters, Alsu Kurmasheva's daughters, have not seen their
mother for months and months and months. She has been in a
Russian jail since October, deprived of adequate medical
attention and care and wrongly accused of being a foreign
agent.
Earlier this year, she wrote: My greatest wish is to get
out of here alive and well. Some illnesses have gotten worse,
but medications and regular exercise give me the strength to
hold on and endure the pain.
Journalism is not a crime. Yet, around the world,
journalists like Alsu are increasingly targeted for just doing
their jobs. In Russia, Belarus, Cambodia, Vietnam, Myanmar,
Hong Kong, and China, our journalists and their families face
enormous risks. Some of them are languishing in prison, like
Alsu, while others' families are threatened just for the
association with objective journalism. And, meanwhile, the
People's Republic of China is spreading its own distorted
message to Asia, to the Global South, the U.S., and other
Western democracies, and Russia is following suit.
Disinformation by our adversaries compounded with
censorship of the truthful reporting presents an urgent
national security risk to the U.S. Many see this terrifying
trend and conclude that democracy has already lost the
information war. We do not think that. USAGM and our entities,
the Voice of America here, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
here, the Office of Cuba Broadcasting, Radio Free Asia, the
Middle East Broadcasting Networks, the Open Technology Fund,
and the Frontline Media Fund were all built just for this
moment.
To power our mission, I have prioritized building a culture
of trust and clarity among our workforce since day one. I have
led with transparency, improved operational efficiency, and
invested in the public servants who make our mission possible.
And this approach has led to some tangible results, including
the fact that we have gotten our very highest-ever rankings in
the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey, a survey in which we
have been noted for being at the bottom of the barrel for years
and years and years. For the first time, we are noted among the
most improved.
And it is only up from here. The Federal board, the
International Broadcasting Advisory Board, that joined us
earlier this year and its members are already expanding our
capacity to advance our mission. And together we have taken
steps to protect the entity's editorial independence to ensure
their competitiveness, strength in journalist safety, and
secure top leaders across our entities. And as a testimony to
that, I am proud to be here with two of our newest leaders,
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty President and USAGM CEO Steven
Capus and VOA Director Michael Abramowitz, who were chosen in
harmonious cooperation among the board of Radio Free Europe/
Radio Liberty, the IBAB board, and the CEO, and all of us
agreed that these two gentlemen are really the extraordinary
choices for this job.
Many of our journalists have made tremendous sacrifices and
faced enormous risks to report the truth, and they are some of
the bravest people I have ever met. And we are doubling down on
our efforts to keep them safe. Just to show you what that is
like, I would just like to show you this thing here. It is very
hard to lift up even. This is a bulletproof vest. It was
provided to us thanks to the reporters at Middle East
Broadcasting Networks, and these were used by journalists
reporting from war zones in Gaza, Israel, Ukraine, and other
environments around the world. And while this protective gear
is sturdy, it is only one of the tools we deploy to protect our
journalists. We have begun providing risk assessments, safety
trainings, and, recently, we established a 24/7 threat working
group that is available to our journalists at all times.
In addition to journalist safety, we are investing in
infrastructure and technology to secure our reach to regions
where our reporting matters most. We recently launched the
Frontline Media Fund to incubate and advance new approaches to
distributing content, identify opportunities for savings,
provide surge capacity during crises, and champion journalist
safety and security. And as part of the FMF, we plan to launch
the Global News Service this year which will directly compete
with an existing similar news service that has been operated by
China for years. We are going to create one here at the USAGM.
The Global News Service is a transmission and translation hub
that will revolutionize how we conclude, curate, and promote
stories by our entities in Mandarin, English, and eventually in
many other languages.
We are also pursuing a new headquarters for our agency and
VOA, and moving into a modern building will save us over $100
million in taxpayer dollars over the course of our anticipated
15-year lease, securing cost-savings that can be reinvested in
our mission, particularly in updating our technology to make
sure that we are more competitive with the technology used by
our adversaries to preserve and extend our reach for the
future.
You know, this hearing refers to management successes and
failures, but, with a mission this critical, failure is not an
option. We are winning in the global information war. We are
currently winning, but we are going to lose if we miss an
opportunity to invest in our future. And we cannot succeed
without your support. Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Bennett follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Issa. Thank you. Mr. Abramowitz.

STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL ABRAMOWITZ, DIRECTOR, VOICE OF
AMERICA

Mr. Abramowitz. Thank you, Congressman Issa and Ranking
Member Crow, and I want to thank Chair McCaul and Ranking
Member Meeks for your opening comments. And I really appreciate
the opportunity to testify today. I was sworn in less than 3
weeks ago as the new VOA director after nearly 8 years as the
president of Freedom House where I had a first-hand
appreciation of the impact and the global reach of
authoritarian governments.
When others ask me why I wanted to leave VOA, the answer
was simple: I love the mission. It is a true privilege to take
on this role during an age when propaganda is spreading
globally and fact-based journalism is under dire threat. VOA is
a critical bulwark against the accelerating efforts of
authoritarian regimes to spread lies and disinformation. VOA is
a vital source of trusted news and information in large parts
of the world without access to reliable and independent news.
It is a fierce defender of the free press and the safety of
journalists who increasingly practice their craft amidst a
dizzying array of physical threats. I could not be more proud
to be leading VOA with its long and storied history of
countering lies with truthful and factual journalism.
I would like to take a moment to express my appreciation to
VOA's outstanding journalists and staff who perform their
critical work in often dangerous and trying circumstances.
Although I haven't been here for long, I am already impressed
with their work. On just my fourth day at VOA, I stayed during
the evening to watch the news teams cover the Trump--Biden
debate, and, thanks to Voice of America's live simultaneous
translation, speakers of Russian, Mandarin, Farsi, Urdu,
Spanish, Ukrainian, Dari, and Pashto were able to follow the
debate live, and speakers of 40 other languages were able to
access honest, fact-based coverage of the debate presented from
Washington by a time-tested American media organization with a
legal mandate to be accurate, objective, and comprehensive.
I very much look forward to working closely with this
committee and with the Congress more generally. I believe
strongly that the nature of VOA's work and its importance to
U.S. national security interests should inspire support across
the political aisle. Voice of America is one of the most cost-
effective foreign policy tools the United States possesses. We
are a highly efficient antidote to the disinformation and
propaganda spread by our adversaries. As the new VOA director,
I promise to protect taxpayer dollars and use our funds
effectively to advance our vital mission, and I will expect
myself and VOA personnel to adhere to highest journalistic and
professional standards.
I am eager to sit down with this committee to get your best
ideas for how we can strengthen VOA and its ability to carry
out this vital mission. I also look forward to working with my
colleagues at USAGM and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty to find
ways to better collaborate and coordinate our efforts. With
China and Russia doubling down on information warfare, it is
essential that VOA and the other networks work closely together
to create synergies and avoid duplication.
It is early in my tenure, so it is probably a little bit
too early to provide definitive plans. But my aspirations for
VOA are straightforward. I want to ensure that the agency
continues to be the leading international broadcaster providing
factual and impartial news and information to international
audiences, especially those living under tyranny. VOA will
rebut misinformation and disinformation, whatever the source.
And, in addition, we will tell America's story to the world.
And as our charter mandates, we will represent all of America,
not any single segment. And in so doing, we will counter
malicious narratives spread by state-sponsored media, extremist
groups, and other actors.
We will also present our content in a way that is relevant
to the diverse audiences we serve around the world. VOA, like
many other news organizations, faces an urgent challenge of
building audiences in places where young people have turned
away from traditional news sources. We need to win them over
with stories that are interesting and meet them where they are:
on their cell phones and social media feeds and in the
languages they speak.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today, and
thank you for giving your time and energy to an agency that was
vital in America's efforts to win the Second World War and the
cold war and that remains just as vital today in meetings
today's challenge of defeating authoritarianism. Thank you,
sir.
[The statement of Mr. Abramowitz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Issa. Thank you. We now go to Mr. Capus.

STATEMENT OF HON. STEPHEN CAPUS, PRESIDENT, RADIO FREE EUROPE/
RADIO LIBERTY

Mr. Capus. Thank you, Chairman Issa. Chairman McCaul,
Ranking Members Crow and Meeks, the distinguished members of
this subcommittee, including Chairman Mast, thank you for
hosting this important hearing and inviting me to speak today.
Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty is a media organization
with a proud history and a very bright future. It reflects the
values of the American people through congressional and
taxpayer support and through its independence and the desire
for freedom for more people in the world.
RFE/RL is unlike most any other news organization.
Everywhere we work, we are in the thick of it. Our news
organizations parachute in. While other news organizations
parachute in to cover a story a day or two and then go back to
their safe homes, our people are already home. They are firmly
in place in some of the most difficult, dangerous places
imaginable. There, we operate with a dedicated commitment to
serving people as surrogate broadcasters, reaching people in
their local languages and dialects, offering a dramatic
alternative to State broadcasters' well-funded propaganda
machines.
We offer something completely different. It is called the
truth. And just yesterday, the truth is all of us watched in
horror as a children's hospital was bombed in Kyiv, Ukraine.
Our extraordinary Ukraine service is comprised of nearly 200
people based in Kyiv, Lviv, and on the front lines, and so they
were some of the first people to show up at the scene. They
rushed from their bomb shelter studio in the parking garage in
Kyiv, and what they found was horrific. The video they captured
was instantly shared around the world and seen by millions.
Even the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense shared our video on
their sites, and the truth went viral. And it was funded by
you. This is how we compete with the Russian version of this
war.
And, yes, we do all of that kind of front-line reporting in
Ukraine, but we also do investigative reporting. We document
Russian atrocities, outright war crimes, and--this is
important--we also hold the Ukrainian government accountable.
Before, during, and after the war, our Ukraine service covers
the local, national, and global aspects of this war for
Ukrainians in Ukrainian.
I have spent my entire career in American network
newsrooms. I am the former president of NBC News. But nothing
has been as important as the work that I am doing right here
right now as the president of RFE/RL. These days, I work side
by side with journalists dealing with issues of life and death.
For example, a young Iranian journalist on our staff, Parisa
Sohbati, she is winning awards for her podcast that connect
young women of her age inside Iran who are facing oppression
and terrible abuse just for being a young woman inside Iran
yearning for freedom.
RFE/RL has unsurpassed street credibility and brand equity
in this region. We might still have the word radio in our name,
but these days RFE/RL is a powerful multimedia company that
reaches 42 million people across 11 time zones every week. That
success is good, but it is hard earned, and our opponents are
well funded. Consider this: China, Russia, and Iran outspend us
by many billions, and they are not constrained by the truth. In
contrast, RFE/RL is funded at a modest $142 million a year. We
are outgunned, but we will not stop. Without us, Iran, China,
and Russia will be very happy to fill the void, and we cannot
let that happen.
We are a thorn in the sides of these dangerous regimes, and
so they pass new foreign agent laws, they label us extremists,
they call us undesirable. If our work wasn't effective, they
would simply ignore us, but they do not. We clearly are a
threat to them, so they go to great lengths to silence us. And
the same goes for our colleagues on democracy's front lines in
places like Taiwan with our colleagues from Radio Free Asia.
And with thanks to the Open Technology Fund circumvention
technology, we reach inside closed societies.
As I said, when all else fails, they imprison our people.
As we sit here today, four of our colleagues are in imprisoned.
Amanda mentioned one of them. Alsu has been held in Russia for
nearly a year. Our colleague Vladysav is imprisoned for more
than 3 years now in Crimea. Ihar and Andres are locked away in
Belarus. In fact, Ihar Losik has been held incommunicado in
Belarus for 505 days now. He has been forced to divorce his
wife, separate entirely from his beloved profession and his
family. Simply put, his life has been destroyed because he
worked for us.
I am going to conclude with the words of a famous Iranian
women's rights activist who has been recently freed from prison
who wrote to us: Say Hello to all of the Radio Farda
colleagues. Your inclusive coverage is rare and very much
appreciated inside the female section of Evin Prison.
We want to do more. Why? Because all that we hold near and
dear and as inherent fundamental human rights is at risk. We
are at an inflection point in the world. In the past, during
the cold war, when the Berlin Wall fell, during 9/11, and as
Russian aggression surged, RFE/RL has been there to bring home
the truth to the darkest corners. We cannot abandon the people
who view RFE/RL as lifelines. It is worthy of your continued
support. Thank you very much.
[The statement of Mr. Capus follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Issa. Thank you. We now go into 5-minute sessions,
alternating between majority and minority. And we will begin
with Mr. Perry first for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Bennett, I am sure
you are probably aware that the oversight of your operation has
been something of great bipartisan interest for this committee
for some time, actually for years now. And I cannot say that we
are openly thrilled about the cooperation from your
predecessors, and we hope that it is better under your tenure
here.
Issues include, as you know, decades-long security lapses,
a partisan bias, improper hiring practices, and abuse of visa
programs, which are very concerning to us. Very concerning. We
have got a wide-open border, known terrorists coming through,
criminals, and our national security is at stake. And the abuse
of visa programs and the lack of fidelity regarding security
clearance is problematic to us. And so you will have to forgive
us if we remain skeptical about USAGM's competence and
trustworthiness.
Mr. Capus, your eloquent talk made us think about the Voice
of America and USAGM of days past but not of days that we have
seen recently. We would like to change that. Clearly put and
simply put, you are to serve the long-range interests of the
United States, of the United States of America and its
citizens.
During your tenure, ma'am, as director, according to
various VOA reporters, you and other agency officials halted a
live interview with a known Chinese dissident after Beijing
allegedly complained to the State Department, and then VOA
fired the journalist conducting the interview. That is the side
of the story I got. I am sure you have something else, and I am
interested in hearing it. But what also concerns me is VOA used
CCP talking points to describe the PRC's COVID-19 response
efforts, stating, and I quote, ``From Asia to Europe, South
America to Africa, China is providing or has pledged
humanitarian assistance in the form of donations or medical
expertise,'' unquote, which might be the right thing to do if
you also include the fact that it is very likely and it has
been known for some time and finally admitted that the likely
location of the release of the virus is the Wuhan Institute of
Virology. That might be at least a counterbalance. But we are
not here to do Beijing's bidding for sure and certainly not use
the taxpayers' money to do that.
I am wondering, and this is another subject but along the
same line, do you, ma'am, consider Hamas as a terrorist
organization? Is Hamas a terrorist organization?
Ms. Bennett. I am the head of a Federal agency----
Mr. Perry. I know, ma'am, you are.
Ms. Bennett [continuing]. So I will accept the definition
that is given by the United States, which has designated Hamas
as a terrorist organization.
Mr. Perry. OK. So Hamas is a terrorist organization, you
agree. And, therefore, its members are terrorists. Yet, I seen
a memo, an internal VOA guidance, after the October 7th attack
by Hamas directed VOA staff to avoid calling Hamas and its
members terrorists, except in quotes. Why would that be?
Ms. Bennett. That was a personal opinion by someone that
circulated. It was not, by any means, the policy. The policy is
to be careful about the use of the word terrorists with Hamas
or any other group but to use it as it is appropriate. And this
is one situation where artificial intelligence really enabled
us to shed light on an important situation. In response to
letters from both sides of Congress, we used artificial
intelligence to look through all our languages and look at----
Mr. Perry. Well, that is great, ma'am. And I appreciate
that, but let's drill down on that a little bit. So Hamas is a
terrorist organization by the definition of the U.S.
Government. You agree. Therefore, its members are terrorists,
and you are saying you are using artificial intelligence to
determine when it is appropriate. So tell me when it is not
appropriate.
Ms. Bennett. No, sir. We used artificial intelligence to
determine all the instances in which we did use the word
terrorist in describing Hamas. We used it frequently, and we
sent a graph of all the instances to the members who wrote the
letters to us. We have used it frequently. We have used it in
quotes, we have used it out of quotes. We have used it----
Mr. Perry. When does it go in quotes, and when does it go
out of quotes? When----
Ms. Bennett. There is very widely used standards as to how
it is used, and people, the journalists, are using their own
determination as to whether or not it is appropriate to use it
in quotes or not quotes. But we use it in both ways.
Mr. Perry. But the journalists work for you, and you work
for the United States citizens, and Hamas is a terrorist
organization designated by the United States of America who
attacked Israel. And the free world or the world that wishes to
be free is counting on you to call the balls and strikes, not
equivocate whether Hamas is a terrorist organization that
slaughtered Jewish individuals without cause. And that is why
many of us have pause about funding your organization because,
if we cannot count on you to have the correct judgment
regarding such an egregious occurrence, well, the American
taxpayers do not want to pay for that. I yield.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. We now go to the ranking
member for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman. Ms. Bennett, I want to pick
up where we just left off here because there is just some facts
and then there are things that are not facts. I would like to
give you a minute or two to actually explain the facts about
how your organization has treated the reporting on Hamas and
its designation as a terrorist organization.
Ms. Bennett. Yes. Thank you. And, yes, we do not shy away
from using the word terrorist in conjunction to Hamas or any
other terrorist-designated organization. We have found examples
of many, many, many, well over a thousand examples in which we
have used that exactly as you describe in appropriate manners.
There are best practices guides that talk about how careful
you have to be in using the word terrorist because you do not
want to apply it indiscriminately, and the thing that
originally started this discussion was mistakenly described as
a policy when, in fact, it was an email sent around to staff by
a person who was expressing her opinion, as I think we are all
entitled to do. It did not represent the policy. The policy is
as I have stated, which is that we are careful with the use of
the word terrorist, but we did not shy away from using it in
conjunction with Hamas or any other terrorist group.
Mr. Crow. Just to clarify, you are careful with the use of
that word because it is a serious word. You take it seriously.
You are careful generally.
Ms. Bennett. We are careful generally in using the word
generally, and that applies to Hamas or any other terrorist
organization.
Mr. Crow. And you have never shied away from using it with
regard to Hamas as a matter of policy.
Ms. Bennett. We have never, and we can provide examples of
it to anyone who requests and have done in the past.
Mr. Crow. And to clarify your use of AI, it wasn't actually
to determine whether or not to use it. It was actually to do
the extra due diligence to make sure that across your entire
enterprise that you were looking at all instances, so you
actually were going kind of above and beyond by doing a scrub
using AI; is that accurate?
Ms. Bennett. That is correct. For the very first time, to
do a scrub in all the languages that are used inside USAGM to
look and make sure that we were using it appropriately, as
everyone rightfully demands us to do.
Mr. Crow. OK. Thank you. I want to touch on the issue of
budgeting and resources. I mean, you outlined in the beginning
the incredible case as to the powerful tool, and, Mr. Capus,
you said it so eloquently when you indicated that the response
from our adversaries actually indicates how effective you
really are. I mean, they come at you and your journalists and
reporters very hard because you pose a threat, and you pose a
threat because you are good and you are credible and you are an
important tool.
So if we were going to cut your budgets, as the majority
proposes to do, what would that look like in your
organizations? What would be those hard decisions, those things
you would not be able to do for us? We can start anywhere we
want to start.
Mr. Capus. I would say it would have a devastating impact
on the work that we are doing, and I mentioned some of that in
my opening statement. The work right now is vital. We are
without a doubt targeted by Russia, by Belarus, by Iran, by
China, you name it. And if we leave the playing field, if you
will, if we leave that space to those countries and their
propaganda and attempts to sway public opinion, we are giving
them that terrain to themselves. We are busy in all of these
areas.
The degree of threat that our people face cannot be
understated. Right now, we have to devote significant resources
to advocate for our people, legal resources to try to get them
out from behind bars, and I do not want to leave anybody
behind. That is the other thing that goes along with the
mission of these organizations right now is to take care of our
people.
Mr. Crow. Thank you. Any other thoughts on that? Mr.
Abramowitz.
Mr. Abramowitz. I would just say that on the issues that
this committee cares about, that we care about,coverage of Iran
or Russia, it would be quite devastating to have the kind of
cuts I have seen bandied about. What is interesting to me, just
in the first few weeks of being at VOA, is I see that when big
news stories happen, like the debate I mentioned but also, you
know, 2 years ago during the Women, Life, Freedom protests in
Iran, during the recent terrorist attacks inside Russia, that
we have a large reach in those countries, and the people of
those countries come to VOA because it is the only source of
information to kind of counter the false information that is
coming from the government. And so that is what the concern
would be, that we would steadily lose that ability to push back
against that false information.
Mr. Crow. Yes. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. We now go to the gentleman
from Tennessee, Mr. Burchett.
Mr. Burchett. Thanks, Chairman Issa, ranking member. Mr.
Bennett, Setareh Sieg was fired for lying on her resume, for
mishandling taxpayer dollars, and harassing staff at the United
States Agency for Global Media. Why was she rehired? Your
microphone.
Ms. Bennett. Sir, that whole issue has been thoroughly
overseen, and I have great respect for the oversight
capabilities and responsibilities of this organization. It has
been thoroughly overseen over a period of three and a half
years, including all the issues you mentioned there. I hope
that we are able to--as a conclusion was drawn, a report was
issued. I am hoping that we will be able to work in partnership
with your committee in oversight of the important things that
are now facing us. So----
Mr. Burchett. Well, ma'am, do you have any comment on that?
I mean, I know there is a public statement that was issued
following the Foreign Affairs Committee report, so you clearly
have no problem with commenting on the matter. I am just
wondering why was she rehired.
Ms. Bennett. Sir, it is really, as you know, inappropriate
to talk about personnel issues in an open forum like this,
although this whole entire issue has been very thoroughly----
Mr. Burchett. Well, ma'am, it is taxpayer money. I think it
is very appropriate for us to talk about it. And I would issue
some caution there. You know, the Privacy Act doesn't apply to
Congress, and these are taxpayer moneys, and these people--
ma'am, you know, we had whistleblowers tell us that this lady
was harassing staff. I mean, is that what is acceptable?
Ms. Bennett. Sir, you are right. We have spent three and a
half years being exceptionally cooperative, really trying to
answer every question----
Mr. Burchett. You answered every question, but you rehired
her.
Ms. Bennett. Sir, we dealt with that issue. We talked about
it. It is in the report. We----
Mr. Burchett. Well, I appreciate the talk, ma'am. But
rehiring her, to me, really defeats a lot of the purpose of why
we are here. I think it was pretty much proven in the committee
report, it was unequivocal and was even proven by third-party
credentialing service what went down on that deal, so that is
very disappointing.
You know, you all released a report detailing Ms. Sieg's
offenses for which she was fired. Do you agree the committee's
findings are accurate?
Ms. Bennett. Sir, we do not always agree on everything the
committee finds, but we, nonetheless, have great respect for
the committee on its oversight responsibility and we try to----
Mr. Burchett. And I appreciate the lawyers giving you that
answer, ma'am. But the evidence in the report that relates to
her lying on her resume was verified by a third-party
credentialing service. I mean, how do we go out here and tell
people that we are hiring and some people that we are letting
go that, well, we will make exceptions for certain people
because of whatever reason. And when they lie or they harass
employees or other things or maybe some financial dealings that
we are not clear of, sure of, that we keep these people on?
Ms. Bennett. And, sir, as I say, we were extremely
cooperative in talking to you about every single thing that we
have been asked to talk about, and the report reflects the
committee's view----
Mr. Burchett. Ma'am, let me ask you this: do you believe
the whistleblowers who have spoke about Ms. Sieg? Do you think
they told the truth, or do you think they lied? Just tell me
what do you think?
Ms. Bennett. Sir, that is not for me to talk about whether
a person lies or tells the truth, sir, but I would like to say
that we do not agree with everything that the report says.
Nonetheless, we respect the oversight----
Mr. Burchett. Ma'am, she mishandled over $1 million in
taxpayer money. Is that alone not a fireable offense?
Ms. Bennett. Sir, those allegations, long before I came
back to the agency, were, I think, deeply investigated and
found to be without merit, which is why I believe that the
investigation focused in on the educational credentials and not
on these other allegations because they were disproved very
early on, long before I came here.
Mr. Burchett. Well, the third party, I believe, begs to
differ on some of those issues. Who else receives this level of
special treatment at USAGM? Is there other people that have
followed on this same path that you know of?
Ms. Bennett. I am not sure what level of special treatment
that you are asking about.
Mr. Burchett. Well, ma'am, if there is a misappropriation
or mishandled a million dollars in taxpayer money, that seems
to be something I would think we would be concerned about. And
it is very concerning to me when I talk to people about the
level of trust in government and their lack of trust when
things like this occur. I think it is pretty evident why they
do not trust in government because we are not managing our
money and we are throwing it around, and this needs to change
and I believe it will be changing very soon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. The gentleman did seem to want to know
if there was merit to her false allegation that she had a Ph.D.
from a French university. Can you answer that on the record,
please?
Ms. Bennett. Again, sir, we answered these questions many
times, including the seven transcribed interviews by all the
people involved.
Mr. Issa. I am just asking if you can answer on the record
whether she has a Ph.D. or not. That is not a private question,
and I think that was part of the gentleman's inquiry.
Ms. Bennett. I think I need to defer to the testimoneys
that have been given by our people under----
Mr. Issa. Then let the record show that she did not have it
and that those were truthful, that she had lied about, and we
will leave it that way unless we get something different from a
witness.
With that, we go to the gentlelady from Nevada, Ms. Titus,
for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to talk
about some of the languages that you include and some that you
do not. I have worked a lot with the Appropriations Committee
to highlight the importance of including the Mongolian
language. There are 9 million Mongolians out there that are in
Mongolia, in Russia, and the People's Republic of China, and we
are just not reaching them. And, yet, Mongolia is a neighbor
that we need in a kind of unfriendly part of the world, and
they have an opportunity to do independent foreign policy. They
are leaning toward the West and democracy. We need to get
information they have, and they need to hear from us.
I wonder, Ms. Bennett, can you talk about what steps you
have taken to try to establish a Mongolian language service?
There is a Mongolia caucus here in Congress that would be
interested in hearing that.
Ms. Bennett. Congresswoman, I completely agree with you as
to the importance of the Mongolian language, particularly as it
relates to its neighbor in the People's Republic of China and
the issues surrounding it. And, yes, we have done a fair amount
of study and research as to the feasibility of adding that
language, but, unfortunately, like so many of the other
languages that we would also like to add to reach those people,
the recent budget cuts have made this really impossible to do.
We have put it on our list. We have looked for it. We are going
to request that funding be made available for it, but,
unfortunately, it is just a victim of the current budget
situation for which I really feel deeply sorry.
Ms. Titus. Well, I do, too. I know that the report for
Fiscal Year 2025 mentioned that this was something that we
should be doing and then to cut the resources to make it
impossible just seems not in our own national security
interest.
Ms. Bennett. I would agree with you, Congresswoman.
Ms. Titus. What are some of the other languages that you
are looking at, like Mongolia?
Ms. Bennett. Well, there are a number of places that we
would like to think about broadcasting into that we talk about.
Just off the top of my head, there would be perhaps in the
Philippines, the languages that reach the Philippines, Brazil,
India. These places originally were thought to have very robust
free press availability, which no longer do. There are many,
many parts of the world nowadays that we would like to really
consider adding a broadcast to, and I think that those places
would welcome our presence.
Ms. Titus. Well, I think so, too. We will see if we cannot
make that case to get that funding back. Yet another reason why
the budget should not be cut.
So let me ask you this: in Eastern Europe, we are seeing
more and more regimes becoming more repressive. You have got
Lukashenka in Belarus, and you've got Hungary, Poland. Moldova
seems to be next. If you look at, after Ukraine, the pieces
that start to fall, Moldova certainly is, you know, kind of in
that pathway. We have got a limited presence there, but,
despite the fact that Moldova gets an awful lot of propaganda
from Russia, can you talk, Mr. Capus, about some of the maybe
bright spots in that region and how we could increase funding
there to push back Russian narratives?
Mr. Capus. Well, we do have a presence in Moldova, and they
are doing some fine work right now. All across that Eastern
Europe and you get into the Caucasus and other areas, I was
just in Georgia 3 weeks ago visiting our staff, dedicated staff
that we have in Tbilisi. This is a group of people who not only
are Georgian, but this is also a group of people who we have
had to relocate several times. They used to work for us, in
some cases, in Russia. Then we moved them to Kyiv, and now we
have moved them to Tbilisi thinking that would be safe. And
now, of course, this terrible, yet another one of these foreign
agent laws has been passed in Georgia, and so they are facing
an uncertain future, as well.
We cannot afford to continue to open one office, close
another one, open in a new place thinking it is going to be
safe. We have got to--and, to be clear, we do not just simply
do that as soon as it gets a little difficult. Everywhere where
we operate right now, things are difficult. We stay there as
long as we can, as long as we can keep our people safe, because
the audiences expect us to be there. But it is an important
task.
Ms. Titus. There is a lot of overlap with where you are.
You mentioned Georgia and then Kyiv and making those moves.
With HDP, the House Democracy Partnership, we are trying to do
some of the same things that you are doing but working through
legislative bodies in some of these countries that are in very
difficult neighborhoods, and I think it is a good partnership
and I would like to see it strengthened, not weakened by budget
cuts.
Mr. Capus. We would love to welcome you to Prague sometime
to talk about it.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. We will now go to the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Ms. Dean, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Dean. I thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Oh, would the gentlelady yield for just 1 second?
I just want to get this in the record. I ask unanimous consent
that documents from Carol Guensburg dated October 20th and
October 10th be put in the record, and her title is the
Associate Editor, News and Standards and Best Practices.
Without objection, it will be placed in the record.
I apologize, and please go forward, ma'am.
Ms. Dean. Not at all. I thank you, Chairman Issa and my
sympathies to Representative Mast and his family. Thank you,
Ranking Member Crow, for holding this hearing today, and I am
especially thankful to the three of you. It is an honor to be
in your company, to be in conversation with you, with the
extraordinary work, the body of work you all have done but
especially what you are doing now. Please send my regards to
all those you work with. They are well led by you, and that
might reveal that I am a little puzzled by some of the focus of
the questions today on personnel matters because what you are
doing is so incredibly important, and we need to be an
appropriate partner with you, not overseeing HR.
I would like to talk first about combating disinformation.
We have seen a startling rise in the spread of misinformation,
disinformation, and plain flat-out lying both domestically and
across the globe. We have even heard instances in this very
room, which I find so regrettable. I have made a point to call
out disinformation when I hear it and try to correct the record
because, after all, if we are not operating under facts and
truth, we are not operating well. I firmly believe we must
ensure that people have access to reliable fact-based
information. We must support credible unbiased media
organizations that work to provide that information globally.
Ms. Bennett, you say in your written testimony, quote,
``Disinformation by our adversaries paired with censorship of
truthful reporting threatens the viability of fragile
democracies and presents an urgent national security risk to
the United States,'' end quote. Mr. Capus, you similarly State
that reinforcing the democratic foundation of other nations
contributes to the safety and security of the American people.
And I know, Mr. Abramowitz, you have similar responsibilities.
How do you all check, how do you use your organization
appropriately to check and combat disinformation, particularly
in those areas where we see vulnerable democracies at risk?
Ms. Bennett. I would like to cede to my colleagues, but,
first, to say something as basic as the fact that without VOA,
without Radio Free Europe, there are big parts of the world
that would not even know that there had been a Russian invasion
of Ukraine because the Russians were saying there had been
none. These are the only two sources of truth in that matter in
very large portions of the world, so perhaps you two would like
to talk about it.
Mr. Abramowitz. Sure. Well, we do it in a lot of different
ways. I think one of the things that we have 48 different
language services, and each of those services approaches it
differently. But, often, there are fact-checking or
disinformation monitoring types of enterprises carried out that
are appropriate for each culture.
So, for instance, the Mandarin desk, I have learned, you
know, we have a disinformation desk, and they were looking, for
instance, at how Google's artificial intelligence gave answers
online, and they discovered that, often, the answers were in
line with Chinese propaganda. And then when the chat bot, the
Google chat bot was silent on issues like human rights abuses
in Xinxiang or street protests against COVID.
And so our team of reporters surfaced that, and that became
something that got public and many Members of Congress in both
parties learned about that and they publicized it. So it is
dozens of different exercises like that across the news
services that we do that.
Ms. Dean. Thank you. Mr. Capus.
Mr. Capus. There is a number of things I would like to say
about this, and I appreciate the opportunity to talk about it.
I would say that all of the services, and you have to remember
that we are operating in 23 different countries, 27 different
language services, all of our entities have the mandate of
identifying disinformation campaigns. Often, we are some of the
first people to spot them before they go viral, and so they
have the mandate to find them and then report on them. You can
see examples across the board of all of our services doing
incredibly important work in this.
I think there is a misperception that our job is to simply
be propaganda on the other side. Nothing could be further from
the truth about that. We have a mandate to present the truth.
If we are viewed as simply a mouthpiece for the U.S. Government
or for just being the flip side, being propagandists, then I
cannot think of a quicker way for all of us to be deemed
irrelevant by the audiences that we are trying to reach.
So we do not play games with the news. That is the most
important thing that I would say that would be a takeaway, I
hope, is we do not play games with the news. We report what is
going on, and that is the mission.
Ms. Dean. I thank you for that fine, diligent filter, and
it is so desperately connected to national security for us but
also globally. So thank you and especially thank you for the
reporting at the children's hospital yesterday. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentlelady. I will recognize myself
now. Ms. Bennett, the committee has asked for and not received
any substantiation, including dissertation, grades, documents
from a university showing this alleged Ph.D. We have a valid
whistleblower and substantiation from the French government
that she does not have the degree from Sorbonne that she says
she has. Now, you have refused to answer. You are saying you
will let the reports speak for themselves. So on behalf of the
full committee chairman, I am just simply going to make sure
that, on the record, this committee believes that you have
rehired somebody who lied about their degree and they have been
re-instituted as somebody over the control of others, in a
position of authority. Now that is not an H.R. statement. That
is, in fact, a management statement pursuant to this
committee's oversight and pursuant to what we do when we have
whistleblowers report false allegations.
Until or unless you find a way to change that, on behalf of
the chairman and on behalf of myself, we will still stand
feeling that you have not righted the ship. If you can find an
explanation showing why you believe she should be rehired
because her claim was not false or that you are perfectly happy
to have somebody who has lied but is pretty good at other
things, then say so to the committee. Until you do so, that is
where the record is going to be since you refuse to answer.
Now, as to Carol Guensburg, her title which I already put
in the record is the Associate Editor of News Standards and
Best Practices. That is not somebody just sending something
around. That is somebody with the authority to say how things
should be done and to interpret what best practices are. Is
that not true, ma'am?
Ms. Bennett. At the time, she was the acting in that
position, and she was interpreting on her own behalf----
Mr. Issa. Ma'am, she had the title. Acting gives her the
title and the power. So my question to you is would not you
have to agree that when someone sends something around and they
have the title that says they, in fact, are the interpreter and
the boss when it comes to news standards and best practices,
that that is not just, as you said, somebody sending something
around that. That is management making a statement telling
people not to use Hamas terrorist, except in quotations.
Wouldn't you agree to that?
Ms. Bennett. Sir, she interpreted the best practices
information, which is readily available to everyone----
Mr. Issa. We went through a great deal----
Ms. Bennett. It was a loose interpretation. It was
immediately reinterpreted by management, and the----
Mr. Issa. When did that reinterpretation occur? It did not
occur on the 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, or all the way through to the
20th. When did it occur?
Ms. Bennett. Sir, unfortunate--this was done at the Voice
of America before Mr. Abramowitz's tenure there, so it was not
done under his direct supervision, so we would have to go back
and look. But I was made aware at the time that there was a
reinterpretation and a re-encouragement that people look to the
best practices guide, which is readily available to every
employee of USAGM.
Mr. Issa. So in the intervening 2 months, one of the things
that happened is I met with the acting head of it and, through
a whistleblower, discovered they went back and mocked the
meeting and our idea that we would question whether that was
best practice. So, once again, for the record, it was more than
2 months.
We are here because we do provide authorization and,
ultimately, appropriation of an amount that, over the years,
has been many billions of dollars. I believe in your
organization, and I believe that the hardworking men and women,
many of whom aren't Americans, that are across the globe and
they are operating, trying to bring the truth to people. I
would ask all of you, and I know I did not ask all of you
questions here today, I would ask all of you to go back and ask
the question. We do not want you to be propaganda. We do know
that people take great risk, but we also know that the Voice of
America and its other namesakes are, in fact, supposed to be
the voice of an American position of liberty, an American
position that promotes the human side of freedom. And it is not
completely without a bias. It, by definition, does have the
American bias. It does have the bias of the free world. That is
what we did, that is what we sent over the Berlin Wall and
throughout the Iron Curtain for generations.
And so I would ask you to please take a good look because
the term best practices, for gentlemen, including Mr. Capus,
the definition that exists at CNN versus Fox, neither one of
those definitions work. And the definition at the Washington
Post and the definition at the New York Times, quite candidly,
when we contrast them, they are not looking at the same book.
So your definition has to be consistent with a mandate that
comes from Congress and a tradition that I think everyone on
both sides of the aisle here today can be supportive of. And I
know I have been tough on you, and I am doing this on behalf of
the chairman of the subcommittee, but I am also doing this
because I believe in your organization and I would hope that
this hearing isn't just one of those things you slough off and
say, oh, that was good, we got it done, but you actually ask
the question of could not we do better than saying we have best
practices and say, you know what, we have uniquely the type of
practices we are proud to come before Congress and show them
what we do. And please continue using your AI to sort of figure
out whether you have some level of consistency over so many
languages.
And with that, I would ask if anyone needs a followup
question.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman. This is less a question,
just wanting to point out in response to the questioning about
this employee and the employee's credentials. The minority has,
on numerous occasions, requested from the majority the
transcripts of the TIs that the majority took at their request
during the conduct of the investigation that is underlying the
report. The majority has not released the transcripts from
those TIs. So in the interest of transparency, in the interest
of bringing to light all of the facts of this case, let's just
release those transcripts so we can all see for ourselves what
it is we are dealing with. What do they have to hide?
So we will again reiterate our request from the minority to
the majority to release the transcripts of those TIs so we can
have a more thorough and open conversation. Thank you,
Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. And we are asking whether we can get
you a direct answer to that. I will, from experience, comment
just briefly. As you know, you had members of your side in
those transcribed interviews. And for purposes of the
committee, you are free to ask questions relevant to that and
even to opine on what you believe you understood in those
hearings. They are not closed from essentially your release. If
they are transcribed interviews, they are free even for you to
say a great deal. If they are depositions, then the actual
release requires a committee vote, but I would only say from my
own experience please feel free to bring copies or to refresh
your memory and ask questions from it in the future and,
hopefully, we will be able to release all or whatever is
mutually agreeable between the majority and minority shortly.
Ms. Titus, do you have any further comments in closing?
Ms. Titus. Yes. Thank you. I just wanted to ask Mr. Capus
if he could briefly give us an update on Ms. Kurmasheva's
situation. We met with her family, and we know she is being
held. She is one of your journalists. Could you tell us where
she is, how she is, what is happening?
Mr. Capus. Well, thank you for asking. No. 1, she is a
beloved colleague of all of us. She has been a resident of
Prague for 25 years. She is an American citizen. She made what
we now know is a mistake, not reporting inside Russia but she
went home because her mother was quite ill. And she went back
to visit her, and, when she went to leave, they stopped her and
she has been there ever since. She has been in a prison now for
8 months, and sometime this summer she will face a formal
hearing. All of this has been pretrial. She will face a formal
hearing. The charges are baseless. They have been brought up
against her, we believe, because she works for us.
Her conditions in the prison cell have been terrible. She
was forced to sleep a mere few feet away from a hole in the
floor that doubled as a toilet, and, recently, they moved her
into a different facility. We have had to take the Russians to
court in order to get just basic level of health care for her,
and she has had some concerns. We have had to push to get those
conditions treated, and we have had to go to court in order to
get that done.
She has not been able to have communication with her
family. The United States has tried to send consular visits to
her cell. We have been pushing the United States Department of
State to give her the wrongfully detained designation, which we
believe would give her the full weight and support of the U.S.
Government as we push for her release, and, to date, she has
not been given that designation, though we believe she meets
each and every one of the criteria necessary.
Her detention has been a blow to the organization because
all of our people know that there are inherent risks, but this
goes to a whole other level. And we feel most profoundly for
her 12-year-old and her 15-year-old, two daughters who are
wonderful, and her loving husband who also works for us. It is
cliche to say that a workplace is family. This is family for
us, and this hits awfully close to home.
Ms. Titus. Is there anything we can do to call on the State
Department to see if we could not expedite that designation?
Mr. Capus. Chairman McCaul and this committee have already
held hearings about all of the Americans who are wrongfully
detained, including Paul Whelan, including Evan Gershkovich,
and Russia is using this as a political tactic, grabbing
Americans as they can and see what kind of a price they can get
in exchange. It is a hateful tactic, and it happens to have
caught up one of our colleagues in the process.
Yes, we would like to see the designation because we think
it would help also, especially as she is about to go into the
formal hearing sometime this summer.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Mr. Perry, any final words?
Mr. Perry. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just following up,
Mr. Capus, why do you suspect there is a delay in her receiving
the designation? I mean, we hear the stories, and, of course,
they are heartbreaking and they are unacceptable. They are
outrageous. Why would there be any delay whatsoever if you
know?
Mr. Capus. I am not sure I can answer that, sir. I believe
that we have had a very high level engagement with the State
Department, and they have said and we believe, we take them at
their word, that they are doing absolutely everything they can
to get her out, even without the designation.
Mr. Perry. Do they think having the designation imperils
her freedom?
Mr. Capus. I think you would have to ask them what their
concern is. I think that they, I believe that they would like
to see her released, as well.
Mr. Perry. Well, I sure hope so, but, my goodness, I mean,
when they say they are doing everything they can and we are
waiting on a designation and it is your studied opinion that
the designation would aid in her release or at least her
defense, I cannot imagine what the rationale would be. If you
do get the answer any time timely, I think, certainly, I would
like to have it.
Just one more question, Ms. Bennett. You might not really
be aware, but, back in the summer of 2020, OPM published a
report questioning long-running issues with the way USAGM used
its delegated authority to conduct background investigations
for eligibility for access to classified information. Now, the
MOU lapsed in 2012, which is quite a long time from now, but
USAGM simply just continued to conduct background
investigations for, literally, several years after that.
Is USAGM still conducting background investigations for
potential USAGM employees under delegated authority?
Ms. Bennett. We are on the verge of getting back our
authorities. We have handled every single thing that has been
asked of us. I think there is only one issue left open, and we
expect to get our delegated authority back within, I think, the
next 30 to 60 days.
Mr. Perry. OK. And who is conducting the investigations
currently?
Ms. Bennett. ODNI.
Mr. Perry. ODNI is currently conducting----
Ms. Bennett. I believe that's----
Mr. Perry [continuing]. And would you commit to providing
the documentation regarding your eligibility when you receive
it so that we have that?
Ms. Bennett. Yes, absolutely. And I would just like to
correct one piece of misinformation, this misunderstanding that
our employees have access to classified information. These are
not people that--these are journalists. They report news
outside, just like every other journalists. They have no access
to classified information; and, therefore, their security
clearance does not need to reflect that.
Mr. Perry. Well, I did not make that assertion. However, in
past investigations, it was pretty clear that there were
employees of USAGM with security clearance. I'm not saying
under your command, but there were employees that had received
the clearance that should not have received the clearance, if
nothing else for the fact that USAGM was not qualified and was
not authorized to conduct the investigation. Yet, the
clearances were granted. And, again, this is a dangerous world.
We have got a wide-open border. We have got known terrorists
coming into the United States of America, and we cannot be too
careful. And so it is important that not only that we are
conducting the oversight but that you are watching that and
understand that we are aware of that issue, and we do not want
that issue to be replicated ever, ever again.
Ms. Bennett. I feel proud of the work that the staff has
done in clearing up the issues that have been raised, and we
are very close to receiving our authorities back again and I am
very pleased with that.
Mr. Perry. All right. Thank you, ma'am. Mr. Chair, I yield.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. That brings to a close
this hearing. I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the members who asked questions. Both those
members and other members of this subcommittee will have some
additional questions for the witnesses. Would each of you be
able to answer questions you receive in writing in the next 5
days?
Mr. Capus. Yes.
Ms. Bennett. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Please let the record reflect all
answered in the affirmative. The chair now----
Mr. Crow. Can I just confirm----
Mr. Issa. Go ahead, Mr. Crow.
Mr. Crow. Your question was, chairman, that they agreed to
answer questions in the next 5 days. Are you saying those are
questions that the members will posit in the next 5 days? I
just want to make sure we are not committing them to answer----
Mr. Issa. No, no. In the closing, it will say, you know,
members may have 5 days in which to----
Mr. Crow. Yes. I just want to make sure that is what you
were referring to.
Mr. Issa. Yes. Thank you. Pursuant to the committee rules,
all members may have 5 days to submit statements, questions,
and extraneous materials for the record, subject to the length
limitations. And without objection, that brings us to a close.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, the above-entitled matter went off the record
at 3:45 p.m.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
