- ETHIOPIA: PROMISE OR PERILS, THE STATE OF U.S. POLICY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ETHIOPIA: PROMISE OR PERILS, THE STATE OF U.S. POLICY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

NOVEMBER 30, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-68
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-696PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania      BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California      GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida      AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee      TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas      DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa      SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas          Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio      GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida      JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey      JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida      JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia      JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields , Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Africa

JOHN JAMES, Chair
CHRISTOPHER SMITH, New Jersey        SARA JACOBS, California, Ranking
YOUNG KIM, California                    Member
JIM BAIRD, Indiana       SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey           Florida
CORY MILLS, Florida       COLIN ALLRED, Texas
JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois

Joe Foltz, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Hammer, Honorable Mike, Special Envoy to the Horn of Africa,
Bureau of African Affairs, U.S. Department of State............     7
Beckelman, Mr. Tyler, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Bureau for
Africa, U.S. Agency for International Development..............    13

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    35
Hearing Minutes..................................................    36
Hearing Attendance...............................................    37

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD

Statement for the Record.........................................    38

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    40

ETHIOPIA: PROMISE OR PERILS, THE STATE OF U.S. POLICY

Thursday, November 30, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Africa,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. John James (chairman of
the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. James. The Committee on Foreign Affairs, Subcommittee
on Africa, will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the current state
of United States policy toward Ethiopia. The chair would also
remind our guests today that peaceful protest is welcome in
this House. However, violence or verbal outbursts will not be
tolerated as they are violations of House rules.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
A little over 1 year ago, there was widespread attention on
the situation in Ethiopia. A Cessation of Hostilities Agreement
was reached between the government of Ethiopia and the Tigray
People's Liberation Front, bringing an end to the intense
conflict.
This hearing serves to examine the status of Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement implementation and more broadly the U.S.-
Ethiopia bilateral relationship. A stable Ethiopia is good for
the Horn of Africa and important to broader strategic U.S.
interests in the region.
However, I am very concerned about Ethiopia's current
trajectory and the direction of our policy. The high
expectations that began in 2019, including awarding a Nobel
Peace Prize to expand and deepen bilateral relationship with
Ethiopia, can still be met.
But recent challenges by leadership in Ethiopia, and
challenges including greater conflict in the region and global
economic shocks, have clouded Ethiopia's journey. In particular
the war in Tigray, current conflicts in Amhara and Oromia,
direct comments regarding Ethiopia's so-called existential
right to port access. And an increasing posture away from the
United States has eroded some of the optimism in Ethiopia's
democratic future and raised fundamental questions about
Ethiopia's economic and long-term political stability.
These conflicts and their aftershocks have exposed the deep
divisions present in Ethiopian society. Eritrea's president,
Isaias Afwerki, continues to undermine the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement as his troops remain in Ethiopia, troops
that have committed massacres, rapes, and other human rights
violations and atrocities.
Meanwhile, countries like China and the United Arab
Emirates have established extensive economic ties with
Ethiopia, ties that increasingly are moving into political and
security space. Reports widely indicate that weapon systems
provided by the UAE, among others, were a decisive factor in
the Tigray conflict and appears that Ethiopia is leading an
increasingly rapid regional arms race.
Additionally, just 3 months ago, the Government of Ethiopia
accepted an invitation into the BRICS country grouping.
Economically, Ethiopia is struggling with unchecked
inflation, a severe foreign currency shortage, and a sinking
credit rating. Without support from international financial
institutions, it is expected that Ethiopia is at risk of
defaulting on its nearly $30 billion of external debt. In this,
and seemingly only this, Ethiopia looks west for our money and
is relying on International Monetary Fund staff-level agreement
to stabilize its economy.
The American taxpayers are tired of being used, and we hope
to have some of our questions answered here today.
Beyond the Grand Ethiopia Renaissance Dam, which represents
a critical piece of infrastructure for Ethiopia to reach its
developmental goals, it is really hard to see other areas of
optimism. The United States has had to suspend the lifesaving
humanitarian assistance for 5 months this year because of the
government of Ethiopia's complicity in a food aid diversion
sham.
Last week negotiations with the Oromo Liberation Army once
again did not conclude with an agreement, while the conflict in
Amhara has not even reached the negotiating table and still
simmers.
Implementation of Cessation of Hostilities Agreement in
Tigray remains incomplete, and no justice has been served for
those brutalized by what some have called the deadliest
conflict in the 21st century so far.
Last December, just 1 month after the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement was signed, and 11 months after
Ethiopia's AGOA eligibility was rescinded for gross violations
of human rights, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed was invited to
Washington, DC. to attend the Africa Leaders Summit.
The hearing title is about the promise and the peril of
U.S. policy toward Ethiopia. And if I am being honest, it is
increasingly difficult to see where the promise lies.
I thank the witnesses for appearing today and look forward
to their testimony.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member for her
statement.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Chair James.
And Ambassador Hammer, Deputy Assistant Administrator
Beckelman, thank you so much for testifying before the
subcommittee today on the State of U.S. policy toward Ethiopia.
Ambassador Hammer, it is great to see you again after
welcoming you in San Diego this summer to host the Ethiopian
Diaspora Peace Conference and hear the perspectives of
different Ethiopian diaspora communities, so we can work
together toward peace for the country and region.
I have to admit, I wish we were in San Diego right now. I
am cold. But I am glad to see you again to further that
conversation.
I am so proud to represent San Diego, a community that has
a long history of welcoming migrants and refugees, including
Ethiopians, with open arms. And San Diego is just a small
portion of the United States' strong Ethiopian diaspora, which
encompasses hundreds of thousands of immigrants who have close
familial, social, and economic ties to Ethiopia, and makes up
the second largest African immigrant group in the United
States.
This hearing is very timely. It has been over 1 year since
the signing of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement in
Pretoria between the government of Ethiopia and the Tigrayan
People's Liberation Front, but we have continued to see ongoing
human rights violations in Tigray and across the country, as
well as spreading conflict in Amhara, Afar, and Oromia.
The war in northern Ethiopia and ongoing conflict have
triggered a massive refugee and displacement crisis, even
setting a world record for displacements in a single year. We
have also seen the destruction of crops, an increase in food
prices, causing millions in the country to rely on food aid,
which was temporarily paused due to its diversion.
I am incredibly relieved that food assistance resumed
earlier this month, and I commend USAID's work in securing
important reforms to prevent diversion and ensure food reaches
those in need.
But it was clear when I traveled to Ethiopia in 2021, and
it is even more clear today, many challenges remain to create
long-lasting peace, safety, and security. Following the signing
of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, the focus must now
be on implementing the rest of the agreement in a thoughtful
way, pursuing a credible and inclusive transitional justice
process that guarantees accountability for war crimes and
ongoing human rights violations, and addressing long-held
grievances across the country through an inclusive and
transparent national dialog process to prevent another large-
scale war.
The United States must also urge all parties to pursue
peace processes to address ongoing conflict in Amhara and
Oromia. Addressing these root causes from a long-term conflict
prevention perspective should be central to U.S. policy toward
Ethiopia, and this will require high-level attention and
prioritization from the United States and the international
community, including cooperation from key regional actors with
broad influence, like the UAE and Turkey.
Ethiopia represents the future of the African continent and
is the second most populous African country. It has the
potential to be a stabilizing force for the region and across
the continent. As it experiences high inflation and economic
stressors since the war, it is now more important than ever to
invest in Ethiopia's long-term stability, which must include
real accountability and reconciliation among Ethiopians.
It is a key national security priority for the United
States to keep its attention on Ethiopia and do everything we
can to help secure a more promising future for Ethiopians. So I
am looking forward to hearing from you all about prospects for
long-term peace and stability and how the United States can be
best positioned to support Ethiopians in this pursuit, which
will be critical for the region and the broader continent.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you very much.
Other members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
And echoing my ranking member's sentiments, I am very, very
pleased to have you here today. The Honorable Mike Hammer is
Special Envoy to the Horn of Africa, Bureau of African Affairs,
U.S. Department of State. Tyler Beckelman is Deputy Assistant
Administrator, Bureau for Africa, U.S. Agency for International
Development.
I thank you, again, each for being here today. Your full
statements will be made a part of the record, and I will ask
each of you to please keep your spoken remarks to about 5
minutes--to 5 minutes in order to allow for member questions.
I now recognize Mr. Hammer for his opening statement. Good
to see you again, sir.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE HAMMER, SPECIAL ENVOY TO THE HORN OF
AFRICA, BUREAU OF AFRICAN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Hammer. Good to see you. Chairman James, Ranking Member
Jacobs, it is a pleasure to see you both again, and I welcome
the opportunity to discuss U.S. policy and interests in
Ethiopia and the Horn of Africa with you and the distinguished
members of the subcommittee, as well as other members who have
come here today because of their interest in Ethiopia.
And I also want to recognize the Ethiopian diaspora, which
is extremely active and which of course cares very deeply about
events in Ethiopia.
Ethiopia, as you have said, Mr. Chairman, is a
strategically important country. The Biden-Harris
Administration is committed to working to promote peace,
democracy, and economic development for the benefit of all
Ethiopians, the broader region, as well as the American people.
Our long-term goal is to support policies and reforms that
will enable greater partnership between our two countries.
During my tenure as special envoy, the Administration has
focused on bringing an end to conflicts in Ethiopia and
reducing tensions around the filling and operation of the Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, otherwise known as GERD.
Following the November 2022 Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement, the COHA, between the government of Ethiopia and the
Tigray People's Liberation Front, we have been focused on the
agreement's implementation while impressing upon the Ethiopian
government the importance of dialog and negotiation as a path
to resolving ongoing violence in Oromia and Amhara.
And we regularly engage with the Ethiopian diaspora to
explain U.S. policy, encourage civil discourse, and foster
reconciliation among all ethnicities and regions. As we pursue
these policies with our colleagues at USAID and the
interagency, we absolutely prioritize our responsibility to
U.S. taxpayers.
In Pretoria, I was proud to represent the United States as
an active observer in the African Union-facilitated talks that
led to the COHA. Within 48 hours of the signing of the COHA, it
silenced the guns and ended a horrific 2-year war that killed
hundreds of thousands and caused untold suffering, including
from horrific mass sexual and gender-based violence.
Since its signing, the United States has supported efforts
to implement all aspects of the COHA, among them transitional
justice, accountability, protection of civilians, and respect
for human rights, including by funding of international human
rights observers.
As Secretary Blinken said during his visit this last March,
to avoid future conflicts arising from past grievances, it is
important, essential, to account for the war crimes, crimes
against humanity, and other human rights abuses and violations
committed in the context of Ethiopia's conflicts.
Shortly after his visit, the secretary announced his
determination that all sides had committed horrific atrocities
in the northern conflict and that ensuring accountability will
be a key element of our policy toward Ethiopia.
As part of our commitment to accountability, the State
Department has supported the work of the Transitional Justice
Working Group of Experts, an independent body with a nationwide
mandate. This working group held 60 consultations throughout
Ethiopia to gather views from affected communities on the
desire for justice, truth, reparations, and institutional
reform.
We look forward to the working group's recommendations, and
we will work with the Ethiopian government, civil society, and
the victims, including survivors of the conflict-related sexual
violence on their implementation--on the implementation of
their recommendations.
Over the last year, we have seen significant progress. For
example, independent monitors have reported a dramatic decrease
in human rights violations and abuses in Tigray. However, much
more needs to be done. Eritrean forces have not fully withdrawn
from Ethiopia. Disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration,
DDR, of the Tigray forces is lagging, and the status of
contested areas remains unresolved. Therefore, implementation
of the COHA remains a work in progress.
And we are deeply concerned about the ongoing violence in
Amhara and Oromia. There have been credible reports of gross
violations of human rights, significant loss of life, and
severe economic disruption. We have urged all actors to refrain
from violence and hate speech, and to protect civilians, and we
have offered to support or participate in mediation efforts.
In fact, I returned this last week from Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania, where the U.S. participated in talks between the
Ethiopian government and the Oromo Liberation Army. We
reiterated to all involved that there are no military solutions
to the complex challenges posed by these situations.
Compounding these challenges, Ethiopia is also confronting
macroeconomic stresses. Foreign exchange reserves are at the
lowest in two decades. Inflation has averaged over around 30
percent for the last 2 years. So the IMF is in discussions with
the government of Ethiopia over concerns about the State of the
economy.
Regarding the GERD, we are encouraged that there are
diplomatic negotiations underway between the parties, and the
United States remains actively diplomatically engaged to
support those parties in achieving an agreement that benefits
Egypt, Ethiopia, Sudan, as well as the region writ large.
In closing, let me reiterate my appreciation to this
committee for your commitment and counsel. Rest assured that we
are clear-eyed about the challenges in Ethiopia as we work to
support an Ethiopia that is more peaceful and prosperous, one
in which the United States and Ethiopia can benefit from a
strong partnership.
Thank you, and I look forward to your insights,
recommendations, and to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hammer follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Hammer.
I now recognize Mr. Beckelman for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF TYLER BECKELMAN, DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
BUREAU FOR AFRICA, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Beckelman. Good morning, Chairman James, Ranking Member
Jacobs, members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today and for your committee's support
for USAID and for the people of Ethiopia.
USAID's longstanding development partnership with Ethiopia
has helped propel historic improvements in living conditions
for millions of Ethiopians, and we remain the largest bilateral
donor of assistance to the Ethiopian people, yet these gains
have been compromised by the 2-year war in northern Ethiopia
and in security in other parts of the country.
The Cessation of Hostilities Agreement between the
government of Ethiopia and the Tigrayan People's Liberation
Front brought a much-needed reprieve to the millions of people
affected by that terrible war, yet many of the most critical
commitments in this agreement have yet to be fully realized.
It is imperative, as you note, as both of you noted, for
Ethiopia to reckon with its past and commit to dialog to
prevent future conflicts. USAID will continue to stand with all
Ethiopians wishing to live in dignity, peace, and prosperity.
Disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration, DDR, is one
of the most important elements of the COHA. As we see all over
the world, DDR requires sustained political will and strong
international commitment and financing. USAID plans to focus on
the R in DDR, promoting reintegration, resilience, and early
recovery for conflict-affected communities, particularly
survivors of sexual and gender-based violence.
We also plan to support intercommunal dialog and
revitalizing livelihood opportunities that will give
demobilized soldiers productive pathways in civilian life.
As the Ambassador noted, one of the most important
provisions in the COHA was the government of Ethiopia's
commitment to a comprehensive national transitional justice
policy. The government undertook broad public consultations to
develop its framework but has not yet begun implementation.
We agree wholeheartedly that it is important to get this
right. USAID stands ready to support the implementation of a
transparent victim-centered process that contributes to truth
and reconciliation.
It is also critical that Ethiopians themselves lead the
fight for justice and accountability, which is why USAID
supports local civil society organizations that monitor and
advocate for these principles. We will continue to support both
the national human rights institution and international human
rights monitors. USAID plans to increase assistance to local
human rights actors and organizations to respond to crisis-
related human rights violations and address other ongoing human
rights issues.
Beyond Tigray, we are of course troubled by the violence
and abuses in other parts of the country, including Amhara and
Oromia. USAID is supporting locally led initiatives in these
locations to de-escalate tensions and will continue to
emphasize that the peaceful resolution of conflicts through
negotiation and dialog pays off.
Ultimately, Ethiopia's prospects for long-term stability
and its tremendous, tremendous economic potential hinge on
whether the country is able to resolve grievances through
dialog and politics rather than violence and suppression. USAID
is tracking the national dialog process closely and stands
ready to support an inclusive, transparent, and broadly
accepted process that helps reinforce long-term peace and
stability.
USAID continues to support civil society and other
stakeholders, so they can meaningfully engage in this process,
and we will continue to consider support to the Dialogue
Commission as it facilitates community consultations.
Let me briefly turn to a critical issue, which you both
alluded to, which is the divergence of humanitarian food aid.
In the spring of 2023, USAID identified a coordinated food aid
diversion scheme that prompted us to make the very difficult
decision to pause food assistance to Ethiopia. This pause was a
measure of last resort due to the extreme scale and scope of
the diversion that we uncovered.
Earlier this month, after the government of Ethiopia agreed
to major changes in the food aid distribution system, USAID
decided to resume food assistance to vulnerable groups across
the country. Key elements of the reforms included ensuring the
independent and verifiable management of the entire food aid
supply chain and agreements on ensuring full access to
warehouse mills and distributionsites for regular monitoring
and oversight.
The government also agreed to the internationally accepted
best practice of vulnerability-based targeting with joint
identification of beneficiaries and joint approval of
beneficiary lists. USAID and the government of Ethiopia will
implement a 1-year trial period of this process that will be
informed by periodic reviews and backed by continuous
monitoring and evaluation by our team, our partners, and
independent monitors.
We are confident that the agreed reforms will reinforce the
integrity of the food aid system and help ensure that critical
assistance reaches the most vulnerable. We will not hesitate to
pause activities again, however, if we continue to see evidence
of diversion.
So, in closing, while we recognize the challenges ahead,
USAID remains a committed partner in helping all Ethiopians
live in peace, dignity, and prosperity. Thank you for your
support of USAID's work in Ethiopia and for the opportunity to
appear before you today. I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Beckelman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. James. Thank you, gentlemen, for your opening remarks.
I now recognize myself for as much time as I may consume.
In October 2023, Abiy publicly argue that Ethiopia,
landlocked since Eritrea seceded in 1993, must acquire a port
on the Red Sea to break its population out of a geographic
prison, describing it as an existential issue. Further
discussion around reopening direct Red Sea access, arguing that
his request was based upon historical, geographical, ethnic,
economic grounds, indicating lack of access was potential
source of future conflict. Historical, geographical, ethnic,
economic grounds. Does that sound familiar?
Russia cultivated closer ties with Ethiopia during the
Tigray conflict, which overlapped with its invasion of Ukraine.
The more I learn about this, the more I am growing concerned
that the Ethiopian government is not interested in peace and is
only interested in the West, the United States in particular,
to solve its increasing financial woes.
Can you help me parse through this? Number 1 question,
gentlemen, whomever would like to answer first, when I hear a
potential source of future conflict, is that a threat from the
Ethiopian government?
Mr. Hammer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have seen that the
comments relating to port access have created concerns, not
only for the United States but also for other countries in the
region. But I would also note that the prime minister has
publicly said that efforts to gain access to a port will be
done through commercial peaceful means, and he has done his bit
to provide public and private reassurances.
Certainly, the last thing this region needs is another war,
and we have been clear that from the perspective of the United
States what needs to happen both in the region, but most
importantly internally inside Ethiopia, is to address conflicts
and violence through peaceful dialog.
And we have demonstrated both through our work with the
African Union in achieving the comprehensive COHA, as well as--
the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, as well as
participating more recently in the talks on the OLA, that that
is our commitment so that, Mr. Chairman, while----
Mr. James. Mr. Hammer, excuse the interruption. You just
acknowledged also credible reports of gross violations of human
rights in Amhara and Oromia. Does the Department consider this
in addition to the past statements, regardless of how it may
have been softened for Western ears?
Does this constitute a pattern? And how much should we
believe folks who are following in the footsteps of essentially
Russia joining and aligning with BRICS?
Mr. Hammer. Well, Mr. Chairman, we are deeply concerned and
alarmed by the reports of extrajudicial killings, detentions,
that are--and suffering that is being inflicted upon civilians
in both Amhara and Oromia. We have made this clear to the
government, Secretary Blinken, in numerous calls with the prime
minister, as well as officials at all levels of the State
Department.
Mr. James. Have we made it clear that concrete steps must
be taken in the immediate future to rectify this? And are you
satisfied with the progress they are making, sir?
Mr. Hammer. Yes, sir. We have always in our conversations
made clear that human rights is a core component of the Biden-
Harris Administration's foreign policy, and that it matters in
terms of how we view our bilateral relationship with Ethiopia.
So we are continuously pressing for improvement. We are not
satisfied, and those conversations will continue every day as
needed until hopefully we see a cessation of all violations and
abuses taking place.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Hammer.
Mr. Beckelman, if you have a comment, next 30 seconds.
Mr. Beckelman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me just say
just very quickly that we believe very firmly that it is in our
interest, it is in the Ethiopian people's interest, and it is
in the world's interest, to prevent an economic collapse in
Ethiopia and to see the Ethiopian people stand on their two
feet. That is why we continue to support these processes and
continue to support them in a way that we feel is consistent
with our values and our interests in Ethiopia, and we will
continue to do that.
With a population of 126 million people, over 40 percent of
which are youth under the age of 15, we think it is absolutely
incredible to continue to help Ethiopians stand on their two
feet, and a stable and democratizing Ethiopia is ultimately in
the best interests of the United States.
Mr. James. Totally agree with all of this. Monkeying
around, the Ethiopian people are the ones who truly suffer.
I would like to recognize my ranking member, Ms. Sara
Jacobs.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In September, I led a
letter to Secretary Blinken and Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield
urging the United States to use its voice and influence to
renew the mandate of the International Commission of Human
Rights Experts on Ethiopia, ICHREE. Unfortunately, ICHREE's
mandate was not renewed, ending the only independent
investigative mechanism with the mandate to investigate abuses
across all of Ethiopia.
Ambassador Hammer, what specific steps did the U.S.
Government take in advocating for ICHREE's renewal? And what
plan is in place to ensure independent human rights monitoring
continues?
Mr. Hammer. Ranking member, I appreciate--I remember
receiving your letter and appreciate your deep interest in
continuing the ICHREE mission, which we thought absolutely was
critical and important. We worked to try to renew it in Geneva.
Unfortunately, it was not renewed. However, anticipating that
perhaps there would not be the support for its renewal, we, the
United States, through our colleagues in USAID, provided
funding for OHCR monitors to be deployed in Tigray and other
regions of Ethiopia.
In fact, I have met with those monitors on my visits to
Mekelle this past year, and they have reported a dramatic
decrease in human rights violations. So we are committed to
ensuring that there is independent monitoring and that there is
certainly investigations into past abuses and atrocities and
war crimes that have been committed.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. I am glad to hear that.
On that note, according to a recent Harvard survey, more
than 90 percent of Ethiopians believe it would be unacceptable
to move forward without some sort of truth-seeking trials or
reparations.
But I think all of us who have worked in conflict know that
transitional justice, how you do it is more complicated than it
sounds, and the survey also found that residents of Tigray have
little confidence in domestic courts to provide justice but
that a plurality of Ethiopians across the country favored using
existing domestic courts to pursue accountability as opposed to
some sort of hybrid or international mechanism, and, obviously,
like everything in Ethiopia, vary widely among regions.
So navigating a credible transitional justice process will
be challenging but incredibly important. Ambassador Hammer, how
does the United States intend to work with the government of
Ethiopia to address structural challenges and political will to
pursue an inclusive transparent and credible process that is
conflict-sensitive?
Mr. Hammer. Thank you, Ranking Member Jacobs. As I
mentioned, when Secretary Blinken visited in March, he had
direct conversations with the prime minister and the senior
members of his cabinet, as well as making public the United
States' absolute commitment to seeing through what both the
government of Ethiopia and the TPLF have committed to in terms
of ensuring that there is transitional justice, but
transitional justice, as you said, has to also be a national
process.
And, in fact, our Office of Global Criminal--what is it?
Criminal Justice--I am sorry--Ambassador Beth van Schaack and
her team have been very thoroughly engaged in Ethiopia. I was
there during one of her visits, and recently I actually, when I
was in Addis last week, met with Minister of Justice Gedion to
find out what is the status of their policy process, and he
said that their white paper is coming soon.
But we absolutely agree with you that it needs to be
credible, it needs to be inclusive, it needs to take into
account the victims, and, as you said, it is a very complicated
process. But we, as the United States, are also--with other
countries are prepared to support this process, to support the
government, if it is in fact credible and inclusive, and
ultimately it will be the Ethiopian people that will be there
to judge whether it is achieving the desired result.
But we all agree that to overcome the historic grievances
that have plagued Ethiopia there absolutely must be a
transitional justice system that is responsive to the people,
and there needs to be accountability for the gross violations
of human rights that have occurred.
Ms. Jacobs. And has the Ethiopian government taken any
steps yet to prosecute military officers who had command
authority for units implicated in atrocities?
Mr. Hammer. Ranking Member Jacobs, my understanding is that
there are efforts underway to prosecute. I am also advised by
our experts that those prosecutions need to be transparent and
should not be rushed. But we can get you further information on
the prosecutions that may have occurred, but we are expecting
that they will happen.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
I yield back.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Madam Ranking Member.
I now recognize Rep. Kean for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
witnesses for being here today with us, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for holding this hearing.
I want to followup on some of the chairman's line of
questioning regarding, as Prime Minister Abiy increasingly
orients his foreign policy decisions eastwards and continues to
ignore basic benchmarks on justice and transparency, what in
the last 3 years has indicated that Abiy cares about his
reputation in Washington? And, as a followup, in what regards
has Prime Minister Abiy followed through on any of the
concessions or agreements made when he was here for the African
Leaders Summit?
Mr. Hammer. Thank you, Representative Kean. We have
consistently had very direct and frank discussions with the
prime minister as well as with his government on the
expectations that the United States has for having a
partnership that is beneficial to the American people and to
Ethiopians.
And as a part of that conversation, we have repeatedly
urged that there be an improvement in the human rights
situation. And, again, at least as part of the COHA that was
signed on November 2d of 2022, we saw the government follow
through on its commitments in allowing for an interim regional
Administration to be established in Tigray. We saw withdrawal
of ENDF troops that has now led to a significant decrease in
human rights abuses as recognized by independent monitors. And
after months of urging, we have seen now an effort for dialog
with the Oromia Liberation Army, one in which we were invited
as the United States to again participate as an observer.
So we believe that, again, U.S. engagement in order to
promote stability, democracy, in Ethiopia is essential to
trying to put Ethiopia on the right path, and we will continue
to pursue those efforts at every level, including when Prime
Minister Abiy attended the African Leaders Summit and had
discussions with both our national security advisor, Jake
Sullivan, and Secretary Blinken.
Mr. Kean. So what was it that you saw when you were there
as an observer status in the negotiations? What is the timeline
for resolution to these--some of these conflicts and the
fighting in your point of view?
Mr. Hammer. No. Thank you. I appreciate the question. When
I took this job in June 2022, I was told that this horrific war
in Tigray, northern Ethiopia, would never end, that it would be
disastrous, and it had already been horrific. And yet through
quiet diplomacy and working with the African Union, we were
able to achieve a very significance peace.
Now we are involved in talks with--between the government
and the OLA. It would be--well, it would be difficult to say
that we can yield the kind of result that we would like,
everyone that--the people of Oromia would like, in short order.
The talks were difficult. I spent 2-1/2 weeks in Dar es Salaam,
but progress was made. But we are committed to trying to see a
peaceful resolution to these conflicts.
Also, in Amhara, if there is an opportunity, we will offer
our good offices to help mediate, to help promote a peaceful
dialog. We have been clear repeatedly there are no military
solutions to these complex, difficult, historical issues in
Ethiopia. And I am proud that the Administration has made every
effort consistently to try to advance peace, and we are
committed to continuing these efforts whenever, you know, the
opportunity raises.
Mr. Kean. If I may----
Mr. Hammer. Yes.
Mr. Kean [continuing]. What do you think are the biggest
limitations to negotiations succeeding?
Mr. Hammer. Well, of course it is not only just the
government, but both parties need to be prepared to make
compromises and, frankly, to have the courage to decide that
violence is not the answer, that what is best for their
interest and their people more broadly is to enter into a
political dialog that achieves some of their objectives.
We have seen their efforts underway for a national dialog,
which we believe, if it is inclusive and credible, could be a
very important step forward for overcoming some of these
historic grievances and horrific and terrible ethnic tensions
that are currently plaguing Ethiopia.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. My time has run out here.
I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Kean.
The chair now recognizes Rep. Cherfilus-McCormick for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, along
with my colleagues, are obviously pleased that this month marks
1 year since the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement was signed,
bringing an end to the horrific 2-year war in Tigray. During
that horrific conflict, hundreds of thousands of Tigrayans were
forcibly displaced from western Tigray during the war, and what
the State Department determined constituted an ethnic
cleansing.
My question is a followup to Rep. Jacobs. Is there any way
the U.S. can assist Ethiopian authorities in prosecuting those
responsible for crimes in western Tigray?
Mr. Hammer. Thank you, Congresswoman. We appreciate your
interest and concern. We share the same concern that those
responsible for these war crimes, crimes against humanity, and
gross violations of human rights, be held accountable. We are
prepared, of course, to cooperate. It is currently the
responsibility of both the government of Ethiopia, and in fact
the government of Eritrea, whose forces were also responsible
for war crimes and crimes against humanity, to prosecute the
individuals responsible, and we will continue to insist that
they do.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. My second question is, Ethiopia
has historically been a major contributor to U.N. peacekeeping
missions. It currently has 1,500 troops serving the United
Nations mission in South Sudan.
Now, my question for the Ambassador is, how is the U.N.
ensuring through enhanced vetting that the Ethiopian troops who
have committed gross human rights violations during the war are
not serving in the U.N. peacekeeping missions?
Mr. Hammer. That is a good question. And, in fact, you
know, we demand through Leahy vetting in terms of, you know,
any security cooperation that we might be involved in, and the
United Nations, as you have indicated, has its own vetting
procedures, which are absolutely necessary, again, as you said,
to ensure that any troops or individuals who have been involved
in human rights violations not participate in any U.N.
peacekeeping mission.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. And could you shed some light on
some of the new vetting processes and practices?
Mr. Hammer. The UN's, I would have to defer to their
processes. Again, it is important that they are in place in
terms of the thoroughness. I am proud of the lengthy vetting
that we do as the United States, and I would hope that they are
equally thorough.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. In late 2021 when the United
States terminated Ethiopia's eligibility for AGOA benefits, the
Biden Administration provided the Ethiopian government with a
set of benchmarks, many of which focused on the Tigray
conflict, in order to regain its AGOA status.
Ambassador Hammer, what is the Administration's current
assessment of Ethiopia's compliance with those benchmarks?
Mr. Hammer. Thank you very much. In fact, you are right. We
provided some benchmarks. As you may know, the eligibility to
AGOA is currently under review and will be determined in a
matter of weeks. But as the chairman and the ranking member, as
all of you have said, there are grave concerns about continuing
human rights violations in Ethiopia, specifically in Amhara and
Oromia.
And not to get in front of what will be decided by USTR and
the White House, but those human rights concerns need to be
addressed under the legal standards of AGOA.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. And from your personal--your
professional assessment of the eligibility requirements, what
do you think about them?
Mr. Hammer. Well, as a member of the Administration, I do
not have any personal thoughts.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Professional.
Mr. Hammer. Yes. No, professional.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Give me your professional----
Mr. Hammer. I mean, of course, I mean, Congress passed AGOA
and set some very clear and stringent guidelines, and it must
be abided by. And, therefore, that is what the Administration
does. We analyze the situation on the ground and see if in fact
eligibility is available, and we constantly evaluate the
situation.
AGOA is beneficial to the United States as well as to--
obviously, to the country that is seeking it. But there are
certain standards that must be adhered to.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. And with information you have
right now, do you believe that they will meet the eligibility
requirements?
Mr. Hammer. Again, it is not just my decision alone. This
is a very thorough interagency process led by our USTR. And I
think that given what we have been discussing here at this
hearing, it is fair to say that there are very serious
remaining concerns given the reports of human rights violations
occurring currently in both Oromia and Amhara.
Mrs. Cherfilus-McCormick. Thank you for your testimony.
I yield back.
Mr. Hammer. You are welcome.
Mr. James. The chair now recognizes Rep. Kim for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Chairman.
Special Envoy Hammer, I want to thank you and start by
commending your efforts to reach an agreement to bring the
intense conflict to an--to be an end about a year ago. But it
is clear that the terms of the agreement have not been fully
implemented, and it looks like the timeline for peaceful
resolution of those disputes in line with the constitution
remain still undefined.
Many human rights groups and experts, including the Simon-
Skjodt Center for the Prevention of Genocide at the U.S.
Holocaust Memorial Museum, have been critical of the
transitional justice process being conducted by the Ethiopian
government. However, despite the skepticism, the State
Department appears to be giving credence to this government-run
process.
So I want to ask you, who is the senior-most individual in
the government of Ethiopia or among the Tigrayan political
establishment to be held accountable for the human rights
violations?
Mr. Hammer. Thank you, Representative Kim. The process is
ongoing. I know that we are impatient in terms of wanting to
see that justice be done and that individuals be held
accountable. I can assure you again at all levels of our
government, with the Ethiopian government and those responsible
for developing their transitional justice process and ensuring
that there is accountability, that we continue to press to make
sure that it is a process in terms of transitional justice that
is inclusive and that will be----
Mrs. Kim. Special Envoy, does Ethiopia's interministerial
level task force still exist?
Mr. Hammer. I believe it does. And, again, there are
internal Ethiopian processes underway. We provide advice and
support to try to ensure, again, that it will be a credible,
inclusive transitional justice----
Mrs. Kim. Does the task force have jurisdiction over the
ministry of defense?
Mr. Hammer. I believe it--well, I do not think so.
Mrs. Kim. Well, what benchmarks is the Administration using
to determine whether the Ethiopian government's proposed
transitional justice policies are in line with the
international standards, including being victim centered?
Mr. Hammer. Yes. No, you are absolutely right. It needs to
be victim centered, and I am sure my colleague from USAID,
Tyler, can provide even further guidance in terms of the
support that we are doing there.
The white paper enunciating the government's policy has not
come out yet. There have been discussions in the lead-up to it.
We have been providing advice. I attended one of the
conferences with a group of international experts on
transitional justice where there were other experts from
Africa, Europe, and Latin America, so I know that the
government has been getting advice in terms of how it best
should proceed in line with other international efforts that
have produced credible, inclusive transitional justice
processes.
Mrs. Kim. Can you tell me who has the accountability over
the ministry of defense?
Mr. Hammer. Well, the government of Ethiopia is responsible
ultimately, and they will have to ensure that members of their
forces who have been involved in gross violations of human
rights are held accountable.
Mrs. Kim. You know, Chinese economic activists--activities
and investments throughout Africa have been directly linked to
environmental degradation and have created public health
emergencies throughout the continent. For example, in 2014, the
Somali Ogaden region of Ethiopia has been--has seen thousands
die from a mysterious disease in areas surrounding a Chinese
government-linked natural gas plant that has poisoned the
drinking water supply.
I want to ask the question to both of you. How does the
State Department plan to hold China accountable for the
negative impact of China's investments in African and local
communities?
Mr. Beckelman. I am happy to take a first stab at that.
Mrs. Kim. Yes.
Mr. Beckelman. Congresswoman, thank you very much for your
question. I think the incidents that you cite are absolutely
tragic, and we know across the board, you know, in Ethiopia
that environmental degradation is a huge problem in many parts
of the country, and it contributes to poverty and food
insecurity.
Our first response to this should be--and we would
certainly encourage the government of Ethiopia to do its own
investigation and to prosecute those companies that are
responsible for harming their citizens, first and foremost, as
a mechanism of responsibility.
I would also say that, just as USAID, we place the highest
priority on ensuring that our investments are in line with
world-class standards of environmental quality and
sustainability. But I would really press the government of
Ethiopia to fully investigate and to hold accountable those
firms that are harming the Ethiopian people.
Mrs. Kim. I think my time is up, but----
Mr. James. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
Mr. James. The chairman now recognizes Rep. Kamlager-Dove
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And good to see you again, Mr. Hammer. I just want to say
on the outset that I think the African community as a whole
would like to see some consistency regarding our outrage to
civilian deaths and human rights violations and the need for
accountability. I am not justifying any side of any conflict,
but African countries often feel our double standard.
I would also just like to thank you for elevating the
underrated power of diplomacy. The last Administration didn't
understand that when it came to the continent.
So I have a few questions. The first is, what do you think
the impact of BRICS's recent expansion, to include Ethiopia,
and what should we be thinking about?
Mr. Hammer. Thank you. It is good to see you again. I do
have to report that my Trojan daughter, Brinya, graduated and
is working in L.A.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Great. Right on.
Mr. Hammer. Got to keep the Trojan connection.
Well, on the BRICS, we, as the Administration, see that the
majority of countries want a stable and open and prosperous and
secure world. They respect sovereignty and territorial
integrity and promote shared responsibility and enables
cooperation on shared challenges. We have no interest in
dividing the world into rigid blocks. The United States will
continue to work closely with our partners, including those
that are members of BRICS.
And so, yes, we have seen that Ethiopia is going to join
the group. It is a motley of countries that do not seem to
share much in common. So from the U.S. perspective, we want to
again stand by our values, our market economy, the key
components that have helped in development and have helped
countries progress. And we remain I think a very attractive
partner to countries around the world, including in Ethiopia.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you for that. I think they do
share a skepticism for the West, and I ask the question because
I do have concerns about Somalia and contentions around
maritime route.
I will go to my next question. I have been concerned to
hear reports of escalating hostilities in Ethiopia,
particularly in Amhara, between the Fano militias and the
Ethiopian National Defense Force.
So has the State Department been engaging with the
government on ways to bring an end to this violence?
Mr. Hammer. Yes, in fact, we have. I was in Addis last
week, met with the prime minister and some of his senior
advisers, and we continued to impress upon them that we do not
see a military solution to the conflict in Amhara, and that we
believe that the best way forward would be to start some type
of dialog. And of course we have repeatedly urged all parties
to refrain from hurting and inflicting horrific acts on
civilians.
So there is an absolute need to protect civilians, to stay
away from ethnic hatred, and the United States is prepared,
again, to offer our good offices, our diplomatic efforts to try
to, again, bring some level of peace to that region, and so
that those problems can be addressed through dialog rather than
conflict.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Great. Deputy Assistant Administrator
Beckelman, I would love to get your voice on the record. So
recent studies suggest that more than 100,000 women may have
been the victim of conflict-related sexual violence in Tigray
during the 2-year civil war.
So what is the level of need of victims of this conflict-
related sexual violence? And what has USAID--how have they been
serving in this space?
Mr. Beckelman. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question.
Let me just say that the need is huge. The degree of sexual
violence that attended this conflict was horrific and
widespread. We have seen--you know, it is very difficult to
verify these reports, but we have seen upwards of estimates of
over 50 percent of the women in Tigray experience some form of
sexual violence, a lot of times--and a significant majority of
those cases being rape and other forms of really, really severe
sexual violence.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. All ages? Ages?
Mr. Beckelman. All ages. After the signing of the COHA,
USAID made it a priority to surge support into organizations
that were providing protection services to women, providing
counseling services to women who were affected by this terrible
conflict, providing psychosocial support to women who were
affected by this conflict.
We estimate that through USAID programs we will reach close
to 100,000 survivors of SGBV with counseling services, with
dignity kits. We are supporting a broad network of referrals in
hospitals to be able to help women access these services,
continue to get the treatment that we need, and we have seen an
increase of approximately about 25 percent of sort of service
availability to now over 68 percent, just in the time since the
COHA was signed, due to USAID investments and the work of our
implementing partners on the ground.
We are going to continue to make this a priority for our
investments, and we are going to continue to try and make sure
that women who were affected get the services that they
desperately need.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you for that.
Apologies for the time going over, Mr. Chair. I just want
to say I think it is the frailty of men that caused them to
harm women.
And with that, I yield back my time.
Mr. James. Thank you. I would like to come back to a
question that I do not believe was answered. Ambassador Hammer,
if you could State for me clearly, you acknowledged credible
reports of gross violations of human rights in Amhara and
Oromia. Does the Department consider that a pattern? Yes or no.
Mr. Hammer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As of yet, we do not.
But we are constantly reviewing the facts on the ground, and we
know the implications of making such an assessment and
determination in terms of whether it is a consistent pattern or
pattern of gross violations of human rights.
Mr. James. Thank you. I now recognize Rep. Crow for 5
minutes.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman. I represent a diverse
district in Colorado with a vibrant Ethiopian diaspora
community. For this community, these challenges that we are
discussing today are tangible, lived reality. They have loved
ones who have been affected by conflict, killed, displaced in
extreme economic stressors, by droughts and floods, and by
ongoing challenges that have shaped and distorted their way of
life over many years.
I meet with these communities to hear about their concerns,
and I appreciate the opportunity to discuss a few of them
today.
So, first, in signing the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement, Federal officials committed to restoring basic
services and expediting aid. But I still hear from constituents
about their inability to access basic necessities.
So to Deputy Assistant Administrator Beckelman, how has the
U.S. pushed the Ethiopian government on the issue of addressing
outstanding access issues in Tigray? And can you speak to the
Ethiopian government--how they have taken steps to abide by the
cessation agreement and make improvements?
And also, similarly, along the same vein, I have heard a
lot of concerns about human rights violations and civilian harm
in Amhara as well, and a lot of issues there. So a State of
emergency and other limitations have reduced access to the area
and make it very difficult to understand what is occurring on
the ground in real time.
So to Ambassador Hammer, how is the United States
monitoring reported violations and engaging with the Ethiopian
government to pursue a peaceful resolution in the Amhara region
as well?
Mr. Hammer. Thank you, Congressman, very much for your
question. Let me just say the access picture for humanitarian
organizations, USAID partners, and others, is still decidedly
mixed. We saw, after the COHA, a tremendous increase in access
to parts of Tigray that silenced the guns, and we took full
advantage of those opportunities to surge our assistance and
services into those locations.
In other places, access continues to sort of track around
the areas that are experiencing insecurity. So in parts of
Amhara and Oromia now it is still very difficult and very
dangerous for humanitarians to work there. They continue to
face persistent threats on the ground, and they continue to
have to make day-to-day decisions about their security and
their ability to deliver services in those locations.
We continue to insist and continue to push for full access
across the board for all of our implementing partners. But,
really, you know, there is still a lot more work that needs to
be done, and it still remains a very dangerous place for
humanitarian service providers.
Mr. Crow. Ambassador?
Mr. Hammer. Yes. Thank you very much. Appreciate your
interest. I have engaged with Tigrayan diaspora in Denver
directly, so I know of their passion and their concern for
their loved ones in Tigray as well as the diaspora writ large,
some of the members who are here representing the Amhara
community of course, Oromia and all the others.
We, as the United States, care about all Ethiopians and
certainly will denounce violations of human rights against any
individual, irrespective of ethnicity.
In terms of the situation in Amhara, we have had
discussions and urged the government to lift the State of
emergency to allow access to media, to allow access to the
internet, and to enable there to be clear ability to understand
what the situation in Amhara currently is.
We also have urged the government to find a way forward
through dialog and peaceful discussion to address some of the
very difficult historic issues that affect people in Amhara and
that are currently the reason for the fighting. We have been
clear that there are no military solutions to this conflict,
and we hope that, like the government has in the past, that
perhaps the United States might be able to help resolve these
issues by offering our good offices and our expertise in terms
of trying to move forward in a way that ends the violence.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Ambassador. I appreciate that, and I
appreciate the outreach to the diaspora community as well. I
mean, I represent all of those groups, Tigrays, Amharas,
Oromos, and it is very clear that the only pathway to peace
will be if all of those groups have the right to live in
security and dignity and safety.
And I will reiterate my request that the Administration
continue to push the government to make sure that that is the
case, that is true, and that they are pushing--that we are
pushing hard for peace and security for all Ethiopians.
Thank you.
Mr. Hammer. Rest assured that we are and we will continue.
Mr. Crow. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you, sir.
I now recognize Rep. Sherman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this
hearing. Thank you for allowing me to participate, although I
am not a member of the subcommittee. This conflict lasted 2
years. Half a million people died. That is 40 times the number
of deaths in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict over--since
October 7.
It is outrageous that this conflict has not gotten more
attention in the world. That is not a problem caused by our
witnesses here. They are working on it every day.
We have a U.N. Secretary General who outrageously said that
what is happening in Gaza is unparalleled. No. What is
unparalleled is what happened in northern Ethiopia. We have a
number of others in the human rights community who have very
falsely said that what is happening in Gaza is massively larger
than anything that has happened since 2019. No, it is what we
are here to talk about today, and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
having this hearing.
There is also a feeling that since we had the Pretoria
agreement in November 2022 our job is done. I think this
hearing is illustrative of the fact that that is not the case.
I know there has been discussion here about Ethiopia's desire
for a seaport.
Obviously, we do not change international boundaries almost
ever. But I will point out I believe that Bolivia has certain
rights with regard to Chilean ports. There are a number of
other circumstances where a landlocked country has the right to
use a port and have access to it and to not have tariffs on
goods going out or going in. And I would think it would be a
step toward peace if Eritrea would agree not to give up any of
its territory, but also not to charge tariffs.
Mr. Hammer, thank you so much for coming to my district and
meeting with the diaspora there. Last November, I asked
Assistant Secretary Phee if the United States would support
additional sanctions on Eritrea if they failed to withdraw
their troops from Ethiopia. And I asked particularly sanctions
on the president himself and on mining that goes on in Eritrea.
She said yes.
It is a year later, and Eritrean troops are still there.
What is worse is that they are committing extra judicial
execution of civilians, sexual enslavement of women, and other
terrible human rights abuses. So I will ask you, why haven't we
sanctioned Eritrea, its mining operations, and especially its
president?
Mr. Hammer. Thank you, Representative Sherman. Good to see
you again, and I appreciate your passion, dedication, and
concerns for all Ethiopians affected by horrific human rights
violations.
And as you have indicated, the job is not done. We continue
to work on this every day. Appreciate your comments on access
to the port, access to the sea. We discussed this earlier in
the hearing, but it is interesting that you would mention
Bolivia and Chile, as I have served in both Bolivia and been
Ambassador to Chile, and had a discussion with Prime Minister
Abiy just last week on Thursday, on Thanksgiving day, where I
mentioned that they might want to look at that as an example.
But the prime minister has clarified or made public remarks
that in fact he is looking for a commercial, peaceful way to
achieve that access, and so we will continue to encourage that.
We cannot afford another war on the Horn.
In terms of your specific question of sanction of
Eritreans, we have sanctioned some. We have extended the
Executive Order, and we continuously review whether we should
sanction other individuals or organizations. So I will take
that back and see where we are at on that.

Mr. Sherman. Especially with the commitment made by the
assistant secretary that under those circumstances we would
have sanctions on the president. It is time to act. It has been
a year. What would be even better of course is if Eritrea
withdrew its troops. There is absolutely no justification for
them being there.
Second, I understand that our food trucks will be getting
in next month, that finally Abiy has relented and allowed us to
have the control necessary to prevent massive theft.
And I will ask the witness from USAID, are we going to be
sending enough in, not only to deal with those in refugee camps
but all of the very hungry people in northern Ethiopia?
Mr. Beckelman. Thank you, Congressman Sherman. We are going
to do our best on this and----
Mr. Sherman. Do we have sufficient funds and trucks and
logistics to get the job done?
Mr. Beckelman. We are confident in the logistics chain that
we are doing it. We are confident in our partners' ability to
deliver. And we are--and with the very generous support of
Congress, we greatly appreciate--we think we are in a good
place to continue to make a difference in the lives of the
Ethiopians.
Mr. Sherman. People are hungry.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Sherman.
I now recognize Ranking Member Jacobs for as much time as
she may consume.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. So many more questions for you guys.
The UAE and Turkey have both sent sizable arms shipments to
and engaged in significant military cooperation with Ethiopia
during the 2-year civil war. Given the significant relationship
the United States has with these two countries, and the
seemingly few consequences these two countries have seemed to
face for this involvement, did the U.S. Government ever urged
either government to seize its material support to Ethiopia
during the war? What was the response? If not, why?
How have we prioritized our policy objectives in Ethiopia
with these two countries when we are dealing with them at the
highest diplomatic levels?
Mr. Hammer. Thank you, Ranking Member Jacobs. One of the
first trips I made out to the region included a stop in Abu
Dhabi, and I have had also separate discussions with Turkey
officials, as have more senior members of our government,
expressing concern about the provision of drones to the
government of Ethiopia during the conflict.
Rest assured, we raised those concerns, made clear that it
was only making matters worse, and fortunately we were able to
bring an end to that conflict through the COHA. But we did in
fact, during the conflict, make it clear that it was only
fueling more suffering and that we had hoped that they would
desist.
Ms. Jacobs. And have they faced any repercussions for their
involvement in the conflict vis-a-vis that relationship with
us?
Mr. Hammer. We have very broad and complex relationships
with both of those countries, and I would defer to others who
handle those relationships. But, again, we have very frank and
direct conversations with our partners, our allies, and others,
making U.S. views very clearly known.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. So the humanitarian needs in
Ethiopia remain high. We have talked about them a bit already.
They continue to be triggered by the combined effects of
climate events, conflicts, intercommunal violence, disease
outbreaks. According to OCHA, only 33 percent of the funds
required to address these needs have been met.
Deputy Assistant Administrator Beckelman, what is the U.S.
doing to urge the international community and key regional
partners to scale up humanitarian assistance in Ethiopia and
address challenges to humanitarian operations in the region?
Mr. Beckelman. Congresswoman, that is a fantastic question.
We very much appreciate it. I think if you look globally,
sadly, because of so many crises around the world, humanitarian
needs are going up everywhere. And so we continue to
recognize--USAID is by far the largest donor in Ethiopia, but
we cannot do it alone, and we continue to emphasize to all of
our partners, and regular donor dialogs on the ground in
Ethiopia, with our mission in Addis and in other places, the
need for others to step in and to help.
We are also very focused on ensuring that we are not just
providing relief and assistance, but we are helping people
recover and stand on their own and graduate from humanitarian
assistance and be able to provide for themselves. That is why,
you know, with the very generous support of Congress through
previous supplementals, we have also invested heavily in
resilience and recovery activities that we hope will make a
difference in helping reduce long-term needs in Ethiopia.
Thank you.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. And then my last question, because I
know some of my colleagues have some more questions for you as
well, one of the key grievances that needs to be addressed in
Ethiopia is corruption, including at the regional State level.
We have been hearing from the various diaspora communities
about their concerns on this issue in particular.
So if both of you could talk to what we are going to
support anti-corruption efforts across the country, including
not just at the national level but also within regional
governments.
Mr. Beckelman. Thank you. Again, great question. I think
the--as I mentioned in my opening statement, one of the key
elements of our support is to support and empower Ethiopians
who are leading the charge on addressing those issues.
So we continue to expand and look to continue to partner
with support to local civil society organizations throughout
Ethiopia, who are playing an absolutely critical role in
exposing corruption and providing that sort of popular check on
those types of abuses. And we are proud to continue that
support as one of the key elements of our program and portfolio
there.
Mr. Hammer. Yes. I would just add that--give great credit
to my colleagues in USAID that uncovered this massive aid
diversion denying the people who needed much-needed food
assistance. And that is part of the effort of fighting
corruption. In fact, we are using that to demonstrate to the
government that it needs to do more, and that we are prepared
of course to fight corruption and to support efforts.
But, again, USAID's work in this field has been tremendous,
and we will continue to expand. And I am sure there are
programs that our colleagues in the INL Bureau are also
involved in to support anti-corruption efforts.
Ms. Jacobs. That is great. And, you know, I think sometimes
we forget that anti-corruption is both a programmatic focus but
needs to be addressed at a diplomatic level as well. So I
appreciate you all working together.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. James. Thank you, Madam Ranking Member.
I now recognize Rep. Sherman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Mr. Beckelman, returning to the aid
situation, I point out that AP has reported that possibly
thousands of people have starved to death in Tigray since we
suspended aid. On the other hand, the diversions there were not
only harmful to the people in Ethiopia, but if we ignore
diversions that will be harmful to aid elsewhere in the world.
So I understand what you have done up until now. Some
reporting suggests that USAID is only restoring aid to those
who are refugees in Ethiopia. Can you clarify that we will be
providing food to other--and medicine to other needy people in
northern Ethiopia?
Mr. Beckelman. I can, Congressman. Thank you for that
question. We did announce that we have resumed--after we
reached agreement with the government of Ethiopia on the
implementation of reforms, that we have resumed food assistance
deliveries to the entire country, including conflict-affected
IDPs in northern Ethiopia.
I would also just note that a lot of focus has been placed
on the pause in food aid. But throughout, you know, the period
of that pause, food aid is just one component of the overall
sort of suite of humanitarian activities that we provide to the
people, that we help provide to the people of Ethiopia. And
things like, you know, supplementary and nutritional feeding
for malnourished children and children under five continued
throughout the period of pausing.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Looking at the internally displaced
persons, 1.8 million have been displaced. They have been
ethnically cleansed from western Tigray by Amhara forces. The
question is, what will we do to accomplish two goals: first, to
let people go back to their homes; and then, second, to make
sure that we resolve the issue of western Tigray.
The Pretoria agreement says that that is supposed to be
according to constitutional means. The constitution seems to
say you go with a referendum, but nothing is more phony than a
referendum after an ethnic cleansing.
So what does--Ambassador, what can we do with AGOA and the
IMF to press Ethiopia to allow Tigrayans to return to western
Tigray and to make sure that a resolution occurs that isn't a
phony referendum?
Mr. Hammer. Thank you very much for the question. As you
probably know, I have visited Mekelle. I visited an IDP camp,
and I have seen the horrific circumstances under which those
Tigrayans are living and their urgent need to return back to
their homes.
As you accurately pointed out in the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement, it has meant that the disputed areas be
resolved within the constitution as well as through political
dialog, and that is ongoing. We are all inpatient. We all
recognize the urgent need for internally displaced people to be
able to return to their homes and live in security. We are
continuously assured that security will come to western Tigray.
Mr. Sherman. If I can interrupt.
Mr. Hammer. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. We have had all these people displaced from
western Tigray. Have other people from outside western Tigray
moved in? Or is land lying fallow? What is happening in western
Tigray?
Mr. Hammer. Unfortunately, it is difficult for us to know
exactly what is happening because of the security situation.
There are no impediments from the government for us to travel
into Welkait, western Tigray. But given the security situation,
it is extremely dangerous, and we have to be very careful about
deploying our personnel from the Embassy, from USAID, into that
area.
So we do not have perfect clarity, so I do not want to
misspeak. But, again, what we are very much focused on is
making sure that internally displaced people, wherever they
might be, are able to return to their homes as soon as
possible.
Mr. Sherman. If the Ethiopian government on this issue and
other important issues does not adhere to the Pretoria
agreement, their biggest pressure point is to prevent IMF
lending to Ethiopia. Are we prepared to do that? And do we have
the clout inside the IMF to do it? Not with a goal of
permanently preventing the IMF lending, but with the goal of
getting Ethiopia to adhere to the agreement.
Mr. Hammer. I appreciate the question. And, frankly, our
engagement with the IMF is very much focused on trying to
ensure that there is not a collapse of the Ethiopian economy,
which would certainly not be in America's interest, in the
Ethiopian people's interest.
And the engagement of the IMF--and I will defer of course
to my Treasury colleagues--is important, to try to bring about
economic reforms, privatization, that will help all Ethiopians.
So----
Mr. Sherman. I would hope that in addition to those reforms
that resolution in western Tigray and the implementation of the
Pretoria agreement is at the very highest level, that major IMF
loans are not approved until we get Ethiopia on the right track
there.
We are dealing with a government that interrupted USAID,
first, allowed the theft, and then, second, interrupted the aid
by not allowing us until I guess next month to have the kind of
controls that we have elsewhere in the world.
So this is a government that needs your pressure, and I am
sure you will do it. It is a difficult job, but we have you
there doing it.
Mr. Hammer. With that I can agree.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. James. Thank you. So, at this time, we are going to
conclude, and we conclude with my thanks and gratitude from
this subcommittee. Your valuable testimony and the members--I
am grateful for your questions. Very insightful.
The members of this committee will have some additional
questions, which may be given to the witnesses later on, and
you can respond to them in writing.
Pursuant to committee rules, all members may have 5 days to
submit statements, questions, and extraneous materials for the
record, subject to length limitations.
Without objection, the committee stands adjourned. Thank
you.
[Whereupon, at 11:22 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

statement for the record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
