- UNRWA EXPOSED: EXAMINING THE AGENCY'S MISSION AND FAILURES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

UNRWA EXPOSED: EXAMINING THE
AGENCY'S MISSION AND FAILURES

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

AND

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GLOBAL HEALTH, GLOBAL
HUMAN RIGHTS, AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

January 30, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-78

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
Dor http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-989PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa                   SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                    Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JIM COSTA, California
RICH MCCORMICK, Georgia              JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               GABE AMO, Rhode Island
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Oversight and Accountability

BRIAN MAST, Florida, Chair

SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JASON CROW, Colorado, Ranking
DARRELL ISSA, California                 Member
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               ANDY KIM, New Jersey
CORY MILLS, Florida                  SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas                   Florida
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
Parker Chapman, Subcommittee Staff Director
Subcommittee on Global Health, Global Human Rights and International
Organizations

CHRISTOPHER SMITH, New Jersey, Chair

MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania, Ranking
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,           Member
American Samoa                   AMI BERA, California
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                SARA JACOBS, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
Mary Vigil, Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Goldberg, Richard, Senior Advisor, Foundation for Defense of
Democracies....................................................    10
Sheff, Marcus, Chief Executive Officer, Impact-SE................    21
Neuer, Hillel, Executive Director, U.N. Watch....................    33
Rudman, Mara, Schlesinger Professor, University of Virginia
Miller Center..................................................    41

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    83
Hearing Minutes..................................................    85
Hearing Attendance...............................................    86

MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Materials submitted for the record from William Deere............    87

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    91

UNRWA EXPOSED: EXAMINING THE AGENCY'S MISSION AND FAILURES

Tuesday, January 30, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight and
Accountability,
joint with the
Subcommittee on Global Health,
Global Human Rights, and International
Organizations,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 2:20 p.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Brian Mast [chairman of
the Subcommittee on Oversight and Accountability] presiding.
Mr. Mast. The Subcommittee on Oversight and Accountability
and Subcommittee on Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency's priorities and operations as
it pertains to the United States foreign assistance standards,
and I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
This hearing is entitled ``UNRWA Exposed: Examining the
Agency's Mission and Failures.'' This hearing will take a
closer look into the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine refugees--or UNRWA--and address serious concerns
raised regarding the U.N. agency and its policies funded by the
American taxpayer.
The world was horrified when the Hamas terrorists with the
support of other Palestinian men, women, and children raided
houses, kibbutz, schools, concerts and kindergartens to kill,
capture, rape, or torture any Jew that they could find on
October 7th.
As the dust settles and as we put together the pieces of
what enabled such barbaric atrocities, we are getting a picture
of failed U.N. policies that have been accumulating for the
last seven decades in the Gaza Strip.
I want to pause for a moment and say that, thankfully, at
least in part it appears that the Biden Administration has
realized the folly of funding UNRWA. I'm concerned the
Administration is playing a shell game with us, however.
While the Biden Administration announced on January 26th
that it would return to President Trump's policy of not funding
UNRWA for a period of time, it does appear as though they may
have waited to make this announcement until after they allowed
for a disbursement of tens of millions of dollars to go out to
UNRWA, on or before January 24th, and if that's the case it
should be considered outrageous.
Let me be clear that we are examining UNRWA because the
agency directly and indirectly supported Hamas and other
terrorist organizations in multiple, different ways.
First of all, UNRWA takes the talking points from Hamas and
broadcasts them to the world. When all of the so-called
journalists took the lie that Israel bombed the Al-Ahli
Hospital, UNRWA, an official U.N. agency, pulled the casualty
number from the Hamas-run Gaza health ministry.
In fact, to this day UNRWA continues to parrot the numbers
put out by the Hamas affiliates without taking a single grain
of salt on who puts them out in the first place.
Second, wherever you see UNRWA facilities including schools
in Gaza you are almost guaranteed to find tunnels, rocket
launchers, and weapons storages. During Israel's incursion into
Gaza Israel Defense Forces uncovered a variety of rifles and
ammunition hidden underneath UNRWA institutions.
If you think those are just a coincidence this brings me to
another point. UNRWA employees are actively involved in calling
to wipe out the only Jewish homeland on Earth.
We have seen footage and evidence of UNRWA teachers and
staff praising and celebrating the October 7th attack on social
media, referring to the attack as an unforgettable glorious
morning and a splendid sight.
We read reports that at least 12 UNRWA employees directly
participated in the attack. Let me say that one more time. We
read reports that at least 12 UNRWA employees directly
participated in the attack.
In fact, intelligence reports indicate that as many as 10
percent of UNRWA workers have direct links to Hamas and
Palestinian Islamic jihadists. While all of these are taking
place what does UNRWA not do?
You can go to UNRWA's very active X, formerly known as
Twitter, and find little to no mention of Hamas. Not a single
word of Hamas stealing U.S. taxpayer-funded food, medicine, or
fuel. Not a single statement to condemn Hamas for the hostages
it continues to hold. Not a single mention of how Hamas has
created the devastating situation for the people of Gaza.
It is clear that UNRWA would never use its platform to
speak out against Hamas because it is in cahoots with Hamas. At
this point, you could say that when UNRWA schools are not
teaching the Palestinian children to hate Jews these schools
are used to hide and fire rockets at Israeli civilians, all
using our tax dollars.
Make no mistake, the attacks on October 7th did not happen
in a vacuum. The sickness on display from UNRWA is rooted in
something deeper within its structure and mission. It's rooted
in the double standard the world applies for them, from their
definition of refugee to the hatred they teach the Palestinian
children from UNRWA schools.
The barbaric hatred that we see from Hamas as they
butchered, raped Jews on October 7th is in part the result of a
Frankensteinian monster of the United Nations' agency that the
United Nations created and the United States remains the top
donor of that agency.
The American people deserve to know why their tax money
enabled the deadliest attack on the Jewish people since the
Holocaust. Again, most of this is not new information. Many
watchdog organizations have been warning us about UNRWA for
years and some of them are represented by our witnesses.
I am grateful for their attendance and for their bringing
us their essential insight so that we could try to change the
field, the paradigm on the ground, that has been taking place
with the American taxpayers' dime.
With that, I'd now like to recognize Ranking Member Susan
Wild for as much time as you may need.
Ms. Wild. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The developments that we have learned about in the past few
days are horrific. The fact that 12 UNRWA employees out of
13,000 staff members in Gaza were implicated in the October 7th
massacres is deeply disturbing and it only underscores the
already clear need for reform.
But the question we face right now is how do we ensure that
the innocent civilian population of Gaza, that is facing
famine, does not pay an even steeper price in human life
because of the actions of 12 horrific individuals and their
actions.
We know that for the civilian population in Gaza UNRWA
services have been a lifeline. Regardless of what one thinks
about UNRWA, its mission, or the many well documented examples
of its dysfunction, the facts on the ground right now are
indisputable.
It is the only entity on the ground with the systems and
the personnel and the capacity to deliver what little relief
there is for the people of Gaza. We're talking about shelters
for more than a million people, emergency food delivery, and
urgently needed health services.
We know that 87 percent of the Gaza population is now
estimated to rely on UNRWA services. But having said that, we
also know that the events of the past days have created an
unprecedented crisis of credibility for UNRWA and we have to
recognize that.
It serves as a potent reminder of the entrenched and long-
standing flaws of both the organization's functioning and its
mandate and I do believe that the Administration was absolutely
correct in pausing the funding and keep in mind, please, that
it's not just the United States that has done this but a number
of other countries as well.
But we have to have oversight and we have to be vigilant.
In short, what I believe is that we have to see a change in
UNRWA that reflects the gravity of what took place. Over the
medium term the need for major organizational reform is clear.
We have to prioritize reorganizing and restructuring aid
for Palestinians in a way that better serves the needs of the
innocent civilian people but that also makes sure that the
safety and security of the citizens of Israel is not affected,
is not jeopardized by the fact that we are funding this
humanitarian aid.
And so I do not have a perfect answer. I am hoping that as
I sit here listening to the testimony, and listening to the
members, that we will hear some constructive solutions free of
politics that really will address this very important need for
reform that we have, but that at the same time is cognizant of
the fact that there are innocent civilians that are suffering,
that are facing famine, and that who unfortunately have Hamas
as their government.
And with that, I will yield back and just say that I hope
we can all come together and find some sort of meaningful and
constructive solutions for this.
Thank you.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Ranking Member Wild.
The chair now recognizes the chairman of the Subcommittee
on Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International
Organizations, the chair--the Congressman from New Jersey Mr.
Smith for his opening statement.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Chairman Mast.
First of all, let me thank you that we are doing this joint
hearing, bringing further focus and hopefully resolution--some
resolution--the beginning resolutions to this horrific problem.
Public pressure motivated by explosive new evidence that
UNRWA employees were directly involved in the October 7th Hamas
terrorist attack on Israel, the Biden Administration last
Friday, as we know, announced that it was, quote, ``temporarily
paused additional funding for UNRWA while it reviews the
evidence.''
With all due respect to the President, this was a long
overdue response. Going far beyond the revelations of last
week, however, there has been a long--massive and irrefutable
evidence of UNRWA's extensive complicity and cooperation in
Hamas' anti-Semitic genocidal hate campaign. Like the Nazis
before them, Hamas and their chief terrorism sponsor Iran they
are committing genocide against the Jews.
As many of you know and many of my colleagues have read and
maybe some recently, the 1988 Hamas charter demands the
absolute destruction of the State of Israel and proclaims,
quote, ``Israel will exist and will continue to exist until
Islam obliterates it.''
Article 7 of the Hamas charter demands the slaughter of all
Jews. Quote, ``The day of judgment will not come until Muslims
fight Jews and kill them. Then the Jews will hide behind rocks
and trees and the rocks and trees will cry out, 'Oh Muslim,
there is a Jew hiding behind me. Come and kill him,' '' close
quote.
Article 13 of the 1988 charter of Hamas explicitly rejects
initiatives for peace and reconciliation and states, quote,
``Initiatives in so-called peaceful solutions and international
conferences are in contradiction to the principle of the
Islamic resistance movement.''
In its 2017 charter, building on the first one, Hamas
reiterates its goal of wiping Israel off the face of the earth.
It says, quote, ``There is no alternative to a fully sovereign
Palestinian State on the entire national Palestinian soil with
Jerusalem as its capital,'' close quote.
In 2018 President Trump suspended all U.S. funding to UNRWA
and they survived without the 30 percent of their budget the
U.S. typically provides.
But tragically in 2021 the Biden Administration resumed
lavish support from UNRWA without reform. The U.S. Government
has donated more than $1 billion to UNRWA since 2021.
In Fiscal Year 2022 U.S. taxpayers gave UNRWA $364 million,
in 1923 $344 million, and in Fiscal Year 1924 the U.S. is on
track to provide $371 million.
But the Administration has failed to provide clarity about
how much of this funding is affected by the pause announced on
January 26th.
Yesterday, joined by Chairman Mast and Chairman Wilson, we
introduced H.R. 7122, legislation to prohibit--to prohibit our
government from making any voluntary or involuntary
contributions to UNRWA.
A good deal of the evidence of UNRWA's involvement with
Hamas and other terrorist groups as well as educating children
toward terrorism--that is, poisoning their minds--has been
presented publicly at hearings including two that I had chaired
during the last 8 months.
Those two hearings, one was on June 22d and a second on
November 8th, and we heard from some of the witnesses including
Hillel Neuer who's here today, and the information is
absolutely devastating how these children--how these children--
how these children from the earliest days of their lives are
trained in hate for Jews and for Americans.
Now we have heard how UNRWA's textbooks, curricula, summer
camps, and official media are all infamous incubators of hate
and we have seen the evidence of its teachers Administrations'
involvement in--with Hamas.
They do not make their case. As you can see, the hatred
coming out of that particular man is so sad.
UNRWA, the U.N. Relief and Works Agency, was set up as we
know in 1949 to provide aid relief to refugees. Seventy-five
years later it's still going which is absurd, in a way, since
nearby Arab nations will not permit the former to integrate
into their societies.
UNRWA provides education in hatred of Jews for the vastly
expanded number of children, grandchildren, and great
grandchildren of the original refugees. UNRWA's textbooks--and
I've had meeting after meeting on this including hearings where
we have actually read through the textbooks filled to
overflowing with anti-Semitic hatred.
This is all--you know, this is serious. Aspects of its
anti-Semitism is so twisted I won't describe all of them here.
But they talk about martyrdom, suicide bombers, to children.
A new report by the U.N. Watch carefully documents, quote,
``how UNRWA teachers in a 300-member UNRWA staff Telegram group
cheered and celebrated Hamas' October 7th massacre'' while at
the same time they were asking about their salaries--when are
they going to get paid.
The UNRWA staff in the group shared photos and video
footage of those events and prayed for the terrorists' success
and for Israel's destruction, in clear violation of U.N. rules.
Thank you, Hillel, for being here today, for testifying about
this.
Similarly, IMPACT-se has recently published three reports
analyzing, quote, ``hundreds of pages''--hundreds of pages of
teaching materials revealing that content glorifying terrorism,
inciting violence, and promoting anti-Semitism is actually
included in UNRWA's own materials created by UNRWA staff for
UNRWA students. Thank you, Mr. Sheff, for joining us to bear
witness to that ugly, ugly truth.
And Mr. Goldberg has pointed out UNRWA does not recognize
Hamas, Islamic Jihad, Hezbollah, or the PFLP as terrorist
groups.
Does not submit staff, contractors, or beneficiaries for
U.S. counterterrorism vetting. It indoctrinates generation
after generation to hate Jews, to hate Israel, and prepare for
genocide. For UNRWA terror finance is a feature, he points out,
``not a bug,'' close quote.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Smith. The chair now recognizes
Mr. Crow for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman Mast, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, or UNRWA, was established in 1949
with a mandate to provide humanitarian assistance and
protection to registered Palestinian refugees.
In carrying out this mandate UNRWA has provided
humanitarian assistance including food, shelter, and medical
care in five areas including the West Bank, Gaza Strip, Jordan,
Lebanon, and Syria.
Thousands of UNRWA staff continue to go to work today amid
very dangerous conditions to provide medical care, drive
trucks, distribute aid and play an essential coordinating role
with aid organizations like the World Food Programme and
Israeli security authorities.
Now, I am also deeply troubled by the allegations made last
week about the 12 UNRWA employees that may have been involved
in the horrific October 7th terrorist attack and I echo the
concerns of many, and I echo Secretary Blinken's concerns and
sharing my support for a swift and thorough investigation and
the need for absolute accountability for any participants in
that attack.
But we also have to understand that humanitarian aid in
conflict zones must continue and it's difficult under the best
of circumstances, and we know that conditions in Gaza are far
from that.
Over 150 UNRWA staff members are among the over 25,000
Palestinians killed in Gaza in recent months. They are among
those wake each day with famine on the horizon and impossible
conditions around every corner.
UNRWA's humanitarian assistance is a lifeline to over 2
million Palestinians in Gaza who are sorely in need of that aid
and this is an organization largely reliant on voluntary
contributions and financial peril from month to month, and one
already facing a financial shortfall of hundreds of millions of
dollars.
It is also a lifeline to 3 million Palestinians living in
Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria. So if aid is cut or UNRWA is
abandoned without a replacement or a different organization to
fill that role, security in the region is further imperiled and
the burdens are then shifted onto other regional actors
including some of our allies.
The complexity of this situation cannot be overstated. But
my experience in combat zones and my understanding of our
Nation's 20 years of war in the Middle East have made it clear
to me that conditions in which people are starving, fearful, or
hopeless do not breed peace and they will not bring security to
Israel or to the broader region. People's basic needs must be
met.
So I have very deep concerns about the shift in funding and
the halting of funding. I have very real concerns about the
security impact and the moral implications if we do not find
quickly a way to resume some funding and allow that aid to move
forward expeditiously.
The horrifying and inexcusable actions of, roughly, a dozen
people should not speak for the over 13,000 UNRWA employees in
Gaza alone.
It is possible to acknowledge the lifesaving nature of
assistance that UNRWA provides and the importance of ensuring
that humanitarian assistance reaches the people of Gaza without
diversion or use/misuse by Hamas or other nefarious actors.
Now, this is not to understate the very real challenges and
concerns about the integrity of UNRWA that have been raised by
my colleagues and others and the need for substantial reform or
to find a follow-on successor organization to fulfill the
functions.
What I'm trying to say here is that these needs and these
functions must continue whether it's under UNRWA or some other
organization and that all of our collective interests in
security are undermined if we do not do that, and that has both
short-term and long-term implications.
So let's have a discussion today about how we achieve that,
what the very real concerns that we all have, how they should
be met, and how we can get that done in everyone's interests
because--let me finish with this--we cannot stop the delivery
of aid and the support of an organization that is essential to
the livelihood of about 2 million Palestinian people and I will
continue to be a vocal advocate to make sure that we figure out
a way forward here.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Ranking Member Crow.
I now ask unanimous consent that the following members be
allowed to sit on the dais and participate in today's hearing:
the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Murphy. Without
objection, so ordered.
I'm now going to recognize Ranking Member Smith for the
introduction of our panel today. Mr. Smith, you're recognized.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much.
And let me first begin with our first witness, Richard
Goldberg, who is a senior advisor at the Foundation for the
Defense of Democracies.
He previously served as deputy chief of staff and senior
foreign policy advisor to former U.S. Senator Mark Kirk, who
not only was our chief counsel once on this committee, went on
to become a distinguished U.S. senator.
He was also chief of staff for the Illinois Governor Bruce
Rauner, and director for Countering Iranian Terrorism Weapons
of Mass Destruction on the White House National Security
Council. He was sanctioned personally by Iran in 2020.
Next we'll hear from Marcus Sheff who is the CEO of the
Institute for Monitoring Peace and Cultural Tolerance in School
Education, or IMPACT-se, a research and policy nonprofit that
analyzes textbooks, employing standards on peace and tolerance
as derived from UNESCO's declarations and resolutions and
presents recommendations to governments, ministries of
education, and to policymakers.
Then we'll hear from Hillel Neuer who is the executive
director of U.N. Watch, a human rights NGO in Geneva,
Switzerland.
He's an international lawyer, writer, acclaimed speaker,
human rights activist, and matter of fact since 2009 Mr. Neuer
has headed a coalition of 25 human rights groups as chair of
the annual Geneva Summit for Human Rights and Democracy, a
renowned international gathering that provides a global
platform for courageous pro-democracy dissidents from around
the world.
Last and--but certainly not least we welcome Ms. Laura
Rudman, who is the James R. Schlesinger Distinguished Professor
at the Miller Center at the University of Virginia, and welcome
her and her testimony and expertise to the committee.
So if we could go to Mr. Goldberg as our first witness.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Ranking Member Smith. I think you
meant Mara. We all make--I think I had the wrong one on my
paper as well.
But we now recognize Mr. Goldberg for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD GOLDBERG, SENIOR ADVISOR, FOUNDATION FOR
DEFENSE OF DEMOCRACIES

Mr. Goldberg. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Members, all members of
the committees, thank you so much for holding this very
important hearing at this time.
I have worked on oversight of our foreign assistance
including to UNRWA for about 20 years now and let me just tell
you something.
UNRWA is a horror show that is decades in the making, co-
produced by the United States taxpayer. A lot of people woke up
and read the Wall Street Journal and other reports and were
shocked to hear that 12 employees of UNRWA participated in the
October 7th massacre, that 10 percent or more of its staff in
Gaza may be affiliated with terrorist organizations and even
more of them have some family members that are affiliates as
well.
I wasn't shocked. Many members of this committee who have
worked on UNRWA reform for years weren't shocked. Terrorism
support and subsidy for UNRWA is a feature, not a bug.
The organization is built from its core mission, its
mandate, to indoctrinate generation after generation to hate
Jews, to destroy Israel, to be ready to manifest themselves as
those that will come to wipe the Jews into the Mediterranean
Sea, to fulfill the mission that was outlined in 1948 by Arab
armies, never fulfilled.
But UNRWA established back then with a mandate to have the
political manifestation--the political warfare arm--to get
ready to fulfill that military mission, and decade after decade
pumping kids to hate through their schools, never recognizing
U.S. designated foreign terrorist organizations as terrorist
organizations.
When you have a conversation with an UNRWA official and you
say, is it possible your aid is going to Hamas--is it possible
families that are receiving cash assistance in your program are
affiliated with designated foreign terrorist organizations--is
it possible your staff are affiliated with these groups the
answer is, of course, these are political labels to UNRWA.
These aren't terrorist groups. These are political
movements so why would they want to discriminate based on
political persuasion?
And to a United States citizen and I would say to our
allies around the world that is, in fact, horrific, disgusting,
and part of the reason we sit here today.
Now, when you look at the incitement to violence that has
gone on for decades, the internalization in generation after
generation to rise up and believe they are refugees waiting to
come back to what is today Israel, to drive the Jews into the
sea, October 7th is the logical conclusion of UNRWA.
It is, of course, what they have been training generations
to do with the resources we have provided going to these
terrorist organizations to help carry out that mission.
We're focused on UNRWA in Gaza today because that's where
the news is. Follow the news elsewhere where UNRWA operates. In
the West Bank, the IDF is conducting daily operations today
against terror cells in UNRWA facilities and UNRWA areas.
In Lebanon in the largest refugee camp in Lebanon there
have been months of terrorist battles. There's no Israeli
presence there. Anywhere UNRWA goes terrorism follows. We have
documented this for years.
Now, you hear a lot of people saying, well, we cannot
cutoff food--we cannot cutoff aid--we cannot leave people
starving. That's true. That's correct. Nobody is calling for
that.
If only we had another organization that was built to help
refugees around the world and internally displaced persons
around the world. We should think of such an organization. Oh,
that's right. It exists, the U.N. High Commissioner for
Refugees.
If only we had an organization built to distribute food
aid. That's right, we give them billions of dollars. It's
called the World Food Programme.
If only there was an organization for children and for
schools and education and for health care. They're all
available. It's an alphabet soup.
The only reason to remain dedicated to supporting the
terror, financing, incitement promoting, genocide promoting
UNRWA is to help UNRWA keep Hamas in power in Gaza, promote
terrorism incitement against Israel, and maintain a mandate
that the region has moved on from and that is to hate Israel,
destroy Israel.
The Arab armies that failed in 1948, that set up UNRWA as a
political weapon, have moved on. They've made peace with
Israel. UNRWA hasn't.
UNRWA is the problem. UNRWA is a part of what happened on
October 7th and it will keep happening again and again if we
keep funding it.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goldberg follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Mast. I want to thank you, Mr. Goldberg.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Sheff for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF MARCUS SHEFF, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, IMPACT-SE

Mr. Sheff. Chairman Smith, Chairman Mast, Ranking Member
Wild, Ranking Member Crow, members of committee, thank you.
On October 7th terrorists breached Gaza's border with
Israel. The result was catastrophic. They raped children,
women, and men, burned families alive, beheaded and murdered.
They abducted babies and the elderly. A hundred and thirty-two
are still being held in dungeons in Gaza and we know UNRWA----
Mr. Mast. The gentleman will suspend for a moment.
[Pause.]
Mr. Mast. The gentleman will resume.
Mr. Sheff. Thank you, sir.
We know that UNRWA employees took part in this massacre.
But these were not a few bad apples. Rather, the institutional
barrel is rotten.
How do we know? We know by researching UNRWA's educational
infrastructure. In it textbooks teach that Jews are liars and
fraudsters who spread corruption which will lead to their
annihilation.
Students are taught about cutting the necks of the enemy,
that a fiery massacre of Jews on a bus is celebrated as a
barbecue party, that Dalal Mughrabi who murdered 38 people and
13 children is a role model.
UNRWA educates that dying is preferable to living, that
becoming a martyr will be rewarded in heaven. First graders are
taught the alphabet by learning the words for attack and martyr
and fourth graders are taught addition by counting martyrs.
These are just a handful of examples of incitement which
runs like a thread, a strategy, throughout the Palestinian
curriculum which is taught in UNRWA schools and our research
shows the same violent jihadi educational materials are created
on a large institutional level by UNRWA staff.
One of our reports confirms that at least 100 Hamas members
who carried out terror attacks in the past were educated,
celebrated by being part of the UNRWA system and the stark
truth given that over half the schools in Gaza are UNRWA run is
that the majority of the October 7th terrorists are more likely
than not to have been UNRWA school graduates.
And make no mistake, the terrorists' barbarity is cheered
by UNRWA teachers. Another of our reports reveals dozens
celebrated the massacre on social media.
These extremist views go way beyond a handful of
individuals. Rather, they are endemic to the institution. UNRWA
staff were previously found to be extremists from school
principal Suhail al-Hindi of Hamas' politburo to convicted
terrorist Said Seyam, 23 years an UNRWA teacher.
And IMPACT-se has warned for years about the consequences
of this hate education and I ask you what can UNRWA possibly
offer the next generation of Palestinians? Poisonous textbooks
taught too often by extremist teachers? Quite simply, UNRWA is
not fit for purpose.
But there is an alternative. Elsewhere in the region the
UAE has produced a curriculum that is centered around peace,
tolerance, and acceptance of the other. Saudi Arabia has
removed practically all the anti-Semitism and violent jihad
from its textbooks.
Israeli textbooks center peacemaking and feature a
Palestinian narrative. Moroccan textbooks embrace Jews, the
Amazigh, and they empower girls. Egypt is reforming its
textbook system comprehensively.
In other words, we look at the region and extremist UNRWA
schools stand increasingly alone. It has chosen to teach
conflict and violence over hope and over peace.
But it is a path we can no longer afford to walk down. One
thing is clear. If we want to prevent the next massacre, if we
want to dream of peace, then UNRWA can play no further part in
Palestinian education. There are alternatives.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sheff follows:]

sheff
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Sheff.
I now recognize Mr. Neuer for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HILLEL NEUER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, U.N. WATCH

Mr. Neuer. Chairman, Ranking Members--Chairmen, Ranking
Members, members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today.
For years we have been told by UNRWA and its supporters
that the agency performs lifesaving work and that its teachers
offer Palestinian students an education that promotes human
rights, tolerance, equality, and nondiscrimination.
Today more than ever before, and I mean literally today in
light of the bombshell news reports in yesterday's Wall Street
Journal, Reuters, and elsewhere, we now know this has been a
lie.
From these and other revelations over the past few days we
know that in Gaza at least 12 UNRWA employees personally
participated in the massacre of October 7th which involved the
murder of 1,200 Israelis, along with mass rape, torture, and
mutilation.
Secretary of State Blinken said yesterday these
intelligence reports are highly, highly credible. The world
also learned yesterday that 1,200 UNRWA employees in Gaza are
part of Hamas or Islamic Jihad, meaning actual operatives
within the political and military organizations.
Finally, an estimated 6,000 UNRWA employees being half of
the workforce in Gaza have close family members in these
terrorist organizations. Now, UNRWA's top donors--the United
States, Germany, Britain, Canada, and many others--have just
announced they are freezing funds.
Accordingly, I've come here from Geneva to bring before the
Congress our case against UNRWA. I've come here to ask the
Congress of the United States, which is the largest donor to
UNRWA at over $300 million a year, to not just suspend but to
end the funding for good, and to take the lead in dissolving an
organization that is riddled with incitement to hate,
involvement in terrorism, and the perpetuation of war.
Members of the committee will find all of the evidence that
I present here on our website at UNWatch.org under ``The Case
Against UNRWA.''
Now, on Friday Secretary General Guterres announced that he
was, quote, ``horrified'' to learn that members of his UNRWA
staff were implicated in terrorism.
Members of the committee, I'm here to bear witness and
testify that Secretary General Guterres, the head of UNRWA
Philippe Lazzarini, their predecessors, their senior colleagues
could not possibly have been shocked that UNRWA employees are
implicated in terrorism because for the past 9 years--and
Chairman Smith knows this very well because he's been on this
issue and he's invited me to testify--we have been uncovering,
publishing, and submitting to the United Nations, to UNRWA,
evidence of widespread and systematic incitement to jihadi
terrorism, the praise of Nazi leader Adolf Hitler, calls to
slaughter Jews on the part of UNRWA teachers, school
principals, and other employees.
These reports range from 10 to 200 pages. For example, just
in November we sent a report on 20 teachers who celebrated the
October 7th massacre. In March together with IMPACT-se we
identified 133 UNRWA teachers and staff who promoted hate and
violence on social media.
In June 2022 we released a report called ``UNRWA's Teachers
of Hate'' and included the following Facebook posts by Elham
Mansour. Quote--an UNRWA teacher--quote, ``By Allah anyone who
can kill and slaughter any Zionist and Israeli criminal and
does not do so does not deserve to live. Kill them and pursue
them everywhere. They are the greatest enemy. All Israel
deserves is death.''
This is an UNRWA teacher's statement on Facebook. We sent
it to the U.N. They did nothing. We sent them reports in 2021,
2019, 2017, 2015--numerous reports. They never contacted us for
information.
They refused our repeated written requests to meet to
discuss the problem. They cannot say they did not know. Mr.
Guterres knew. The head of the UNRWA knew. The United Nations
knew. They simply chose not to act.
But it's much worse than that. From the beginning their
response to our reports was to attack us for doing the work
they failed to do. If we look at Christopher Gunness, the
longtime UNRWA spokesman--he's now come back as a surrogate
giving interviews on Al Jazeera--he said on Twitter the
following in response to our reports.
Quote, ``Appeal to journalists. Please do not turn U.N.
Watch baseless allegations about anti-Semitism into a he said/
she said story. It's a nonstory.''
Quote, ``U.N. Watch makes a fool of itself again,
credibility dead in the water. Will anyone believe them
again?''
Quote, ``Interested''--he's interested--``to find out more
about U.N. Watch's political and financial affiliations since
its establishment. Can anyone advise?''
This was their response, to smear the messenger. They are
not interested in finding out the root problem of incitement to
terrorism.
In June 2022 when they had to suspend six out of 10 of
their employees under pressure from the U.S., UNRWA Deputy
Commissioner General Leni Stenseth, who's now the director
general of the Norwegian Foreign Ministry, she informed donor
states and put it on her website that, quote, ``The real intent
of U.N. Watch--my organization--is quote, ``to destroy and not
build and to invite conflict, not build a lasting peace.''
Now, the U.S. and other donors have asked UNRWA to
investigate and to ensure accountability. I can tell you for a
decade UNRWA has shown itself to be unwilling, unable, and
unfit.
Today, I wish to present our new report called ``UNRWA's
Terrorgram,'' which I've handed to each of the members and it's
on our website UNWatch.org.
In this report we document a Telegram chat group of over
3,000 UNRWA teachers in Gaza that is replete with messages,
photos, and videos cheering and celebrating the massacre of
October 7th.
It includes, for example, Safaa Mohammad Al Najjar on the
morning of October 7th--she's an UNRWA teacher of computers in
Gaza, an administrator of this Telegram group--she celebrated
the massacre, posting videos. She praised the Hamas mujahideen,
the holy warriors, as they massacred, mutilated, and raped
Israelis.
UNRWA English teacher Abdallah Mehjez shared a message from
Hamas urging Gazans to stay put, to ignore Israeli messages
asking them to evacuate for their safety, effectively doing the
work of Hamas to ask Gazans to be human shields. This is an
UNRWA teacher.
Abdul Kareem Mezher in our report, an elementary school
teacher, celebrated the Hamas terrorists saying, quote, ``May
Allah keep their feet steady and guide their aim.''
When a group member wondered what these heroes, the
terrorists, as they are perpetrating the massacre what they
were brought up on Mezher replied, ``They imbibed jihad and
resistance with their mother's milk,'' and a few days later
this UNRWA teacher asked to execute--asked Hamas to execute
their Israeli hostages.
When Stephane Dujarric, the U.N. spokesman, was asked about
our information he replied on January 11th, quote, ``I mean,
U.N. Watch, they have a track record and I think from our end
it speaks for itself.'' He tried to disparage us.
You know, just to conclude, we have massive incitement to
terrorism. You know, prominent people have said bad apples--
it's a few bad apples.
We're talking about 1,200 who belong to the organization,
3,000 in this group, 6,000 whose family members belong to it.
This is not a problem of bad apples. It's rotten to the core.
We have talked about incitement, we have talked about acts
of actual violence and, finally, let's get to the core problem
and with that I conclude.
The core problem of UNRWA, the very purpose of the agency,
is to perpetuate the war of 1948, to send the message to
Palestinians that the war of 1948 is not over.
Don't use cement to build homes, hospitals, and schools
here in Gaza. Use it to build hundreds of miles of terror
tunnels to tunnel into Israel, to invade Israel, to go back to
what your homes are.
That is the message of UNRWA. We should not be surprised
what happened on October 7th because that is the message that
these Palestinians got for more than 70 years in UNRWA schools.
UNRWA is a failure. We have to recognize what the Swiss
Foreign Minister Ignazio Cassis said. This is a country
historically that's supported--that supports the U.N. He said
the following:
I quote, ``UNRWA has become part of the problem. It
supplies the ammunition to continue the conflict. By supporting
UNRWA we keep the conflict alive. It's a perverse logic.''
And I'm here to say if the United States and other
governments that fund UNRWA truly care about helping
Palestinians and Israelis it's time to put an end to this
perverse logic. We're asking the Congress to take the lead in
dissolving this agency.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Neuer follows:]

neuer
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Neuer.
I now recognize Ms. Rudman for her opening statement.
Microphone, ma'am.

STATEMENT OF MARA RUDMAN, SCHLESINGER PROFESSOR, UNIVERSITY OF
VIRGINIA MILLER CENTER

Ms. Rudman. Thank you, and I thank the subcommittee chairs
and ranking members----
Mr. Mast. If you could speak into it just a little bit more
I think everybody will hear you better.
Ms. Rudman. Thank you.
I'd like to thank you and the ranking member and
subcommittee Chair Smith, members of the committee, for the
opportunity to appear before you. I have warm memories of my
service on this committee's staff as legal counsel under Chair
Lee Hamilton.
So much of how I learned to approach U.S. foreign policy
and the important oversight responsibilities of this committee
I attribute to the tutelage of Lee Hamilton. Of course, I alone
am responsible for my statement here today.
In my written testimony I discuss, first, the U.S. national
security interests at stake in this topic; second, Palestinian
basic needs historically, particularly in Gaza, and why meeting
them is intrinsic to Israeli security and regional security and
stability; and third, why I continue to see a case for U.S.
support for UNRWA and/or other U.N. entities with appropriate
oversight and related pauses where necessary until and unless
alternatives are created. Such support is critical for serving
U.S. national security interests and sustainable security for
the State of Israel.
In my brief time with you now I want to highlight five key
points. No. 1, I am not here to defend UNRWA, which has many
shortcomings well documented including here today. So let's
start with its most immediate failures.
We have talked about those. They fired 12 staff who based
on reporting and the strength and rapidity I would say of the
U.S. pause as well on funding were clearly operatives who
participated in the barbaric ISIS like Hamas attack on
Israelis, and there are allegations that more of the 13,000
Palestinians on UNRWA's payroll may be affiliated in some way
with the Hamas movement.
In my experience working with Israeli military, Palestinian
leaders, and U.N. officials, I found some in UNRWA leadership
to tend toward the sanctimonious, too often painting only in
black and white when the reality was much more often a
continuum between the two, and in so doing they rarely
acknowledged faults or shortcomings within their own
organization. This has rendered them on occasion blind and
often blinkered in their outlook.
Two, UNRWA's mission is unique and it is critical to
Israel's security and regional stability. UNRWA is mandated to
provide assistance and protection specifically to some 5.4
million registered refugees.
As has been pointed out, in Gaza, the West Bank, Jordan,
Lebanon and Syria UNRWA's mandate includes providing education,
health care, social services to its target population as well
as employment and direct relief.
There is no other organization right now. It's not WFP, not
UNHCR that is set up to be able to take the reins tomorrow and
fulfill this.
UNRWA employs 13,000 Palestinians in Gaza. It's the single
largest employer in Gaza. It runs the only public school system
in Gaza. A majority of the 2 million Palestinians in Gaza
depended on UNRWA assistance before October 7th.
For the services UNRWA provides to a desperate population
there is no substitute at this time. It does not mean that
there are opportunities to create ways forward.
But in terms of what they're doing right now there is no
substitute and they are providing for the most basic needs, No.
3--the most basic needs of Palestinians which is part and
parcel of providing for security for the State of Israel.
Having 2 million famished increasingly desperate people
long treated as expendable by de facto Hamas rulers with no
ability to move and limited ability to provide for themselves
and their families within walking distance of southern Israel
threatens Israelis' security and stability.
Palestinians who are food secure and able to sustain
themselves and their families and have a political horizon that
will 1 day realistically offer a better future for their
children alongside a State of Israel are Palestinians less
likely to be drawn to or be forced to serve terrorists forces
such as Hamas.
No. 4, Israeli military officials long have been committed
to getting humanitarian assistance into Gaza--Israeli military
officials. I know from the countless hours I spent with them on
the details they prioritize doing so because they saw it as
directly serving Israeli security interests.
They work closely with UNRWA leaders and other U.N.
officials to devise the most effective and secure means for
executing these aims.
They did so appreciating that there was risk involved but
they saw a far greater risk to their country and to their
security if goods were not able to flow and they knew these
U.N. entities were vital actors to ensure provision of such
services in Gaza in particular.
Five, U.S. aid to UNRWA is key to meeting basic needs of
Palestinians, particularly in Gaza, and that's critical to
Israel's security and to U.S. security. For that aid to resume
we need a framework to assess what has gone so terribly wrong
with the agency, and whether it can be righted with internal
reform or requires a transition of responsibilities to another
organization within or outside the U.N.
The development and oversight of the audit necessary for
such assessment should be led from outside of UNRWA, no
question. I have some thoughts on who that--who could do that.
Aid must resume to UNRWA at the same time, though, as the
assessment is being carried out. The United States, Israel, the
world, cannot afford the risk of famine taking root in Gaza.
That problem will not stay in Gaza. It is very directly
threatening to the security and stability of Israel and the
region and thus the United States.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rudman follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Mast. Thank you, ma'am. I now recognize myself for
questions and I'd like to start with you.
Looking at some of your comments here you said that you're
not here to defend UNRWA, but you did also say in your comments
that you are here to make the case that we should continue to
support UNRWA.
Kind of sounds to me a little bit like having your cake and
eating it, too. But I want to ask you a few questions about
this.
Do the Rohingya have an UNRWA?
Ms. Rudman. I believe I stated, sir, that UNRWA is a unique
agency with a unique vision, and also that it's not the same
all the time.
Mr. Mast. So no UNRWA for Rohingya? No UNRWA for Rohingya?
None? Ma'am, no UNRWA for Rohingya?
Ms. Rudman. Sir, as I said UNRWA is unique.
Mr. Mast. No UNRWA for Sudanese?
Ms. Rudman. That would--that would imply by an organization
being unique that there is not a similar organization elsewhere
in the world for other refugees.
Mr. Mast. So none for the Sudanese either, correct? You've
worked in this field. None for the Sudanese?
Ms. Rudman. I'm sorry, sir. I'm doing my best to answer
your question, which I believe I'm doing.
Mr. Mast. None for the Sudanese either.
So I'd like to know from your opinion what percent or
number of UNRWA employees do you believe are Hamas or support
Hamas?
Ms. Rudman. I do not have the basis for making that
assessment. I read the same press reports that I'm sure you've
read that talk about a percentage within UNRWA that is,
roughly, around the same percentage as estimated in the
Palestinian population at large in Gaza. So between 10 and 15
percent.
Mr. Mast. Say that one--your estimate is that between 10
and 15 percent of UNRWA employees, just to make sure I'm
hearing you correctly, are possibly Hamas or supportive of
Hamas or Palestinian Islamic Jihad or Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade
or one of the terrorist organizations that exists in the Gaza
Strip?
Ms. Rudman. What I'm saying, sir, is that press reports
have indicated that the percentages of UNRWA staff that may be
affiliated in some way with Hamas are, roughly, similar to
the--to the percentages in the general population that are
thought to be affiliated. So between 10 and 15 percent. But I
want to be clear that I'm relying----
Mr. Mast. Do you look at that and say that's out of this
world, that's crazy, no way, not a chance? Or do you look at it
and say, seems like it might be a reasonable estimate?
Ms. Rudman. I believe if they employ 13,000 people in the
population--the single biggest employer--it would not be
surprising if the percentages are, roughly, that of the general
population.
Mr. Mast. Thank you. As you're here to make the case for
continued support for UNRWA, per your statement, what would you
need to see to say this is a threshold, this has gone too far,
there can no longer be support for UNRWA? Would it be if UNRWA
fired 100 people?
If they said 100 people--we have the evidence these
individuals took part in the attack. Would that to you reach
the threshold of saying, all right, I'm no longer here to
support UNRWA?
Ms. Rudman. I'm here, sir, to look at what's in the best
interest of U.S. national security, which was my teaching under
the former chair of this committee, and what's in the best
interest of Israel's security and I believe that is finding
some function, some way of providing for the most basic needs
of Palestinians.
Mr. Mast. So 100 people confirmed working for Hamas as a
part of UNRWA, for you, would not be a threshold for cutting
ties with UNRWA?
Ms. Rudman. So for me what would be a threshold is finding
a suitable framework that can be put in place both to evaluate
UNRWA and to be able to go forward with other means of
providing aid at the same time.
Mr. Mast. So there's no threshold for bad behavior?
Ms. Rudman. The threshold is U.S. national security
interests and concerns for me, sir.
Mr. Mast. No threshold for bad behavior, though?
Ms. Rudman. Same answer applies.
Mr. Mast. So none. And I think this is concerning because I
heard this in remarks from my colleagues. You were invited here
as the Democrat witness of choice. They chose for you to be the
person that they requested to be here.
And, again, in your remarks you say that you're here to
make the case for continued support of UNRWA and I think this
is what we're going to continue to see very likely from the
Administration is in this case that there is no threshold for
bad behavior.
It does not matter if it's one individual that was a part
of Hamas or one of these other terrorist organizations, or a
hundred that were a part of them that took part in the attacks,
or there's a hundred right now that are participating in
holding hostages.
Doesn't matter. No threshold for bad behavior. This is some
sacrosanct entity that just simply must continue no matter
what, and that cannot be the case that we have, moving forward.
I will not show support for that especially, as I said in
my opening statement, I think that we have a shell game going
on from the Administration right now where they're saying that
they're cutting off the funding, pausing the funding for UNRWA,
but in fact they waited until just after they allowed tens of
millions of dollars to be released to UNRWA and then now they
are saying they're going to pause funding for UNRWA. Absolute
shell game, in my opinion.
In that I'm now going to yield time to Ranking Member Crow
for as many questions as he needs to ask.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman.
Well, first of all, we need to just clear the air here. You
mischaracterized our witness' testimony repeatedly and tried to
put words into her mouth. She did not say at any point that
there was no threshold for bad behavior.
In fact, she specifically answered your question about what
the criteria and the framework should be and that is centering
our national security and our interests, centering Israel's
security and interests, as well as the rights and dignity of
the Palestinian people.
Mr. Mast. Did you want to yield?
Mr. Crow. Those should be the measures and the gauges and,
frankly, I will push back on the notion that she answered in
the manner in which you characterized her answer.
Mr. Mast. Did you want to yield to me or----
Mr. Crow. Yes, I'll yield to you.
Mr. Mast. I did very specifically ask her to clarify, are
you saying that there is no threshold. I asked the question are
you saying there is----
Mr. Crow. Yes, and she answered what her threshold was. She
gave a very clear answer to that.
Mr. Mast. No threshold for bad behavior.
Mr. Crow. No, she provided the framework for what her
threshold was.
Mr. Mast. Which was no threshold----
Mr. Crow. Because it wasn't your answer you kept going
after her.
Mr. Mast. I asked for--I do not want to take up your time.
It's yours. But I did ask if there's no threshold for bad
behavior.
Mr. Crow. And she answered very clearly.
Mr. Mast. Without answering.
Mr. Crow. So, Ms. Rudman--I will reclaim my time if that's
fine for you, Chairman.
Mr. Mast. Absolutely.
Mr. Crow. All right. But I also heard you say, Ms. Rudman,
is that you have no allegiance or loyalty to UNRWA the
organization. Just like me, right. I have no allegiance and
loyalty to any one organization. I'm not going to sit here and
defend UNRWA nor should I, and I have very real concerns.
What I have an allegiance and loyalty to is the mission,
right, the services that are being provided by this entity and
that is your concern as well.
So what I want to do is get beyond the point where people
just criticize because the problem with policy right now is
we're very long on criticism. People roll in here and they're
very long on criticism and they're very short on solutions.
So I'd like to take a moment to talk about solutions,
right, and you made a very clear point that despite the very
real concerns about UNRWA they are the only game in town on
some very key points.
Right now there's no other entity that exists that provides
the scope of services that UNRWA provides to the Palestinian
people.
So could you explain for us for a moment, given your vast
experience in this area and the substantial time that you've
spent personally in Gaza, how we would go about identifying
those core services and transitioning them either to existing
organizations that currently do not provide those services or
to create a new entity that would still do it.
Because at the end of the day there are very important
things that need to happen, right, and services that need to be
provided. So how do we get there?
Ms. Rudman. Thank you, Representative Crow, for your
comments and for the question.
I think that the most basic needs I'm going to put, though
I recognize for this panel education is a primary focus, I
would focus first on food and water and electricity,
understanding and appreciating the importance of education as
well.
And so I would look at the structures inside Gaza, the
staffing and the employees. As we have talked about, UNRWA has
many more than--they have the whole infrastructure inside.
So how do you replicate that? That would require figuring
out whether it's UNHCR--I think less likely. UNDP is quite
active in Gaza but, again, not anywhere near the numbers. World
Food Programme that handles distribution and goods going in and
out but not with, again, staff on the ground to carry out the
delivery of these means.
There are ways you might be able to divide the
responsibilities among AND between but you're still going to
need screening mechanisms, auditing mechanisms, things to
ensure that what has happened with UNRWA and their staff is not
replicated elsewhere.
What I can tell you is that the Israeli military,
recognizing absolutely the importance of getting goods into
Gaza, does not want to be, ought not to be for a variety of
reasons in Gaza responsible for distribution of that food.
They are quite active on the crossing points at--and have
been historically again pre-October 7th at Nir Oz and at a
couple of the other crossing points--thank you, Kerem Shalom--
and so watch very closely goods coming in and out and have kind
of strict means for that.
So there are roles, again, for Israeli military but they
are not inside Gaza. So what I would do is figure out exactly
who does what, who has which resources in which ways, how do
you make sure that food and water, the basic necessities, are
getting in to people and how you develop the mechanisms to
better screen staff who are working for these--for any of these
agencies at the same time, not just UNRWA.
Mr. Crow. And because UNRWA is a organization that
historically lives paycheck to paycheck, so to speak, and in
the United States and I believe nine other countries at this
point have joined the U.S. in cutting funding and I've seen
estimates that that funding will run out by mid-February.
Is it your--is it your professional opinion that what you
just described could be accomplished in 2 weeks or do we really
need to look seriously at, you know, an interim gap measure or
to resume some limited funding with appropriate oversight to
make sure people do not starve to death in that time?
Ms. Rudman. That's exactly my concern. I do not think it
can be reserved and it can be put in place by flipping a
switch, and it will take time. I think it's important that it
be done. I think there are ways of doing it.
But it's not going to happen in a week or two and I heard
that the view that there's much more money out there UNRWA is
very much paycheck to paycheck, probably, like, still paying
last month's debts and the United States and Germany are
about--kind of over $500 million between the two. So quite a
significant impact.
So there needs to--my view is there needs to be some
transition plan, which I recognize is not--and I do not speak
for the United States government--I have not heard what their
plan is on that front.
Mr. Crow. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Crow.
And I would say that I do not have an allegiance to UNRWA's
mission. My allegiance is to America and Americans singularly.
I now yield to Ranking Member Smith.
Mr. Smith. I appreciate that.
Mr. Goldberg, you talked about the horror show, and I think
that was a very apt description of what UNRWA does. I mean, do
you know of any instance where an UNRWA employee or leader
dissented from Hamas and offered a vision that was inclusive
and respectful of Jews?
Mr. Sheff, you talked about the hate and violence being
endemic. You know, one of my--when I was growing up I remember
eight or 9 years old I saw the musical by Rodgers and
Hammerstein called ``South Pacific'' and there was a--there was
one song that as a young kid caught my attention and I've
thought of it ever since in all of my human rights work, and I
do a lot of it, because it just--it talked about hate.
Two of the paragraphs--two of the song, ``You've got to be
taught to hate and fear. You've got to be taught from year to
year. It's got to be drummed into your dear little ear. You've
got to be carefully taught. You've got to be taught before it's
too late, before your sixth or seventh or eighth, to hate all
the people your ancestors, relatives hate. You've got to be
carefully taught.''
In my opinion, and I've been at this--I served with Lee
Hamilton--I've been raising UNRWA issues for decades. We have
given them as the U.S. Government $7 billion years to date and
we get crickets back. We get false reform that never happens.
There's no transparency and, unfortunately, it has gotten
worse over the years. It has--and we have seen the results. One
generation of young people after another who wants to kill
Jewish people, who hate Jewish people, have an absolute ugly
caricature of who Jewish people and Jewish kids and adults
actually are and dream of the day when they are all killed.
I mean, is there anybody in an UNRWA camp or in an UNRWA
school that dissents from the Hamas charter of 1988 and stands
up and say, you know, that charter is an outrage when you talk
about human rights?
Do they? I do not see them doing it. If they do it what
happens to them?
Mr. Hillel, you talked about bombshell revelations. None of
this is a bombshell to you or me and others who've been
following this. I've met with the UNRWA board over the years.
They always have a nice slick presentation that sounds like,
wow, what are we talking about? They know better than us.
And, yes, I understand why the Israelis as a matter of
necessity would have to do some kind of accommodation. What
else are they going to do when the entire international
community including the United States are all on board, say
this is the means to the end?
I believe that the people in Gaza do need to get food,
clothing, shelter, and their children need an education that is
free of anti-Semitic hate. That's what they deserve.
This is--this brainwashing, frankly, in my opinion, is
child abuse of these kids. You wonder why they're filled with
all this hate. They're taught year to year to year to year.
And so if you want to comment on that as well. I do believe
they need a new platform. You know, I do not know if UNHCR or
any of those--maybe, you know, necessity is the mother of
invention.
This has to be the pivot point what has happened with UNRWA
now, and the international community including the Biden
Administration and if he gets another term or whoever follows
has to say enough is enough.
Otherwise, this will be happening again. A couple years
we'll have another incidence like this and we'll have more kids
toting AK-47s and rocket grenade launchers and other means of
violence who are killing innocent people.
As you said, Mr. Sheff, about the burning bus you see that
bus burning and they're celebrating. I mean, that is disgusting
on steroids and I do hope, you know, you would speak to what
might be a follow-on group.
But, you know, to say we're going to go right back to UNRWA
and we're going to go right back to the same teachers who have
been inculcating this hate-filled agenda which is poisoning
those kids those kids need--you know, we see it with child
soldiers in Uganda. Remember all those years? I've worked on
all of that, too.
These kids needed to be deprogrammed and find a way out of
the hate that they have been--that has been inculcated into
their hearts, minds, and souls in this case by their teachers.
So if you could speak to that, Mr. Sheff.
Mr. Sheff. ? Sure. I've never heard that musical reference
before. Extremely opposite. And thank you so much for that.
Yes, textbooks are uniquely authoritative, especially in
the MENA region in the Middle East where you get one book, one
grade, one subject, and they carry the values, the identities
that leaders wish to pass down to the next generation for good
or for bad.
This is how we create the societies of the future that we
want to see, through these textbooks, through education and, of
course, for bad. You know, we know that one of the first things
that Hitler did when he came to power was change the textbooks
and there he was in 1939 with enough young people who would
join the Einsatzgruppen and commit those terrible acts they
committed and textbooks were used then for good by Germans
after the war in order to deradicalize that society.
They are incredibly powerful and, yes, Palestinian children
deserve a set of textbooks which is filled with ideas of peace
and tolerance, with those UNESCO standards. And this is not
rocket science, by the way.
This has been done time and time and time again. These
textbooks can be changed in a matter of weeks. They look like
this.
What you're looking at here is a Palestinian textbook. This
one actually has a picture of Dalal Mughrabi, the terrorist
that I was telling you about before which is taught in
Palestinian Authority schools, which is taught in UNRWA schools
and was taught in Hamas schools.
You know, it's a magazine. All you need to do is switch the
PDF, put in material which is better than Dalal Mughrabi
material which can inspire young people rather than teach them
to be terrorists.
Weeks--that is how long it can take in order to change the
school curriculum. So we're talking about what can we do in the
future. Again, this can be done really simply.
Those schools in Gaza can have a new school curriculum
which is filled with these ideas of peace and tolerance and, by
the way, it needs to be the Palestinian Authority as well
because they are producing this.
UNRWA is teaching the textbooks which the Palestinian
Authority created as well, of course, as UNRWA creating its own
material. So let us insist on this. Let us demand this. Futures
absolutely rely on changing these textbooks.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Sheff.
Mr. Smith?
Mr. Smith. Just one very brief followup.
I remember in June 2021 when UNRWA was pressured into
removing their Gaza director after he gave an interview that
Hamas and others condemned.
Can you--perhaps, Hillel, you can give us a little
background on what happened there?
Mr. Neuer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
That episode is actually a very telling episode. You know,
there was a war between Israel and Hamas in May 2021 and
afterwards the UNRWA Gaza director Matthias Schmale, a German
national, was interviewed on Israeli TV and he was asked
whether the Israeli strikes against Hamas were precise and he
said, yes, they were very precise.
And he wasn't thinking when he gave his answer to adhere to
the Hamas script, which UNRWA officials invariably do, what
everyone else in Gaza does, because it's an authoritarian
terrorist regime. If you do not follow the script when you
speak to the media, you're going to get in a lot of trouble.
You're going to get hurt very badly.
And he said--he conceded that Israel's strikes against
Hamas were very precise. They were able to hit a precise point
when they were successful and not--and not hit civilians and so
forth.
And moments later there were protests orchestrated by Hamas
throughout Gaza. There were pictures of him photoshopped onto
an Israeli military uniform as if he was an Israeli--even
though he's someone who was quite anti-Israel for many years.
But because he slipped in his interview he was deemed
persona non grata, protests against him and his deputy, and he
was forced to leave. Hamas forced the head of UNRWA in Gaza to
leave.
Then the--his boss, Deputy Commissioner General Leni
Stenseth, a former Norwegian diplomat who has gone back to Oslo
to be the head of their foreign ministry, she went to visit
Yahya Sinwar.
He is the evil mastermind of the October 7th massacre,
someone who kills people with his own hands--you know,
Palestinians with his own hands who he considers collaborators.
A vicious murderer.
She went to see him--this is their headline in the
newspaper--and she said that she wants to reaffirm her
solidarity with the Palestinians. Basically, the message was we
went off script but do not worry.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Neuer.
We have to move on to the next person, Mr. Neuer. Thank
you. Thank you for your testimony.
The chair now recognizes Ms. Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My first and foremost concern is always for children. It
was unbearable to see what happened to Israeli children on
October 7th and since when they were tortured, murdered, taken
hostage, many of them having to witness their parents' murders.
It was horrific.
It's equally unbearable, at least for me, to watch what
Palestinian children are suffering and their deaths, their
medical problems, which are extensive, their hunger.
And so I start with the children as a starting point
because I think that if we consider all children to be innocent
and deserving of a safe place to live, water to drink, and food
to eat we might be able to find some common ground in solving
this problem.
And aside from that basic humanitarian concept I think we
have to recognize that desperate childhoods often give rise to
violence in adulthood whether it's here in the United States or
elsewhere, and I think we can all agree we do not want to
create future generations of terrorists. Full stop on that.
So with that, I'm going to direct my question to you, Ms.
Rudman, to the national security part of this. You've got a
special expertise in national security and your testimony--your
written testimony has reflected that focus. Thank you for that
very comprehensive report.
Could you talk about this concept of aid to the Palestinian
civilian population from a national security perspective?
Ms. Rudman. Sure. Thank you, Congresswoman.
The issue is, as you have reflected, the threat from the
risk to security from people who are desperate and Gaza--I was
first there in 1987 or 1988.
It has never been an easy place to live. It has gotten
worse and worse and more and more difficult even before October
7th and certainly under Hamas rule.
I would just say on that point to Chairman Smith's comment
I actually do know a number of Palestinians who survived very
difficult childhoods, who survived UNRWA schools. They cannot
speak out publicly in Gaza because of the nature of Hamas rule
and the lack of freedom of speech.
But there are any number of Palestinians who are absolutely
concerned about both their future, their children's future.
Those who could left and are living other places also under
very difficult circumstances.
But there are any number of people who can be reached with
their basic needs being taken care of while they cannot do it
themselves who want jobs, who want futures, and it's in our
national security interest to find a way.
And Israel, I believe, has repeatedly made the calculation
that it's in their security interest as well to ensure that
basic needs are covered for people who--and let's just be
clear.
These are people who--it is a small area from Israel
itself. Gaza is maybe twice the size of Washington, DC. but
with no exit--entrance or exit. But it is actually walking
distance as Dahara (phonetic) and I was at kibbutz Nir Oz. I
was at kibbutz Be'eri in December. They are within easy walking
distance of Gaza.
And in addition to that, there's a population of three and
a half million Palestinians in the West Bank who watch,
reflect, see what's happening to Palestinians in Gaza and react
as well.
And so on the relative scale of what it costs the United
States, and I do not make light of what $300 million is--that's
a significant amount of money. But the cost to the United
States, the cost to Israel, the cost to regional stability, of
not feeding people, of not getting water in, is far, far higher
than a clearly inadequate agency but the agency that has the
infrastructure doing it until and unless we have an
alternative.
So I think it very much comes back to the risk that the
United States is willing to take on in this situation and the
risks that Israel will absorb as well if we do not find a means
to continue to go forward with basic services.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. I would have followup, except that my
time is up. Thank you very much. I yield.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Ranking Member Wild.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Perry.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ladies and gentlemen, I think it shocks the conscience of
every person even if you've, because of your professional
norms, have been exposed to some of this kind of stuff to see
the kind of carnage that's happened in Israel and Gaza since
October. Shocks the conscience.
However, there's a reason this is happening and it's not
the Jews that attacked Gaza. It is not the Jews.
Mr. Neuer, UNRWA's commissioner General Lazzarini do you
know of any time that he has denounced the Hamas charter?
Mr. Neuer. No, sir. I'm aware of no time that he has ever
denounced the Hamas charter.
Mr. Perry. And I suspect, like me, you have read the Hamas
charter and you know that it specifically calls for the
destruction of Israel and the massacre of Jewish people?
Mr. Neuer. Absolutely.
Mr. Perry. Mr. Goldberg, does the United Nations Relief
Workers Agency--UNRWA--the United Nations Relief Workers
Agency, does it provide cash or simply materiel, supplies, to
the people in Gaza? How does--for the American people that
aren't familiar how does that work?
Mr. Goldberg. There's a range of services that would
typically be provided by State actors and so rather than--this
is, by the way, why if you're a supporter of a two-State
solution, I've never understood why you support UNRWA. It's
antithetical to statehood building.
But there are a number of--a range of local government type
services--streets and sanitation, housing, education. So a lot
of services that are being provided but there's also cash
assistance.
Now, back in the day when we started oversight in the
Congress this was literally bags of cash being handed out and
they did not have----
Mr. Perry. So can I--can I drill down on that? Because Ms.
Rudman, I think, appropriately said, you know, we have got to
provide food, water, electricity.
I imagine when you say housing that might be building
material and thinking in my mind's eye, thinking back to
pictures from Gaza of tunnels. Tunnels are hard to build. You
know, you need--you need equipment. I remember the tunnels were
lighted so that's electricity.
My point is for a concrete tunnel with electricity you
probably got the concrete somewhere. You probably got the
electricity somewhere, and it's reasonable to believe, I think,
that the American taxpayer has been a part and parcel to
funding that stuff. Is that a stretch for me?
Mr. Goldberg. That is not a stretch, sir. That is
guaranteed.
Mr. Perry. So if I'm running my household and I only have
so much a month to feed my family, provide a roof over their
head, clothing and education, but I want to spend all my money
killing my neighbor is it my neighbor's--is it my neighbor's
job then to go ahead and continue to provide the roof over my
head and the food in my belly?
Is that--does that seem reasonable to anybody here? Does
it--Mr. Goldberg, does it seem reasonable to you?
Mr. Goldberg. Nothing about UNRWA has ever seemed
reasonable to me.
Mr. Perry. Well, the United Nations--the United Nations
Relief Workers Agency is a terrorist-supporting entity, ladies
and gentlemen. America's taxpayers pay for the absolute worst
of it. The absolute worst of it.
They pay for all--they do not get a say. They send over the
money, they send over the material, and it gets used against
America's interests. It gets used against America's national
security interest, against the world's national security
interests, and everyone in this room knows it.
Everyone in this room knows it including people that would
protest by showing blood on their hands. They're literally the
ones with the blood on their hands. They're supporting that.
Now, for those who say there is no other organization to
take this mission, no substitute, and that we must continue to
fund UNRWA--the United Nations Relief Workers Agency--while the
assessment is being made--while the assessment is being made.
Well, I do not know how many years you need to make the
assessment, ladies and gentlemen. I've made the assessment. The
American people are tired of getting up early in the morning
and going to work and trying to pay their bills and also be
forced to pay for people that get money from UNRWA to slaughter
Jews.
They're tired of doing it and they're sick of it. We had a
vote on the 28th of September. I know because I offered the
amendment--I offered the amendment to defund this terror-
supporting organization. Came close--213 to 218. We lost. We
came close.
If we had the vote today, I suspect it might be different
because America can finally see what many of us here have seen
for years and decades, years and decades, as you have, Mr.
Goldberg.
This absolutely must end and must end now.
Mr. Chairman, I think this highlights and the information
that we have highlights the fact that we all believe in the
best of people and humanity and our heart cries out to anybody
on either side of this equation and the tragedies that have
happened.
But we, the United States of America and the American
people, cannot be complicit any longer, and I yield.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Perry. The chair now recognizes
Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Chairman Mast and Chairman Smith,
and thank you to all our witnesses for joining us today.
I am outraged by reports that at least 12 of UNRWA's own
employees participated in or helped plan the heinous October
7th terrorist attacks against Israel, attacks in which 1,200
innocent civilians were brutally murdered and hundreds were
taken hostage with many, including young women and children,
who are still being held by Hamas.
It is sickening to think that any teacher of children would
participate in that attack or that many other UNRWA employees
might have links to Hamas or Islamic jihad.
I strongly support humanitarian assistance for the innocent
Palestinians in Gaza and what Hamas has done to the very people
it was elected to govern is appalling.
That's why what the Administration--but it is simply
intolerable to allow a U.N. agency to have employees who are
members of Hamas and that is why the Administration was right
to suspend funding to UNRWA pending investigation. Our
international assistance can never be used to promote
terrorism.
Many of us have long demanded reform to UNRWA's fundamental
problems including its mission creep, the ongoing
politicization of its mandate, its own employees' violations of
U.N. principles of neutrality and tolerance, and the
persistence of biased, anti-Semitic content in textbooks used
in UNRWA schools in both the West Bank and Gaza.
In many UNRWA schools teachers have literally been raising
terrorists with the appalling anti-Semitic content in their
textbooks.
Given the serious legitimate humanitarian needs as we look
at the day after Gaza I hope our witnesses can help us
understand how we can go about overhauling UNRWA because I just
do not think we can tolerate what we have recently seen and I'm
concerned that what we have recently seen is just the tip of
the iceberg with regard to UNRWA.
Mr. Goldberg, according to its website, the U.N. High
Commission on Refugees works--protects refugees and works with
governments and partners to find long-term solutions so they
can find a safe place to call home, and that includes
integration into the host community or resettlement into
integration in a third country and helping them access
livelihoods so they can live with greater independence and
contribute to their communities.
In other words, the UNHRC helps refugees build new lives.
Does UNRWA do this?
Mr. Goldberg. No, ma'am. It has a mandate to keep people in
refugee status indefinitely and raise them to internalize that
as a vision that 1 day they will return to homes and destroy
modern Israel, push the Jews into the sea.
It is core to the mission to keep Palestinians limited in
their economic and political rights. In my view, it is anti-
human rights as an organization.
Ms. Manning. And the day after this conflict is resolved if
the international community were to establish a new mechanism
to serve the same population in Gaza, how would or should its
workforce and its mandate be different from UNRWA's current
workforce and mandate?
Mr. Goldberg. That's a great question, ma'am, and that's
actually where the focus of our attention should be. If we all
can agree on the premise that UNRWA is done and now we're
moving on to what comes next now we can actually have a policy
discussion, which is very important.
The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees can play a role.
There are other places in the world where conflict breaks out
where we have IDPs. UNHCR moves in very quickly.
By the way, they did that in Syria where UNRWA was
operating. UNRWA couldn't operate anymore. UNHCR came in and
took over a lot of responsibilities.
We have the World Food Programme. We have UNICEF. We have
other organizations. But also if we get to a place where Hamas
is finally out of control of Gaza, where we get to a place
where we have reform in the Palestinian Authority, at some
point we also have to talk about moving this out of the
multilateral system into a bilateral aid program with true
oversight, metrics for success, how are you moving people to
economic success, political prosperity, openness, et cetera.
If you're just looking at handing a check over to an
organization that just keeps people in despair you're going to
get more people in despair. You're going to get the terrorism
you do not want.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. I have many more questions but,
unfortunately, my time has expired.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Ms. Manning.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Mills.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think it's simple to say that over the 20-plus years that
the United States has been involved in overseas conflict,
whether that be the war in Iraq or the war in Afghanistan, that
you cannot simply defeat ideology through bombs and bullets.
This is something that is taught. This is something that is
trained, and that is why even after the Russians fell in
Afghanistan it was such a big element for us to want to fight
toward education of our children because it's very proven
through many studies that children are not born with hate. They
are taught hate.
And so I agree with many of our panelists on the ideas that
the first thing that we have to do is root out the hatred in
these curriculums and textbooks that are actually intentionally
looking at breeding the next generation of terrorists.
The problem for me, however, is that many are trying to act
as if the United States stops being a donor to UNRWA that it
simply ceases to exist. It's just not true.
You've got Germany, EU, Sweden, Norway, Japan, France,
Saudi Arabia, Switzerland, Turkey, Canada, Netherlands, et
cetera, et cetera, who are all donors into these programs.
I think that it's simple to say that we all echo the same
sympathies that Representative Perry mentioned by saying that
it's not OK for any civilians of any type to lose their lives.
That's what we're trying to prevent.
But we certainly cannot continue to fund the very
organizations that are responsible for these attacks and UNRWA
is directly responsible as are many of these organizations for
the horrendous, horrific, and barbaric attack that occurred on
October 7th.
But I would also argue that this is systemic across the
United Nations, which I have said should be replaced with the
notion of being the Useless Nations because you had Resolution
2231, the nuclear JCPOA that was set up to try and keep Iran
from funding and continuing terrorism.
And under General Secretary Ban Ki-moon and Guterres, we
know multiple violations of mid-range ballistic missiles and
other types of terrorist activities, that was taking place
where they wouldn't do anything until President Trump came
forward and removed us from these failed policies.
So I think this is a deeper issue. You know, whether it's
the 12 members who participated in the event itself, whether
it's the 3,000 UNRWA teachers who are celebrating this massacre
and yet they're screaming for more aid to try and develop peace
it's all a failure and a false premise.
But I will tell you right now $343 million, Ms. Rudman, is
a lot of money. When you're $34 trillion in debt, when you have
no economic growth strategy in the United States that enables
us to actually ensure that we have opportunities for the
American citizens and which we serve, and when we're
continually being pulled back into these kinetic elements of
warfare whether it be in Iran, whether it be the Iraq and
Afghan conflict, whether it be the Ukraine conflict, whether it
be defending the 12 percent of global shipments through the Red
Sea, the bottom line is that the time is now to start thinking
about America.
The time is now to start not looking at things as just
business as usual across D.C. and the swamp.
And so I'll tell you I absolutely support with full heart
the end of funding to UNRWA and their destabilizing role that
they've played within the Middle East.
I'm one of the members who actually went over to Israel
recently. You know, when the attack took place on October 7th I
actually went over on October 11th and helped to rescue and
evacuate 255 Americans, 96 by ground.
I'm not sitting here having these 5-minute discussions for
talking points so I can post on social media for clicks and
likes. We have to have real effective change, and we have to
acknowledge that Hamas is a terrorist organization.
We have to acknowledge that Hezbollah is a terrorist
organization under Hassan Nasrallah. We have to acknowledge
that the Iranian-backed militias, whether it be through Qais
Khazali or Hadi al-Amiri or Muqutada al-Sadr or any of the ones
who are continuing to try and make the 150-plus attacks on
American soldiers, the 30-plus attacks that's happened in our
shipping lanes, or the three brave heroes that just lost their
lives in the outpost in Tower 22, the 13 who lost their life on
August 26, 2021, that many people want to forget in the botched
withdrawals.
Our domestic and foreign policy must change in America. It
cannot be the decades and decades of failed policies that has
either resulted in America training eight of the 11 coup
leaders in Africa or whether it be funding organizations like
UNRWA who continues to support terrorist activities that
resulted in many people losing their lives.
I stand with Israel's rights to defend itself and I stand
with the American colleagues that are here who are willing to
defund UNRWA and stop these terrorist organizations like Hamas
from using our money to build the terrorist tunnels and
continue these types of horrific attacks.
With that, I hand back.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Mills.
The chair now recognizes Ms. Dean.
Ms. Dean. Thank you, Chairman Mast, and thank you, Chairman
Smith, Ranking Member Crow, Ranking Member Wild, for holding
this important hearing.
Thank you to our witnesses for testifying and sharing your
knowledge and expertise with us on this important matter.
But let's remember we're here for the purpose of oversight.
We are here, I hope, for the purpose of solutions, not just
white washing or black washing or whatever kind of washing
entire structures until and unless they deserve it.
The allegations of the UNRWA employee involvement in the
October 7th attack is deeply troubling--we can all agree upon
that--and warrants a thorough and independent review.
I too have traveled to Israel since the war 5 weeks into
the war, visiting with Minister of Defense Gallant, visiting
with our Ambassador, visiting with the prime minister, visiting
with hostage families.
What Israel suffered is unspeakable. There are no words.
What I want to do now is to say that is a truth that we must
deal with but we also have to deal with the war, the
prosecution of the war, and how do we keep people from famine--
a basic thing.
Professor Rudman, I appreciated your five points and in
your fifth point you indicated something that you had an idea--
I'm sort of jumping to the end of the story--that you had an
idea of something or some structure that could be put in place
around UNRWA to address the gravest needs that the people of
Palestine, that the Gazans, are enduring and how we fulfill
that both for Israel's security and our own national security
interests.
What were some of your ideas?
Ms. Rudman. So I think there are any number of different
structures, going forward. The challenge is the immediate
period and how we get through that. In other words, people need
to--now you cannot stand--that while I agree with some of the
others on this panel that there are entities out there.
Those entities are not currently set up to be able to move
forward and get food and water in to the many, many innocent
Palestinians in Gaza at this point.
And so I think the two things need to happen in parallel.
One, the investigations that the United States and others are
calling for into how UNRWA--how this came to be with UNRWA--I
know we have a variety of views on that here on this panel.
But an investigation from outside of UNRWA. I think that
the United States and Germany are two logical countries as the
two biggest donors by some degree to UNRWA to carry out that
kind of investigation.
I think you could also go to former leaders of various U.N.
entities. I think there's a leader of UNHCR who is quite
familiar with what's been going on--with aspects on the ground
from his prior experience.
I would like to get his insights on how things could run--
what we could set up and in which ways. But the challenge is
you have an immediate issue they need to address.
Ms. Dean. Well, that's what I want to ask you.
I agree with the pause, based on the reporting, but if the
pause of funding to UNRWA is sustained--this abrupt pause is
sustained--what is the outcome in Gaza?
Ms. Rudman. If the funding does not resume we have people
who will be starving and it's--because it's not just us.
There's a number of countries that have followed the United
States' lead on this. I understand that.
But there is not enough funding going in to UNRWA to be
able to feed people. It's that simple.
Ms. Dean. On the question of educational materials it seems
to me that should be something that pressure could be brought
to bear to make that happen. Do you see a path to that?
And Mr. Sheff also, do you see a path to that? Yes? First,
Professor?
Ms. Rudman. Sure. Yes, I think there are people working on
it. People on this panel have.
I think there are people in other countries in the region,
some of whom were named as well by Mr. Sheff, and there are
folks--there are people within Israel who have worked on
changing their curriculum as well.
So there's a route forward. That is not an UNRWA specific
challenge, though. That's a broader challenge on Palestinian
Authority curriculum as well.
I also know you met with our Ambassador. You know, he's
very committed as well to addressing this. So there are routes
forward to doing that and I just put food and water as the more
immediate pressure. But I understand the need to address this
as well.
Ms. Dean. Mr. Sheff, if you'll indulge me just a few more
seconds.
Mr. Sheff, what's the prospect of cleaning up the
educational materials?
Mr. Sheff. Sure. So very briefly then, it's a matter of
will. It's as simple as that. This is not complicated. This is
a matter of exchanging material in the textbooks, making sure
that that is material of peace and tolerance.
But I would argue, actually, if you'll allow me that this
is about UNRWA and UNRWA made the choice--the choice--to teach
the Palestinian Authority's curriculum. It did not have to.
There are organizations around the world that do not teach
the host nation curriculum because it is appalling--Yemen, the
Houthi curriculum, just as an example.
So they absolutely made that choice and not only that they
created their own material to go with those textbooks which is
equally as bad.
Is it possible to be done? Yes. Really very simple, indeed.
Curricula is changed all over the world all the time. Is there
a will? I think there really ought to be, do not you?
Ms. Dean. And to just conclude, I hope there is a will on
this committee to get at the oversight, to get at the truth,
and to get at solutions.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Sheff. Thank you, ma'am.
Mr. Mast. The chair now recognizes Mr. Moran.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before I get in some questions I just want to make clear
that in my opinion under no circumstances should U.S. taxpayers
be on the hook to pay organizations that work contrary to the
economic and national security interests of the United States.
UNRWA seems to be doing just that and that is highly
unfortunate and we need to take a continued close look at this.
Most notably, in connection with recent events in Israel UNRWA
has a history of perpetuating the problem through
indoctrination of children to hate Jews, instigate violence,
hate the West, and in latest reports even hiring persons linked
to the Hamas terrorist attack in Israel. It's totally
unacceptable.
Mr. Goldberg, I want to ask you a couple of questions in
regard to that. I thought I understood Ms. Rudman to say that
there's some--there's other organizations that exist but none
of them really are equipped to do this work that UNRWA is
doing.
Is that the case or are there are other private
organizations outside of U.N. control that can do substantially
similar items and complete the same mission that UNRWA purports
to do now?
Mr. Goldberg. It is 100 percent false. How do I know that?
This isn't the first time we have had a conflict in the world
where we had to move quick funding for humanitarian support.
The U.N. moves at our direction. U.N. agencies move at our
direction and the money. Follow the money. Follow into
conflict. We move very quickly when we want to to set up relief
for people in need when there is crisis in the world. We have
done that for decades. There are organizations that exist.
I have heard this argument now repeatedly from members of
the committee. UNRWA is indispensable. What's the alternative?
If we cut it off we're going to just have horrific suffering
and loss.
Well, let me take that logical argument to the next level
because this is really important. Hamas runs the health
ministry in Gaza. Hamas runs the utilities in Gaza. Hamas runs
the ministry of tourism and trade and economy in Gaza.
My goodness, we have no alternative to Hamas, I guess.
Hamas should stay.
Is that the logical conclusion? Would any of those members
say we want Hamas to stay in charge of Gaza--what's the
alternative?
No. So why would you make that case for the United Nations
Hamas Relief and Works Agency?
Mr. Moran. I agree with you, Mr. Goldberg and, frankly, I
find it ironic that we're sitting here talking about supporting
an organization that purports to support the plight of refugees
when oftentimes they're the ones that are causing a lot of the
suffering or at least contributing to the cause of the
suffering by supporting organizations like Hamas.
And I notice that when we talk about how you still--how
UNRWA selects its employees they do some background checks. But
those checks do not include checks that would exclude Hamas-
connected individuals. Is that true?
Mr. Goldberg. Correct. If you look at their statement and
the agreement we have with UNRWA they reference United Nations
sanctions lists, not U.S.-designated foreign terrorist
organizations and certainly not the U.S. intelligence
community.
Mr. Moran. Yes, and I think that--I hope that all of us on
this committee would agree that when we look at what happened
on October the 7th and subsequent to that and the plight of the
refugees in this region the cause--the proximate cause, the
single cause of that is Hamas and the hatred behind Hamas'
attacks. Would you agree with that as well?
Mr. Goldberg. Yes, sir.
Mr. Moran. So what's preventing the United States from
redirecting the 300-plus million that's presently going to
UNRWA to another organization that has no ties to terrorism, no
ties to Hamas, that can accomplish much of the same thing?
Mr. Goldberg. Political will.
Mr. Moran. That's what I thought.
Wouldn't it be better if we actually had the political will
to turn away from entities and organizations like UNRWA that
embrace organizations like Hamas and for the United States to
say no, there is a better more strategic pathway that we can
take and that is to support organizations that can accomplish
the mission and are strategically aligned with our friends and
allies and, frankly, with just morality itself? Would you agree
with that?
Mr. Goldberg. Yes, sir.
Mr. Moran. Are you aware of any circumstances prior to the
most recent firing of 12 employees, any of you on the panel, in
which UNRWA employees have been removed from their position
after publicly or privately making anti-Semitic statements or
giving support to Hamas?
Is anybody aware of any of that? Go ahead, sir.
Mr. Neuer. I'm not aware of a single case, and we have
talked about hundreds. We have talked about UNRWA teachers,
school principals inciting to jihadi terrorism and the
slaughter of Jews. I'm not aware of one case that UNRWA has
communicated to us where they have fired that individual.
Mr. Goldberg. I do recall one case of a headmaster of an
UNRWA school who was moonlighting as an Islamic Jihad
commander. He was removed by an Israeli air strike.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Moran. Well, that's one successful removal. Do any of
you have any analysis on how the curriculum for these children
when UNRWA goes in to educate children in these areas--how is
that curriculum developed?
And one of my big questions here is is there any part of
the educational curriculum or programming that is overtly pro-
American or pro-Israeli that teaches the benefits of democracy?
Mr. Sheff. So, you know, a really important question. The
curriculum is developed in Ramallah; it is developed by the
Palestinian Authority.
And, you know, you had this moment actually between 2014
and 2016 when the Middle East and many regions started looking
at this school curriculum and that is when the United Arab
Emirates, when Morocco, when other countries and Egypt, other
countries, started making these decisions about the need to
take out the hate, to take out the incitement, to create better
societies of the future and this has been rolled out over years
and now, as I said before, you know, there are really exemplary
school curricula in the MENA region.
The Palestinian Authority decided to go entirely in the
opposite direction. Between 2014 and 2016 it spent an enormous
amount of time and effort and money creating a curriculum that
was even worse than the one that came before.
Any ideas of peacemaking were entirely removed and what was
left was a curriculum centered on jihad, centered on young
people sacrificing themselves, centered on anti-Semitism,
centered on hate, and that is the curriculum which UNRWA, a
neutral United Nations organization, adopted as is without
changing a line, a jot, a tittle of this school curriculum.
And just to make sure it got rammed home they created their
own supplementary material to go with it. So it comes from the
Palestinian Authority. UNRWA adopted this and I need to say
this again. They did not need to. It's supposed to be best
practice to teach the host curriculum.
There's no best practice about this curriculum and
organizations all over the world make sure that they do not
teach hate.
UNRWA made a choice, a decision, to teach hate in its
schools in Gaza and in the West Bank, and it is continuing to
this day in the West Bank.
We can stop this and we need to stop this.
Mr. Moran. Thank you for your comments. I know my time's
out.
In conclusion I'll just say UNRWA is not a new
organization. It's not a fledgling organization. It's been
around for a long time. These are not negligent mistakes. These
are intentional acts. We need to walk away from this
organization.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Moran.
I now recognize Mr. Schneider.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
I want to thank both our chairs and the ranking members for
holding this hearing. I want to thank the witnesses not just
for your testimony here today but for your lifetime of work
addressing this important issue.
Mr. Neuer, you noted in your opening remarks, and I agree,
no one should be surprised about the recent report of UNRWA
complicity with Hamas. We have been talking about this for
years if not decades.
Recent reports estimate that more than 10 percent of UNRWA
employees are affiliated with Hamas. But, in fact, according to
what I read in those reports it's worse among men. It's
estimated that 29 percent of the men working for UNRWA have
affiliation with Hamas and approximately half the employees
have at least one family member affiliated with Hamas.
On October 7th, as we have just talked about today, at
least 12 UNRWA employees crossed a new line actively taking
part in the horrific attack of Israeli communities near the
Gaza border, brutally murdering more than 1,200, countless
cases of torture, rape, mutilation, UNRWA's employees involved
with taking hostages back, more than 250 people taken hostage.
And let me pause here to note that there are 130 people
still--more than 130 people still held in Gaza now more--for
more than 116 days, and the path to deescalation starts with
the immediate release of all these hostages. That's what we
should be calling for and we should be saying that now.
But Hamas has no interest in deescalation or in peace.
Hamas is a nihilistic genocidal terrorist organization founded
on and dedicated to the principle of the destruction of Israel
and the murder of Jews.
Which brings us back to the topic of UNRWA we are
discussing today. No one who's been watching Gaza can be
surprised by the reports. No one should be surprised by the
extent.
Yesterday's report showed the pervasiveness of the
integration of Hamas and Hamas ideology within the fabric of
UNRWA. It's a systemic problem. We should not be asked to
accept a Hamas-UNRWA link simply as the cost of ensuring
humanitarian relief gets to Palestinian civilians.
Mr. Goldberg, you said it in your opening remarks. There
are other organizations.
Ms. Rudman, you talked about the uniqueness of UNRWA. What
I do not understand is that uniqueness. Why is there but one
organization established by the U.N. that for 75 years has kept
people in refugee camps, preventing them from rising up to a
life and a standard of living that they see among their
neighbors?
Why is it that one organization is focused on this single
point when there are another organization, UNHCR, who can
address the rest of the world? I do not think we have to accept
this.
I do not think it's right that an organization charged with
doing good should be allowed to be a cover for terrorism and
that's why we're talking today about what should happen to
UNRWA.
I think there's consensus--I hope there's consensus--that
the services provided, the feeding of people who are hungry,
providing good education to a population--you talked about it.
How can we give an education that teaches the aspirations
of democracy, of integration into a world society that sees
success for all nations and not the destruction of perceived
enemies?
This is the handle or this is the challenge. Now, we are in
a crisis. There is a war. People need to get that humanitarian
relief. We have to find another way.
Again, Mr. Goldberg, you talked about it today. We have
shown that we can do this in the past. We have to replace UNRWA
with something else.
There are organizations prepared to do that. My question as
we talked about it--because it's not just food. It's
desalinization of water. It's handling of sewage. It's the
provision of shelter and, obviously, education.
There are other organizations but based on Mission Order 21
a lot of these organizations are prohibited for dealing with
Hamas, having any contact with Hamas. The reality is Hamas is
there.
Can we get support from organizations like the World Food
Programme to bring more help, more flour and bread and food?
Can we work with the Office of Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to assist with emergency coordination?
I support getting rid of UNRWA. I support the
Administration's decision to suspend it. But my question is, as
I have 29 seconds left, are there ways to deal with this, to
get around this prohibition of having any contact whatsoever
with Hamas?
I'll leave that with the last few seconds.
Ms. Rudman?
Ms. Rudman. So I think what you're talking about is the
U.S. prohibition and in fact there has been assistance that has
gone in for things like water and electricity which is not
controlled as directly as some others might have said.
But each municipality in Gaza the rules for the United
States go to kind of who controls the municipality and there
have been times when we have had Administrations that have
waived the requirements.
For example, there are very technical people who carry out
the--what's needed to get clean water in and out and they are
employees of a municipality that might be controlled by Hamas.
The United States has at times waived prohibitions to allow
those people to be involved in us trying to get water in.
Mr. Schneider. And I'm going to reclaim my time just
because I'm over time and I want to give others a chance.
But we cannot let obstacles block us from replacing UNRWA
and getting to a situation where we are taking care of the
civilians in Gaza but not supporting terrorism.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Mast. The chair now recognizes Mr. Hill.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, panel, for being
with us today. Thank you for both our chairmen of our
subcommittees for holding this important hearing. I'm grateful
to you.
And what a disgrace UNRWA has become. You know, I was
thinking about the whole world that the U.N. attempts to
provide care and service to. You know, think about it. It's a
massive task.
And yet UNRWA has a budget of about almost a billion
dollars, employs 30,000 people, 13,000 of which I think are in
Gaza or were, and then the Commission on Refugees, taking care
of the whole rest of the world, has a budget of $10 billion and
just 18,000 employees. Let that sink in.
Mr. Goldberg, you know, what's wrong with this picture?
Could the U.N. Commissioner on Refugees handle this work and
just abandon, since of all the countries are disgusted with
that $806 million or close to a billion dollars with UNRWA?
Why does not this just get transferred to the U.N.
Commission on Refugees? Let's pick a handful out of the 13,000
that are effective. What do you think?
Mr. Goldberg. That has been the obvious solution for
decades but for the United Nations' inherent systemic
structural bias against Israel, support for UNRWA's mission of
trying to instigate incitement against Israel, that is the only
reason that hasn't happened.
Mr. Hill. So you're charging that the U.N. itself is the
most anti-Semitic organization on the planet. Is that what
you're saying?
Mr. Goldberg. One hundred percent correct, documented by
U.N. Watch and others.
But I would say--Ms. Rudman said something before and it's
very, very much a flag. Don't go to ask U.N. High Commissioner
for Refugees is it OK--would you like to do this?
The U.N. Secretary General is already circling the wagons
to defend UNRWA. If you ask the United Nations, what do you
think, the U.N.--we know what they think. They hate Israel. We
tell them what to do. Our taxpayer dollars lead the way, not
the other way around.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, and I thank you for that.
I want to shift to Mr. Sheff. Thank you for testifying. I
spent a lot of time looking at curriculum--education
curriculum--most of the time in Egypt. I'll say that's an area
that I've spent quite a bit of time.
And you see--you've reported in your testimony some
successful curriculum changes in the UAE, Saudi Arabia,
Morocco. Mr. Moran was just talking about this.
And, you know, even though the Commission on Religious
Freedom has done a particular study on the Egyptian education
system still we struggle with proper terminology and proper
framing for Christianity and the Coptic Church, for example, in
Egypt.
How did you find the countries that have broken the code
and found success? What was the key point on that that you
would share?
Mr. Sheff. A really good question, sir, and I'll try to
answer it very, very briefly because it's such a big subject.
In fact, though, just refer back to the point you made
before. UNRWA is, frankly, not even good at this distribution
job. Last Saturday, they actually asked if there would be a
stoppage of trucks going through Kerem Shalom because they
couldn't cope with the volume.
So let us not think that this is actually their area of
expertise. It really isn't.
Two, in relation to curricula countries change their
curricula for their own reasons, not to make the United States
or anybody else proud of them or happy for them but because
they want to create societies of the future which makes sense
to them.
You know, for MBS it is about Vision 2030. It is about a
Saudi Arabia that is more open, that is able to trade with the
world, that is less dependent on oil and gas, and there's no
question that a curriculum which prepares young people in a
tolerant, open, peaceful way will go a long way to a country
which in 2030 will be more able to do that.
The UAE--Mohamed bin Zayed made exactly that determination
in 2011 and drove a quite remarkable change because that is the
UAE he wanted to see, and anybody who's spent time in Dubai, in
any other parts of the UAE, can see how successful that has
been.
Egypt----
Mr. Hill. Well, I would hope then that leaders in those
countries would help lead the change in these reluctant
countries including--let me say, I'm a proud supporter of
Christian education in the West Bank through the Catholic
Church and yet history starts at 600 A.D. and I'm not sure if
that's the right way to teach history.
So let me yield back.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Hill.
The chair now recognizes Mr. McCormick.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll make this fast
because I got a lot to go over.
We have talked a lot today about the 12 UNRWA employees but
those 12 employees are just the tip of the iceberg when you
talk about possibly thousands of employees loyal to Hamas and
anti-Semitic and anti-American interests.
Over the years this organization that we spend about 28
percent of the U.N.'s budget is supported by the United States
and yet this organization has thousands of allegations of child
trafficking, rape, murder, theft, embezzlement, with almost no
accountability.
I was in Uganda in 1994 as part of Operation Restore Hope.
Watched the U.N. leave and watched almost a million people be
killed. And if you look at the U.N.'s history and their
involvement in foreign countries, let me list some of them:
Congo, Somalia, Rwanda, Libya, Angola, Sierra Leone, Sudan,
Haiti, Afghanistan, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Yemen, Iraq, Iran, just
to name a few. How's that been going?
Mr. Neuer, there have been hundreds of resolutions of the
United Nations condemning Israel. How many have condemned the
Palestinian Administration?
Mr. Neuer. I am not aware----
Mr. McCormick. The one they condemned--the one that was run
by Hamas, by the way.
Mr. Neuer. I'm not aware of any resolution condemning
Palestinian----
Mr. McCormick. Nor am I, but there have been hundreds
against Israel, usually in the double digits per year. This is
the United Nations, by the way--the United Nations, that
organization which we fund 28 percent of.
I know that UNRWA oversees Gaza's educational system and
for years has sanctioned the textbooks used that have, quote,
encouraged to sacrifice their blood to liberate Jerusalem, with
terms such as, quote, jihad warriors, including the attempting
to erase Israel's existence and legitimacy.
I know that you, Mr. Neuer, have been against the
appointment and nomination of Mr. Pierre along with 18,000
other folks.
Can you tell me exactly why Mr. Krahenbuhl should be
opposed?
Mr. Neuer. Thank you, Congressman.
Look, the Red Cross on its own has failed to meet with any
of the hostages that are being held in Gaza and that is
shameful.
In addition, beyond their diplomatic failure in their
public statements we have counted 10 to one their statements
are in favor of the Hamas narrative and biased against Israel.
The notion that they would now appoint Pierre Krahenbuhl,
the former head of UNRWA who was forced to resign in disgrace,
is shocking and we oppose it.
He was forced to resign in 2019 in wake of a major
corruption, abuse of power, and ethics scandal which included
allegations that he had a very inappropriate relationship with
one of his staffers who was paid $200,000 a year and the Swiss
government paid for it.
Several countries suspended funding in 2019 in the wake of
the scandal including Switzerland, Belgium, and the
Netherlands, and his response was to say he was cleared of the
charges, he claimed, in a Swiss TV broadcast. He said it was a
conspiracy.
The implication of this broadcast was that it was a
conspiracy between the U.S., Israel, and the Swiss foreign
minister to besmirch UNRWA.
But the reality is that even people who like UNRWA said
it's false, that he was not cleared of the charges. The UNRWA
ethics inspector Lex Takkenberg and Professor Ricardo Bocco,
both of them leading supporters of UNRWA, said Pierre
Krahenbuhl was not cleared of the charges.
So the notion that the Red Cross would appoint this person
is shameful and I just want to say in closing that the Swiss
newspaper Le Temps Luis Lema wrote three parts in
investigation.
He wrote that the allegations of corruption are all valid.
There was terrible corruption in UNRWA but no one wants to talk
about it because it might help the U.S. and Israel in their
criticisms. No one wants to talk about it.
Mr. McCormick. So this is what--I want to sum this up. We
spend about $13 billion per year right now on the United
Nations, the leading funder by far, and this is an organization
that has tons of corruption, tons of appointees that are anti-
American, anti-Semitic.
I want to call not on just to question what we spend on
UNRWA but on the United Nations in general--a top down review.
I'm talking about all spending.
I'm very much in favor of ceasing all spending until they
get their stuff straight, until they prove they're not corrupt,
until they prove they're not anti-American and anti-Semitic.
If you want to help people out of trouble whether you be in
Gaza or Palestine or anywhere else in the world how about we
start with organizations that are not corrupt, not anti-
Semitic, and not anti-American?
That's a better investment. It is a time for a change. It
is a time for a choice and let's start there.
With that, I yield.
Mr. Mast. The chair now recognizes Mr. Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Rudman, you had several things you wanted to answer and
I--no one's asked you a question in a while. So I'd like--with
your distinguished career at the State Department--the State
Department has about a $70 billion budget--you controlled in
your time about a $1.8 billion budget plus or minus.
So you're familiar with large budgets, you're familiar with
development, and you're a specialist in the Middle East. Is
that a fair reducing of your long career?
Ms. Rudman. Thanks. I appreciate it. I was actually only at
State for a couple of years and stayed in AID role which you're
referencing.
Mr. Issa. Right.
Ms. Rudman. But I spent a lot of time working on budgets.
That's fair.
Mr. Issa. But, you know, looking at your history I want to
ask you some questions because I'd like to touch on something,
which is the day after. OK.
We're not going to give UNRWA another penny during
whatever--however long this kinetic conflict goes on in the
region and when we go to startup again on the people of Gaza,
the 2 million people of Gaza, things are going to have to be
different.
So from your State Department time and your private sector
time is it fair to say that--and I'm going to ask everyone this
question--is it fair to say that there are sources of people
who can be skilled educators who can help teach the children of
Gaza in a balanced way what the world is and could be?
Ms. Rudman. Yes, there are sources of people including many
Palestinians in Gaza if you did not have Hamas as the de facto
ruler.
Mr. Issa. Well, I'm going to agree to disagree on that
group being able to do it unless they're supervised at a very
close level by people who have a demonstrated history that
would say they're not going to go down that road.
I'm not going to disagree with you that in any program, and
you've seen some of them, we generally have some local
employees. As I like to say, you know, I have no problem with
someone carrying a bag of cement, you know, in a construction
project being a local. I do have a problem with UNRWA
overseeing goods and services coming into Gaza that got used to
produce weapons that were stored in their facilities.
So I'm going to ask the same question, Mr. Goldberg, and
for that matter any other witness for a moment. You are critics
of UNRWA but you're also critics of everything that has been
taught to a generation of people in Gaza.
In a short way isn't it fair to say that if America is
going to take leadership there are two things we have to do?
One is we have to find the supervisors for the teachers and
the teachers who will teach the next generation of Palestinians
other than hate and, two, that the United Nations has not
historically demonstrated ability to be that NGO that can do
that.
Is there anyone that disagrees with those two assumptions,
that the record of U.N. is poor and that we must change the
teachers of the children of the next generation of
Palestinians? Any----
Mr. Goldberg. No disagreement.
Mr. Issa. OK.
Mr. Sheff. No disagreement, just to say there are services
skilled pedagogues in MENA who can be helpful. You need to
change the textbooks. You need teacher guides. You need to
train the teachers. You need accountability. You need
transparency. It can be done.
Mr. Issa. And just quickly, the top funders--the people who
are giving the money for UNRWA--it's an interesting who's who
with the United States being such a large one, followed by
Germany and in the top six is Japan.
What's amazing to me is a vast amount of the funding comes
from Germany and Japan. It comes from countries who themselves
went from teaching hate to in a generation being leaders for
freedom and democracy. Is that fair?
And Ms. Rudman, I'd like your answer on that, that that
piece of history is well demonstrated that we as Americans have
led the proper training and emergence of democracy in the past
and Germany and Japan are good examples.
Ms. Rudman. I think they are good examples. I would note as
well that the United States provided tremendous assistance to
help them in getting to where they needed to go.
Mr. Issa. But we did it, and this is my closing question.
We did those conversions of the Italians, the Germans, the
Japanese. We did it led by Americans, staffed by Americans and
other allies, and then at a local level we vetted and found
people who would cooperate with us and be part of it.
That was what both in the European and in the MacArthur
area made the difference. Is that the model that we should be
considering for the day after this conflict?
Mr. Sheff. Yes. Yes, absolutely, and I think there can be
an involvement in MENA countries in that. You know, I think
Germans who I'm speaking to are, you know, absolutely horrified
about their efforts being turned into the horror show that
education is.
By the way, the Japanese are giving money specifically to
scientific education. I wonder how they think about math being
taught by adding up martyrs, about physics--Newton's Second Law
being taught by telling young people to endanger themselves.
So, yes, their efforts are being made into a joke, frankly.
Mr. Issa. Ms. Rudman, is that--as a closing, is that
something that all four of you can agree, that that model and
that approach should at least be given serious consideration by
our State Department?
Ms. Rudman. I would support it being given serious
consideration. I'd prioritize a little bit differently the
immediate day after because I think getting basic needs in to
people--there are not buildings for people to be taught in.
There are not buildings for people to live in.
Mr. Issa. And, Mr. Chairman, I think we not only agreed on
what I asked to agree on but I would agree with the gentlelady
that in fact the day after will have to be comprehensive. We
cannot teach people to give up hate if we cannot help feed them
and house them.
And so I look forward to this committee, which has the lead
role in that day after and, Chairman, thank you for your
oversight. And I yield back.
Mr. Mast. I thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony, members for their questions.
Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses and we will ask you to respond to
those in writing.
I now recognize Mr. Crow for any closing remarks that he
may have.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you for convening this
meeting and to our witnesses today for the very robust
discussion.
I'm going to keep it short because we have votes that we
have to run to. But the bottom line for me is I'm deeply
troubled by the allegations against UNRWA and believe that
those allegations must be addressed and that very well may take
the form of disbanding and replacing it with a different
entity.
But I'm equally--as deeply troubled by any action that
would further deepen the catastrophic conditions on the ground
for innocent civilians, right.
So for me the issue is very simple--how do we address these
allegations and the challenges that have been well documented
but make sure that we continue a flow or an increase a flow of
aid to the suffering Palestinians in Gaza.
And I look forward to working with everybody to try to
figure out what are the solutions to get us there and we need
to bridge this, right, because there's a time line challenge.
If we cutoff funding to UNRWA I think there's a very real
debate and I, frankly, do not think that there are entities
right now that can fill the exact services that are being
provided by UNRWA.
So how do we bridge that gap is the challenge to make sure
that people that are starving now do not die. With that, I
yield back.
Mr. Mast. The chair now recognizes Mr. Smith for a closing
statement.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman.
And without objection the testimony from Dr. Debbie Soffen,
who is the first child abuse--first child advocate, I should
say, for the Wiesenthal Center will be made a part of the
record.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. I want to just point out for the record that
decades ago Dr. Soffen, who's a pediatrician, brought to my
attention some of the most horrific things that were happening
by UNRWA which just blew my mind in terms of the hatred that
was being conveyed to these children.
And, again, you got to be taught. They're being taught and
they'll keep getting taught. You know, we--and, Mr. Goldberg,
you made a very good point about how we know how to set up
emergency situations for refugees.
We have been doing it forever, and the United States takes
the lead not just in funding it but doing it. I remember when
the Kurds left--in Operation Provide Comfort. They got out to
the border of Turkey.
Our military in that case, especially from a humanitarian
point of view, provided food, clothing, medicine, and saved the
lives of so many people.
There are ways to do it. Hamas is disgraced. So is its
proxy or its identical twin and that would be UNRWA. They have
disqualified themselves and if we cannot during this terrible
time when they have proven themselves beyond any reasonable
doubt to be absolutely anti-Semitic but even more than that
they have taught these kids to hate. That cycle will never be
broken if we in any way, shape, or form countenance any further
support for UNRWA.
Let's find the alternative. Let's do it. Let's put our
minds to it and our money in order to save lives and to save
these children from child abuse.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Smith. I now recognize myself for
a closing statement.
I want to start by a word of thanks for many. I want to
start by thanking President Trump, No. 1, for being the first
to have the stones to defund UNRWA. He went out there and he
did it. He saw the writing on the wall and he went out there
and did it.
I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony today
which show to be that to have been a correct course of action.
You all provided vital information, context, raised important
questions about UNRWA and UNRWA has a lot to answer for.
We reached out to UNRWA's Commissioner General Mr. Philipe
Lazzarini requesting that he appear before this committee and
the American people.
In his response, which I will introduce for the record,
while declining to appear publicly Mr. Lazzarini goes on to
tell us a number of things, that UNRWA is committed to
neutrality, he said--that UNRWA conducts quarterly integrated
assessments of their installations and to ensure adherence to
neutrality.
I guess these assessments must have somehow missed the
missiles, the weapons, the anti-Semitic textbooks in the
schools, and the terrorist tunnels being built underneath them.
He must have missed that 10 to 15 percent of the employees
are tied to Hamas. The letter goes on to tell us that UNRWA has
a zero tolerance policy with regard to staff neutrality and yet
we know that at least 1,200 UNRWA staffers have direct ties to
Hamas and other terrorist organizations and at least 12
staffers who were directly involved in the October 7 attacks.
My assessment today is that the Administration will likely
ignore the facts and go back to funding UNRWA at some point and
I say what was said here before. I'll repeat what was said in
this hearing essentially.
I'm going to say this--I'm going to paraphrase the way that
I interpreted this. There are many here that are not here to
defend UNRWA but they will support continuing to give UNRWA the
earnings--the dollars--of the American people with no threshold
for bad behavior.
That cannot be the course of action for Congress, for the
Administration, for America whatsoever. I can tell you that to
expect, moving forward, we will be introducing legislation to
claw back any recent dollars that were sent to UNRWA.
And in that I thank again the witnesses for their
testimony. Pursuant to committee rules all members may have
five legislative days to submit statements, questions, and
extraneous materials for the record subject to length
limitations.
And without objection, this committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:37 p.m., the subcommittees adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
