- IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TRAFFICKING VICTIMS PROTECTION ACT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TRAFFICKING VICTIMS
PROTECTION ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

GLOBAL HEALTH, GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

of

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

May 12, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-16

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-071PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania      BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California      GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida      AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee      TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas      DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa      SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas          Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio      GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida      JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey      JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida      JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia      JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN JAMES, Michigan
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on Global Health, Global Human Rights and International
Organizations

CHRISTOPHER SMITH, New Jersey, Chair

MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania, Ranking
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,           Member
American Samoa                   AMI BERA, California
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                SARA JACOBS, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
JOHN JAMES, Michigan

Mary Vigil, Staff Director
Allie Davis, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

BIOS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Bio submitted for the record from Mr. Morris.....................    10
Bio submitted for the record from Mr. Bedrossian.................    13
Bio submitted for the record from Ms. Basham.....................    16

WITNESSES

Hounakey, Bella, Trafficking Survivor............................    23
Cavallo, Gina, Trafficking Survivor..............................    28
Lung, Robert, Trafficking Survivor...............................    34
Murray, Becky, Founder and CEO, One By One.......................    40
Vandenberg, Martina, President, Human Trafficking Legal Center...    52
Dyer, Hon. Cindy, Ambassador-at-Large to Monitor and Combat
Trafficking in Persons, U.S. Department of State...............    86
Walsh, Johnny, Deputy Assistant Administrator, U.S. Agency for
International Development......................................    91

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................   114
Hearing Minutes..................................................   116
Hearing Attendance...............................................   117

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................   118

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TRAFFICKING VICTIMS
PROTECTION ACT

Friday, May 12, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Global Health, Global
Human Rights, and International
Organizations,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:32 a.m., in
room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Christopher H.
Smith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Smith. The hearing will come to order. This is a
hearing of the Subcommittee on Global Health, Global Human
Rights, and International Organizations. Today we will examine
the ever-worsening exploitation of vulnerable persons by human
traffickers and discuss U.S. efforts to combat this heinous
crime.
This is the 41st congressional hearing that I have chaired
on human trafficking and I am looking forward to hearing from
all of our truly remarkable witnesses, leaders who have made
the difference, especially our survivors who have not only come
forward to tell the world, but to tell other victims that there
is hope, that there is life after this unbelievable cruelty.
And you are just amazing and I thank you for being here.
I also thank that we have the Administration here today,
especially our Ambassador-at-Large for Trafficking in Persons,
Cindy Dyer. Thank you for being here as well.
More than 20 years ago Congress approved and the President
signed historic legislation that I authored known as the
Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000. This bipartisan
landmark law created a comprehensive whole-of-government
initiative to combat sex and labor trafficking in the United
States and around the world. It also established dozens and
dozens of new programs to protect victims, prosecute
traffickers, and prevent human trafficking in the first place:
the three Ps.
Looking at the progress made over the years it is hard to
believe that the Trafficking Victims Protection Act was met
with a--with serious opposition, a wall of opposition, if you
will, dismissed by many as a solution in search of a problem.
And that goes for the media, many of who just dismissed this
and thought we were exaggerating when we were talking about the
prevalence of this crime, not only around the world but right
here in the United States.
Most people at the time associated trafficking with drugs
and weapons, not human beings. Reports of vulnerable persons,
especially women and children, being reduced to commodities for
sale or often met with surprise, incredulity, or indifference.
Top Administration officials even testified against major
provisions including--right here in this room including
sanctions and even the move to create the Trafficking in
Persons, TIP, Office, arguing that exposing and sanctioning
countries with egregiously poor records on human trafficking
would be, quote, ``counterproductive.''
The plan was to put some more enhanced reporting into the
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices and call it a day.
They did support however increasing the penalties for
traffickers, and that was a good thing. So we had solidarity on
that. They also liked the interagency coordination. They
already had one. Our law expanded it and made it statutory.
But again the TIP Office would not have existed and I think
it is--there was talk--and we found this when we did the
International Religious Freedom Act, that somehow we would be
creating a hierarchy of human rights rather than value-added.
All human rights abuses need to be confronted and fought, but
this one is so egregious and so pervasive. We were not doing
enough at the time and we would not be a Tier 1 country back
then. We would have been a Tier 3 country. And thankfully that
all of that has changed.
As a matter of fact, when our bill was stalled and
languishing and presumed dead; and I cannot tell you how many
times I was told it was not going anywhere, especially in the
Senate, I invited victims of sex trafficking to inform and to
motivate. And they sat at hearings just like this and made
their case, often through tears. They made clear that delay was
denial and that we cannot do this fast enough. We have to do it
right, but it has to be done as quickly as possible. It took
over 2 years to muster the votes for passage and my bill was
finally signed into law on October 28, the year 2000.
Within a year after enactment no one was arguing anymore
that the Trafficking Victims Protection Act's integrated three-
piece strategy: prevention, protection for victims, and
prosecution of the traffickers, was flawed or unworkable,
unnecessary, or counterproductive. And remember the pushback
was with the Administration. It was bipartisan, too. I will
never forget after the bill passed we went now to the Bush
Administration and said please implement. One month went by.
Another month went by. Another month went by. And they were not
doing it.
So finally I asked Henry Hyde. I was vice chairman of the
Foreign Affairs Committee, and I asked him if we could do it a
hearing demanding that they get this up and running. He said
OK. We set a date and the Administration got back to us in that
case and said give us a month.
So we gave them a month and they still did not do much.
They even said you can come over and cut the ribbon. I said I
do not want to cut the ribbon. It is all about getting this up
and running. And probably the biggest laggard in all of it was
a T visa which took so long to get enforced. So there has been
bipartisan foot dragging with the Administrations and it needs
to be underscored that it is just not acceptable.
The bill included, as I think all of you know, a number of
sea change criminal code reforms including treating as a victim
of trafficking and not a perpetrator of a crime anyone who has
recruited, harbored, transported, or obtained for the purpose
of a commercial sex act, or for labor services. We were just
talking to Ms. Vandenberg. Right from the beginning there was
that twin--no diminution of how important forced labor is, and
slave labor, if you will. Both trafficking offenses need to be
confronted and aggressively so. And she always has made that
point so eloquently.
The Trafficking Victims Protection Act radically reformed
the way the U.S. responded to human trafficking and it has
pushed States--because we had an admonishment to States with
Justice to say pass your own laws. We need more prosecutors,
more eyes and ears to take this. Everything cannot be done at
the Federal level with the U.S. Attorneys. Thankfully every
State including my own has a tremendous statute in hand. And as
long as we have got good prosecutorial discretion, say this is
a priority, it will make a difference, and it is making a
difference.
Thanks to the act thousands of human traffickers have been
prosecuted and jailed. Jeffrey Epstein was being prosecuted
pursuant to the TVPA. He never got obviously to the point where
the trial took place, but the indicting charges were all TVPA.
Most countries in the world have responded to this gross
violation of human rights and have enacted anti-trafficking
legislation, yet there is more that must be done to strengthen
the U.S. and international response to these crimes as more
than 27 million people are still--and the estimates vary, but
are still being trafficked today.
I have also authored four additional laws to combat human
trafficking including the TVPA re-authorizations in 2003 and
2005. When we first did the bill we could not get buy-in for an
ambassador-at-large. We got that in the 2003 reauthorization.
And that not only raises the status and stature and gravitas of
Ms. Dyer, now Ambassador Dyer, but all the other previous
leaders, not just in the building at the State Department, but
of course everywhere they go. I mean ambassador-at-large is a
very, very high position and we couldn't get that until 2003.
We also put in the 2003 language that said when supply
chains--and this went to the labor trafficking issue, that the
CEOs or CFOs have to sign saying clearly that they understand
that if they are complicit in trafficking they lose the
contract. Hopefully they will be criminally prosecuted as well,
but they lose the contract. And that has made a difference.
Nothing is perfect, but it has made a difference.
In 2016, after 8 years, three times passed in the House,
International Megan's Law became law. Now why is that
important? We know that child sex tourism is rampant. Men
mostly go on these child sex tourism trips all of the world, to
Bangkok, to South America, to Brazil, Mexico, and they rent a
child, which is disgusting beyond words, and abuse that child.
And we know it is happening.
Well, the International Megan's Law, as you all know--and
Megan Kanka, the little girl lived in my district in Hamilton
Township, in our hometown. And I got to know the parents very
well, Megan's parents. She was killed in 1994 by a cruel
pedophile who lived across the street. Nobody knew of his
background. And he lured her in and killed her horribly and
then even had the audacity to go out and hand out pamphlets. Do
you know where Megan is? Help us find Megan. He is the one who
killed her. He is still in prison today.
But it led to Megan's Law in all of our States, District of
Columbia, and everywhere else, Puerto Rico. But we found that
what happens, these pedophiles, when they are out, go get
passports. They travel. And they did it with impunity and with
secrecy.
The bill passed three times in the House. Could not get any
movement in the Senate. We finally did. Became law. And the
Angel Watch Program is doing a tremendous job of noticing
countries of destination of that pedophile who is traveling, or
pedophiles; they often do it in groups. And they have been over
2,000 notifications. About half have led to the country saying
you are not coming in.
And you know where the idea came from? I was meeting, like
Ambassador Dyer does, with all the delegations when they come
in to talk about what they are doing to try to combat human
trafficking. And so I met with the Thai delegation. And I said;
it popped in my head, if you knew a convicted pedophile was
coming to Bangkok or to Phuket or to some of these other
places, what would you do? They said we would not let them in.
That night we started drafting the bill. Eight years later it
became law and it has I think made a difference.
I am happy to say that all of this has been bipartisan.
Karen Bass and I wrote the Frederick Douglass Trafficking
Victims Prevention and Protection Act. We worked with the
great-great-great-grandson of Frederick Douglass and put a big
emphasis on some of the prevention pieces like making sure that
our children are situationally aware K through 12 as to what it
looks like, what to be on the guard for. And if you see a
friend who may be being enticed with drugs or something, that
you immediately get to that principal, to your teacher, and to
train them as well.
And HHS and the TIP Office and others all have very good
curricula on how to--and I would hope anyone hearing this
hearing in a school would look to say let's have an anti-human
trafficking couple of days and really bring in someone who is a
survivor who can really sensitize these young people, these
students. And that will make a difference as well.
So I do believe this a pivotal time to be focused on human
trafficking as the U.S. faces a crisis at our southern border
that has resulted in countless victims, especially women and
children, being exploited while traffickers take advantage of
the chaos. With the expiration of Title 42 last night I think
it is now more important than ever that we examine what can and
must be done to stop this crime and rescue and tangibly assist
these victims.
I talked to one president; this was of Guatemala, and he
suggested to me that about 80 percent of these young women
making their way up to the border and into the United States
are sexually assaulted somewhere along the line. And we do not
know how many then, particularly the unaccompanied minors--the
New York Times put that number at about like 85,000 that we do
not know where they are--that they are just easy prey for these
predators. So we got to do so much more.
Let me just say briefly and then I will conclude on this:
In 2015 I chaired a congressional hearing on--to demand
accuracy and accountability when designating tier rankings
pursuant to the TIP report. Egregious violators. Fourteen
countries in all. And it was Reuters that broke this story. We
thought there was a problem, but then Reuters interviewed
anonymously a number of people at TIP who had made strong
recommendations that China, Cuba, Malaysia, Oman, 14 countries
in all, be Tier 3. And we went up the chain at the State
Department for other reasons unconnected--disconnected from
trafficking. All of a sudden they got passing grades.
And I said at the time--and then I did three hearings
within a space of 2 years. One of them was called Get It Right
This Time: A Victim-Centered Trafficking in Persons Report. The
point is that the credibility of the report itself is--that is
one of the mainstays of the TVPA and all of our efforts. Of
course all the other programs are important as well. It rests
on accuracy.
So the TIP reports gets it accurate, but then--and
countries look at this. I remember even Thailand being upset
that Malaysia was getting a passing grade, even though on
forced labor. They had horrible things that were happening. And
even the European Union, I believe it was, gave them a red
card, as they called it, because it was so, so bad.
We must get the report right. No fudging, no favors to
national--nations based on other agendas. Friends do not let
friends commit human rights abuses. If our best friends in the
world are doing it, we hold them to account. If we are doing
it, we hold us to account. It is all about the victims.
Grade inflation for certain favored countries undermines
the credibility and I believe it really demoralizes the victims
and anti-human trafficking advocates as well as countries
trying to improve their record.
In the coming days I plan on reintroducing the Frederick
Douglass Trafficking Victims Prevention and Protection Act
which has been significantly informed by survivor input and
includes a survivor empowerment approach to victim services.
The bill will strengthen and expand U.S. anti-trafficking
programs including up ramping up prevention and protection
efforts against the trafficking of children and I look forward
to working with my colleagues on this.
And again I thank you for being here and I would like to
now yield to my good friend and colleague Ms. Wild, our ranking
member, for any opening comments.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here.
I appreciate your willingness, Mr. Chair, to call this
really important hearing today.
Let me begin by addressing the extraordinary witnesses who
are here today. Thank you all for your steadfast dedication to
taking on the horrific scourge of human trafficking. Several of
the witnesses here are themselves survivors of trafficking. By
dedicating your lives to ensuring that others do not experience
the inhumanity that you did you exemplify the forces of
solidarity that reflect the human spirit at its very best and
most courageous.
As members of this committee and this subcommittee,
Democrats and Republicans alike, we are very united on this
issue. And while we have made substantial progress, much of it
outlined by the chairman in his opening remarks, all of us here
know that an enormous amount of work remains to be done.
Every aspect of this crisis demands ever more
interconnected efforts by our government in lockstep with
governments across the international community and through
international organizations which is also part of this
subcommittee's work. We are the Subcommittee on Global Health,
Human Rights, and International Organizations. So this is a
topic that is squarely in front of our subcommittee.
But the trafficking of children, sex trafficking, men,
women and children denied their most basic human rights and
forced into systems of modern slavery, which almost seems like
an oxymoron to me--but that is what we are here to address and
what we must continue to address. And it is all too easy for so
many of us to forget that this exists throughout the world. And
for many it is something that if we are--we do think about it,
it is too easy to compartmentalize and not think about it
because it is such a terribly difficult subject to think about.
But that is what we are here to do. We are called upon to
do it. I am honored to be part this subcommittee and to work on
this issue with the chairman and with the other members of this
subcommittee.
Our objective is clear: We have to build a future of
dignity for all, a future where no human being is ever
confronted with these practices which are an affront to our
common humanity. And this transcends not only party lines, but
religious boundaries, philosophical boundaries, cultural
differences, whatever. This is an issue that is unacceptable to
no person who considers themselves to be a moral and humane
being. And so we have got to work on this.
I really look forward to hearing the powerful testimony of
all of you and I look forward to working with each of you, with
Chairman Smith, and with our colleagues to bring about the
progress that so many people around the world so urgently need.
I truly hope that in a matter of years there will not be a need
for this kind of hearing and I am going to try to be me more
eternally optimistic self and believe that we will actually get
something done on this. Thank you very much.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much, Ranking Member Wild, for
your excellent opening statement.
I would like to now ask Ms. Radewagen if she has any
opening comments.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and ranking member.
I do not.
Mr. Smith. OK. Thank you.
I would like to now yield to Dr. McCormick if he has any
opening comments.
Mr. McCormick. There is different kinds of courage. I have
been around a lot of Marines, a lot of Navy guy, a lot of
sailors and a lot of Army soldiers, and they have a certain
kind of courage, but I think in many ways it pales to the kind
of courage of those people who are victims, who actually come
out of something so horrible and actually appear before a very
public committee and become vulnerable to save others.
I applaud you. I thank you from the bottom of my heart. As
a youth minister for 20 years you see some great things and you
see some horrible things. And I really cannot say how bought in
I am to solving this to our best of our ability. It is a
bipartisan issue. It is something that all Americans should be
bought into. Hopefully we try to stay away from the politics of
it and just the human nature--embrace the human nature aspect
of this because it is something purely evil that we could all
agree that there is no--nothing other than to defeat this is
our only point. So thank you.
Thank you very much for being here. Thank you for
participating. Thank you for being brave, courageous, for
standing up for not just yourself, but everybody else who goes
through these things now and into the future.
This fight will never be done. We will never be done making
it better, and we have a long road ahead of us. We have seen in
Georgia--one of the worst places for child trafficking. We have
made some good strides I think. The Governor has addressed this
in big ways and I think it has huge support from all aspects of
the political spectrum as well as the private industry because
quite frankly the government cannot solve this by itself.
Anybody who thinks that the government is going to solve
this by itself does not understand what a massive problem this
is. This is a heart problem. This is a spiritual problem. It is
a humanity problem. People have turned away from what is good
and embraced what is evil to a large extent. And so we have to
be equally courageous on what is good and courageous and
spiritual to defeat this. So I continue to pray on this. I
continue to work on this.
And after this hearing do not think that there is ever a
day that will go by where you cannot reach out to any of us and
continue this fight aside from a hearing because this is just
the beginning. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much. It is now my honor to
introduce our first panel, and I will begin with Ms. Bella
Hounakey. She is a subject matter expert on human trafficking
with lived experience. She is an appointed member of the U.S.
Advisory Council on Human Trafficking. Bella currently works in
program management for the Administration for Children and
Families, Office of Refugee Resettlement, with specific
expertise in child welfare, migration, and mental health. She
has worked with unaccompanied children from Central and South
America as well as unaccompanied refugees, minors, and foster
care operations for over 7 years.
Prior to ORR Ms. Hounakey was an asylum officer for the
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services under the
Department of Homeland Security and a monitoring and evaluation
specialist at the U.S. Catholic Conference of Catholic Bishops.
Bella holds a master's degree in social work and a
bachelor's degree in Spanish and Criminal Justice from Western
Michigan University.
And again I thank you for your help as we were writing the
TVPRA Frederick Douglass Act last time and helping us again in
crafting that bill for this year.
Ms. Gina Cavallo is a subject matter expert at well on
human trafficking and she too is an amazing survivor. She is
the founder and the executive director of the survivor-led non-
profit organization We Rise New Jersey which provides resources
and emergency assistance to survivors and currently serves as
both survivor consultant and board member on the New Jersey
Coalition Against Human Trafficking.
She also serves as co-chair for Anti-Trafficking Task Force
of the New Jersey Chapter of the American Academy of
Pediatrics. Working with the New Jersey Department of Education
Gina helped develop guidelines for schools on human trafficking
and frequently speaks to students on the prevention of human
trafficking. Gina engages with legislators at our State house
as well as in Washington. Testifies and has really helped move
our State to be in the lead on this important issue.
She received the National Liberators Award for survivor
leaders in 2020, and parenthetically we were together as
recently as Monday in Monmouth County, New Jersey when Sheriff
Shaun Golden had an excellent symposium on combatting human
trafficking. And while we all spoke, everybody listened with
great attentiveness to what Gina had to say.
It was an amazing presentation you made, and so I thank you
for that.
Then we will hear from Mr. Robert Lung who is again another
subject matter expert on human trafficking with lived
experience, a survivor. He is the former chair of the U.S.
Advisory Council on Human Trafficking. He serves as a district
court judge in the 18th Judicial District of Colorado. He also
provides presentations nationally and internationally on issues
such as human trafficking, childhood trauma, and resiliency to
an exceptionally diverse audience including the military, the
medical field, educational field, including U.S. Department of
Education, various judiciaries, faith-based organizations,
first responders, mental health professionals, and law
enforcement.
Mr. Lung has also served as a consultant with the Office
for Victims of Crime under the U.S. Department of Justice, the
Office of Trafficking Persons, the U.S. Administration for
Children and Families, OTIP, the Human Trafficking Expert
Consult Network under the U.S. State Department Network, Shared
Hope International, SHI, and the National Center for Missing
and Exploited Children, or NCMEC.
And thank you, Mr. Lung, for your experience and expert
review and consultation on the Frederick Douglass Act. I mean
what we do here is ask you what you think should be in our
legislation. And without that we would not be I think making a
difference, so it is all attributable to you and to others for
doing that.
We will then hear from Ms. Becky Murray who is an
entrepreneur and philanthropist who has dedicated her life to
making a positive impact on the world. She is the founder and
CEO of One By One, an international non-profit organization
fighting exploitation in some of the world's most impoverished
areas. Since being founded in 2011 One By One has provided
necessary restorative care, educational support, and
empowerment toward sustainable living to prevent exploitation
of vulnerable communities around the Third World.
Becky started her career as a pediatric nurse in the United
Kingdom. After graduating from Sheffield University with a
bachelor's degree in nursing studies.
So thank you, Becky, for making the trip here.
Then we will hear from Ms. Martina Vandenberg who is the
founder and president of the Human Trafficking Legal Center.
For more than two decades Ms. Vandenberg has worked to fight
human trafficking, forced labor, rape as a war crime and
violence against women. Ms. Vandenberg has represented victims
of human trafficking pro bono in immigration, criminal, and
civil cases. She has obtained T visas for trafficking survivors
and won significant judgments in Federal cases.
Ms. Vandenberg has trained more than 5,000 pro bono
attorneys nationwide in handling human trafficking matters. And
that is truly remarkable. She provides technical assistance and
mentoring to legal teams handling trafficking cases nationwide.
And without objection even further bios will be included in
the record about this wonderful panel.
[The information referred to follows:]

morris

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

bedrossian

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

basham

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. I would like to now go to Bella.
And you are yielded such time as you may consume.

STATEMENT OF BELLA HOUNAKEY, TRAFFICKING SURVIVOR

Ms. Hounakey. Good morning. My name is Bella Hounakey and I
am a member of the U.S. Advisory Council on Human Trafficking.
So thank you for having me here today to speak on behalf of the
council.
The members of the council are sincerely grateful to
Congress, the White House, and each of the President's
Interagency Task Force to Monitor and Combat Trafficking n
Persons for its effort to combat human trafficking.
As many of you know, since 2015 the council has published
six reports to Congress with recommendations to Federal
agencies. This year the council has begun its planning for its
2023 report with focus on how to best address gaps in services
and support for human trafficking survivor.
In my time on the council I have born witness to the
strength of collaboration. I join in 2019. For example, in the
council's intersections with Department of State and Health and
Human Services we have made recommendations on the importance
of collaboration between agencies. In my individual capacity I
have interacted with groups like the Warnath Group as a subject
matter expert. These engagements both on council and off
council give me hope that at last our voices, our suggestions,
our recommendations to the Federal Government as survivors are
not only about sharing our trauma with you all or about our
past experiences, but it was--it is about collaboration and
partnership.
So unfortunately I will not be sharing my story with you
today, but I can say with 100 percent certainty that those who
have survived trafficking, how they are living today, how they
are able to tell their stories is embodiment of the strength of
the human will and human spirit.
Their/our collective experiences is also a tale of
morality. It is a story for more than surviving in my opinion.
It is a story of power, of evil, and the human spirit's refusal
to be dominated by evil.
The council, since its inception, has prioritized
collaboration with Federal agencies toward a common goal of
combatting trafficking by making efforts to address and
identify the root causes of trafficking at their root. You
mentioned earlier that it is a heart issue, and we agree with
that.
We have previously call on Federal agencies to address the
demand for forced labor and sexual exploitation by holding
buyers and traffickers accountable and hope to continue to call
for increase accountability of companies who exploit young
people for cheap labor.
All of us here know that human trafficking is a complex and
changing issue which requires consistent effort from all of us,
from government, to law enforcement, to non-government
individuals, and individuals. I also heard somebody earlier
somebody that exploitation is a humanitarian crisis which
demands a multifaceted response involving a range of strategies
from stakeholders. So to that end survivor leaders like
ourselves must continue to be among these voices and continue
to represent a diversity of experiences and background with
sincere effort for you all to reach communities that you do not
often engage with or hear from.
As a direct recipient I receive a lot of support through
the TVPA. Because of that I was able to achieve the things that
you mentioned in my bio today, so I can attest from my own
personal experience that the progress that we have made
together to improve the outcomes of trafficking survivors.
Many of you also acknowledge the many unaddressed needs of
survivors that are--still remain. Like for example, many do not
have access to equal essential mental health services and lack
short and long-term housing support. And also vulnerable
populations remain at risk of experiencing labor trafficking in
our country.
So I looked up some of your bios before speaking to you
today and I recognize that many of you have dedicated your
entire career to combatting trafficking, like Representative
Smith, to ensure that we receive the support we need. So thank
you very much for your continuous effort. Thank you for
remaining strong in face of adversity and opposition. You all
should be proud of the strides you have made through the TVPA,
but also continue to remain vigilant.
I am hopeful that together we can continue to create
pathways of opportunity through new legislation to reauthorize
the TVPA so that survivors like myself and Judge Lung to
continue to be on a path toward self-sufficiency so that other
people, other survivors can fully reintegrate and reclaim their
lives where holistic quality of care could become their
reality.
As a country, as legislators, as people we say no to
exploitation and our actions must continue to demonstrate where
our values lies. It is a moral obligation from all of us. And
so on behalf of the council we thank you very much for
collaboration and we look forward to seeing you at our release
report event. Sincere thank from my heart. Thank you for having
me here today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hounakey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Thank you so very, very much.
And I would like to now recognize Ms. Cavallo, Gina
Cavallo.

STATEMENT OF GINA CAVALLO, TRAFFICKING SURVIVOR

Ms. Cavallo. Good morning. First I want to thank God for
bringing me here today. For me I am one of the miracles for
many I am choosing to share and give you a little bit more of a
snapshot of my background because it did not start with just
trafficking. There is always layers upon layers. And hopefully
if this can help continue to support all your efforts, and then
it is worth it for me, and also to be a voice for those who are
still silent and living in fear and shame. But thank you for
inviting me here today from New Jersey to speak about my own
lived experience and as a subject matter expert on human
trafficking. It is so critical that survivors are heard, and I
would like to commend you all for inviting me to the table and
listening to what I have to say.
I am a New Jersey native who is a survivor of domestic
violence and childhood abuse. That experience as a child led me
to a place where I felt ashamed, unloved, and rejected. It also
led me to being trafficked. School was like an extension of my
home. I struggled in school with other learning with
disabilities--learning disabilities as well as other
disabilities. The only thing I succeeded at was being the
funniest because I used laughter to hide behind my pain.
It was very important for me to be accepted and loved
especially by my family. I wanted my family to be proud of me.
And that need was incredibly strong, but unfortunately I was
never able to obtain their love or approval. That was my
vulnerability and weakness.
That vulnerability led me into the hands of the wrong
people. Force, fraud, and coercion were all used by someone who
pretended to be my friend, but ultimately abduct me into being
trafficked. For nearly 2 years from the age of 18 I was
prostituted and sold to the highest bidder and raped over and
over again. My identity was taken as I was given a new name.
Sleep deprivation, threats of violence, pornography, drugs, and
food were all used as punishment and reward, leading my
traffickers taking psychological control over me.
Does this sound like anything a young person dreams of for
their future? Of having this kind of life? Being stripped and
robbed of your mind, your body, your dignity, your respect,
your humanity? I became a commodity to be used for others'
gain. But I often blamed myself for my situation because I
believed it was my fault.
Because of the complex nature of this crime traffickers
frequently operate under the radar and those being trafficked
do not always identify as victims. Traffickers maintain power
and control over their victims with physical and psychological
control and substance abuse.
As a victim I was taught by my traffickers to distrust
family, friends, and especially law enforcement. The more they
isolated, the more fear I felt and the more control they
gained, which is very intentional. They instilled in me a
strong distrust of the police. I was afraid of being arrested
which in my case happened several times. In one case I was
raped by an officer and released back to my traffickers.
Had there been a national hotline number at the time I
would have had a safe place to call that was not law
enforcement, who I feared. Thankfully today we have a national
hotline number which allows victims to feel safe and access
service and most importantly it is done through a trauma-
informed manner.
My traffickers moved around a lot, not necessarily to
follow conventions or big events, but so they would not get
caught. Because of my forced addictions many times I would not
know where I was in the country or even when I was moved into
Canada for a short time.
Traffickers are also women. In my case while I thought I
knew the people; in total over 2 years it was three men and one
woman, who trafficked me, little did I know that they were also
using false identities to protect themselves. I have learned
that this is quite common. Many traffickers are not who they
usually say they are making it difficult to prosecute them.
It took decades for me to identify that I was a victim of
domestic violence, that I was a victim of child abuse, and that
I was a victim of sex trafficking. I learned through counseling
and my continuous healing journey that what happened to me was
not my fault and realized that I had been protecting those who
were violating me.
As a victim I was left with a lifetime sentence: ruined
relationships, addictions, hospital visits, suicide attempts,
lack of jobs and education, and also left with shame and fear.
And I learned that if you do not heal what hurt you, you will
bleed on others who did not cut you. In the years after
escaping trafficking the effects of being stripped of my
humanity left me with trauma and mental health issues. I was
also left with criminal records and further mental anxiety.
We need to expose all buyers and sellers. They must be
accountable. For that we need to strengthen--continue to
strengthen our laws, improve education on all levels, and name
and shame the buyers and sellers and not the victims.
I am also hoping that all those who seek to end
exploitation and abuse of trafficking learn that they need to
be a safe person and understand what that means. It is
something we can all become, someone who holds back judgment
and instead offers food, offers a blanket and emotional
support, treating all individuals with dignity and respect.
But what you especially can do as lawmakers is to ensure
that in every aspect of your work to end trafficking you put
forward measures mandating widespread survivor-informed and
trauma-informed training. This has to become the norm and it is
the only way to bring light to this inhumane crime, awareness
to our communities, and to expose the criminals. We need to
create a safer country where people can come forward without
stigma to reveal their experiences. No one should feel double
victimized. No one should feel the double victimization of
being trafficked as well as feeling that they have to stay
silent because of shame, fear, and not feeling safe.
It was not until 2015 that I found my voice, my truth, and
my freedom. I am working to get the criminal records I was left
with expunged and vacated. One down and one to go. Today when I
go into countless schools throughout New Jersey and the United
States students are always engaged and eager to talk, as are
their parents. Students and families always want us to come
back.
There are many young people in particular that needs safe
people to talk to about trafficking and other forms of abuse.
It is essential that children are made aware of what
trafficking looks like and the valuable information to empower
them and keep them safe while ensuring that all information
they received is trauma and survivor-informed.
This is a bridge of all voices, the survivors and the non-
survivors. We need to collaborate to continue to make this
work. I couldn't do what I am doing without the amazing leaders
and advocates I walk alongside with each day. I am deeply
grateful to my colleagues at the New Jersey Coalition Against
Human Trafficking, the New Jersey Chapter of the American
Academy of Pediatrics Task Force, and all those on the New
Jersey Commission on Human Trafficking, which I am honored to
serve.
I am also incredibly grateful to Congressman Chris Smith
who had led this fight against trafficking for so long ensuring
that there is funding and other provisions to protect,
prosecute, and continue educating our communities in a
survivor-informed way. That is why I am so pleased to be here
today. You are all making such a difference to help and support
survivors.
Human trafficking comes in so many forms and it
discriminates against no one. Countless women and men, boys and
girls are trafficked every day and subjected to humiliation,
shame, exploitation, and continued being abused.
Although I am no longer a victim if what happened to me
could make a difference to one person, it would have been worth
it. I am encouraged today and I am filled with gratitude and
hope because you are willing to hear me and hear other
survivors. It is essential that survivors are included in all
aspects of the work to prevent trafficking including education,
law enforcement response, health care, and so on. Survivors
need to be at the table engaged from the beginning to the end
and compensated in doing so.
Thank you all for listening and thank you for all you
continue to do to end this horrendous crime.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Cavallo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Ms. Cavallo, thank you so very much for that
very eloquent statement and for your leadership. It is
extraordinary.
I would like to now yield to Mr. Lung for such time as he
may consume.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT LUNG, TRAFFICKING SURVIVOR

Mr. Lung. Good morning. Thank you, chairman, thank you
honorable Members of Congress, and thank you, my colleagues.
I begin with a quote credited to both John Bunyan and later
to Mahatma Gandhi. ``It is better in prayer to have a heart
without words than words without heart.'' I pray you all hear
my heart in these words as I speak my truth.
In the 1970's a man took a boy to whom he was related to a
cabin in a rural part of the country. The man told the boy to
undress and to wait. The boy obeyed him. Moments later another
boy entered the room accompanied by two men. The first boy upon
seeing how scared the second boy looked asked, ``What's the
matter?'' Why are you so scared? The second boy replied in
shock and in disbelief, ``You do not know. You do not know.''
The man took the second boy into an enjoining room and the two
men proceeded to violently rape the boy.
I am the first boy, and that was the first time I was
trafficked. I was trafficked for 4 years. I survived physical
abuse, sexual abuse, mental and emotional abuse, sex
trafficking, and torture over more than 13 years of my
childhood. And I managed to graduate high school, and I managed
to graduate college, and I managed to graduate law school. And
in my courtroom they all rise when I come in and they call me
judge.
And now know this: There are no survivors who stand alone
in their recovery. Survivors need help, they need food and
shelter, they need an education, they need counseling and
recovery services, they need good and fair employment, they
need peer support. They need the very provisions of the TVPA.
The survivors of today need this bill and they need you. And
they need you too. And they need you too. And they need you to
support this bill and to carry this bill forward.
I will undoubtedly receive criticism from my fellow
survivors for saying that they need you because survivors are a
proud people and they fiercely fight for themselves in whatever
way they can to survive.
But no survivor stands alone.
I did not get here alone. I had my mother, a strong woman
of faith who taught me to believe in hope. I had my grandmother
who taught me about courage. I had my brother who taught me to
trust again. I had a flock of therapists including Dee Marcotte
and Jennifer Sandberg of Colorado who taught me that
vulnerability is not weakness. Vulnerability is unimaginable
strength. I have had amazing friends: Pat, Mark, Ed, Dave,
Bill, Dan, Paul, Lon, Ellesondra, Tina, Nathan, Russell, Anna,
Bukola, Suleman, Bella, and so many others who stood by me in
my lowest of lows, the greatest of which my wife of 19 years
and my best friend, Charine Chase. And all along I have had my
God who loves me, who forgives me, and who guides me to this
very day, to this very moment.
The bill before you contains provisions that can provide
the resources and pathways for children, for youth, for young
persons, for adults to find their own pathways, to their own
goals, whether those goals are to graduate high school, or to
own their own company, or to be an advocate, or to be a parent,
or to be a mentor, or a lawyer, or a judge, or a
congressperson, or United States Ambassador. With the aid you
have the power to provide their futures are limitless. The
victims of trafficking need these protections and these
provisions so they too may transition from victim to survivor
to thriver. They need you. We need you. And I need you.
I need you to look at our faces, the faces of these
survivors not as if we are strangers with no connection to you.
I need you to imagine instead that seated here are your sons
and your daughters, your children needing this help. I need you
to imagine saying yes, saying yes that you will help a victim
become so much more than what happened to them.
I shared with you that I was the first boy and what
happened to me that day and the years thereafter.
Support this bill, adopt this bill, follow Congressman
Smith's path to provide for survivors so that 1 day there can
be the last girl, the last boy, the last child to come before
Congress begging, begging for your help.
Every single one of you took this job for the exact same
reason: to help others, to make a difference, the most noble of
employs. And in the mix and mess of your daily duties you start
to lose sight of your first purpose, your true calling.
Now I know no one will remember me. No one is going to
remember this 5-minute speech, but I beg you to remember the
story of the first boy because history will remember you.
History will remember if you made a difference, if you joined
in support of the TVPA. Here is your chance to re-embrace your
true purpose, to make a difference. Make this difference.
Support this bill. This is the way back to your true purpose,
to help others and to make a difference. This is your way.
I leave you with one more quote from someone else history
will never forget, St. Ignatius Loyola. ``Work as if everything
depends on you. Pray as if everything depends on God.'' May you
be blessed in all of your work in these sacred halls for the
greater good of all. I thank you. May you be blessed.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lung follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Judge Lung, thank you for that excellent
testimony. Your experience absolutely encourages all of us to
do far more than we have done and again for helping us write
this bill, which is almost ready for reintroduction. And you
helped us last year when we did the Frederick Douglass, which
did pass the House; did not get out of the Senate, but I want
to thank you for the input that you provided. It is
extraordinary.
Mr. Lung. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Smith. Without our survivors and survivor-informed,
trauma-informed we would not know where to go, so thank you.
Ms. Becky Murray, the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF BECKY MURRAY, FOUNDER AND CEO, ONE BY ONE

Ms. Murray. Good morning, Chairman Smith, honorable
committee members. Thank you for the honor and privilege of
sitting before you today. I am representing the global
community of NGO's working to fight against modern day slavery
and human trafficking abroad.
My name is Becky Murray and the CEO and founder of One By
One, and international NGO that has its U.S. headquarters in
Nashville, Tennessee, as you can obviously tell by very
Nashville-sounding accent.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Murray. One By One was founded over a decade ago. I
went on a trip to Sierra Leone. I was a student at the time in
my early 20's and on the trip I met a little girl, a 9-year-old
girl who was living on the streets. And I noticed she had no
shoes. So with less than a dollar I bought her a little pair of
flip-flops and she approached me and she said should I wait in
your bedroom? That little girl had been so abused by both men
and women that she presumed less than a dollar meant I know
deserved her body. And that one moment changed my life and I
decided in that moment I will give my whole life to this. Even
if it is only ever for one child I will give my whole life to
this because no child should go through that.
This singular event launched a global movement to address
human trafficking and modern day slavery in some of the most
impoverished areas of the world. And since founding in 2011 One
By One has provided necessary restorative care, educational
support, and empowerment toward sustainable living to prevent
exploitation of the vulnerable cross-communities in the
developing world.
One of the signature projects that I am most proud of is
the Dignity Project which has now reached over 30,000 girls
across Africa and Asia and different parts. Period poverty is a
worldwide problem that affects millions of women and girls
every day and it refers to the lack of access to menstrual
products, proper sanitation facilities, and education around
menstrual health.
It is a complex issue that is deeply rooted in social,
economic, and cultural factors and leads so girls to being
exploited and trafficked. Girls missing school and missing
critical educational time during their absence and girls who
miss school or the work due to their periods become far more
vulnerable to the tactics of traffickers as a result.
Since the implementation of the Dignity Project we have
seen attendance rates, test grades, and completion rates rise
significantly and the efforts are cost-effective measures that
in my opinion really deal with one of the most neglected of the
three Ps, prevention, and its impact is clear.
However, many efforts cannot scale to the level of having a
true global impact without the investment and support from the
U.S. Government. As you are undoubtedly aware, both USAID and
the State Department's Office to combat trafficking plays a
critical role in addressing issues of modern day slavery, and
the United States has been a global leader in this, which as a
British girl to say is a big deal.
You guys are global leaders in this since the passing of
the Trafficking Victims Protection Act in 2000 thanks to the
unwavering leadership and commitment of Representative
Smith, amongst many others. I want to say a personal thank
you on behalf of every child that I have had the honor of
helping and working with. On their behalf I want to say thank
you to yourself and everybody who is committed in this.
Just recently I had the opportunity to meet with USAID
representatives across Kenya and Uganda and I was disheartened
to learn that little to no investment was made a focus of the
work on specifically human trafficking. While I was thankful
for the time and the insights for the work that is being done,
I was confused at the lack of focus given the scope and impact
of human trafficking in those regions.
Additionally it was concerning that Congress authorized
more than $60 billion in the 2023 budget alone for foreign aid,
yet since 2001, so in the last 22 years, USAID has only
invested a grant total of $370 million into fighting human
trafficking.
Trafficking in persons is a threat to economies, global
health, health security, gender equality, gender equity, and
empowerment, all of which are key highlights in the President's
2024 budget request, however trafficking was not represented in
the budget justification. The State Department's Office to
Monitor and Combat Trafficking Persons has made significant
investments and efforts to enhance capacity for foreign
governments to combat human trafficking.
Much of this investment is being focused on the pillars of
protection and prosecution. And I recognize that these are
obviously critical to effectively addressing modern day
slavery, however I respectfully submit that prevention, the
third P, has been somewhat neglected.
As a practitioner in the field it is my observation that
governments often fail to address root causes of exploitation
and trafficking. I understand that prevention is harder to
measure and activities aren't quite as flashy as conduct in the
so-called rescue operation, however, if we are going to truly
have an impact we must focus and invest on prevention. The most
important question before the government should be how do we
prevent human trafficking from happening in the first place?
There should never be a first boy.
In 2019 the Trafficking in Persons Report published by JTIP
rightly recommended, and I quote, ``Increase prevention efforts
through outreach and intervention services for marginalized
communities,''
It is of paramount importance that the United States
continues to invest in the global fight against human
trafficking, a crime that affects millions of people worldwide
and poses a significant threat to human rights, public health,
and national security. The U.S.' commitment to eradicating this
modern day form of slavery not only reflects its unwavering
dedication to the principles of freedom, justice, and human
dignity, but it also serves as a strategic investment that
fosters stability, prosperity, and the rule of law in countries
around the world.
By funding and supporting anti-trafficking efforts the
United States continues to dismantle criminal networks that
profit from the exploitation of vulnerable individuals, many of
whom fall prey to traffickers due to poverty, lack of
education, social marginalization, period poverty. These
criminal enterprises undermine the global economy, corrode the
integrity of U.S. institutions, and jeopardize the collective
security.
I respectfully submit in closing the following
recommendations to this committee: To increase and direct the
use of appropriated funds to USAID to invest addressing the
issues of modern day slavery.
To pass the Frederick Douglass Trafficking Victims
Protection and Prevention Act without delay. This legislation
will expand U.S. efforts relating to combatting human
trafficking including forced labor as well as new
recommendations for USAID to integrate prevention efforts for
their global programming.
And to amend International Megan's Law to address any
loopholes to keep children safe from traveling convicted
pedophiles.
And last, I call upon this committee to introduce the
legislation that would enhance child trafficking prevention,
education to address children that have been sexually abused
and exploited as well as child trafficking online.
These steps will bolster the work already being done and
foster new efforts in preventing exploitation of the vulnerable
people. As we work toward establishing a world where all
children are free to achieve their full potential without
threat of being exploited or trafficked.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Murray follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Ms. Murray, thank you so very much for your
testimony, your leadership, and for sharing that story of that
young girl in Sierra Leone. I mean it just--what a pivotal
moment for you and just underscores how cruel the exploitation
truly is. So thank you.
Ms. Vandenberg?

STATEMENT OF MARTINA E. VANDENBERG, PRESIDENT, HUMAN
TRAFFICKING LEGAL CENTER

Ms. Vandenberg. Good morning, Chairman Smith, Ranking
Member Wild, and members of the subcommittee. It is an honor to
testify before you today. My name is Martina Vandenberg, and I
am president of The Human Trafficking Legal Center.
I also just want to say that it is an honor today to
testify alongside Bella, Gina, and Robert. Thank you all for
your leadership. We couldn't do this--any of this without you.
Before I begin, I just want to thank you, Congressman
Smith. I have appeared before you over your last 25 years of
leadership on human trafficking, testifying before you on
multiple occasions to discuss peacekeeping and human
trafficking, human trafficking by government contractors,
trafficking of domestic workers by diplomats and forced labor
and global supply chains. I am particularly grateful to you for
your attention to forced labor which is an egregious violation
of human rights.
We have gathered together today to discuss the
implementation of the TVPA. And so I want to begin this morning
with the successes. The first success is accountability.
The TVPA has proven to be a powerful tool to hold
traffickers and perpetrators of forced labor accountable. The
statute covers extraterritorial jurisdiction, an essential
provision to combat forced labor in global supply chains. No.
2, access to justice for survivors.
In 2003, Congress created a private right of action under
the TVPA. That law permits victims to hold their traffickers
accountable in the Federal courts. The extraterritorial
jurisdiction provisions of the statute have allowed trafficking
survivors to bring successful civil cases even where the forced
labor occurred abroad.
In two important cases litigated in the Eastern District of
Virginia, litigated by pro bono lawyers I should add, Roe v.
Howard and Doe v. Howard, Federal courts awarded damages to
domestic workers trafficked into sexual servitude and forced
labor by a U.S. diplomat. The trafficking occurred in Japan and
Yemen. The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the jury
verdict in Roe v. Howard, a decision that reflected Congress'
intent to provide trafficking victims with extraterritorial
jurisdiction to hold their traffickers accountable.
No. 3, the success of the TIP report. The Trafficking in
Persons report has evolved into a powerful foreign policy tool,
although I do agree with you, Congressman Smith, absolutely
about the grading issues. The country rankings matter a great
deal.
And being rigorous and honest with those country rankings
is absolutely essential. No. 4, a big success of the TVPA is
evident here today on this panel and its survivor leadership.
One need only look at the remarkable and powerful witnesses on
this panel to recognize the fundamental role that experts with
lived experience play in the formulation of U.S. policy.
Trafficking survivors have an immense amount to teach us.
They know what is working. They know what is failing. They know
how it can be fixed, and they should be in roles of authority
to fix it.
Finally, a big success that is already been mentioned, the
three Ps, the TVPA's famous three Ps, prevention, protection,
and prosecution. Over the last two decades, we have focused
myopically, I fear, on prosecution. We are beginning to see
more focus on the most neglected P as Becky also called it,
prevention.
To prevent human trafficking, we must focus on root causes.
Again, I agree completely here with Becky. We must focus on
root causes.
Violations of workers' rights, violations of the freedom of
association, discrimination, lack of enforcement of labor law,
and poverty. And as we have seen today, also broken immigration
systems. But still despite this progress over 20 years which is
remarkable and enviable, there is still enormous challenges.
One problem that we see here in the United States is with
diplomats. Diplomats and information organization personnel are
permitted to bring domestic workers into the United States on
special visas known as A-3 and G-5 visas. And some of these
domestic workers are held in forced labor.
The Department of State now administers an in-person
program to interview each A-3 and G-5 domestic worker annually.
These official check-in interviews play an essential role in
preventing human trafficking, catching it before it can become
so egregious. These interviews also have placed diplomats on
notice that the State Department is watching and will take
action.
Moreover, the in-person registration interviews can provide
the only opportunity for a domestic worker held in forced labor
to escape her traffickers. And we have seen this happen. We
have advocated to make these in-person registration program
requirements statutory.
And we urge Congress to pass this mandate in the new TVPA.
But what about the domestic workers for whom trafficking was
not prevented, those who were held in forced labor, those who
suffered human trafficking in the United States? Those workers,
those trafficking survivors still confront total impunity.
Take the case of Malawi. In 2016, a Federal court in
Maryland ordered a diplomat from Malawi, Jane Kambalame, to pay
1.1 million dollars in damages for trafficking a domestic
worker into forced labor in the United States. That domestic
worker is here today. Her name is Fainess Lipenga.
Fainess Lipenga is my colleague at The Human Trafficking
Legal Center. She is also a member of the U.S. Advisory
Council. That diplomat, Jane Kambalame, was allowed to return
to Malawi where she was promoted.
She became an ambassador to two other African countries on
behalf of the government of Malawi. Seven years later, that 1.1
million dollar judgment is still outstanding. Other countries
have made what are called ex gratia payments, payments directly
to survivors to cover the crimes of their diplomats because
this is a prime example of corruption.
When State officials engage in human trafficking, that is
corruption. It is clear that additional consequences are
necessary for diplomats and their sending States who choose to
thwart Federal court orders. This makes a mockery of the rule
of law.
And diplomats who engage in human trafficking should face
sanctions. I would like to turn now to migrant workers held in
forced labor in other sectors. What we have learned in our 25
years of working on trafficking and working on the TVPA is that
forced labor is a feature and not a bug in global supply
chains.
We now know that we will not prosecute our way out of
forced labor or human trafficking. In 2021 according to the
State Department's Trafficking in Person's report, there were
just 1,379 prosecutions for forced labor in the world, in the
entire world. We still need criminal prosecutions.
I am not saying avoid that P entirely. But we absolutely
now must pivot to prevention and focus on worker's rights.
Speaking of worker's rights, I want to raise the alarm bell
because we are seeing a very troubling trend here in the United
States.
Professional workers brought to the U.S. with contracts
that includes steep financial penalties that are
euphemistically called liquidated damages. We call these
provisions abscondment clauses. The provisions are ubiquitous
and contracts for nurses, particularly nurses coming from the
Philippines.
The contracts preclude the nurses or any worker from
leaving their position for 3 years. And if that individual does
try to quit their job, the employer or recruiter enforces the
liquidated damages clause in State courts. There are many of
these cases in State courts that are pending even as we speak
this morning.
The penalties range from 30,000 dollars to 150,000 dollars,
trapping these workers in debt bondage. And in New York, ten
nurses who left their jobs and their lawyer faced criminal
prosecution for so-called abandonment of their patients. It
took years to clear up those charges to get those indictments
off the book.
But you cannot turn around those arrests. You cannot turn
around that harm. Finally, a State appellant court in New York
determined that those prosecutions violated the Thirteenth
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.
Nursing shortages in the United States should not give rise
to human trafficking. Nursing shortages in the United States
should not give rise to abusive conditions for foreign nurses.
Nursing shortages should not give rise to what we consider an
American Kafala System.
Contracts with abscondment fees, no matter the euphemism
used to mask the abuse must end. These contracts are
unconscionable and they should also be unenforceable. I would
like to end today with some concrete recommendations.
First, I echo Becky. Increase appropriations to focus on
the forgotten P, prevention. That means increasing funding for
the Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Affairs.
That also means that the State Department TIP funding and
USAID funding should shift to focus on worker's rights, freedom
of association, prevention of forced labor, and prevention of
all forms of human trafficking. Second, focus on corporate
accountability. All of us have seen the series in the New York
Times about children exploited on the night shift in
slaughterhouses in the United States. It is 2023. This is
appalling.
Corporations should face prosecution, administrative fines,
and debarment from U.S. Government contracting if they are
found to have held workers, if they are found to have held
children in forced labor, or if they have benefited from that
forced labor. Hold diplomats and their sending States
accountable for trafficking of A-3 and G-5 domestic workers. We
have requested sanctions in the Kambalame case.
Mandate in-person registration interviews with domestic
workers on A-3, G-5 visas to prevent trafficking by diplomats
and to allow them an opportunity to escape. Finally, prohibit
the use of contracts with penalty abscondment fees for nurses
and for all migrant workers in the United States. These tools
are used to traffic in our country.
I would like to end with a quote from my colleague, Fainess
Lipenga, who has said for many years, nothing about us without
us. And that is why it is so important that you are working
directly with survivors to write this legislation. Thank you
for this opportunity to testify, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Vandenberg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Ms. Vandenberg, thank you so very much. You have
for years, I think you have testified seven times at least. I
deeply appreciate that.
Every time, we learn something new. And obviously, all of
our consultations vary. Vigil is our staff director for the
subcommittee, and we are working on this legislation and your
input again and the input of all of our very distinguished
witnesses.
It is making a difference, so thank you for highlighting
but also giving depth as to what these issues are all about.
And you are right about the forced labor issues. And they have
been neglected to some extent.
I mean, I just had a hearing on the Uyghur Forced Labor
Act. I chair the China Commission, and it is something, again,
a good joint effort to get that legislation passed. And there
is every reason to believe that Xi Jinping is gaming the system
despite good efforts on part of our customs people.
And I mean, there is all kinds of loopholes that they are
already exploiting. Equally, we are talking about forced labor.
I had a hearing on what is going on in D.R. Congo with regards
to EVs.
Whether you like an EV or not, an electric vehicle, that is
fine. That is your preference. But the cobalt that is needed
for them is all--all, but most--coming from D.R. Congo.
And they are using children, thirty-five, forty thousand
kids who are being exploited horribly. Our hearing brought this
out. Our witnesses who were from the some of the D.R. Congo
talked about the death and the sicknesses that these kids are
acquiring by the inhalation of dust and the like from the
cobalt and about 200,000 adults.
And so we have a bill that we are dropping next week. Not
similar but pretty much the same timeframe as this bill on
Frederick Douglas reauthorization to go after that supply
chain. Ford and Tesla and all the others are going to be using
cobalt.
Well, get it from a source that is completely and totally
clean. And this is not clean. And as you all know or probably
know, most of the work on those mines after they extract cobalt
goes to China, goes to Xinjiang and places like that to right
where the Uyghurs are experiencing a genocide.
So you cannot make this stuff up, how horrible it is. And
we need to do a lot more. So thank you. Forced labor is a huge
issue.
And I think we got to be careful about not taking promises
or fake reforms that come out of places like Beijing when China
was upgraded from Tier 3 country which is where it absolutely
belongs for both forced labor and for sex trafficking. It was
pointed out that, yes, they were getting rid of their reform
through labor. And I have actually been in Laogai.
I was in Laogai along with Frank Wolf right after Tiananmen
Square where 40 Tiananmen Square activities were making Jelly
shoes and socks for export. We brought the evidence, gave it to
customs. They put an import ban on it, and that place actually
closed.
They opened it up somewhere else. But they went through
this great subterfuge about how they were getting rid of reform
through labor in the Laogai system, and it was not true. They
just transferred what they were doing, and of course they went
back to Tier 3 the next years.
But we have got to have those eyes wide open and not being
willing to buy into Xi Jinping or--what is his name--Hu Jintao
and others false representation about what China is doing. So
thank you all for your testimoneys. Just a couple of brief
questions and they are very brief.
Obviously, COVID-19 has exacerbated efforts to combat human
trafficking. I know ECPAT has made it very clear that grooming
online has become much more aggressive to get young people. And
one of the things that I learned because I chaired a couple of
forums with as head of the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly special
representative of trafficking.
And we had a number of women who had employment and then
lost it because those jobs went away. So the employment piece I
think is extremely important. You might want to speak to that
on housing which was mentioned earlier.
Our bill will have a 35 million dollar per year times 5
years effort to have money set aside for housing. There needs
to be a decent place to live that is safer than where many of
these victims find themselves. So that is something we want to
put in there and really make an all-out effort.
It is not major. Thirty-five million is a lot of money. But
as least it is a step in the right direction time five like I
said, 5-year authorization.
On situational awareness and you might want to speak to
this, particularly those who have the lived experience, there
have been surveys that have found that 80 percent of
trafficking victims, some even say higher, access healthcare at
some point, often several times, particularly if there is a
pimp involved and his property, which I find so outrageous and
we all do, needs to get into the hospital because of beatings
and because of the rape that so frequently occurs. We need to
do more to make our hospitals and personnel. We have
legislation, of course, law, situationally aware.
And I know, Gina, you were at our conference and we heard
from what some of the New Jersey hospitals are doing to train
the emergency room people and everyone else at that hospital
health care facility, whatever it might be to have eyes wide
open about what is going on, situationally aware. And do not be
a vigilante. Take that information to law enforcement
immediately so that they can hopefully step in and rescue that
victim if that is a trafficking situation.
So you might want to speak to the health care part of it.
Schools, we are working on that like you know to try to--and
thank you, Gina, for doing so much in the schools. And all of
you do talk about the importance of faith in terms of the
healing process.
And I do not know how someone who does not have faith,
maybe they can get through it through good psychological
counseling. But again, to know again you have been victimized.
And so often the victims blame themselves which is absurd but
it happens almost all the time.
And faith gives that sense of renewal, reconciliation, and
hope. And it says in the Bible, without hope, people perish. We
all need hope, but a trafficking victim seems to me needs it
more than anyone. And faith helps to provide that.
So if you would want to speak to that briefly as well. I
have so many other questions, but I do want to get to my
colleagues Yes, Gina.
Ms. Cavallo. I know for me when I was in the life, I did
welcome drugs because I just did not want to feel or see
anything. So I mean, that added to the addition. But then that
also enabled and added to their control over me where there was
that reward and punishment concept.
As far as emergency rooms and beatings or any other health
issues, I mean, I had no insurance. And one of the big red
flags because it is so difficult at times to identify what a
trafficker looks like. What these criminals look like because
it is very deceptive and they are masterminded.
I am uncomfortable even giving them that credit, but it is
so true. But one of the victims across the board that for my
own experience is that when victims whether they know their
victims or not, they do not speak for themselves and their head
is down. And someone else is speaking for them.
Or they start to speak because they may be feeling a little
safe to speak. But the perpetrator, the criminal takes over.
That is a huge sign, whether it would be regardless of what is
said, whether it is health care, any other setting as well.
But in hospitals, I felt safe but I was still scared
because the perpetrator is there. Very rarely was I left along.
And one of my women traffickers was always tagging along with
me.
And if I did not keep in the aligned steps that I was
psychologically groomed to set in, and then she would go back
to him. And then there was retaliation. And their threats are
real.
There is a lot of violence. So those are areas that are
really important. I know another instance, I mean, even as a
child I remember someone intentionally hurt me. And this was a
family member.
And I went to the hospital and I share this with you
because it is the way I thought everyone lived like this. I
thought that this was the normal. And I remember going to the
hospital because a family member intentionally hurt me where I
required stitches.
So I was at the hospital and my mother came. And the staff
was asking what happened. And my mother was protecting someone
who was harming me and said, oh, she closed the door too hard.
But that is not what happened.
The person who was trying to hurt me pushed the door with
his arm and the glass shattered over me, causing me to go to
the hospital and needing stitches. So my point behind this is
that I heard her say it and I said that is not what happened.
And I whispered to her, and she just disavowed what I said.
But I did not close the door too hard. But my takeaway from
that was what I learned through the years is protecting those
who are hurting me. So that foundation was already laid at a
very young age.
And the other part was is when I said to her why did he
hurt me. And she said, he did not hurt you. He loves you. So
there is that trauma bonding. There is the Stockholm syndrome.
There is so many layers to this because it is not until for
me--I mean, my healing journey will always continue. I am in
counseling. I do not go as frequent as I used to.
But for me, I have tool belt on. I know what works. And
especially being called to the work that I do, it is important
that I take care of myself and I know what needs to be done.
But it is not like you go to counseling and say, OK, I am a
little better. I arrived.
That is not how this works. The trauma, the triggers, they
are always there. So in order to do this effectively, I know
what my needs are. I know when I have to say no. I know what
the boundaries are.
As far as the school setting, I mean, it is incredible. I
am just taken back every time I walk into a school, whether it
is middle school through universities. These kids from sixth
grade are so engaged and they are so hungry not only to listen
but to talk.
And unfortunately, we always have to adhere by the bell.
You get so many minutes. I think it is 32 minutes per class,
and we will go for the whole day and do sixth grade through the
high school.
And the kids are left with so many questions because we do
not have enough time for Q&A. And teachers and the principals,
the feedback is always consistent that even the kids that they
have difficulty whether it is kids that--the bullies. It is the
kids that are distracting.
It is the kids with the poor grades. It is the kids that
think they know at all. Even those kids that are difficult,
they are there so attentive and so hungry to want more because
there is so much they can relate to.
It is not a simple crime where whether you know the person
or not. And plus there is so many different types of
trafficking when we talk about familial trafficking, the gang
trafficking, when we talk about the grooming with the
boyfriending. And many times, it is not who we think they are.
And they are being deceitful. They are luring you into a
relationship. And another big sign is when they want to
continue to divide you from the parents or the family that you
think you are safe from in some cases because the more they
isolate you, the more control they have over you.
One of the things that I would like to see more of is more
caretakers and more parents involved because I feel it is so
important that as far as prevention as well, I feel that we
need to start from the beginning. And how girls and boys are
raised can look very differently regardless of your background.
And I know that from my own experience speaking from where I
came from, the boys--and there is many cultures where boys do
not have accountability.
And it is OK for boys to get away to do that or it is cute.
And it is not cute because we are creating monsters. We are
enabling behaviors that have no accountability at all. And the
same thing for girls because I have seen it too where girls are
so abusive and girls are always, as I said earlier,
traffickers. So that is really important.
Ms. Hounakey. Thank you, Ms. Gina. Representative Smith,
you mentioned about psychological healing. And you talk about
faith perspective. One thing that I submit to you all is to
somehow introduce a bill that allows for continuous mental
health services informed of funding for survivors.
We know that trauma isn't a linear path. People do not
heal. It is a continuous journey. And so if a survivor is not a
believer, perhaps they can have access to funding that allows
them to receive mental health services.
And from a faith perspective, when I am at these things, I
am aware that there are survivors that are watching from all
over the world. And so if you are a survivor that is watching
all of us today, I would say that from my personal experience
that you cannot heal by yourself. Everything you see was formed
by something you cannot see.
And so if you are watching, I need you to believe that
those things that your traffickers told you, they are not true.
You are not broken. You are not made of glass. You can heal.
You are not defective. You are not damaged. You are not
disposable. You are loved. And if you have experienced
religious trauma, you can identify to that.
I invited you to have a sense of belief. At least try it
out. You cannot possibly heal on your own. God did not hurt
you. People did. And it is people that is going to give you
hope again. So thank you.
Ms. Murray. In terms of the medical training, I think that
is a really crucial point. And certainly from an international
perspective to go in and do training with medical professionals
because it is a key place where they are coming into contact
directly with victims of modern day slavery and trafficking.
And they do not even recognize it.
And I have kind of got two brains when I go in the room
because obviously I was a pediatric nurse before launching the
foundation. And so I know the chaos of being an A&E and how
hectic the workplace is. And your mindset is definitely let is
fix the physical problem and then discharge.
You are conscious of how many beds and time scales. And so
the crucialness of going in and training medical professionals
and to be aware of all the red flags and then what to do so
that they do not endanger the victim further. And so I think
doing medical training is crucial.
So we have just started launching ones in hospitals that
are right on the borders between Kenya and Uganda because we
are seeing a lot of children crossing over the border there
being trafficked. And so we are starting to do training in the
hospitals on both sides of the border because this is a key
place. The other avenue obviously mentioned was schools.
And I think from a prevention point of view to go in and
reach the children at an early age of what to be aware of, what
to look out for. But for me specifically and from where I come
from in the international community, identifying period poverty
is a huge vulnerability factor. It is massive.
We are encountering children across different communities
who they are having to miss a lot of school every month because
of the shame and the stigma that is still attached. And so they
wait a home for that week of the month. So many girls are
dropping out of education, and it is still in primary care--
primary education.
Elementary here? Let me get my terminology right,
elementary education, never making it onto high school. And so
I think if that can be addressed as a key component in
prevention in tackling poverty, then we can actually made a big
impact.
Ms. Vandenberg. If I can just address three of your
questions briefly. One is we have learned over the last 30
years of working on human trafficking that survivors actually
need lawyers. That goes also for children who are----
Ms. Wild. I am sorry. Could you repeat that last statement?
Ms. Vandenberg. Trafficking survivors need lawyers. And
that goes also for children who are sexually abused by
Americans or U.S. persons abroad. We have worked very hard to
get pro bono lawyers to represent those children even while
they are still in the country of origin and the country where
that abuse has occurred. So having legal representation along
with mental health support and addition support and housing,
all of those basic needs, but legal needs are also, I think,
quite fundamental.
Second, and I think you heard this today, survivors need
agency. And so when you talk about medical care, I think it is
very important to remember that survivors need to be making the
decisions. Survivors need to decide whether there is reporting
to law enforcement unless it is a child and there is mandatory
reporting.
This also goes for the hotline. And as Gina said,
survivors, trafficking victims, when they are in the situation,
they are terribly frightened of police and are sometimes abused
by police and are certainly arrested by police. And so with the
U.S. hotline now with the National Human Trafficking Hotline,
victims themselves when they call need to be able to decide
whether or not to report to law enforcement.
Survivors should not be arrested. They should be given
opportunity to do what my colleague, Evelyn Chumbow, who is a
survivor of child forced labor in the United States said to me
one. Evelyn Chumbow said, I rescued myself. Trafficking
survivors rescue themselves.
Finally, I want to turn to this question about employment
because I think some of the biggest wins that we have had in
the last 4 years, 5 years on forced labor have been because of
the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act and because of robust
enforcement by customs and border protection of Section 307 of
the Tariff Act. And those laws as I have said in my written
testimony, those laws which prevent goods made with forced
labor from entering the U.S. market. Those laws protect not
just workers abroad from being held in forced labor.
They protect workers here in the United States who can in
no way compete with workers abroad who are held in forced
labor. The last thing I will say is that we have much to thank
Department of Labor for these days. It was the Department of
Labor who found those children working, cleaning meat house,
packing floors in the middle of the night. It is the Department
of Labor inspectors who found that. One thing that we need to
do to protect workers here and again to prevent human
trafficking is from the Department of Labor so that those
inspections can take place and so that they are fully, fully
resourced.
Mr. Lung. Thank you. I begin by considering what is
probably a very common experience for survivors of human
trafficking, whether in labor or in sex trafficking, is the
overwhelming sense of isolation that you can turn to no one.
There is no one coming to rescue you.
There is no one that is going to help you. And that keeps
you silent for years, sometimes decades. And when I began to
realize that I was not the only one and that there were others
out there like me, of course it was sad but also very
encouraging and empowering to know that there is others out
there that have had these experiences and are trying to make a
difference.
And my first encounter was with a nonprofit in Colorado
that was doing some great work. And then I learned that there
was a Colorado Human Trafficking Council. It was often called a
Governor's council which is a collection of professionals
trying to improve laws in Colorado on anti-trafficking.
And then I learned when I attended in 2014 a Share Hope
International Conference in D.C. that the Federal Government
was working on it. And I had no idea as a victim of human
trafficking that the Federal Government had any idea what human
trafficking was or what they were doing. And nor did I know 20-
plus years ago that you, sir, were making an enormous
difference.
So I thank you for all your work. And I think of how proud
I am of the United States and of you, sir, and of my Congress
and that we are the greatest country in the world and that we
lead by example. We are not infallible. We are a flawed
country. We are a flawed government.
But we are doing a hell of a lot of good and will continue
to do that. And I am forever a man of hope. And when I
encounter that the Department of Justice had OVC and the
Administration for Children and Families has NHTTAC, the
National Human Trafficking Training and Technical Assistance,
that the State Department has their network of experts, that
the Department of Labor is engaged.
It was humbling, encouraging to realize just how many
different divisions of the Federal Government have actively
been combating human trafficking. It is so very encouraging.
And we still have a lot of work to do. But I am so proud of my
country and my government for making a difference. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Judge Lung, we are so proud of you and frankly
your hope is contagious. I will defer my other questions in
written form. Yes, Gina.
Ms. Cavallo. Can I make one more comment? One of my
concerns in the work that I do that I observe and it is pretty
consistent, I think that organizations and individuals who do
this work, not many of them, they are still a lot that are not
survivor informed where they are not survivors at the table.
But they say they are survivor informed.
But if they are doing a project or they are having a panel
or they are having speakers, they are missing the survivors. Or
they may invite a survivor, but the survivor is just there and
others are speaking over their voices. And to me, that is
tokenism.
And I think we need to take a look at and I would love for
your support to help me take a look at this that when funds are
distributed that I believe that they should be distributed to
those who are actually doing the work and not using survivors
as tokens but really--because we need each other. Survivors
cannot do this alone. And you all cannot do it without us.
So I appreciate that camaraderie, that respect, that
collaboration. And we need to continue to build bridges, not
separate them because we are more than our stories. We are more
than survivors.
I have my professional life, my personal life, and my lived
experience. But it really concerns me when I see organizations
who are trying to do the work but they are just missing the
most important part. Because I see it when I do presentations.
I see it when I take a backseat and I see other people do
presentations but their survivor is missing. Because the impact
that you have when you walk alongside a survivor is between
your professionalism, your experience, and our experience, the
impact we make and the outcome we will have can move mountains.
But if we do this without you or you do this without us, it is
not going to work.
It is not going to have that same impact. So I request and
I plead to you to take a look at this moving forward. Well, if
they say, well, yes, we have a survivor included. Well, you
have 10 or 20 people there and you have one survivor there and
I barely hear him speak or her speak.
I could clearly within a few minutes see that as tokenism.
And if that survivor is not in a good place, we are re-
exploiting. And that is not what we want to do.
I also want to just mention that for me which I am so
grateful to and I always will be has been a big part of my
healing has been Celebrate Recovery which I did not
intentionally go to 1 day and say, oh, I have issues. I did not
even think I had issues.
However, I went and I was invited. And it was four books
and a year commitment and it was free. It is all over the
country.
And I was invited and I said, oh, I will just do it to do
it. And when I started, it was incredible. I mean, I did get to
the point after a couple of months where the horses were at the
gate and the trauma and the triggers were coming out.
And I was saying, I cannot continue going there because it
is causing me to remember things that I buried decades ago. But
that is where my healing and what I am so grateful for. The
only difference between NA and AA and Celebrate Recovery is
that this was a faith-based program.
And I share this with you because part of it is I had one
prayer. And as Robert had shared too, the isolation and feeling
or being alone can be really, really difficult. And I prayed to
meet one survivor.
I wanted to meet one survivor because I think it is like
someone who is going through cancer or they are recovering and
they have those groups, different types of groups, divorce
groups, cancer groups, recovery. I wanted to meet one survivor,
not necessarily to get into a group but just to be able to
relate, that I was not alone. And it was amazing.
My prayer was answered, just incredible. I met this SOAP
Project, Theresa Flores, and through Theresa Flores who does
SOAP projects throughout the United States, provides healing
retreats for women and men. I have a community of brothers and
sisters throughout the United States. And it is just so
important that we have that as well. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Ranking Member Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you so much. I honestly do not even know
where to begin. Again, thank you all for shedding light on this
subject. And I regret that more members of our subcommittee are
not present.
I will be sharing with my colleagues on the Democrat the
import of what happened today. Unfortunately, Friday hearings
on what we call a fly out day are very challenging. I believe
Mr. Chairman Smith and I both drive which makes life a little
easier for Friday hearings.
But I do apologize that there are not more of us here and
they canceled votes for today which means that people got out
of town early. So I just wanted to say that because the lack of
bodies up here does not in any way reflect on the importance of
this subject which I will be sharing with all of them. The
testimony of Ms. Cavallo and Judge Lung makes it clear that
although the jurisdiction of our committee, this subcommittee,
falls within the Foreign Affairs Committee.
This is not just an international problem. This is not just
something that has roots abroad that we need to address. It is
clearly worldwide. And I do have to tell you even sitting here
and listening to all of the testimony, I couldn't help but
almost feel not helpless, never helpless in this job, but
worried about how do we really stop this.
How do we really address this? And I think there are a lot
of good efforts that are happening, many of which have been
discussed here today. But I think that this is going to be
something that is going to require far more than governmental
officials, far more than civil societies, far more than
philanthropic organizations, but is literally going to need to
be addressed by employers, educators, and people at all levels
of every society in order to really, really get to the root of
this and stop it from happening.
So as I said, I do not know where to start. But I do want
to start with the issue of the diplomats and their domestic
workers because I guess I am drawn to that because it feels
like an area where we might actually be able to be effective
quickly. And to you, ma'am, in the audience, I am so glad you
are here today with us. Thank you for being willing to appear.
It is very meaningful to hear the stories. But Ms.
Vandenberg, you mentioned that the State Department personally
interviews domestic workers of diplomats. And I want to talk to
you about that for a couple minutes or ask you a few things
about it. From what your remarks were, I took it that this is
sort of a policy of the State Department but it is not embodied
in any kind of statute. Is that correct?
Ms. Vandenberg. That is exactly right.
Ms. Wild. So that if the State Department--and I am not
talking about any particular State Department under any
particular Administration. But if the State Department were
understaffed, overworked, had different priorities, these kinds
of interview could easily not happen. Is that correct?
Ms. Vandenberg. That is exactly right.
Ms. Wild. And how long, to the best of your knowledge, have
these interviews been going on?
Ms. Vandenberg. So they have been going probably for about
six or 7 years. You can ask the State Department officials who
testify next. I think it is about six or 7 years.
This idea was not our idea. We are way behind on this
because the Europeans have been doing this for more than a
decade. And so the U.S. actually learned about these in-person
interviews at an OSCE meeting where other countries including
Belgium, the Netherlands, Austria indicated that they were
doing these interviews to prevent harm against these domestic
workers.
Ms. Wild. Well, it seems incredibly obvious that we need to
make it a statutory requirement. And I will reserve some of my
questions for the State Department individuals. But one of the
concerns I have, Ms. Cavallo pointed out the importance of
having survivor informed people present.
I do not know how these interviews are conducted or whether
survivor informed individuals are present and participating in
these interviews. I am also very concerned about what then
happens to the domestic worker. I imagine there is a lot of
fear in being honest at these interviews and probably fears of
deportation I assume if they leave the employ of their
diplomat.
And that is an issue I will ask the State Department about
as well unless you know. But providing a safe haven for these
domestic workers I think is really, really important and also
sends a message to the diplomatic corps that this will not be
tolerated by the United States. So I think that is a really
important first step, and I am glad you brought that to our
attention.
You also mentioned migrant workers and focus on workers'
rights. And this is one of the areas that I am most deeply
concerned with. As you know, we had a vote yesterday on a
border bill. There has been a lot of discussion about the
problems of not allowing migrant workers to come into the
United States to work in construction, to work in agriculture,
that kind of thing.
Many of us on both sides of the aisle recognize that these
industries need migrant workers. At the same time, I worry
deeply that they have absolutely no level of workers' rights
and are at the complete mercy of their employers once they are
here. And that obviously addresses pay and that kind of thing.
But in addition, it seems like a situation that could really
just lead to trafficking and forced labor and I think does.
Ms. Vandenberg. You are right. It does.
Ms. Wild. If they complain of not being paid, the answer is
too bad because you have no legal status here. Is that a fair
statement?
Ms. Vandenberg. That is exactly right except when those
workers are connected with service organizations. That goes for
the domestic workers who were interviewed by the protocol
office. Workers who are being harmed should be connected
immediately with service providers.
And the migrant workers that we see who are most protected
are those who are in worker driven social responsibility
programs like the Coalition for Immokalee Workers, for example.
So when there can be peer support among workers, then workers
understand that they do have rights and they cannot be
deported. And they can get T visas if they are being
trafficked.
Ms. Wild. So if we were to--and this may be idealistic of
me. But if we were able to come up with a bipartisan
comprehensive approach to having migrant workers come here to
work legally, it would seem to me that the information about
these organizations that you just mentioned needs to be given
to them at the onset, not wait for--once they are in a forced
labor situation, they are not going to be able to reach out to
these organizations. Is that fair to say?
Ms. Vandenberg. That is fair to say. Unfortunately in one
of the TVPA reauthorizations that we did years ago, I think it
was 2008, there is a brochure that workers who come in with
legal visas receive upon their interview with----
Ms. Wild. Hopefully in more than one language, more than
English?
Ms. Vandenberg. Hundreds of languages last I checked. So
they have translated into other languages. That pamphlet is
enormously important, but it is not enough because those
workers have to be able to reach the organizations that are
able to help them.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. And it just makes me wonder whether we
need some sort of program as you have described with the
diplomatic corps that also--and I am talking about a
governmental agency that interfaces with any kind of industry
or employer that is using migrant workers.
Ms. Vandenberg. I think that is the role for the Wage and
Hour Division of the Department of Labor, right? That is what
the Department of Labor should be doing and should be resourced
to do.
Ms. Wild. OK. The other problem--and Judge, you mentioned
the different States and all of these organizations. And I am
glad that we are seeing a multiState approach to it. On the
other hand, it seems that in many ways it needs to be
centralized.
Because I am from Pennsylvania, I have some knowledge of
what is happening in Pennsylvania to combat this problem. But
if I heard from somebody in another State about a human
trafficking problem, I am not sure that I would know where to
direct them. I would make it my business to find out where. And
I would be interested to hear from you, Judge, about how you
feel about the decentralization of these kinds of services.
Mr. Lung. I will start with acknowledging in the Obama
Administration, there was the National Committee on the Sex
Trafficking of Children and Youth in the United States. And I
was honored to be a member of that committee. And they tasked
us with this impossible challenge that we accomplished over the
course of 5 years to create a two tier system to analyze the
anti-trafficking efforts of every single State in the United
States.
We created the two tiers to determine at what level the
States are. Some States might be only Tier 1 and some States
are more advanced, New Jersey and Texas and a couple others
that Shared Hope regarding as their A States were definitely
Tier 2 right from the start. But we created--I think it was 35
or 36 different ways of analyzing the anti-trafficking efforts
in each individual State and then required each individual
State to grade themselves and to have other folks involved in
the system to participate in the grading of their individual
States.
Our point of contact was generally the Governor's office in
each of the individuals' States where we would at least reach
out to the Governor's office and ask them to make the point of
contact. And then we would receive feedback from each State on
where they were in the tier system. What I have been told is
that the chairperson of that committee has reached out.
I believe that our host was the State Department and that
they were going to reach back out and see if they were going to
sort of re-up that committee to follow through and see if, OK,
well, we have developed this tier system to analyze each
State's performances. How are you doing? And it is the thing I
think of with all of your efforts especially under the TVPA is
that it is incredibly important to have this multi-disciplinary
approach by the Federal Government.
We need the Department of Labor and Agriculture and
Education and State Department. We need every single agency,
every single division of the Federal Government to have a role
in this. But then what else we need are two things--well, three
things.
We need collaboration. Last year, OTIP collaborated with
OVC to have a project together. And it is fantastic to see the
Department of Justice and OTIP saying, OK, well, let's do
something together. Let's see how we can advance this together.
Having different Federal agencies reach out to each other,
if Department of Education says, I am not sure how we do this.
Let's go call Department of Justice, OVC, and see what they
would recommend. You do not have to reinvent the wheel.
For each individual division of the Federal Government, we
do not have to reinvent the wheel. Start with who already is
ahead of the game and get their information. So I think cross-
agency or cross-divisions of the government is important.
I think certainly as Congressman Smith has indicated, I
think what is critically important is to make sure that there
is implementation. We can write every great law in the world.
But if we do not implement them, then we have just been sitting
her wasting our time and words, right?
So I think implementation is critically important. Then I
think the third thing that is most important is followup, is to
have accountability. OK. Hey, such-and-such division, we gave
you 350 million dollars. Show us what you did with it.
We wrote these laws. We passed this. We expanded your
mandates on what you can do from your agencies. Show us what
you did. So we need to have accountability.
The interesting thing is for nonprofits, they get a grant
of 15 million dollars to do this project or that project. And
they are mandated to have a followup of, OK, now we gave you
that grant. Show us what you did with it.
And they have to. Now we need the Federal Government to do
the same thing. If you are going to have your grantees prove
what they do with the money, I would like to see the divisions
prove to an accountable position or to this very committee, OK,
we gave you this money. We authorized this law. What did you do
with it?
It does not have to be some kind of consequence. It is
just, how about we celebrate what you did with it? Let's
recognize what you accomplished and then let's figure out how
we can advance it further. If we accomplish this----
Ms. Wild. That may very well be the subject of another
hearing I would suggest to the chairman and same thing with the
diplomatic corps. I can envision we could spend an entire
congressional session just on subhearings of today's hearing, I
am sure. I want to give my colleagues a chance. I have got
plenty more questions. But I would like to yield to them for
now. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Dr. McCormick?
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Almost hate to call
you victims because of the phenomenal success you have had in
your lives, what you have carved out and in what I think is a
very bright future for people like you who have made a
difference and continue to make a difference in the future. You
are truly empowered warriors more than anything as what defines
you. So I appreciate that.
This is a very real and painful topic to talk about a lot
of times. As an ER doctor, we see some horrible things in the
home, things that are unspeakable. You see death of babies. You
children who grow up with demeaned senses of who they are and
how that leads to these horrible abuse situations, both in the
home and out of the home.
You also see this in spiritual realms. And as a matter of
fact, several of you talked about the spiritual side of this.
And quite frankly, I would like to reinforce the point that
this goes far beyond government and how we are going to face
this, through our churches, through our communities, through
all the individual relationships we have.
One of the things I thought was really interesting is when
I first joined the military, it was a very commonplace for us
to--when I say, we, I mean the military in general, I do not
mean myself--visit brothels when you go into a foreign port.
And that is now illegal. We do not allow that anymore because I
think that was a big part of child trafficking. That has been
addressed probably by yourself and others. So I applaud those
efforts.
We have seen progression over time. But I wanted to just
take a moment to recognize what I think is a bigger part of
this when you talk about faith, Ms. Bella and Judge. And we
talk about what we are doing outside the government.
I wanted to give you an opportunity to kind of talk about
not just what we can do but what we collectively can do as a
nation outside of government which is always well intended but
sometimes does not get to the heart of the matter. How can we
as communities band together? How can we empower you as a
government to even get out of the way or to encourage
participation not just by people who have massive budgets but
people who have massive hearts when it comes to dealing with
this thing?
People who are in churches that aren't aware of the problem
or who can address this when it comes to counseling or pro bono
work or all the things that we do for communities. If you would
just speak on that, the empowerment of people inside this great
nation which I believe has the most philanthropic hearts, who
would give millions of dollars outside of taxes in the most
accountable way in making a difference into the future. So if
Ms. Bella and Judge--and by the way, I want to acknowledge too.
I thought it was a very powerful statement when you say now
you walk into a room and people stand. I want to stand right
there because that really empowers not just as somebody who
went through something but somebody who has overcome something.
That was just an incredible moment that I wrote down. I am
going to write that down in my journal tonight. Fantastic,
thank you for sharing that.
Ms. Hounakey. I nominate you as tribute to go first.
Mr. Lung. I think it is a great question because sometimes
government is not the right solution. I think it is a part of
the solution, right? I think the great efforts, the grassroots
organizations can make that are not dependent on or restricted
by certain government regulations.
Bella and I actually worked with St. Thomas University
College of Law in Miami. A professor there, Roza Pati, she
actually runs an anti-trafficking organizations and it is a
faith-based organization. They are an ethic law school and
making efforts in Miami that way.
I think of a church that I attend to in Colorado, Southeast
Christian, that hosted an anti-trafficking organization and put
on this presentation. It was a phenomenal presentation of
survivors and anti-trafficking organizations in the community.
And I was astounded at what a basic level of absence of
knowledge community members had.
And so these provisions that a church provides to just have
this educational outreach. I think about Shared Hope
International. For a period of time, they had not just their
national conference but they also had a faith-based conference
that they hosted in Florida 1 year.
And they had a different conference that was just for first
responders. So I am very encouraged by people who I think,
well, here is an absence of knowledge or here is a place that
we can make improvements and then go do it, right? Don't just
find that there is a problem. Be the solution.
And I think of all these amazing examples of very, very
small organizations making phenomenal differences. I think your
point is well made. I love our government. Our government is
the greatest.
But sometimes we are too big or we cannot accomplish things
and we need to rely on small organizations or a different
approach to the solutions. So faith-based organizations,
community organizations are phenomenal. I appreciate you paying
homage to having a faith-based approach. Sometimes the
government cannot be a part of that, and that is OK too.
Mr. McCormick. It is interesting you said homage. I think
it is interesting that people now rise when you enter the room.
But eventually, I think we are all going to have to take a knee
to something bigger than us. And that is why I point out faith
because there is an ultimate power far greater than this
government for sure. So thank you.
Ms. Hounakey. All rise. Thank you for that question. I grew
up in Michigan. I grew up in Grand Rapids, Michigan in a little
street where the youth pastor who was also a lawyer will drive
me to school when my foster mother cannot or the teacher or the
nurse or my piano teacher.
It was a part of community. It was not about if they were
Republican or Democrat. It was not about if they were from
Michigan or Togo. It was not about anything but prioritize me
and the 22 other girls who survived--and boys who survived
trafficking with me.
It was seeing us as people, as children. And I think the
more we prioritized that, at the heart of it, everything we do
is to love people, to care for people. Yes, sometimes it is
about budgets. I understand that working for a controversial
agency.
I understand that. But I think continuing to see that if we
do not take action, who is at risk here? And we see that you
mentioned being a doctor and being in the ER and seeing people
lose their lives.
We might not tug at every community but just doing what we
can for the next person. It is because of all of those people,
my little street on Madison Avenue in Grand Rapids, Michigan,
that is allowing me to be in front of you today. If those
people see me, I was a little girl from Togo who survived
trafficking, now as a girl in foster care, now as a girl in
juvenile home, but as a person that needed help, as a person
with potential and doing everything.
Seeing their actions, support, their belief. They say they
love God and they do not go on the street and shove the Bible
in everybody's faces. They say they love God.
And so they do what they can for me. And I was the next
person that presented the love of God for them. So I think
again the part of collaboration, regardless of where we fall in
the aisle and see people as people needing to serve them is
where we need to continue prioritizing. Thank you.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you. And as a guy who has witnessed
far greater youth ministers myself, I will say that pretty much
the universal truth is we all want to be loved. And oftentimes
when we do not feel loved is when we are most vulnerable to
those predators.
So thank you for pointing that out. Getting back to
government and unintended consequences, though, one of the
things I do have, I am very, very encouraged by the programs we
do have that are helping that we are making progress toward
better legislation. But I am also worried about legislation
with unintended consequences that can actually encourage a
problem.
I am very concerned with half a million people per month
crossing the southern border not just because it is a
humanitarian crisis but because the vast number of children who
are being assaulted as the progress up here. I believe the
chair mentioned 80 percent of the women who are migrating up
this way are being raped, 80 percent. And if you consider how
many people out of that half million, let's make it a fraction.
Let's say it is a couple hundred thousand per month. Take
80 percent of that. Let's just round it off even lower. A
hundred thousand women being raped per month who are migrating
up here because of what I consider a bad policy.
I am sure that it is horrible where they live too. But that
is not due to us necessarily. It is not that we cannot help
with that.
But I am worried that what we have legislated or failed to
legislate has led to over 100,000 rapes per month. And then
further the chair also mentioned 85,000 children that are in
our charge. I take this very seriously.
I am a man of not just faith but of military consequence.
In the Marine Corps, we are accountable for what we take charge
of. The general orders are very clear of that.
And we as Americans, we as a government, when we take
charge of a child, our most precious commodity. As a father of
seven, I will tell you nobody is going to come near my children
or take charge of my children more than I am going to. There is
nobody more accountable to my children than myself.
If I as a government going to say, I am going to take
charge of your child whether I know who the parent is or not,
85,000 children that we take charge of have disappeared. We
have a significant problem in our policy. I am worried that
what we are doing is causing harm.
Our first application of the Hippocratic Oath is to cause
no harm. And I am worried that policy, of course, can do great
good. But it also can create great harm.
And I want to make sure that our government is not just
held accountable what we do right but what we do that causes
harm. And so I want you to address--and Ms. Murray, you talked
about prevention. Maybe the biggest thing--in healthcare by the
way, prevention is one of the biggest things we talk about.
If you are not obese, if you are exercising, if you are
taking care of yourself, if you are taking your medications,
prevention will lead to an incredible life compared to without
prevention. In government what I am worried about is we are not
doing the right things to prevent these horrible things. Nobody
can doubt that if 85,000 children disappear and 100,000 kids
are being raped on the way up here by the way, if 100,000
people are already used to being raped and then 85,000
disappear, what have we caused because of our lack of
prevention or because of harmful legislation? I would like you
to address that please.
Ms. Murray. Of course. And again, from a medical
background, it is drummed into you right from school.
Prevention is better than cure. It is better for the person.
But also, as an NHS nurse, it was cheaper for the NHS to
prevent it than to cure it. And so with that approach with
human trafficking, I think prevention is absolutely key. It is
a key pillar for me.
And so as much as I do not feel like I have the authority
to speak into what is going on here, what I can speak into is
certainly identifying key vulnerabilities that have a global
impact. And so being aware of what key vulnerabilities are and
then addressing that at that point. So rather than waiting till
it has happened, rather than waiting till someone has been
trafficked, rather than waiting till have somebody has been
raped.
But instead being aware of the key vulnerabilities and then
addressing that at that point. So again, for me, I always keep
coming back to period poverty because that for me has been
something that I have seen firsthand across both Kenya, Uganda,
and Pakistan have a huge issue where girls particularly are
marginalized because of this. And so it leads them into
different situations of abuse.
I have met girls that have been willing to sell their
bodies just in order to get sanitary products. Now that, for
me, is an area where every single one of us can make an impact
that is so cheap, so easy, and yet makes a life difference to
girls around the world. And so I think for me as much as I
cannot and will not speak into your border issues, but what I
will speak into is being aware of the vulnerabilities that are
out there and then trying to equip different NGO's around the
world that are tackling those key vulnerabilities before it
becomes an issue.
Mr. McCormick. By the way, thank you for mentioning Africa.
Thank you for mentioning sanitary products. I have seen--I am
going to combine my two statements now with the faith-based
which I have been part of a faith-based organization that has
distributed sanitary stuff to Africa and other countries.
I think that is incredibly important because you nailed it.
That is right. People are selling their bodies for necessities.
I think I have been to orphanages or places of faith-based
in about five different nations around the world. And it does
me great joy to see America involved in that in some very real
ways that are consequential around the world. But to talk
about--I do have the authority to talk about what we do here in
the government.
And I just want to make the statement that although we
often mean well, that there are real consequences to bad
policy. I am very concerned about this migration for people who
want to have hope, that want to experience the American dream
which I do not disparage anybody who wants to take part of this
American dream. I have benefited as much if not more than
anybody in the world by this American dream. And I am so
blessed as anybody who comes to America.
But at the same time the amount of evil by evil people who
are preying upon people who try to hope in something greater
that they are experiencing because we have had bad
consequential legislation or lack thereof that has led to a
massive border crossing of humanity that is being pillaged and
raped and put into slave labor and being tormented and
sometimes killed even because we have horrible border policy,
worries me greatly. And I think I would be remiss if I did not
mention that if we do not change it, we are going to see more
death, destruction, slavery, and rape. Those words should never
come out of the words of a U.S. Representative's mouth when it
comes to our consequences for our actions or lack thereof in
America. And with that, I yield.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so very, very much, Dr. McCormick, for
those comments. And I agree with you 100 percent. Eighty-five
thousand kids who have been lost, unaccompanied minors and we
do not know where they are.
It is engraved invitation to the traffickers to exploit. So
thank you. I would like to now yield to Ms. Radewagen.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Talofa lava. Thank
you for sharing your profoundly touching stories with us.
As an indigenous woman, I am truly cognizant how human
trafficking particularly affects indigenous women. I am very
deeply concerned about it. I have a couple of questions here,
and one of them, I think, has been kind of partially addressed
along the way.
But let me just put these two questions out there for all
of you. If you want to address any or all parts of it, that
would be very helpful. And what more can the U.S. Government,
international community do to more effectively deter
traffickers and implement prevention strategies? That is one.
And the other is how has the crime of human trafficking
including geographic trends changed over recent years? How did
the invasion of Ukraine, COVID-19, and other world events
affect human trafficking trends? And how did they impact anti-
trafficking trends or efforts? So I would love to hear from any
and all of you.
Ms. Vandenberg. I can start. Thank you for those very
important questions. Let me start with the Ukraine invasion
because an organization called La Strada which coordinates
many, many services for trafficking survivors and does policy
advocacy all over Europe, in Ukraine, and in the former Soviet
Union.
La Strada wrote a report at the very beginning of the
crisis right after the Russian invasion. And that report, a
very important report, put out a list of all the things that
could be done to prevent trafficking of Ukrainian women and
children mostly who were fleeing a war zone. What they
suggested and what the Europeans by and large have done is
creating paths for people enter those countries and work and
survive.
It is not reasonable. It is not humane. It is not logical
to expect people to come to the country and then have no
opportunity to work and also have no money to support
themselves.
And so I think there needs to be incredibly thoughtful
consideration of what people need while they are waiting for a
war to end, what people need while they are waiting for their
asylum decisions to be made because people cannot live on
fumes. And what we have seen is people who are highly
vulnerable are the ones who then are trafficked. And although
there has been trafficking of Ukrainians in Europe which is
where most the refugees ended up.
There has been trafficking of Ukrainians in Europe. It has
been far less than anticipated because of those protections put
in place for those migrants. The United States has also allowed
Ukrainians to come to the United States as a sponsorship of
people from Ukraine, Haiti, and several other countries. I
would argue that those programs that give people status, that
give people an ability to earn a living, that make them less
vulnerable, those are the policies we need to look at to
prevent trafficking rather than trying to solve it and resolve
it after the harm has already been done.
Mr. Lung. So I will start with something that is not quite
on top of your questions. But you began with identifying as
indigenous people. And it makes me proud of the work that the
United States Advisory Council does.
As you may know, the United States Advisory Council, the
members are only survivors of human trafficking. And Bella is
serving on the council. I served for 2 years under the Trump
Administration.
And when I was on the council, one of the projects we were
doing was trying to identify the underserved populations. And
we included the indigenous people, not just Native Americans
human trafficking is a crisis in that community but also the
outlying provinces and Samoan Islands and these other locations
that are unseen. They are underserved.
They are almost ignored, I think. And so we made an effort
to define that population and to call attention to all of the
Federal agencies that we engaged in and said here is the
underserved populations. Of course, boys were a part of that,
LGBTQI+ community, et cetera.
But indigenous was one of the populations that we
identified that were underserved victims of human trafficking.
So I was proud of the council's work in that regard. One of
your questions was regarding when it was the impact of COVID.
I think that is a massive issue. One of the significant and
most immediate consequences was that when you take away access
to schools and you take away access to church and you take away
access from everything else that makes up a person and their
community, those connections are how we learn about abuse. That
is how we learn about human trafficking.
As Representative Smith indicated, there is this statistic
that is either 80 or 85 percent of victims of human trafficking
have contact with the medical field, in urgent care and in ER
and in other locations. It is significant. And that is one of
the ways we learn about human trafficking is those providers
finding out that human trafficking victims are coming up
through that system through the medical field.
But the same thing is happening in schools, that school
counselors, nurses are encountering, hey, this child looks like
they have been abused or this child is having emotional or
psychological issues and start to investigate what is going on.
But when COVID occurs and suddenly you cannot go to school and
you cannot go to your church and you cannot go to your
community and you cannot engage in all these things. COVID does
not stop human trafficking.
Human trafficking is amplified by things like COVID when
you start isolating a person from all the different parts of
the community that might have been able to engage and prevent
that further. So massive impact. I am fearful that over the
next pandemic we have that legalizes our being isolated from
our communities of support, that was a tragic shame, one that
we will probably encounter for a while.
Just the impact of our children and their educational
experiences. They were essentially kicked out of their own
schools for a year. And families were kicked out of their own
communities or kicked out of their own churches or whatever was
the definition of their community about it just being removed
from those rights that we had but for the pandemic. That was a
massive impact we are going to discover for quite a while.
Ms. Hounakey. Thank you, Judge Lung. Your question on what
the international community can do, I think of that. I cannot
help that I was born in Togo.
If I would, I could. I would not have been--I do not think
I would have. In some countries, it is sort of a barrier to be
born a woman.
And so for me, I think about the work that the Nomi Network
is doing in India and also Cambodia and Touch of Life in Ghana.
Both of these programs are striving to empower young women and
girls. And so the economic empowerment aspect of it is that in
parts of India, in Togo, in Ghana, it is not a privilege to be
a woman.
And so you have to sell your body to have access to food
that may cost 50 cents. And so in India, for instance, what
they do is that for women who are trafficked there, instead of
aspiring to go abroad in order to have a job to feed your
family, they teach life skills, sewing, making shoes or purses
or scarves so that they can sell these items or ship them
internationally so that they can have the financial return from
that to take care of their families. And in Ghana, they have
boys and girls there who are with Touch of Life who have been
trafficked.
They put them in schools so that they can be educated and
earn a living. And these countries, the stories is that if you
were born a girl which any of us can control. I cannot help
that I was born in West Africa, Togo, that I am a woman.
But then some parts of Togo, being born a woman, it is a
disadvantage because then I am not supposed to go to school. I
am not supposed to be educated. I am not supposed to aspire to
become anything because that is a disadvantage.
So to your question, many of you said about empowering,
giving support--financial support to USA Department of Labor,
Department of State, OTIP so that we can continue on that
financial empowerment so that we do not wait until is
trafficked, exploited or in the State of total desperation. I
do not know many of you. I do not know your personal lives.
But I am sure you have been in situations where you are
extremely desperate. And I do not know if you have been in
situations where you are desperate for water, food, or you
sleep on bare concrete, or that you wish an animal would walk
by so you can kill it and eat it raw. I do not know if you have
been in that situation.
But in a total State of desperation, people, children would
do almost anything to survive life, to survive the next hour,
not even the next day, to survive the next hour. And so when we
talk about what the international community can do, when we
talk about geographic location, et cetera, what I think about
is these young girls in India or Cambodia or Togo or Ghana who
are in this very moment that we are here, they are in utter
State of desperation. Maybe some of them have died since we sit
here.
And these are the things that we can do something about. We
can do something about that. We can buy them an extra day maybe
or extra week maybe. So I think it goes back to what are we
doing to support what we believe in.
We believe in human right. We have a moral obligation. And
so are we taking actions to support what we believe is our
moral right--people's moral right? I will yield the floor.
Ms. Murray. I will amen that 100 percent because we are
seeing again and again how there is a huge still gender and
equality where girls are treated as less than. Girls are almost
classed as disposable in some of the communities that we have
been working in. And so, again, just to echo what you just
said, that is a huge problem that we really need to address
from the prevention angle.
And then in terms of COVID, we have witnessed a lot of
children who dropped out of school during COVID because schools
were closed. And obviously in international communities, there
was not an online learning platform available when you live in
a community where you have not got electricity. There is no
online learning.
And so many children were then put to work. Go and be
useful for the family. Go and sell peanuts on the roadside,
whatever it be to help the family.
But sadly since the schools have reopened, many children
never came back because the families then became used to the
children working. And it was considered then as normal. They
are putting toward the family.
And so COVID had a huge detrimental impact and NGO's around
the world including one by one have been fighting that ever
since and still very much are fighting the consequences of
COVID. And then just to go back to Dr. McCormick. I think
churches have a huge part to play in fighting human
trafficking.
And so one by one in the UK has launched a churches against
trafficking campaign where we are working with churches of all
different denominations, all different kind of backgrounds,
uniting the church together to really tackle Goliath. And it is
great to see the kind of key message there is that actually we
need all hands on deck to fight this. And as we come together
as a community, we can bring down the traffickers.
Ms. Hounakey. I also just want to add something quickly.
You mentioned earlier about accountability for cooperation. I
think it is disrespectful of us here when there are companies
in this country who instead of improving conditions for labor,
they are turning into vulnerable populations for cheap labor.
I think that is utter disrespect that COVID happened.
Instead of saying, we are going to improve conditions so that
people can work in the way that dignify us as a country. They
turn instead to say, you know, hmm, where can I find the most
vulnerable people? Oh, children, there you go, people who have
vulnerabilities.
And so for me, when we sit here, we talk about this. The
first thing I think of and the council is going to speak on
this in our next report is what does accountability lies? Is it
DOL? Is it DHS?
Where does our accountability lies so that the next health
global crisis, traffickers are not just like in the
communities. They are turning into organized crimes. And what
can I say about cooperation?
I am not accountable because I am just a staffing agency
and I subcontract out. So how do we hold third party
contractors? That is my question to you all is that, does the
bill also address companies that are hiring or subsourcing out
to find workers and exploit them? What does our accountability
look like for, for instance, staffing agencies who are turning
into third party contractors to continue their work?
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Can I just very briefly before I go to Ms. Wild
for one final question? I will submit some questions to our
distinguished panel. But we do want to get to our second panel.
A moment ago, Dr. McCormick talked about the military. And
I say this as an invitation to anyone who has any information
about anything relative to trafficking to let the TIP office
know, to let us know, to let their local human trafficking
coalition like in New Jersey know because it does make its way
to policy. Right after the TVPA was signed into law, a
reporter/prosecutor who lived in Ohio came in and said he had
evidence and he showed me a video of our troops in South Korea
going to juicy bars as they called them where women who were
either indigenous, South Korean, Philippine, women--some
Russians.
All were being held could not leave. And we even at CP
patrol outside for troop protection outside of these brothels
and it was horrible. So I went to Joseph Schmitz who was the IG
for the Pentagon.
Asked him if he would investigate the Balkans where there
were problems with the war and trafficking with U.N. as well as
others, military. And they look at South Korea. He did an
unbelievably good job and then teed it up to the President of
the United States, George W. Bush, and asked him to do an
executive order that would make it very clear that complicity
of any kind of trafficking is an actionable offense under the
Uniform Code of Military Justice.
Bush went even beyond that and said that even prostitution
as it should be in my opinion as well is an actionable offense
under the Uniform Code of Military Justice. General Tai
[phonetic] who was our Supreme Allied Commander in South
Korea got so into ensuring that there was no complicity and no
enabling of this. And we worked with the South Korean
government to get rid of their so-called entertainment visa
which is bringing women in from the Philippines, so-called
entertainment.
And the military just jumped in lock, stock, and barrel.
And you know one of the greatest ways of preventing was?
Putting places off limits was one. But also having a time limit
as to when people--yes, when you are drunk at 2 o'clock in the
morning and you go into one of those bars, bad things happen.
So it was amazing how the curfew even worked. General Tai
testified twice before our committee and the Armed Services
Committee. And then we put it into the TVPA as an actual
offense in terms of minimum standards in terms of militaries
and peacekeepers. And all because of this reporter/prosecutor
who gave us a tip that we acted upon. So I say to anyone, even
the CSPAN audience, if you have something that we need to be
working on, please tell us.
Ms. Wild. I too want to move on to the next panel. And I am
going to ask you a question, Ms. Vandenberg, which if it is
more appropriate for the next plane, please feel free to say
so. But the TVPA, the Trafficking Victims Protection Act,
provided authority to impose targeted sanctions against foreign
individuals related to human trafficking.
My understanding is that the executive--and I think it has
been around since 2000, I think. And to date, the executive
branch under multiple Administrations has not yet used this
authority, although it has imposed some relevant sanctions
against other authorities under the Magnitsky Act and so forth.
Do you believe that targeted sanctions specifically on this
issue would help deter human trafficking?
Ms. Vandenberg. On the issue of diplomats, I do. And we
have asked for sanctions under Global Magnitsky. But according
to a CFR report and according to the information that I know
that Trafficking Victims Protection Act sanctions have not been
used.
Ms. Wild. Thank you very much.
Mr. Smith. Again, I want to thank this amazing panel for
your insight, your guidance, your passion. You are just
inspiring beyond words. So thank you so much, and we will
submit a few questions for the record if you would not mind
getting back. Thank you.
We'll adjourn for a minute or two, just to say goodbye.
[Whereupon, at 12:06 p.m., the subcommittee recessed, to
reconvene at 12:13 p.m., the same day.]
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, and again, that was a very
inspiring panel of leaders, including survivors. And so the
hearing obviously is reconvened.
And I do want to thank our panel from the Administration
for not only the work that you are doing, but for your
patience. We did want to hear first from those amazing
survivors. And normally the Administration goes first. And you
were very kind and courteous to extend that to them as well. So
thank you.
We have two distinguished witnesses, beginning with the
Honorable Cindy Dyer, who is the Ambassador-at-Large to Monitor
and Combat Trafficking in Persons, leading the United States'
global engagement to combat human trafficking and support the
coordination of anti-trafficking efforts across the U.S.
Government.
Ambassador Dyer, congratulations on your confirmation.
Ambassador Dyer is a human rights advocate and lawyer with
three decades of experience working at the local, national,
international levels to prevent and respond to human
trafficking, sexual assault, and domestic violence. She was the
Vice President for Human Rights at Vital Voices Global
Partnership.
And I would note parenthetically Theresa Loar, with whom I
went to high school with, served on that as well back in the
Clinton Administration--after the Clinton Administration I
guess, timewise. But you served on that for 12 years, where she
worked with local governmental, and civil society leaders in
more than 25 countries throughout Asia, Africa, Latin America,
the Middle East, and Europe on issues related to human
trafficking.
Prior to that, she served as the Director of the Office of
Violence Against Women within the Department of Justice under
President George W. Bush. Ambassador Dyer began her career at
the local level serving as a specialized domestic and sexual
violence prosecutor in Dallas, Texas, for more than 13 years.
And she earned her bachelor's degree from Texas A&M and her JD
from Baylor Law School.
We'll then hear from Mr. Johnny Walsh, who is Deputy
Assistant Administrator at the U.S. Agency for International
Development. Mr. Walsh oversees the Bureau for Development,
Democracy, and Innovations Center for Democracy, Human Rights,
and Governance.
He was most recently a senior expert at the U.S. Institute
for Peace from 2017 to 2021. And previously served in
government in a range of foreign policy roles, including as the
U.S. mission to the U.N. Senior Policy Advisor for the Middle
East and South Asia, and two stints as the State Department's
lead advisor on Afghanistan's peace process and tours of duty
in Iraq and Afghanistan, no easy places to be working.
I yield the floor to our distinguished Ambassador-at-Large,
and I thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CINDY DYER, AMBASSADOR-AT-LARGE TO
MONITOR AND COMBAT TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE

Ambassador Dyer. Thank you so much.
Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Wild, distinguished members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today to discuss the United States Department of
State's efforts to combat human trafficking.
Thank you also for the opportunity to hear the amazing
testimony of the panel before me. I hung on every word. The
time flew by. And it was an honor to get to really listen to
them. Thank you for that opportunity.
Human trafficking is a crime that exists in every country
and affects people of every age, ethnicity, and gender, with
historically and systemically marginalized groups often at
greatest risk. The last few years have been particularly
challenging as we--as you discussed earlier, and seen new
trends in trafficking.
The covid-19 pandemic, inflation, Russia's war on Ukraine,
and disruption caused by climate change have exacerbated
entrenched challenges, such as poverty and economic inequality,
heightened job insecurity in many sectors, diminished access to
justice and services, disrupted global supply chains, and
contributed to new waves of risky migration.
All of these factors and others have heightened the risk of
trafficking around the world. In recent years, we have seen
increased online recruiting and exploitation of trafficking
victims, especially online sexual exploitation of children;
more forced criminality and forced begging cases; and rapidly
growing forced labor in scam centers based in Southeast Asia
that exploit victims worldwide.
The scale of trafficking is vast, the challenge we face
immense, but we are not helpless, and we are using all the
tools at our disposal to face these challenges head on. Today
more than ever, the United States' sustained leadership and
commitment to combating human trafficking in all its forms is
critical.
As Secretary Blinken Stated during last year's Trafficking
in Persons Report launch ceremony, it will continue to take
relentless diplomacy, coordination, advocacy, and commitment if
we are going to stop it.
And as he noted, the United States is committed to fighting
it because trafficking destabilizes societies, it undermines
economies, it harms workers, it enriches those who exploit
them, it undercuts legitimate business, and most fundamentally,
because it is so profoundly wrong.
The State Department's Office to Monitor and Combat
Trafficking in Persons, the TIP office, which I have the honor
to lead, is advancing the United States' global efforts to
combat human trafficking through a Three P Framework: the
prosecution of traffickers, the protection of victims, and the
prevention of human trafficking.
We address the three Ps collectively by objectively
analyzing government efforts, engaging in strategic bilateral
and multilateral diplomacy, targeted foreign assistance to
build capacity of foreign governments and civil society, and
advancing Federal anti-trafficking policies through interagency
coordination.
We also partner with international and civil society
organizations, human trafficking survivors, and the private
sector to advance the fight against human trafficking. It is
this fourth P, for partnership, that strengthens the
effectiveness of the other three Ps in the fight against human
trafficking.
We recognize that all countries can and should do more to
prosecute traffickers, provide justice and protection for
victims, and actively work to prevent human trafficking.
We are focused on implementing key actions to advance an
effective anti-trafficking response, including addressing human
trafficking in the context of the impact of Russia's war in
Ukraine; documenting and decrying human trafficking in the
People's Republic of China, especially Xinjiang and the PRC's
Belt and Road Initiative; highlight Cuba's coercive labor
export program; and supporting diplomatic engagement with
countries hosting these workers to mitigate their exploitation;
engaging with survivors and underserved communities; and
preventing human trafficking in global supply chains and in the
U.S. Government's procurement of goods and services.
We, too, recognize that combating human trafficking cannot
be done alone. We must continue to work collectively across the
U.S. Government with bilateral and multilateral partners and
with local governments and civil society to further advance
anti-trafficking efforts.
Thanks to sustained support from Congress, in particular
through the groundbreaking Trafficking Victims Protection Act
of 2000 and its subsequent reauthorizations, the Department has
a well-established set of tools to draw upon in the fight
against human trafficking.
For more than 20 years, the Trafficking in Persons Report
continues to be the world's most comprehensive resource on
governmental anti-trafficking efforts and is our principal
diplomatic tool to guide relations with foreign governments.
Our most recent TIP report included narratives for 188
countries and territories, and its introduction focused on the
importance of engagement with survivors of human trafficking.
The TIP report is one of our most powerful tools to encourage
governments around the world to improve their anti-trafficking
efforts. Ensuring it remains accurate, objective, and effective
is among my highest priorities for the TIP Office.
Similarly, the targeted U.S. foreign assistance resources
we bring to bear to strengthen the capacity of governments and
civil society is an important element of our three P approach.
Since 2001, the TIP Office has leveraged more than $700 million
in foreign assistance funding to support nearly 1000 anti-
trafficking projects across more than 90 countries to address
both sex trafficking and labor trafficking worldwide.
Through bilateral projects and innovative programming such
as child protection compact, CPC, partnerships and the Program
to End Modern Slavery, our investments have produced tangible
results. Our assistance has helped thousands of human
trafficking survivors receive vital assistance, including
repatriation, psycho-social support, and counseling to rebuild
their lives.
We have also helped dozens of governments to build crucial
legal, policy, and regulatory infrastructure to care for
victims and bring traffickers to justice. In places where
individuals are particularly vulnerable to trafficking, such as
in Southeast and South Asia and many parts of Africa, our
assistance is helping identify victims of trafficking and
ensuring they receive the protection and services they need.
Chairman Smith and Ranking Member Wild, thank you again for
holding today's hearing and this subcommittee's steadfast
commitment to combating human trafficking.
As this subcommittee considers legislation for the 118th
Congress, I look forward to working closely with you and your
staff on legislative efforts to reauthorize the international
provisions of the TVPA, which remain the cornerstone of the
United States' global efforts to combat trafficking.
Ensuring Congress continues to provide the appropriate
tools and authorities we need to effectively tackle
international trafficking challenges today and tomorrow is
essential.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Dyer follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Ambassador, for your
testimony and leadership. I'd like to now turn to Johnny Walsh.

STATEMENT OF JOHNNY WALSH, DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, U.S.
AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Walsh. Thank you so much, Chairman Smith. Thank you,
Ranking Member Wild. Thank you, distinguished members of the
Subcommittee. Thank you for your leadership on combating human
trafficking all these years, the opportunity to be here today.
I just have to acknowledge the first panel, which was just
so unbelievably powerful. I think all of us in the gallery were
feeling emotion rising within us. But also feeling inspired by
how much courage these folks show. They are much more than just
horrible stories that many of them have gone through. They are
smart, they are strategic, they're a total inspiration.
And if you'll allow me, I just also want to thank the
staffs at USAID and at the State Department who work on
counter-trafficking, who are just so smart and so accomplished,
but who lead with their hearts and have done just immense
amounts to help against this terrible scourge.
So, since 2001, with the passing of the TVPA, USAID has
provided counter-trafficking assistance in 88 countries. We
currently support counter-trafficking efforts in 35, and in
many more our larger body of development work contributes in
one way or another that we can unpack to the counter-
trafficking fight.
In Fiscal Year 1922, we obligated $32.5 million into
counter-trafficking activities globally. That is more than 3
million above our earmark, which is an indicator of how
important our missions around the world very organically
consider this work to be.
And beyond our direct counter-trafficking programming, a
very large fraction of USAID's international development work
helps in one way or another, either by addressing root causes
of counter-trafficking, like conflict or corruption or poverty,
or violence, natural disasters, lack of opportunity. Or by
building local capacity in ways that are directly relevant to
the fight against trafficking. For example, by supporting
stronger judicial systems and rule of law.
So USAID's effectiveness, we think, rests on a very strong
in-country presence in the countries where we work through our
missions. And these allow us to design and effectively monitor
interventions that are informed by local context and adaptive
to local context.
So our counter-trafficking work tends to follow, we also
think in terms of four Ps: prevention, protection, prosecution,
and partnership.
So just briefly first on prevention, we work to raise
awareness of trafficking, particularly with the most vulnerable
groups, the most high risk communities, by promoting public
information and education campaigns across source and transit
and destination countries for trafficking.
By way of example, in Colombia USAID is working in very
high risk communities to protect the rights of Venezuelan
migrants who are vulnerable to trafficking. And this program's
raising awareness among this community about different methods
of exploitation. And we complement it with tools like training
almost 4000 service providers on how to address trafficking
issues, gender-based violence. That is just in the past year.
Second, on protection, when we think about protecting
trafficking survivors, USAID's approach, State Department's
approach also is survivor-centered, it is trauma-informed.
Everything that was said in the first panel about that
resonates very deeply with us.
We support around-the-world reintegration assistance for
survivors. That means psycho-social and medical services. It
means legal assistance. It means providing safe and secure
accommodations where people need it. It means providing access
to employment and business opportunities. Whatever survivors
need to rebuild their lives and avoid being re-victimized.
Third, on prosecution, this is especially in State
Department's lane. But we help with the development of anti-
trafficking laws in many countries, with real penalties for
traffickers and protections for victims. We provide victim-
centered training and technical assistance for law enforcement,
for prosecutors, judges, so they are maximally effective in
what they do.
By way of example, we have a regional program across the
Caribbean region to improve the prosecution of TIP cases,
trafficking cases. We are helping countries develop or
strengthen, for example, national referral mechanisms so they
can better screen, identify, and investigate trafficking.
And fourth, on partnerships, there is no way to do this
alone. We, like, work across governments and civil society and
faith-based organizations, advocacy organizations. We are all
in it together. It takes an all-hands-on-deck approach, as one
of the panelists said.
In Senegal, for instance, we bring together all of these
constituencies to work on the problem of forced child begging,
which, I cannot imagine a more vulnerable population to this
problem. But a multi-stakeholder approach is often the way we
can cover the most of it in the country.
Just briefly, to close, in December 2021, USAID revised our
counter-trafficking policy to align with the U.S. Government's
new national action plan to combat human trafficking.
And among other things, the USAID policy emphasizes
survivor-centered approaches, partnering across all these
groups that I have referred to, government and otherwise;
better coordination within our own government, and for that
matter within our own agency; extensive use of evidence in
learning, rigorous data; and clear roles and responsibilities
for staff across USAID.
And I would say that that CTIP Guide and its associated
field guide for missions, they help missions design, implement,
monitor, and evaluate programming more effectively. But they
also serve in effect as USAID's implementing guidance for the
TVPA.
So Chairman, Ranking Member, thank you for calling this
hearing. We share the belief that we are all in it together. We
do not have a monopoly on good ideas. And through this
exchange, I think we can advance the fight against these
issues.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walsh follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Mr. Walsh, thank you, pardon me, so much for
your testimony and leadership. I do have a number of questions,
and hopefully we can do a second round so I could yield to my
colleagues.
In my opening I did mention, Ambassador Dyer, the
importance of getting it right. I mean, I actually had three
hearings about how we got it so wrong in 2015. And I would say
that Kari Johnstone, who testified at one of those hearings,
that the information that was provided in the TIP Report itself
was right on, it was very accurate.
And but when it--the recommendations went up the chain of
command, for other reasons totally disassociated with human
trafficking, Tier 3 countries were upgraded to either watch
list or to--nobody went to Tier 2. But they were upgraded.
And China, Oman, as I mentioned before, Malaysia was, and
that was because they thought they were going to get into TPP
at the time, which was making its way through Congress and the
Administration. But it was just like these are not chips to be
given away. This is all about speaking truth to power in an
absolutely honest way to the best of all of our abilities.
And so I want to thank Kari, because she did a great job.
But when it went up the chain of command, we did lose. And as I
said before, Reuters were the ones who broke the story after
doing anonymous interviews with the TIP Office, that things got
changed.
Yes, they do make the final call, the undersecretaries, the
Secretary of State especially. But they should just be, you
know, what you do, and we did this when we wrong the original
law, especially with the lag between the findings in TIP and
you know, what action might be taken pursuant to sanctions.
This is all a Administration call, and they may want to
take other things into consideration. I hope they would not,
but the TIP report has to be sacrosanct.
And I remember talking to a number of countries, and I will
not name them, who were so angry because they were Tier 3, and
they said others were elevated to watch list and therefore not
sanctionable, and their records were worse.
So the argument isn't really against the TIP Office or you.
It is really against what happens when it goes up the chain of
command. And if they do it again, I will have them, or try to,
come and give an accounting for that.
I remember I asked Secretary Kerry, I said who made the
decision. He said, ``Well, the buck stops with me.'' It was a
full committee hearing. And it shouldn't be that way. Oman got
it. Why? Because they had been very involved with the nuclear
negotiations, providing--they were conduits with Iran and
United States and our partners in Europe.
But that shouldn't be a reason to give them a benefit where
it is not earned. Same way with Cuba, because we had a
rapprochement with opening up an embassy.
And parenthetically, I have tried to get into Cuba my
entire career. And I thought when we looked like we were moving
toward a, or we had diplomatic relations, I went there with the
Ambassador.
And he said but you got to know this: we tell you the
people you cannot see. I said what? You know, that is not what
human rights work is all about. So I never got the visa. But
they were elevated as well.
So I just would hope that, you know, the people up that
chain of command will realize that, you know, Congress gets fed
up with that kind of manipulation. Speak truth to power and let
it go where it goes. So that is just a encouragement for you,
because I know you will get it right in the report. It is the
next steps that I worry about.
Let me also ask, if I could, and obviously with Title 42
ending last night, you know, the--we have differences of
opinion of what we should do vis-a-vis the border.
I voted for the Secure Fence Act of 2006, which established
everything that we thought would have mitigated illegal
crossings. Chuck Schumer voted for it, Hillary Clinton voted
for it, as did a lot of other people, you know, on both sides
of the aisle. There were 80 votes in the Senate for it back in
1906.
And I think we would have a different dynamic today had
that wall been built. And I am all for legal immigration, I all
for refugees, you know, well-founded fear of persecution,
getting the help that they need.
But one of the concerns, and I know the New York Times
underscored this, that the HH--Office of Refugee Resettlement
similarly has lost some 85,000 migrant children, unaccompanied
minors.
And I am wondering, you know, last year in the TIP Report,
and obviously the U.S. is included in the TIP Report, it was
pointed out to the government, our government, continued not to
mandate human trafficking screening for all foreign national
adults in immigration detention or custody. And did not screen
for trafficking indicators among the people it removed.
It also that on the prioritized recommendations, screen
all--this is you, TIP Report, saying this--screen all
individuals in immigration detention or custody for human
trafficking indicators. And I am wondering if Homeland Security
has followed through on that, on that recommendation made by
you.
And if you could, do we know what has happened to those
children? Is there any further insight? I mean, we all, you
know, we have heard from victims today. To think that there
could be tens of thousands of victims who--and children--that
we just do not know where they are.
Ambassador Dyer. Thank you, sir. First of all, certainly I
personally and the JTIP Office share your deep concern about
not only not only unaccompanied migrant children, but about all
migrants and making sure that those individuals who are making
a perilous journey are protected, and they are protected
specifically from trafficking.
I know that the also really the addressing the challenges
of irregular migration, specifically providing protection to
refugees and asylum seekers and offering lawful migration
pathways are key priorities for the Administration.
And I actually noted that they esteemed Martina Vandenberg,
during her previous testimony specifically, who is of course
such a recognized authority, specifically called out offering
lawful migration pathways as a key way of reducing
vulnerabilities. That is absolutely a part of this plan.
We recognize that forced displacement in the western
hemisphere has reached historic highs. And I am also mindful of
Bella's comment earlier about individuals who, in her words,
they are fleeing an utter State of desperation. And so we look
at this crisis through that lens of sympathy that many of these
individuals are fleeing an utter State of desperation.
The Administration is working closely with the interagency
group, both the Department of Homeland Security, which I think
has the answers to many of the questions that you guys were--
very good questions you were bringing up here today, Health and
Human Services, and Department of State.
For our role, at the Department of the State and at the
Trafficking in Persons Office, we see our highest and best
purpose as making sure that we are protecting vulnerable, and
that they are being screened, to your excellent point, Mr.
Chairman.
So one of the things that----
Mr. Smith. But are they? I mean, that was made a year ago
in your recommendations.
Ambassador Dyer. We are--we agree with you that all
migrants should be screened. I will have to defer to my
colleagues at DHS with regard to, especially now that Title 42
is expiring and Title 8 will come back up. I will defer to them
on----
Mr. Smith. Can you get back to us?
Ambassador Dyer. Yes.
Mr. Smith. So we know what, you know, in terms of your
interpretation of what they are doing?
Ambassador Dyer. Absolutely. And certainly it is the
perfect time to be asking the question because we are having a
change in the authorities under which we will be working.
I do know as it pertains to screening, some of the work
that the Trafficking in Persons Office is doing specifically in
the region, in the western hemisphere, specifically encourages
screening of migrants so that they do receive protection and
services. And to the great point of the panel earlier,
preventing individuals who are at great risk of trafficking
from becoming actual victims of trafficking.
We have programs in the region specifically focused on
screening and prevention. We have regional programs that are
not just one country focused, but a whole-of-region approach,
because we recognize this is a crisis that not one country can
solve.
I think it is important to know that we have $80 million in
trafficking programming in the western hemisphere, which is the
region that has the highest amount of programming, which I
think speaks to the Administration's focus and sincere concern
about this issue.
In addition to the international programming money that we
have there, we are also engaging in bilateral diplomacy, making
sure that our allies and colleagues in the region are doing
what they need to do to stop trafficking in their countries
before it goes further.
We are also making sure to call these efforts out in the
Trafficking in Persons Report. Please know that I share your
emphasis and your focus on getting it right and on integrity,
not only because this year's report will have my name on it,
but also because for 12 years, I worked with NGO's in the field
who relied on that report to speak what they saw.
And it serves as a microphone to those advocates and
activists. So please know that we share your deep concern about
that.
We are really working aggressively to address this crisis,
using all the tools that you have given and paying a specific
attention to make sure and also through the interagency working
group. So thank you for the opportunity to address that.
Mr. Smith. If you could, do we have any idea, I mean, the
news media and others sometimes conflate the coyotes are
bringing people up, getting paid to do it. And I am just
wondering, because I haven't seen the specifics or the
breakout, maybe you have it, how many of these individuals
either it evolves into a bona fide trafficking situation,
particularly for you young people?
You know, we do not want terms being imprecise, because
obviously it is dangerous when you pay somebody to bring you up
and they turn out to be part of a cartel. But how many of them
are--do we have any idea how many cases of human trafficking we
have?
And I'll say why that is so important. When we did the
original TVPA, we got a State Department number of about 50,000
people coming in every year. That was their best estimate, and
nobody knew. But I put it into the findings of the bill.
The Washington Post took me to task a couple years later
and said how, well, it is more like 17,000. Well, that is
because there was a reappraisal that we done, and CIA I think
was involved with it as well. And it was a big page-one story
that we were exaggerating.
So I am one of those who absolutely loathes exaggeration,
pro or con, do not undercount, do not overcount. But really, if
you could, how many of these cases are human trafficking? And
what is becoming of these kids? You know, and adults, not just
kids, the adults as well? Do we have anything on that?
Yes, Mr. Walsh.
Mr. Walsh. No, I was just going to say I would not want to
misspeak on the number. And perhaps you have one. I think that
we should come back to you for the record with our best
estimate of that.
Mr. Smith. If you could. Because again, we need accuracy on
this as well. Maybe you embed it into the TIP report this year,
just so you know, it gets enshrined in, you know, the findings
of the TIP report.
And again, we have done TIP work bipartisan all along. When
the Republicans do not do it right, you know, we got to speak
out. When the Democrats do not do it right, we need to speak
out. It is all about the victims.
So I cannot tell you how concerned I am about how many of
those people, particularly the women and children, are enslaved
today. So that number would be extremely important, and as soon
as you could provide it, it would be great.
And what is being done to help them. You know, because
again, there needs to be a all-hands-on-deck in every country,
every State I mean. But especially in places like Texas and
Arizona.
Let me just ask you very briefly about the DR Congo. You
know, I did a hearing a year and a half ago as Chairman of the
Tom Lantos Commission on cobalt, I mentioned it earlier today,
and the fact that they are using slave labor, especially child
labor, to extract it and then send it to China for processing.
The DR Congo, I know there is an MOU with them, and I do
not think, you know, that is--there is all kinds of corruption.
They do not have a foreign corrupt practices act, so we know
that, you know, people are being paid off, or we have every
reason to believe.
And those mines are being run by the Chinese Communist
Party. There is almost no salary to speak of. When Americans
had one of those mines--since then, it has been dropped by like
60 percent in terms of the salary.
And the kids, you know, that is just wrong on every level.
So I am just wondering if that is something you are looking at.
And if is reminiscent in a way with what happened in DR Congo
with peacekeepers. And I actually went to Goma, met with the
peacekeepers and of course met with government people and above
all with victims.
When the deployment there, they are there to protect and
there you have these U.N. peacekeepers. We had four hearings on
that before and after the trip. And frankly, the U.N. said they
wanted zero tolerance. Kofi Annan put out a strong statement,
and Jane Hall Lute came and testified, who was running point
for that for the U.N.
And you know, one of the areas we called zero compliance,
with the zero intolerance effort. So on peacekeeping in
general, your thoughts on who well we are doing or not doing
with regards to these, you know, what hundred thousand,
whatever the number is today of U.N.-deployed and other AU
peacekeepers as well.
Because we got to stay at that one, you know, because
unfortunately when in country, the sense of entitlement and
abuse is very strong. And you have a vulnerable population. And
remember in DR Congo, these were 12-and 13-year-old kids, for a
meal, who were being sold.
Ambassador Dyer. Thank you so much for your concern. We
appreciate you raising this issue. And definitely we are paying
close attention to the situation in the DRC. And also, to your
good point, the broader influence that PRC has in African
countries, recognizing that it is not just a uniquely DRC-
focused problem. That this is PRC influence.
I also appreciate that not only is it the child victims,
but there are other adult victims of trafficking that are in
equally deplorable situations. We are absolutely using the
interagency working group through the President's interagency
task force and the SPOG. But also through the forced labor
enforcement task force.
The JTIP Office represents the State Department on that
task force to make sure that we are really taking a close look
at any goods made with forced labor. That has actually been one
of the biggest things that I have had an opportunity to do
since joining the office in January.
We are also, I wanted to mention you had also touched on
the peacekeeping and the important to really focus on this. I
will tell you that as someone who has been reading the draft
narratives for 2023 TIP report, this is included.
We are absolutely monitoring peacekeeping and whether or
not peacekeepers are engaging in or contributing to trafficking
in persons. That is definitely something that we call--we are
monitoring and calling out in the Trafficking Persons Report.
Mr. Smith. Didn't you say it's gotten--the IML, the
International Megan's Law, if you could. Again, that took 8
years to get passed, a whole lot of pushback like you cannot
believe, on that one.
And we know that these child sex tourism trips are
occurring. We did put a redundancy, not just on the reporting,
that they have to tell us where they are going or face a very
significant jail sentence, identical to Megan's Law.
Well, long story short, we also put in the language in that
there will be, what do you call it, indicia in the passport.
You open it up, the people at border security, name of the
country, opens it up. It says, ``The Bearer has been convicted
of a crime against a child.''
And we worked very closely with the Kankas, that is Megan's
parents, in getting that into law. As well as with members of
our--of the Senate who were very helpful on that. But long
story short, we understand that there is--there is a lot of
people who are not being included in this.
You know, passports are good for 10 years, and you know,
whenever there is a new passport, it ought to have that stamp
on it so that that out of an abundance of caution for children,
you know.
Because we know why many of these--the proclivities to
recommit these crimes is so high. In a way, you are doing them
a favor, you are making it less possible that maybe they will
do it, you know, that week of renting a child in Brazil or
wherever.
So I just wondering if--what do you think we should be
doing to advance this? Because I am very concerned, you know,
there is up to 900,000 registered sex offenders in the U.S.
That is a lot of, you know, potential people. Not all of them
are child sex offenders, but many of them are.
Ambassador Dyer. Well, first of all, we absolutely----
Mr. Smith. Yes, I just missed one part of the main point.
Critics argue that the State Department should be capturing
more through passport applications by adding a question on it
about this, you know. Right now that does not happen.
Ambassador Dyer. First of all, we are absolutely supporting
the goal of this legislation. As a former sexual violence
prosecutor, I am very well aware of the recidivism rates, and I
appreciate your leadership. And certainly, exterritorial child
sexual exploitation and abuse is awful, and we need to do
everything that we can to prevent it from happening.
I know that Department of--DHS has the Angel Watch Program,
which really oversees it. And I believe that my colleagues at
the Department of State in diplomatic security are the
Department of State colleagues that oversee that. For the
specific mechanics of how it works, I would need to refer to
those experts.
But I will say that in addition to us supporting the goal
of this and recognizing it is important, the Department does
also call this out in our Trafficking in Persons Report. And so
it is definitely an issue that we recognize the critical
importance of and are following.
Mr. Smith. But we are looking in our legislation of
changing from may register to shall. And so hopefully you could
be helpful on that.
You know, I have met with the Angel Watch people, I have
gone and sat with them. They are great, they are wonderful. But
when they do not have, you know, the full help from the
Department of State, it becomes more difficult, you know, if it
is more permissive standard.
I ask Mr. Walsh, if you could just, then I will yield to my
distinguished colleague. We hear that there have been reports
submitted to the IG on USAID's mission staff potential
involvement and with--and participation in human trafficking. I
do not know to what extent that is--where that is.
But as you know, and I appreciated you saying how, you
know, you brief and you train service providers and of course
staff members as well to be very cognizant of being part of the
solution, not part of the problem. And I am wondering if you
could shed any light on the IG's investigation.
Mr. Walsh. So the nature of an IG investigation, I would
not have a whole lot of insight into where it stands right now.
I would say that generally USAID over the last few years has
really tried to batten down our hatches internally.
We have implemented a code of conduct across the Agency
that starts with fairly obvious things like an emphatic
prohibition in any involvement in any way in trafficking or
forced labor by staff, by implementing partners, by
contractors.
But goes beyond that to in effect render all members of
USAID eyes and ears to be watching for this, to be conducting
due diligence as we work with an immense range of stakeholders
who might well see something or finds themselves adjacent to
such an act.
And that every single member of USAID now in the first few
months that they are on board takes training on this so that
they know what to watch for, the different forms that
trafficking can take. Because it is not always common knowledge
for people coming in.
So it is a very intensive internal process. And that is
even in advance of any findings the IG comes out with.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Ms. Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to ask a quick question about funding for the
trafficking hotline, that my understanding is only minimally
funded by the U.S. Government and done more by Polaris Project
on a private basis. Is that correct? Do you know? If not, I
will find the answer somewhere else.
Ambassador Dyer. That is overseen by--Health and Human
Services oversees that.
Ms. Wild. OK, that was my next question----
Ambassador Dyer. I do know that they receive some
Government----
Ms. Wild. So it is an HHS program, OK.
Ambassador Dyer. But it is--but you are correct that it
is----
Ms. Wild. Underfunded.
Ambassador Dyer. Polaris that operates it.
Ms. Wild. OK, thank you. So Ambassador, I haven't been--I
have been trying not to be too obvious with my scrolling, but
what I have been scrolling about on my phone is the topic of
today's hearing. And I was looking up the TIP reports that
State has done.
And I think you made reference to the fact that your name
will go on this year's report, and I look forward to that. When
does that generally come out, or when----
Ambassador Dyer. The TVPA requires that that report be
issued to you by June 30. So that looming deadline----
Ms. Wild. Soon, you are working on it.
Ambassador Dyer. Is super--it is in my sights.
Ms. Wild. OK, that is great. And I am just going to ask my
staff right here to make sure that we get a copy of it when it
comes out.
So but my question, as I was looking through the 2022
report, I was--most of the countries that I saw in Tier 1 did
not surprise me. I was a little surprised to see the
Philippines in Tier 1. And I am the author of the Philippine
Human Rights Act and have a particular interest in what goes on
there.
But, and I will learn more as I evolve on this subject
about the criteria and so forth. But my question to you is how
often do the regional bureaus within the State Department or
other parts of the executive branch argue for modifying, and by
that I mean improving, a country's ranking based on
considerations having nothing to do with the TVPA prescribed
criteria?
I mean, I assume that happens. And I will just ask you the
second part of the--well, let's go with that first.
Ambassador Dyer. I will say the TVPA sets out very clearly
what can be considered in a country's tier ranking and what
cannot. And I can assure you that the conversations that we
have are firmly rooted in the----
Ms. Wild. Language of the TVPA.
Ambassador Dyer. Parameters set by the TVPA.
Ms. Wild. OK.
Ambassador Dyer. And one of the good things is that we
actually, we do not just communicate or consult with those
regional bureaus at TIP report time. We actually have ongoing
relationships with them. And so that actually does make it much
easier.
These are not discussions--it is kind of like an employment
review. You do not bring it up for the first time at the
review. It is something we should have talked about before.
And so we have really pretty good ongoing conversations
regarding not only the TIP report, but also programming in that
country. And then we are very mindful to remain within the
parameters that are very clearly set by the TVPA.
Ms. Wild. So then I take it form that response that no
matter how much internal lobbying there might be by a region or
a bureau, the criteria is strictly applied?
Ambassador Dyer. That is correct. In all of my
conversations and in all of our conversations, we are focused
on the minimum standards that are very clearly laid out for us.
I actually, I love being able to have it, because I can often
tell--and I actually use this when I am explaining to other
governments why they may or may not have a tier ranking that
they like.
Actually, the clarity that is in the TVPA is like a
security blanket for me. And I can say this is what I am here
to look at. And it is very grounding, so thank you.
Ms. Wild. I am glad to hear that. So I guess that leads me
to my next question. And how often do you have to interact with
other countries' governments on the issue of their TVPA
ranking?
Ambassador Dyer. We actually, we will insert ourselves into
any conversation that they will let us slip in the door. We
actually engage really very, in robust bilateral engagement
with countries, as well as multilateral.
I think that of note, just yesterday, the Secretary was
having a meeting with a foreign minister from a country, and we
were able to attend the meeting too, to make sure that this
issue is front and center, even if that was not the topic of
conversation.
I think that a lot of that is due to the hard work that you
guys have done with the TVPA. It is relevant in so many
conversations, and we definitely will squeeze in the door
whenever we can.
Ms. Wild. OK, I am glad to hear that. And I will, as I
said, watch closely for this year's report.
Mr. Walsh, I wanted to switch gears a little bit. I have
the honor of representing the district that counts one of the
largest Ukrainian-American populations in the United States.
And on their behalf, my constituents' behalf, and I hear from
them often, I do want to ask about Russia's horrific ongoing
invasion and Russian forces' use of various forms of
trafficking.
It has been pretty extensively documented. I am not sure
that it has been documented to the true extent that it has
happened. But we had another hearing, and I think we had a full
committee hearing on the issue of children being kidnaped and
taken to Russia. And I just think the numbers are probably--
that we are seeing are lower than what has actually happened.
But that is based on anecdotal evidence.
So can you just tell us generally how USAID is working to
address this situation?
Mr. Walsh. Yes, absolutely. So long before Russia's further
war into Ukraine began, this was a major area of anti-
trafficking work for USAID and for others. And we had a partner
government and many partners across civil society to work, I
would say across the four Ps.
That included helping Ukraine set up its own huge national
hotline that created a lot of reporting mechanisms to detect
trafficking.
Ms. Wild. And do they have that in place now?
Mr. Walsh. They do. And so there were many other things we
were doing before, but the hotline, for example, is one of many
preexisting things that we have contributed to in Ukraine that
were essential when the true crisis hit early last year.
And so we had, you know, 6000 people I think it was working
on like reporting through this hotline, able to receive, you
know, reports of emergencies in a moment when everyone felt
they were in an emergency.
So some of those parts of the problem are very hard to get
at. A kid who is being held in essentially captivity in Russia.
But it does mean that there is a large network to help
Ukrainians contact and reabsorb kids who can make their way
back into Ukraine, to provide survivor services.
It is not just people who are trafficked by way of Russia.
I mean, when everyone is displaced, that creates vulnerable
populations across the board. And so I think this was actually
true in a lot of our programming on Ukraine, but the
preexisting was such a valuable foundation to really turn into
high gear.
Ms. Wild. So let me just, you have led me to another
thought, which is would it make sense for the United States to
work with other countries who perhaps do not have this kind of
infrastructure in place that you mentioned that Ukraine has, or
had before the war? Because it seems to me that that is a vital
component of this worldwide.
I do not know how many countries have that kind of
trafficking infrastructure. Can you give me any idea of like
the percentage-wise, or?
Mr. Walsh. I would struggle to numericize it, but you are
describing the core ethos of our work on trafficking, you know.
And in countries either where the host government is very
serious about this problem, or where the USAID mission/embassy
is every exercised about it, or both, what we try to do is
essentially a whole-of-society approach that is in the first
instance preventive by nature.
But it is also very much about protection of survivors. It
is about upholding and strengthening the rule of law to go
after violators.
And you know, the 35 countries I mentioned where we are
currently operating, the almost 90 where we have done this, it
very often is setting up these systems of resilience that can
catch kind of every kind of trafficking in principle. And like
it works better in some than in others.
We try to be very agile when there is an opening in a
country. So the Chairman mentioned the DR Congo before. Not
everything is easy in DR Congo. But one thing where there might
be a moment of opportunity is they have reconstituted their
anti-trafficking commission nationally. It seems keen to work
with each of us.
And so at a moment when the world is focused on especially
labor abuses in the Congo for much larger geostrategic reasons,
we have this tool that like we can build out into a resilient,
multi-stakeholder approach to really chip away at the problem.
Ms. Wild. OK, that is good to know. And I would love to
continue the engagement with our committee on what we might do
here in Congress to continue to assist in that endeavor, both
in Ukraine and the rest of the world, other countries that need
it.
My impression at least from our full hearing that we had on
the situation with the children in Ukraine was that the
Ukrainian Prosecutor General is incredibly cooperative and
proactive. Am I right in that assessment?
That was very encouraging to see. I do not know whether
that is--you have that in other countries that you work with or
not. But I am glad that that is the case.
So I hope that if there is anything that we can do, and
believe me, I fully understand that Ukraine is not the only
place that we need to focus on this problem, it just happens to
be right now the most visible one I think. And of course I have
a special interest because of my constituents.
But if there's other things that we should be looking at to
improve from our vantage point, please bring it to our
attention.
Thank you. I yield.
Mr. Smith. Mrs. Radewagen.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you very much, Ambassador Dyer and
Deputy Administrator Walsh, for appearing today.
USAID has many comprehensive documents, including the CTIP
policy, CTIP field guides, CTIP code of conduct and standard
operating procedures to guide your work on combating human
trafficking among staff and abroad. Assuming that USAID has
human trafficking experts that have read and understand the
TVPA and related laws, why is the term sex work used throughout
these documents?
Mr. Walsh. I think that the term sex work has come into
increasingly common use across a wide range of fields,
including lots of parts of the trafficking apparatus of the
U.S. Government.
I would say that we are not assigning value judgment to it
when it has been used, and that the official position of the
U.S. Government, including this Administration, is that sex
work is--that is not meant to connote legitimate, legal work in
a place. The legality of it in different places obviously
varies.
But we are not trying to soften or wash the term, because
the U.S. Government has a fairly clear position on it.
Mrs. Radewagen. But is USAID promoting sex work as a legal
form of employment rather than treating it as exploitation, and
in cases where there is recruiting, harboring, transportation,
provision, or obtaining of a person for the purpose of a
commercial sex act, as sex trafficking in accordance with TVPA?
I mean, is the Administrator aware of how this approach
compromises the safety of U.S. taxpayer beneficiaries?
Mr. Walsh. We are absolutely not promoting this work in any
of our programming. That is not policy, that is not the intent.
And if ever we were to find an inadvertent, you know, ancillary
effect of one of our programs that had that effect, we would
address it immediately.
Our focus is on the immense amount of trafficking that
infiltrates this industry in many different ways and trying to
provide every kind of support, especially to survivors, and
accountability to perpetrators that we can, and that we can
help our local partners to do.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Just a couple of final questions, and
again, thank you for your patience. It has been a long hearing,
but I think very, very enlightening and a good one.
Let me just ask you with regards to, you know, JTIP has
obviously create the Human Trafficking Expert Consultant
Network. And I am very glad that you include victims the way
you do.
And I am just wondering if there is any attempt or any
plans to try to hire, bring in and make full-time employees in
very strategic positions, those who, again, have that lived
experience and have overcome what they have overcome.
Ambassador Dyer. First of all, I completely share your
focus on survivor leaders and those with lived experience. They
absolutely are critical in every phase of our program. Not just
in drafting the law, yes, but also in how we implement it. And
it has been an honor to get to work with members of the
advisory council, even in the highest levels, during the most
recent President's interagency task force.
And Brenda Myers-Powell from the advisory council spoke and
sat at the table right there up next to all the cabinet-level
people. It was just amazing, and such a change from when I
began work in 1993. So just, it is wonderful.
We actually are considering ways to better inform all of
our work in all ways, whether it is through hiring, whether it
is through using the consultant network.
We currently do I think the best training that I have ever
personally attended was when I came onto this job, and it was
offered for the Trafficking in Persons Office. And it was
provided by a member of the network, the consultants' network.
And it--she did it in connection with another expert. It is
tremendous, and we are actually, that is one of the priorities
that I want to make to make sure that we are fulsomely
including survivor voices in all that we do. And I promise it
will remain a priority for me.
Mr. Smith. Can I ask you how many people are working the
TIP Office today? And obviously you have people in every
embassy that, you know, are doing data calls and the like. But
in the actual TIP Office?
Ambassador Dyer. I believe, I can correct this is I am
wrong, I believe it is about 86 full-time folks and about 27
additional consultants. We also have some Foreign Services
officers. And I can certainly let you know specifically.
Mr. Smith. That would be great.
Ambassador Dyer. And you are right that we do work really
closely with our colleagues, the Foreign Service officers that
are out in the embassies that are kind of the boots on the
ground. And it is a great honor to get to collaborate with
them.
Mr. Smith. I know OMB may not like this question, but is
your budget sufficient? Could you do more with more resources?
Ambassador Dyer. Well, you know, I am not going to turn
down piles of money. But you know, we--I feel like----
Mr. Smith. Kind of like what is not being done because of
lack of resources.
Ambassador Dyer. You know, we are able--we are a lean,
mean, machine, and we are doing really--we are fully meeting
our mandates. We do have a terrific staff with amazing
expertise. I have specifically enjoyed getting to work with
some of our Foreign Service officers too.
So we appreciate your focus on us. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Walsh?
Mr. Walsh. On the question about the role of survivors, in
our agency, the first thing I would say is such is the
prevalence of this crime, and that any agency as large as USAID
will absolutely have a great many survivors working for it.
There is no way around that.
Second, we very formally and in a concerted way incorporate
survivors in designing basically anything that has to do with
counter-trafficking. I think it was Mrs. Hounakey who said
nothing about us without us.
So for instance, our global anti-trafficking policy that we
put out was based on consultations with survivors who we
brought in for a very rigorous back-and-forth exchange.
Versions of that are true in program design around the world.
And I would just say as a--we often see these very virtuous
follow-on effects from that. And as one example, in Bangladesh,
we did a major anti-trafficking program that included like
training in a vast range of services to help survivors of the
sort we have talked about.
The essentially graduates of that program self-organized
into their own national advocacy network of survivors, and they
are pushing the Bangladeshi Government, which is receptive in
many cases, in a way that we ourselves could not possibly have
achieved. So it is this virtuous cycle.
And then in terms of--I am not going to wade too much into
funding questions, but I would just refer back to my very first
point, which is that we do not have centralized, dedicated
anti-trafficking money at USAID. And so missions are looking at
their discretionary budgets and making choices among uniformly
virtuous causes.
And it is very clear year after year that the demand for
anti-trafficking resources is quite high. Like it easily
outstrips every year the minimum of the earmark. And you know,
we in the center are trying to inform those programs and make
them as effective as possible.
But it reflects not just the scale of the problem, but the
ardor to do something about it that we see, without having to
tell people, just organically around the world.
Ms. Wild. I'm so sorry to step out, Mr. Chairman. I have to
get to a 1:30. But I am going to be following up. Thank you so
very much for holding this.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so much.
Just one or two final questions and we will submit a few
for the record as well.
When the interagency meetings occur, does Homeland security
get into--and Justice Department as well--into what the
prosecutors are doing or not doing, U.S. Attorneys are doing or
not doing to make this a priority?
I mean, every time, every Administration, we have tried
very hard to say please make this a priority. I met with my own
U.S. Attorney a number of times. I said please make it a
priority. You know, and if it comes from the Attorney General,
it is a priority.
And I am wondering especially with these huge numbers of
migrant children, unaccompanied minors, and others who
potentially, and I really hope you will get to us ASAP on those
numbers. I mean, we, I believe, have a catastrophic situation
underway now where they have gone missing and they are being
exploited.
Well, some very heavy focused, and you are prosecuting--
focused on law enforcement, you know, with the idea of it is
all about rescuing. But let's go after the perpetrators of
these crimes, we'll make a difference. Does that get a
discussed when you have the interagency meetings?
And again, you know, with all due respect, when certain
people say, oh, the border is secure, well it is not. And
evidence every day of huge lines of people coming in. And I
couldn't be more worried about those individuals.
Like I said in the opening, I have heard from several
people, including the President of Guatemala, on how many of
these women and young girls are sexually assaulted. It is just,
it is outrageous.
And so you know, what is discussed at those interagency
meetings about we need to go after this with everything we have
got. One thing that Bush did when he first got elected--first
began, because it took him a while to implement the TVPA, and I
am sorry to say that.
But then when he did, he did rescue-and-restore conferences
all over the country. And I went to a few of them. I went to
one in Newark, he did one in Tampa, he did.
And it was to get the U.S. Attorneys, the local
prosecutors, everybody on the same--the NGO's and the whole
faith-based community. It was to say make it a priority, make
it a priority. Because quickly priorities become less so if we
do not ever promote it.
And I am just wondering if, you know, just asking again, is
it a priority enough among all the different agencies?
Ambassador Dyer. Thank you so much for asking. And as you
were asking the question, I was wondering if you were
eavesdropping on a meeting that I had yesterday. Because not
only do we talk about it at the President's interagency task
force, and certainly at the senior policy operating group.
But we have one-off meetings where we go into deeper
detail. I had a meeting with Hilary Axam yesterday, who I am
such a fan of. She is the head of the Human Trafficking
Prosecution Unit at DOJ. She is also the new national
coordinator there at DOJ on human trafficking.
And she and I were talking about this literally yesterday.
So we are absolutely focused on it. We are absolutely trying to
make sure also, another that we talked about, I think that
interestingly I know that people who previously have been in
this role have been prosecutors.
But they were all Federal prosecutors. I was the prosecutor
that had a can of corn propping up one corner of my desk
because it was in Dallas County and we did not have all the
resources. But many of our State and locals certainly are
getting these cases.
And we were even strategizing about that. So please know
that--and I do not want to over-emphasize prosecution, because
I know deeply all that I could not do as a prosecutor, which is
why I worked at a shelter for 9 years and at a non-profit. But
certainly we have a role to play, and certainly it is top of
mind as recently as yesterday.
So thank you so much.
Mr. Smith. Not to belabor the point, but is there any
ballpark number as to how many of the illegal migrants are
trafficked?
Ambassador Dyer. You know, you bring up such a good point.
The migrants are deeply at risk of trafficking, for the very
reasons that you spoke about earlier.
Many times they have debt that they have paid someone to
help them get across the border, and then once they arrive they
are not able to pay off that debt. They are ending up in a
place in a debt bondage. That is one of the most common ways.
I do not have specific numbers for you, but I will
definitely commit to looking to see if they exist. Because we
certainly recognize that migrants are deeply vulnerable and for
the reasons we talked about. And I am happy to look in to see
if there is actual data for that.
Mr. Smith. And again, I do not want the conflating, I am
asking it and not be conflated with smuggling----
Ambassador Dyer. Correct.
Mr. Smith. And that kind of thing. Because we need a clear
line of demarcation, even though sometimes smuggling
matriculates into a trafficking situation. But more--we need to
be specific. And I appreciate you getting back to us ASAP.
But we do have a final question from my--or questions from
my friend and colleague, Mrs. Radewagen.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Actually, I have two questions. Here is the first one. Mr.
Walsh, the revision of the CTIP policy in January 2021 was for
the first time survivor-informed by paying survivor consultants
for their expertise and review of the document. What steps did
USAID take to ensure the revision in December 2021 was also
survivor-informed?
The policy highlights a survivor-informed approach. What
steps are being taken by USAID missions to co-create local CTIP
programming? And are survivors being paid for their consulting
services to USAID?
Mr. Walsh. So that policy is essentially the guidance that
Washington puts out to any field mission that wants to do
trafficking programming or to renew it. And is conveying best
practices, overall priorities. And that is true across a range
of fields.
If there was one foremost principle that we tried to imbue
in this version of the CTIP policy it was the survivor-centered
framework through which we want every program to be designed. I
would not describe that as new per se, but it is our foremost
priority.
And so now when missions do design these programs, we will
send top-notch expertise to help them, to help convene
survivors, to inform the local context of any given program----
Mrs. Radewagen. Excuse me, Mr. Walsh. My time is short.
Mr. Walsh. Oh, forgive me.
Mrs. Radewagen. You are not answering my question. What
steps did USAID take to ensure the revision in December 2021
CTIP policy was also survivor-informed?
Mr. Walsh. I fear I am missing which part I am not
answering. We consulted with a group of survivors. I could come
back to you on who was paid versus not paid. I would have to
look into that, and I would not want to misspeak.
But they were central drivers of the core ideas in that
policy, and by extension, our programs are designed thusly.
Mrs. Radewagen. And with your permission, Mr. Chairman,
Ambassador Dyer and Mr. Walsh, smaller, survivor-led anti-
trafficking organizations often encounter difficulty in
applying for and competing with large development organizations
for U.S.-funded programs because Federal contracting procedures
are complex, to say the least.
How can JTIP and USAID develop systems for anti-trafficking
implementation that help these smaller organizations, such as
set-asides for survivor-led organizations or increasing the
number of smaller grants that only grassroots organizations are
likely to bid for?
Likewise, is there a CTIP senior accountable officer at
USAID to help with these efforts? If so, why--if not, why not?
Ambassador Dyer. I actually really appreciate that
question. I worked at a non-profit where we focused on
supporting locally led women leaders and women's organizations.
You are so right that they were unable to apply for not just
JTIP funding, but just any Federal Government funding. It is
very complicated.
One of the things that I think that JTIP has done a good
job of is many of our programs require like a local
organization. And so some of our big programs, we have the main
organization is a big non-profit that is able to do the
financial disclosure and they have a DUNS number, and they have
all these things.
But they are required to work with a local in the field.
And so that is one of the ways. And you know, the benefit of
that is a lot of times those local NGO's actually get on-the-
job capacity building, with the hopes that they can at some
point learn to do it themselves.
And so that is something I know that we have done that with
our program to end modern slavery, which we are very grateful
to Congress for helping us. I know that we have done it with
that program.
And I know that one of the things that I am really focused
on is, you know, as a former grantee of the JTIP Office, is
making sure that we are really making sure that our programs
are not only available to those smaller NGO's, but also that
they are--that our grantees are survivor-led.
And so really focused on that, so thank you for your
question.
Mrs. Radewagen. Administrator Walsh?
Mr. Walsh. Sure. First of all, localization is one of our
top priorities across areas. It certainly applies here. There
is a continual balance between ensuring accountability for the
money that we put out into the field with minimizing the burden
on implementers such that small organizations, local
organizations, are as able to compete for and to implement
programs with our money as any large conglomerate.
And so I think we look at as No. 1, the percentage of money
that is actually going to small organizations, and we are
trying to continue to move that up.
But it is--localization on CTIP programming or anything
else is also about local voices designing it, per our last
topic, is about how involved are they in monitoring the program
as it goes on. So helping us gather very localized data so that
work we do is actually tailored to local needs.
And by way of one example, I would say in Malawi, there is
an organization Global Hope Mobilization, really inspiring
group, that is the direct implementer of a real whole-of-
society approach across really all the four Ps. There is no
international intermediary. It is just a very effective group
of locals in a country that is experiencing like a democratic
and human rights opening. So a really important moment to take
advantage of.
And then in terms of you asked about the senior official
accountable, on some level I regret to note that I suppose it
is me. We are, in the center we are vastly smaller than JTIP in
terms of a dedicated anti-trafficking office.
That is somewhat balanced by the fact that our missions are
implementing in a more decentralized way the vast majority of
USAID's on-the-ground work.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much.
Again, I want to thank you for your leadership. I thank you
for your patience. This is a very long but I think a very, very
incisive hearing from first our first panel and now the both of
you. So thank you for that.
I do want to thank CSPAN for being here. You know, they
have independent editorial judgment as to what they cover,
because there are so many hearings on Capitol Hill and so many
events that they can go to.
They are here today, and they have provided an opportunity
for Americans to hear you and to hear our extraordinary panel
that preceded you and the victims who just poured out their
hearts about what they went through. But also what they are
doing to mitigate and hopefully end this horrible scourge of
human trafficking.
So thank you. The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:23 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
