- PROTECTING EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES FOR PEACE AND STABILITY IN THE INDO- PACIFIC

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING EMERGING
TECHNOLOGIES
FOR PEACE AND STABILITY IN THE
INDO-PACIFIC

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE INDO-PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 17, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-75

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-137 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania      BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California      GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida      AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee      TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas      DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa      SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas           Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio      GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida              JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida      JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      GABE AMO, rhode Island
JOHN JAMES, Michigan      BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director
Sophia Lafargue, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Indo-Pacific

YOUNG KIM, California, Chair
ANN WAGNER, Missouri AMI BERA, California, Ranking
KEN BUCK, Colorado                         Member
MARK GREEN, Tennesse ANDY KIM, New Jersey
ANDY BARR, Kentucky BRAD SHERMAN, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADAWAGEN,  GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia
American Samoa WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida

Daniel Markus, Subcommittee Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Fick, Hon. Nathan, Ambassador at Large, Bureau of Cyberspace and
Digital Policy, U.S. State Department..........................     6
Kang, Honorable C.S. Eliot, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
International Security and Nonproliferation, U.S. State
Department.....................................................    13
Rozman Kendler, Honorable Thea D., Assistant Secretary, Export
Administration, Bureau of Industry and Security, U.S.
Department of Commerce.........................................    23

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    49
Hearing Minutes..................................................    51
Hearing Attendance...............................................    52

PROTECTING EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES FOR PEACE AND STABILITY IN THE INDO-
PACIFIC

Wednesday, January 17, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Indo-Pacific,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:08 p.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Young Kim (chair of the
subcommittee) presiding.
Mrs. Kim of California. The Subcommittee on the Indo-
Pacific of the Foreign Affairs Committee will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine our existing
bilateral and multilateral engagement on critical and emerging
technology with our allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement. I want to
welcome everyone to the Indo-Pacific Subcommittee's hearing
entitled Protecting Emerging Technologies for Peace and
Stability in the Indo-Pacific.
The Indo-Pacific region is important for U.S. technology
for at least two reasons. First, Chairman Xi Jinping has made
technological superiority a cornerstone to the Chinese
Communist Party's national and military competitiveness. In
2013, Xi said during an inspection of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences that high-end science and technology is a national
weapon in modern times. Since then, through his military-civil
fusion and Made in China 2025 programs, the CCP has aimed to
catch up and surpass the United States in technological power
and strengthen the People's Liberation Army through reform and
technology. Successive U.S. Administrations have concluded that
it is in the interest of our national security to impose costs
and degrade certain capabilities for the Chinese Communist
Party.
Second, to maintain the United States' technological
advantage, we must work with other like-minded and technology-
advanced countries, like Japan, South Korea, and Singapore.
These are three of the top-ten countries in the world with that
expertise. We must cooperate with these countries on research
and development, manufacturing, and implementation of high-end
technology. At the same time, like-minded countries need to
work with us to ensure the technology we share or jointly
develop do not end up in the hands of the CCP.
For example, I was proud to introduce the KOALA Act. This
provides a defense technology trade exemption for one of our
closest allies in the region, Australia. The KOALA Act
contributed significantly to the final implementation law that
passed in the Fiscal Year 2024 NDAA. The cooperation of this
magnitude will help to deter the Chinese and advance our
national security but only if states implement the law
correctly and provides the exemption to which the Australians
are clearly eligible for.
Today's hearing will tackle these issues. We will discuss
several tools today that are vital to ensuring our collective
technologies do not fall into the hands of the CCP, like export
controls, sanctions, and research security. We will also look
at existing and proposed bilateral and plurilateral structures
that can work together to reduce regulatory barriers to
technology cooperation and to harmonize export controls. So I
look forward to our fruitful discussion on what more we and our
allies and partners can do on these fronts.
In just a few days, I will be leading a bipartisan CODEL to
Singapore, Malaysia, and Vietnam to discuss PRC influence in
the region, South China Sea issues, and technology cooperation.
In preparation for this trip, I would particularly like to hear
from our witnesses what Southeast Asian countries are doing to
protect critical technologies from the hands of the CCP and
where there are opportunities for more tech cooperation with
these countries.
So I thank our witnesses for your willingness to testify
today, and I look forward to a detailed discussion about U.S.
Government efforts in this regard.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member, the gentleman
from California, Mr. Bera, for your opening statements that you
have.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Chairwoman Kim, for holding this
hearing and for your partnership on this important topic of
Protecting Emerging Technologies to Ensure Peace and Stability
in the Indo-Pacific. This subcommittee hearing is a nice
complement to the full committee hearing that we had earlier
this morning looking at outbound investments and how we can
protect our outbound investments but also address the national
security concerns that affect not only us but our partners in
the West.
As we saw in that hearing this morning and I think as
you'll see in the subcommittee hearing, this really is not a
partisan issue. This is an issue that Democrats and Republicans
both in this Congress but across Administrations understand
and, you know, whereas two decades ago, we would have hoped, as
China built a middle class and it developed an entrepreneurial
class, that it would become a responsible member of the global
economic order. Unfortunately, we have seen out of Beijing,
we've seen out of Xi Jinping, particular policies, and one that
we talked about this morning was kind of the civilian-military
policy doctrine which really blurs the line on that
cooperation.
I do want to point out and applaud the Biden Administration
for supercharging our export control policy in the face of the
tremendous geopolitical change and challenge that we see in the
Indo-Pacific. The Administration's expansive export controls go
further than any previous Administration. And in 2022, BIS
imposed unprecedented export controls to restrict the PRC from
obtaining advanced computing chips, develop and maintain some
super computers, and manufacture of advanced semiconductors.
These controls were expanded this past fall; and, again, I
think it is a step in the right direction.
I look forward to hearing the testimony of the witnesses
today. I look forward to working with the chairwoman, as well
as the chairman and ranking member of the full subcommittee and
across Congress. I think, as the chairwoman rightfully pointed
out, it is not just our policies, but it is the policies of
working with our like-minded, like-valued allies as we look to
both protect these important investments, important
infrastructures, but then also as we work with the private
sector to make sure they understand, it was pointed out in that
civilian-military policy doctrine that they may be looking at
making reasonable investments in the PRC, that how those
investments may undermine our own national security. So I think
Congress does have to do a job helping the private sector
understand where those investments may have detrimental
effects.
So, again, I look forward to hearing from the witnesses.
And with that, I will yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, ranking member. Other
members of the committee are reminded that opening statements
may be submitted for the record.
And we are pleased to have a distinguished panel of
witnesses before us today on this very important topic. Mr.
Nathan Fick is the Ambassador at Large for the Bureau of
Cyberspace and Digital Policy at the U.S. State Department. Mr.
C.S. Eliot Kang is the Assistant Secretary for the Bureau of
International Security and Nonproliferation at the Department
of State. Ms. Thea Rozman Kendler is the Assistant Secretary
for the Bureau of International Security and Nonproliferation
at the State Department, Department of Commerce. Thank you for
being here today. Your full statements will be made a part of
the record, and I will ask each of you to keep your spoken
remarks to 5 minutes in order to allow time for member
questions.
So let me now recognize Ambassador Fick for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. NATHAN FICK, AMBASSADOR AT LARGE, BUREAU OF
CYBERSPACE AND DIGITAL POLICY, U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT

Mr. Fick. Chairwoman Kim, Ranking Member Bera,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of the
Department of State, thank you for the opportunity to speak
with you today. I'm honored to provide an overview of our work
advancing U.S. technology policy priorities globally and our
efforts to strengthen U.S. technology leadership in the Indo-
Pacific.
At the State Department, I oversee the organizations that
lead and coordinate the department's work on cyberspace,
digital policy, digital freedom, and emerging technologies: the
Bureau of Cyberspace and Digital Policy, known as CDP, and the
Office of the Special Envoy for Critical and Emerging
Technology, S/TECH for short. Building on years of bipartisan
work to establish these organizations, Secretary Blinken
launched both in 2022 as part of a comprehensive effort to
consolidate our technology diplomacy efforts, to upgrade and to
elevate and integrate them, and to make technology issues more
central to U.S. foreign policy.
We thank the committee for your sustained support of this
mission, particularly for the creation of a dedicated
Cyberspace, Digital Connectivity, and Related Technology,
that's CDT for short, for an assistance fund in the recently
passed 2023 State Department Authorization Act. At our core, we
believe in technology's power to solve major challenges and
support American prosperity and global security.
As a Marine combat veteran, a technology entrepreneur, an
executive, and now the first person to hold this role at the
State Department, I see tech innovation as an increasingly
foundational source of geopolitical power driving more and more
of what is and is not possible in our foreign and national
security policies. Technology is increasingly ``the game,'' and
we must engage in this geopolitical competition boldly and with
urgency on behalf of our values and our interests. We face
well-resourced and technologically capable competitors and
adversaries who possess authoritarian visions and use long-term
technology-based strategies to advance those aspirations.
These competitors most notably include the PRC, which
wields all elements of national power to try to bend the rules-
based international order in its favor, to build economic and
technical dependencies, and to lock in long-term influence.
A key tenet of our work is building digital solidarity with
allies and partners across a growing set of technology topics
of high geopolitical significance, including innovation and
industry leadership, cyber incident response capacity building,
information communication technology supply chain
diversification, trusted digital infrastructure project
support, and the rights respecting uses of technology. These
efforts cut across the digital ecosystem from basic
cybersecurity protections to 5G networks to other aspects of
digital infrastructure, including data centers, low-earth-orbit
satellites, and undersea cables, as well as to the new
generation of enabling technologies, including AI.
Foreign assistance is an important element of our
engagement on these topics. For example, we plan to leverage
foreign assistance funding to support a major undersea cable
and cybersecurity resilience project together with Australia
and private sector partners to connect strategically important
Pacific Island countries to trusted digital infrastructure. And
I will be in the region next week, I think just shortly after
you, Chairwoman Kim, to build on this work.
The creation of the dedicated foreign assistance fund in
the State Auth is an important step in streamlining work like
this Pacific Island project, providing the U.S. with the
agility to move at the speed of technology and, importantly,
also at the speed of our competitors. Funding assistance
instrument will be critical to making long-term investments in
Indo-Pacific stability.
More broadly, we've launched high-level dialogs on critical
and emerging tech with Singapore, the Republic of Korea, and
India, together with White House and interagency partners. We
also engage closely, of course, with our Quad partners on
critical and emerging technologies and the cybersecurity of our
critical infrastructure. We support elements of AUKUS with
Australia and the United Kingdom. We are strengthening U.S.
diplomatic capabilities internally, and I do not want to lose
sight of this, with a goal of having a trained cyber and
digital officer in every U.S. mission around the world by the
end of next year.
The U.S., thanks to our robust innovation economy, is the
world's leading provider of cybersecurity and digital
technology products and services, and the State Department
works on behalf of the American people to promote stability and
trusted digital ecosystems around the world. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today. I look forward to your
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Fick follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Ambassador Fick. I now
recognize Assistant Secretary Kang for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. C.S. ELIOT KANG, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU
OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND NONPROLIFERATION, U.S. STATE
DEPARTMENT

Mr. Kang. Chairwoman Kim, Ranking Member Bera, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee----
Mrs. Kim of California. Turn your mike on, please.
Mr. Kang [continuing]. Thank you for inviting me to testify
today on this very important topic. The mission of the State
Department's Bureau of International Security and
Nonproliferation, known as ISN, is to prevent, protect, and
promote. We prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, WMD. We protect critical and emerging
technologies, such as AI, which can be used to develop or
improve WMD. Their protection stems from national security
concerns, not economic competitiveness.
To the extent that we promote, however, we promote civil
nuclear cooperation. It is important that civil nuclear
cooperation are conducted under the highest standard of safety,
security, and nonproliferation. So we leverage diplomatic
relationships, negotiate and implement nonproliferation
agreements and treaties, offer capacity-building programs, and
work multilaterally on export controls and sanctions.
ISN partners closely with the Office of the Special Envoy
for Critical and Emerging Technology and the Bureau of
Cyberspace and Digital Policy. And we work hand-in-glove with
the National Security Council and their interagency. ISN also
has a deep and longstanding partnership with the intelligence
community. For almost a decade, ISN has been sounding the alarm
about the Chinese Community Party's growing ambition to develop
the PLA through its civil-military fusion strategy, MCF for
short. This MCF strategy which merges the PRC's and commercial
innovation ecosystem decreases our confidence in the ability to
ensure that U.S. technologies exported to PRC will be used only
for legitimate civilian uses.
So we have been coordinating with the interagency and
especially with our indispensable partner, the Commerce
Department's BIS, to counter CCP's MCF strategy. This
partnership includes developing advanced semiconductor export
restrictions to the PRC, such as the October 22 and October 23
rules on AI-enabling chips and chip manufacturing equipment.
And as diplomats, ISN works tirelessly with our allies and
partners on export control diplomacy, some of which we do not
discuss beyond our confidential diplomatic exchanges.
Thanks to the work of this committee and a strong
bipartisan supporting Congress, the CHIPS Act and its
International Technology Security and Innovation fund, known as
ITSI, are making a profound contribution to this diplomatic
effort. With ITSI, we are developing the Semiconductor Protect
Fusion Cell to counter MCF by providing access to open source
data to better recognize and raise awareness of the problematic
PRC end users and disrupt any illicit activities. ISN also
manages other foreign assistance programs to strengthen
regional regulatory systems, improve implementation and
enforcement measures, and enhance research security among
partners.
While PRC looms large in our work, we are also concerned
with Russia. As Russia's illegal war in Ukraine continues, we
are tackling Russia's growing ties with the DPRK. Just last
week, in response to the deliveries of DPRK's military
equipment and munition to Russia, ISN used its sanctions
authority to block proliferation networks facilitating these
transfers. And we are vigilant about what Russia may be
providing to the DPRK in exchange. After all, nothing is free.
Everything has to be paid for.
Chairwoman Kim, we recognize that critical emerging
technologies have global supply chains. Hence, ISN takes a
global approach to protecting these technologies, including
engaging like-minded partners in multilateral diplomatic
efforts and expanding bilateral cooperation.
However, the Indo-Pacific is particularly important, a
region rich with technology innovators and critical suppliers.
So ISN is deeply involved in the larger effort to maintain a
free and open Indo-Pacific by promoting cooperation with our
allies and partners. Indeed, ISN's critical work on AUKUS
Pillar 1, a game-changing partnership, exemplifies our
commitment to the region.
Thank you again for inviting me to testify today. I look
forward to your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Kang follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Assistant Secretary
Kang. I now recognize Assistant Secretary Kendler for her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. THEA D. ROZMAN KENDLER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY,
EXPORT ADMINISTRATION, BUREAU OF INDUSTRY AND SECURITY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Ms. Kendler. Thank you, Chairwoman Kim, Ranking Member
Bera, distinguished members of this committee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify about the Biden-Harris Administration's
ongoing efforts at the Commerce Department's Bureau of Industry
and Security, or BIS, to advance U.S. national security and
foreign policy interests, protecting emerging technologies for
peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific. I appreciate the
opportunity to work with you and your teams on these critical
issues to ensure that we are effectively countering China's
military modernization and human rights abuses and identifying
and controlling technologies critical to protecting our
national security while we also degrade Russia's ability to
wage war in Ukraine.
We cannot accomplish these goals without collaboration with
allies and partners on multilateral export controls and the
expansion of international technology partnerships. Through our
bureau's licensing officers, trade data and industry analysts,
and our growing international policy and intelligence analysis
teams, we identify sensitive U.S. technologies that would give
our adversaries an advantage, and we develop the policies and
strategies to protect such technologies. We assess the
availability of foreign technology and the effectiveness of our
controls, as well as foreign end users that require extra
scrutiny. We then adopt controls that address both technology
and end users.
Technology controls are based on the performance
specifications of an item. The country-wide controls we put in
place on advanced semiconductors and semiconductor
manufacturing equipment to China are an example of these
technology controls.
End user controls deny items to particular entities. We
impose these controls through additions to our Entity List when
there are specific and articulable facts that an entity is
engaged in activities contrary to U.S. national security or
foreign policy interests. Of the 787 China-based entities
currently on the Entity List, 303, more than a third, have been
added in this Administration. Many in the last 2 years have
been added for companies that are shipping items to Russia.
For approximately 70 years, a foundation of U.S. dual-use
export controls has been the government's close work with
allies and partners to coordinate our policies to control the
spread of weapons of mass destruction and conventional weapons.
These efforts are steered through four multilateral regimes
and, for most of the world and certain of our partners, these
regimes are so intrinsic to global export control systems that
those country's domestic laws may not conceive of controls
adopted through any other mechanism.
Through technical expert meetings and other international
engagements, we at the Bureau of Industry and Security are
committed to the important efforts of these regimes. With our
interagency partners, including the State Department, BIS has
developed countless proposals over the years to add new items,
remove items, and modify parameters of the control lists. At
the same time, we recognize that the world has changed
dramatically since establishment of these regimes after the
cold war. The digital revolution complicates strategies built
around the control of tangible goods.
In this difficult moment, we are fortunate to have vibrant
export controls collaborations, particularly with the partners
in the Indo-Pacific. They have joined us in the global export
control coalition of 39 major economies that have adopted
substantially similar controls on Russia following Putin's
brutal invasion of Ukraine, an effort that has reinvigorated
our connections with export control counterparts in the Indo-
Pacific and Europe.
We also welcome partner engagement in safeguarding our core
technologies, particularly in the face of China's challenges to
global peace and security, including through the military-civil
fusion strategy exacerbated by China's form of government in
which the government can coerce companies to act contrary to
their interests when it is in the government's interest.
Through export controls we are working to cultivate trusted
ecosystems that will allow emerging technologies to develop in
a safe space. Export controls set a clean line about who we
trust when it comes to dual-use technologies. Through these
ecosystems, partners that share our values, our commitment to a
rules-based order, and our security outlook benefit from trade
in these technologies, while others do not.
In the Indo-Pacific, our partnerships are key to fostering
trusted technology ecosystems, combating economic coercion, and
preventing the misuse of sensitive technologies to undermine
our national security and that of our allies and partners. We
maintain a host of formal and informal international
engagements with other implementing agencies across the region,
which I look forward to discussing with you during this
hearing.
U.S. export controls have been and will always be most
effective when deployed in conjunction with those governments
that share our values. As technology evolves, we will protect
our national security by coordinating with our closest allies
and partners, ensuring that the fruits of advanced technologies
are applied to our shared security and prosperity.
Thank you. And I welcome your questions.
[The statement of Ms. Kendler follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Ms. Kendler. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning, and I want to
start by saying that last year the Administration decided to
remove the Chinese Ministry of Public Security's Institute of
Forensic Science (IFS) from the Commerce Entity List.
So, Ms. Kendler, since you were before our Oversight and
Accountability Subcommittee and testified recently, can you
explain to us why IFS was added to the Entity List to begin
with?
Ms. Kendler. Congresswoman, I appreciate your concern about
this entity and its activities in China, its placement on our
Entity List. I cannot speak specifically to an entity beyond
the information that is in the public record. We have national
security concerns and foreign policy concerns associated----
Mrs. Kim of California. From my understanding, IFS was
added due to their egregious abuse of the Uyghur Muslims
through genomics. So, Ms. Kendler and, Mr. Kang, please chime
in, can you explain to us the interagency process that led to
the decision to remove IFS from the Entity List?
Ms. Kendler. Congresswoman, it is very important to us at
the Commerce Department to--our regulations require that we
have unanimous interagency agreement whenever an entity is
removed from the Entity List. It is very important to us that
we have the equities of all four departments that participate
in the End-User Review Committee, that's Commerce, Defense,
Energy, and State, and that we consider the equities of all
four of those agencies whenever an entity is removed from our
list.
Mrs. Kim of California. Mr. Kang, do you want to add to
that briefly?
Mr. Kang. Yes. What I could add is that tackling fentanyl,
which has been declared a national emergency by the President
and is one of the top Administration priorities to get a handle
on a problem, a crisis, that kills up to more than 100,000
ordinary Americans, and removing IFS allowed us to get better
cooperation from China.
Mrs. Kim of California. Can we talk about that just a
little bit? I want to know exactly when the decision was made
to remove IFS. Like, how far in advance was that decided from
the time President Biden with Xi Jinping in San Francisco
November of last year? I know they had a conversation. They
talked about establishing a working group to tackle the
fentanyl and all of that, but I am specifically interested in
knowing when that decision was made.
Ms. Kendler. Congresswoman, we at the Commerce Department
do run the process for the End-User Review Committee, and I
should note that we have around a hundred entities on the
Entity List that are related to human rights abuses in Xinjiang
specifically. We also have entities on the Entity List that are
there for other human rights abuses in China.
Specifically as to the timing, that's something that is in
the interagency process, and I would be happy to get back to
you within the bounds of our legal authorities of what we can
provide.
Mrs. Kim of California. Well, I want to emphasize, as you
mentioned, the human rights should not be a bargaining chip to
secure high-level meetings with the CCP. Rather, it should be
the priority of meetings with our CCP counterparts.
Let me move on. You know, we have a series of multilateral
engagements with our partners and allies in the Indo-Pacific on
technology issues, including the Quad working group on critical
and emerging technology and the ASEAN Committee on Science,
Technology, and Innovation. Ambassador Fick, this is something
that I think you can speak to. Do we have the diplomatic
structures to engage in discussions at the working group level
on specific sectors of technology cooperation? If so, what
sectors have a stronger diplomatic framework or which are
lacking?
Mr. Fick. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the question. I
believe that the creation of these new organizations at the
State Department is an effort on our part to do exactly what I
believe you're asking, which is ensure that we have the
organization, the expertise, and the senior representation to
engage with our counterparts bilaterally and multilaterally on
these topics everywhere of geopolitical significance to the
United States.
I will be representing us, for example, at the ASEAN
Digital Ministerial Meeting in Singapore in a couple of weeks.
And the areas where we have the closest cooperation include
cybersecurity capacity building, ensuring----
Mrs. Kim of California. Will you be leading our discussions
on our end on all of these structural engagements?
Mr. Fick. I am not sure that I can categorically say all,
but I do represent us on the digital ministerial track with
ASEAN, the G20, the G7, and other similar organizations, yes.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. My time is up, so now
let me recognize Ranking Member Bera for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thanks, Chairwoman. Maybe this is a
question for Ambassador Fick. Certainly, the focus of this
subcommittee hearing is investment export controls on critical
technologies. An area that I have been thinking about a little
bit, which I think is a bit harder to get a grasp on, but I
think, Ambassador Fick, with your experience in the private
sector and the technology sector, should we, as Congress, be
thinking about, you know, where funding for venture companies
come from and if let's say the PRC is funding dollars in
venture that are then going to U.S. startup companies that are
looking at critical technology? Like, how do we track that? How
should we think about that because that also seems to be an
area of potential vulnerability where it looks like a U.S.
startup is working on this, but outside investors could--is
that an area we should be spending time thinking about and how
should we think about that?
Mr. Fick. Congressman, it is a bit outside the remit of my
current role, but I did spend 10 years as an operating partner
at a venture firm, and so it brings some perspective to the
question. I think it is important that we think about these
investment issues both inbound and outbound and, certainly, PRC
or other investment dollars as limited partners into these
funds usually come with strings attached around required
partnerships or technology transfer. And so a congressional
role in shining a light on that, making it clear, and
encouraging investors in the United States to look a layer or
two deeper would, in fact, make us more secure.
Mr. Bera. Ms. Kendler.
Ms. Kendler. Thank you. This is a really important topic to
be discussing. I was out in Silicon Valley last fall having
conversations exactly on this topic, making sure that we have
educated nascent U.S. startups about export controls because,
no matter where the money is coming from, the technology flow
is controlled under export controls, depending on the nature of
the technology or the end recipient of the technology. So those
laws remain in place as implemented by Commerce with our
colleagues regardless of who is investing in the technologies.
Now, I completely agree that we should be very concerned
about whether strings are attached, and that is certainly
something that we can look at also in the CFIUS context when
you have foreign enterprises acquiring U.S. entities. Here, it
is a little bit harder to see, but our export controls will
apply to the technology regardless. And we have a
responsibility at Commerce, which we are deeply engaged in, to
educate all sorts of enterprises, small, medium, well
established, nascent about those controls.
Mr. Bera. And let me ask a similar question on outbound
investment. I think what I call the civilian-military policy
doctrine, I think you guys were calling the military-civilian
fusion policy. You know, legitimately, U.S. companies, U.S.
investors may be looking for investment opportunities overseas
and so forth, and, you know, I asked this question earlier
today: how should we think about, you know, again, legitimate
investment that not necessarily understanding that that
investment in a foreign entity, let's say an entity in the PRC,
then potentially is developing technologies, et cetera,
creating talent that may inadvertently undermine U.S. national
security interests. Again, you know--yes, please.
Ms. Kendler. I think export controls provide an excellent
guidepost here. I share your concerns about money going into
enterprises that may be working on indigenous technology that
we have barred for export. And so the two issues go hand-in-
hand in terms of the most critical technologies that we are
focused on protecting and that may be, for individual companies
or funds looking at investing, that may be a starting point.
Mr. Bera. Does Commerce have the authorities to restrict
those funds from being invested or are those new authorities?
Ms. Kendler. We do not control the flow of money at the
Commerce Department or in the Bureau of Industry and Security,
but any technology would be controlled under our authorities.
And I anticipate, in any sort of outbound regime, that it would
be our technical expertise in the Bureau of Industry and
Security that would be applied.
Mr. Bera. My sense is that is an area where it is not
outbound technology that is going there but it is a startup
company in an adversary that, you know, is drawing in external
investment, but now they are working on some of those
technologies indigenously. Secretary Kang, Ambassador Fick, if
you want to answer
Mr. Kang. Yes, if I may. There is clearly a glaring gap.
Export controls could do so much because it basically deals
with tangible goods. And with regard to even these passive
investments but particularly in the case of venture capital,
you also transfer intangible knowledge and know-how, and this
gives a company in China or wherever access to U.S. origin or
Western origin knowledge base.
And another thing. As someone who has worked
nonproliferation for over a decade, there are so many fund
companies that are dealing with, seemingly, appearing very
legitimate with legitimate support, but they are fronting for
either the military or intelligence services in the case of
PRC.
Mrs. Kim of California. Your time is up. OK. Let me now
recognize Ms. Wagner, Representative Wagner, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Madam Chairman. And I thank our
witnesses for their service. China intends to supplant the U.S.
as the global leader in critical and emerging technologies at
any cost: bullying, bribery, and outright IP theft. If China is
allowed to achieve dominance in the technologies that will
shape our future, American communities and businesses will, in
fact, suffer. Our allies and partners also risk losing access
to safe, secure infrastructure and technologies that we all
rely on for communications, for transportation, it could be
medical care, national security. I could go on and on about
other essential industries.
The Indo-Pacific region is a global center of technological
expertise and advancement, and the U.S. must work in lockstep
with Indo-Pacific countries to safeguard sensitive cutting-edge
technologies and reduce technological dependence on China.
Assistant Secretary Kang or Kendler, what sector or
subsectors of technology are the Indo-Pacific countries most
concerned about and how would you rate their ability to protect
these technologies from adversarial nations? Where are the
biggest gaps in the Indo-Pacific to protecting critical
technologies?
Ms. Kendler. Congresswoman, when we think about critical
and emerging technologies here, we are guided primarily by the
19 categories of items that are identified by the White House
in the critical emerging technologies list, and that is each
one of those technologies is a space where we have export
controls----
Mrs. Wagner. Where are the gaps? Where are the biggest
gaps?
Ms. Kendler. I think that we have room to improve, but
there are no big gaps. I would not identify big gaps. I would
say that we have controls in each of these spaces. Our controls
are generally defined in terms of technological floors, so as
innovation occurs in these areas, they are already captured.
And if they are not, we are working with our allies and
partners, particularly those who are members of, I would say in
this space, the Wassenaar Arrangement, which includes quite a
few Indo-Pacific----
Mrs. Wagner. Well, here is a gap that I see, and,
Ambassador Fick, let me try this with you. Today, submarine
cables transport 99 percent of intercontinental data. These
cables are important. The fact that China is planning to
increase its role in the development and the repair and
production of undersea cables, what measures are your
departments taking to undercut these plans and which pose, I
think, a serious threat and gap to the secure flow of data
around the world.
Mr. Fick. Congresswoman, I agree very much with the premise
of your question. I am going to the South Pacific next week on
an undersea cable project to advance trusted connectivity
across the South Pacific. I believe that, when our adversaries
tell us what they intend to do, we should believe them.
Mrs. Wagner. Yes.
Mr. Fick. We watched them run a playbook with telecom. They
are running the same playbook with every other technology area,
including undersea cable. Unlike in telecom, we still have a
national champion manufacturer here in the United States of
trusted undersea cable, and we need to be careful to ensure
that that company remains vibrant. And we have a comprehensive
effort underway to put trusted undersea cable in place across
the South Pacific.
Mrs. Wagner. I am very concerned about Chinese companies
repairing or even having access to undersea cables owned by
U.S. carriers, to be honest. Are we concerned about this?
Mr. Fick. I was recently at the cable repair depot in Sri
Lanka asking exactly those questions about the Indian Ocean.
Yes, we are concerned about it; and, yes, we believe that that
is critical infrastructure that the U.S. needs to protect from
end to end.
Mrs. Wagner. And let me, just to followup again, what Indo-
Pacific regions and partners are most dependent on China for
undersea cable development and how specifically is the U.S.
collaborating with our partners to reduce dependence on PRC-
controlled infrastructure and promote safe and secure
infrastructure?
Mr. Fick. One of the best things we can do is get trusted
cables deployed. That is, U.S.-or Japanese-or French-
manufactured cables that are owned and operated by the
hyperscale technology companies that are generally American
companies. So we are working to get those projects in place
with branching units that will allow the development of spurs
to islands and nations where we maintain military and other
relationships.
Mrs. Wagner. Well, these cables, as I said, they transport
99 percent of intercontinental data, so this is a big, big
concern that we should have, especially their access and
repairing. So my time is expired. I yield back to the Chair.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I now recognize
Representative Sherman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I want to applaud the Administration for the
action you have recently taken. As Mr. Fick points out, China
is using all elements of national power. Their biggest element
perhaps is their enormous trade surplus with the United States.
It is over a third of a trillion dollars every year, and that
means that it is 150 percent of what they spend on the People's
Liberation Army. So just what they create as a trade surplus,
they could finance one and a half People's Liberation Armies.
In the trade effort, we have tariffs, they have tariffs.
Theirs are higher. But they also have the capacity to orally
instruct their companies not to buy from the United States. We
cannot do that. No Member of Congress is going to call a major
company in their district and tell them who to buy from. And so
we have to match with tariffs. What they can do under the
table, we won't. We will continue to run a giant trade deficit,
and that means that every decade China will have an extra $3
trillion.
We are not at war with China. This is not a zero-sum game.
If China develops better teddy bears more efficiently, I am
happy for that. If the Chinese people live better, that is not
a bad thing. We cannot just have entity controls because you
can create a front company, as Mr. Kang points out. They can
create a startup that is as sinless as a newborn babe, and we
would have no reason to sanction that individual company.
Technology is not, as Mr. Kang points out, not just a product
that we can control. It is know-how, it is inspiration, it is
direction for research.
I want to illustrate this, that it is important what areas
we focus on. If China has a big ship and we need somebody to
carry our cargo, fine. And that means it is in the interests of
the American shipper or the insurer to give them ideas on how
to be more effective at ocean commerce. Fine. But we had a
situation also in transportation but not taking our product
from one port to another but taking our satellites into space
where American companies who own satellites or who insured the
launch gave them ideas on how to have better rockets. So we
have to look at every relationship, particularly those that
involve consulting.
I want to urge some of my colleagues to look at a number of
pieces of legislation. Mr. Van Drew and I have the Country of
Origin Labeling Requirements Act because a lot of people want
to see where something is made, which is fine. If you're in the
store, it is right on the box. What if you buy from Amazon? You
have no idea. What are you going to do? Ship the product back
that you open the package and it is made in a country you do
not want to patronize?
We need to get our companies to report to their
shareholders what they are doing to reduce their China risk.
And as I said at this morning's hearing, we need to end the
capital gains allowance for investment in China.
Mr. Fisk, you are our digital policy special Ambassador.
One thing I am worried about is digital misinformation from
China. One of their best tools for that is TikTok. It is my
understanding that, while we monitor other sources of digital
misinformation, the relevant bureau, the Global Engagement
Center, in the State Department does not monitor TikTok because
you cannot have it on a government computer. What are we going
to do so that we monitor what is going on on TikTok? I am
confident that we have the technical expertise to make sure
that one particular computer at the State Department does not
give them access to the rest. When are we going to start
monitoring TikTok's disinformation?
Mr. Fick. Congressman, I believe I have said in previous
testimony that I am the least popular parent in my children's
middle school because of my stated views on TikTok. I do
believe that it represents----
Mr. Sherman. We have got to monitor it. When is the State
Department going to start monitoring it?
Mr. Fick. I can consult with my colleagues in the Global
Engagement Center, and we can get an answer----
Mr. Sherman. And could you furnish for this committee a
statement as to whether we are monitoring it as we do other
social media or whether we have abandoned that? And do not tell
us, well, there is an executive order to say do not put it on a
government computer. I am sure we could allow it to be on one
unconnected air gap government computer.
Mr. Fick. I am confident that we can get back to you on a
question for the record in detail on that.
Mr. Sherman. And then, Ms. Kendler, there is a tendency to
think that in export controls, well, if we say no to the
export, all we are doing is hurting corporate profits, and so
all the national security interests are on one side. I would
admonish you two things: When we say no, that means some other
company in some other country says yes, and that builds that
capacity. And when we say yes, it goes to an American company
that builds our capacity. And, second, when our department acts
slowly and then ultimately approves something, but it is too
late because the business has gone elsewhere, we have lost on
all fronts. So saying no or delaying is not without national
security risk. Of course, saying yes at the wrong time is what
you are most likely to be criticized for.
I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Let me now recognize Representative
Davidson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the Chairwoman. It is an incredibly
important hearing, and I am glad to see that we can have
Administration witnesses because this is a topic that is
incredibly important. Obviously, Republican promises on a whole
host of things conflict with some of the Biden Administration
promises, and, in this area, I am encouraged to see that we are
aligned.
Ambassador Fick, I am encouraged by your appointment and,
frankly, by your credentials. You are one of a handful of
private sector people, non-academia, people that have worked in
capitalism, not in think tanks or in academia, that is part of
the Administration and credited as one of the most innovative
thinkers in the market. So glad to see you are there.
When you think about this space, in 2018, the United States
decided to update the Foreign Investment Risk Reduction
Modernization Act, a kind of framework for foreign investment
into the United States, and we did touch on the idea of
outbound investment. Where are the voids that you are most
concerned about?
Mr. Fick. Thank you, Congressman. I appreciate your
gracious words. I think that the specifics of inbound and
outbound investment do fall outside my remit, so I would want
to yield to colleagues who are perhaps closer to that
particular issue and reState what I did say earlier, which is
that I think that we need to have attention on both sides and I
think that there is more that we can do in this world where so
many of the innovative technologies that are increasingly
contributing to national power are being developed by companies
that, frankly, are very small or may not exist today, and they
are going to change the landscape very quickly. But I would
defer to colleagues on the specifics.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you.
Ms. Kendler. Thank you, Congressman. We have to avoid a
situation where U.S. investments are supporting Chinese
military modernization. We cannot permit the intelligence, the
military technology of China to be built on U.S. funding. That
would undermine our national security and foreign policy
interests----
Mr. Davidson. I wholeheartedly agree. Prior to being in
Congress, I was in manufacturing. This is a little bit outside
your area, but, fundamentally, does not our whole trade policy
facilitate that?
Ms. Kendler. Congressman, our export controls are
calibrated and tailored for advanced technologies to China. The
technologies that China cannot get elsewhere----
Mr. Davidson. The entire industrial base is at risk. We saw
that during COVID. You look at whether it is vitamins or base
chemicals, I mean, fundamentally, we have a real supply chain
risk problem, do not we?
Ms. Kendler. We are very focused on our supply chain issues
and U.S. technological leadership in the supply chain. We are
on the brink of issuing a survey to poll the industry about
legacy semiconductor chips, for example, as an area where we
need more information about our supply chain, and that is
certainly connected to national security.
Our export controls are focused on national security and
foreign policy interests. Last fall, we published an update to
our artificial intelligence semiconductor chip rule to make
sure that the chips, the most advance chips, which are made
using U.S. technology, are not feeding the Chinese military,
that are not being used for AI modeling of hypersonic missiles.
Mr. Davidson. I thank you for that, and, certainly, that's
important. I haven't been part of the debate on the CHIPS Act
that we passed that, in theory, was supposed to strengthen the
U.S. supply chain and, in a way, weaken China's or limit their
access to the most innovative chips. I do worry about some of
the unintended consequences. One of the companies in my
congressional district is Silfex. They are a large employer in
the region, but, fundamentally, they are supplying base
material, silicon wafers, which is more of a commodity, and
they are at risk of losing substantial employment because they
cannot export those things. China is doing fine on commodity-
grade chips. So how do we strike the balance and not, you know,
cause more harm to domestic manufacturers than we are
intending?
And I think the other thing is, when you talk about, you
know, Ambassador, you mentioned small companies, when you talk
about the biggest companies, a lot of times they will just
create a different entity offshore and do the same thing. So
how do we capture that with our current look at outbound
investment?
Ms. Kendler. Congressman, I am not really in a position to
talk about outbound investment. In the export controls context,
speaking of the AI chips rule, we actually, last October, took
that issue on directly. We expanded our controls to deal with
third countries that might be providing an opportunity for
China to receive the chips that we have controlled through
diversion or evasion of our controls. And so we established a
license requirement for third countries that we thought might
be susceptible to----

Mr. Davidson. What about domestic manufacturers, like
Silfex? What are we doing for those guys?
Ms. Kendler. Congressman, I do not want to speak about a
particular company here, but I would be happy to followup with
you and your team----
Mr. Davidson. We would greatly appreciate it because I
think we are causing some unintended consequences or at least I
hope they are unintended. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I now recognize
Representative Andy Kim for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you to the three of you for coming before us to be able to have
this conversation.
Assistant Secretary Kendler, I wanted to start with you. In
your opening remarks, you talked about sort of our partnership
globally, especially with partners in the Indo-Pacific, and you
were making reference about some of the progress that we have
made, especially vis-a-vis the challenges we face with Russia.
I wanted to see if you can just expand on it a little more. I
want to get a little bit more granularity from you just what
has gotten better, stronger in that capacity and what have we
seen on that progress that might be transferrable or applicable
to the challenges that we face vis-a-vis China right now.
Ms. Kendler. I appreciate that question quite a bit,
Congressman Kim. It has been a core focus of our work over the
last 2 years since Russia's invasion, further invasion of
Ukraine. We, working with our implementing agencies around the
world, 39 major global economies coming together to adopt
substantially aligned measures toward Russia, Belarus, and, to
a degree, Iran, as well, to keep the technologies that Russia
and their allies need from reaching them. They need U.S.
technologies. They do not have indigenous semiconductor
manufacturing, for example. They must buy chips from outside
Russia. That is just one example of a host of technologies that
Russia requires to wage war.
So by building this coalition and maintaining this
coalition, which has required an enormous amount of effort, we
have established new working-level connections, new senior-
level connections, between all of the implementing agencies
associated with these substantially aligned controls, which
enable us to talk about issues beyond Russia. Emerging
technologies is an area where we are able to say, well, how are
you dealing with this issue and share how we are dealing with
the issue on a very practical level. And that can certainly
carry over into any other space. We welcome conversations and
are eager to have them.
Our main partners in that effort have included Japan and
Korea particularly. Of course, the EU and the UK are there, as
well. But it is a great mechanism for further very practical
cooperation.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. Yes. Thank you for that. Assistant
Secretary Kang, I want to bring you into this conversation
here, especially with the insights that you have. We talked
about some of those partners, South Korea, Japan, others that
have a lot more experience in this. But what we also know is
that, in the Indo-Pacific, there are actually a lot of
partners, though, that do not have as much of that experience
and that infrastructure in terms of a robust expert control
regulatory and enforcement system. So I guess I wanted to just
get a sense from you how are we trying to help buildup that
type of capability, that technical aspect, in terms of
assistance or trainings? Is that something that we should be
thinking about more to just try to lift that baseline up? You
know, it is good that we are doing it with certain partners
that already have some of that capability, but I just feel like
there is sort of a weak-link situation here where we need to
try to figure out how to kind of raise all boats there. So what
are your thoughts in terms of that?
Mr. Kang. Exactly. I agree with everything Assistant
Secretary Kendler has said about working in coalition. And,
certainly, the cooperation that we have engaged together to
counter Russia could be transferrable with regard to dealing
with China. But there is a serious capacity issue with regard
to implementation, Administration. Some countries in the region
do not have basic strategic trade laws.
And another priority is also, given the trade flows, so
many of the countries, the No. 1 country they trade with is
China. So there is also the political will, how much to
cooperate in this venture.
So we are engaging diplomatically alongside our
implementing partners from other agencies to engage at the
highest leadership, political leadership, to highlight why it
is in their interests to have a strong export control system,
that it will actually build their prosperity by having a
reliable and trusted network of suppliers and buyers.
So we are utilizing the bipartisan support that you have
given us with regard to our native funding and also in the
context of the CHIPS Act, the ITSI fund. Particularly, we are
focusing on semiconductor packaging in Southeast Asia. So those
are extremely valuable in building that capacity.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. Thank you for that. And I think that
is absolutely key is just this coalition building. Ambassador
Fick, I just want to give you the last word here, just some of
your reactions to this and just how you think we can try to
make sure that this is not some weak link in this broader
effort that we have.
Mr. Fick. Congressman, I think one of the most pernicious
terms in international technology diplomacy is digital
sovereignty and the idea that any country can go it alone on
these issues. And so it reminds me of those broadsides from the
American Revolution that said we hang together or we surely
hang separately. These are issues where we need to hang
together with our allies and partners as we look at the stated
intent of our geopolitical competitors and adversaries,
especially the PRC and Russia and Iran and----
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. I will just say here, as I am
running low, is just let's make sure we are getting to follow-
on conversations about some of these other countries that we
should be engaged. Sometimes, we talk too much about some of
the ones that are working the best, but let's try to figure out
how to engage on some of these others. Thank you. And I yield
back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Let me now recognize
Representative Andy Barr for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Chair Kim. And let me followup with
Assistant Secretary Kendler on Chair Kim's questioning about
the Institute of Forensic Science. Just for everybody watching,
this is, again, the Chinese Ministry of Public Security's
Institute of Forensic Science, and it was, at one time, added
to the Commerce Entity List; and then there was a decision that
was made to remove IFS from the Entity List. And, again, for
everybody watching, what is IFS? IFS was originally added to
the Entity List due to their egregious abuse of the Uyghur
Muslims through horrific genetic testing activities that echo
the various crimes against humanity undertaken by Nazi Germany.
IFS was removed from Commerce's Entity List. Now, Assistant
Secretary Kendler, I am not suggesting this was your decision
or even Undersecretary Estevez's decision, and I know you
respond to Secretary Raimondo, not the State Department. But I
want to know from you, to the best of your understanding, did
the State Department direct BIS to remove this horrible group,
IFS, from the Entity List?
Ms. Kendler. Thank you for the question, Congressman. Each
agency that participates in the End-User Review Committee has
an equal vote. State Department's vote, Commerce Department's
vote, they carry the same weight.
Mr. Barr. So Commerce is equally culpable as the State
Department in the decision to remove IFS from the Entity List,
this Chinese entity that engages in genetic testing reminiscent
of Nazi Germany.
Ms. Kendler. Congressman, I am the granddaughter of a
survivor.
Mr. Barr. I know.
Ms. Kendler. What I can tell you is that human rights and
fentanyl, preventing deaths from fentanyl are both deeply
important issues for this Administration.
Mr. Barr. What did the Administration get from China, from
the Chinese Communist Party for removing this entity from the
export control Entity List? What did we get?
Ms. Kendler. Given the national security imperative for
handling the fentanyl precursors coming into this country, we
were comfortable taking the step to delist IFS. It became clear
that including IFS on the Entity List, it inhibited
counternarcotic action by----
Mr. Barr. When was it removed from the list?
Ms. Kendler. I do not have the exact date. November of this
year, of last year.
Mr. Barr. And have we seen in the time since it was
removed, have we seen any material enhanced cooperation from
China on fentanyl?
Ms. Kendler. I will defer to my colleague at the State
Department on that answer.
Mr. Kang. I could speak to that briefly. I understand there
has been really ramped-up enforcement measures by the Chinese,
and they also promulgated regulation pushed out further
regulating trade and fentanyl precursors.
Mr. Barr. See, here is what I do not understand: why we are
always chasing diplomacy from a position of weakness. Why are
we removing bad actors from our entities lists and our
sanctions lists? Why do not we negotiate from a position of
strength? Why do not we sanction? Why do not we impose more
export controls on bad actors instead of making upward
concessions with the hope that China will somehow change its
behavior down the road. That is what I do not like about this
diplomatic approach. It is negotiating from a position of
weakness. Do you have a response to that?
Mr. Kang. If I may. As a career civil servant serving in
multiple Presidential Administrations, I see bipartisan
consensus with regard to China. I think all of us see China for
what it is. And the decisions we make may be tactical in nature
and there may be tradeoffs that we have to make, but I see
total consistency. Particularly, I served also in the Trump
Administration and this Administration----
Mr. Barr. Well, reclaiming my time. If we want to get tough
on China and their peddling of the ingredients into fentanyl,
exploiting our open southern border and killing our people,
poisoning our people with fentanyl, and that happens a lot in
Kentucky, in my home State, unfortunately, with components from
mainland China. Why do not we sanction? Why does not the
Administration support my bill that would sanction these
Chinese entities that are responsible for manufacturing this
poison instead of taking off a genetic testing arm of the
Chinese secret police from the Entity List?
Ms. Kendler. Congressman, I welcome the information that
you have on entities in China operating to violate human
rights, and we would be pleased to work with you and your team
to get that information. We use the Entity List for national
security and foreign policy protection, and we are eager to put
entities on that have articulable and evidence-based reasons.
In this instance, to protect national security, we care
both about human rights and about fentanyl precursors for
exactly the reasons you have identified, for the people dying
in Kentucky and elsewhere. And those are both priorities.
Sometimes, we make tradeoffs to protect our national security,
and we----
Mr. Barr. I see my time has expired. I do not think we have
to make tradeoffs. I think we need to be tough on China and not
make these up-front concessions in the hopes that somehow China
will change their behavior. With that, I yield.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Representative Barr, I
want to thank you for raising that issue just, you know, since
I have also raised that issue. I want to know if you know if
the flow of fentanyl from China has decreased since November
when the two leaders met and agreed, as I mentioned earlier in
my line of questioning, when they decided to create the working
group to address the fentanyl. I personally have not seen the
decrease in fentanyl from China. Instead, my county, Orange
County, that I represent, which is so close to the southern
border, I work closely with the local law enforcement. Orange
County Sheriff's Department have told me actually there is more
increase in the fentanyl coming through our southern border. So
I am not sure if you can say that we have addressed this issue.
The devil is in the details. What has the working group
done since November when the two leaders met and since we have,
you know, taken the IFS off the Entity List?
Mr. Kang. Chairwoman Kim, I could take that question back
to those who more closely follow this issue. But just as we see
problems with regard to advanced semiconductor chips popping up
in Chinese companies, even after we controlled them, sometimes
there is a lag effect and also there's an inventory that has
been pushed out. So it is an incomplete answer, but I will get
back to those folks who track this more closely and get back to
you.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Sorry about that. I now
recognize Representative Keating for 5 minutes.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Madam Chairman. An area we haven't
hit yet in our discussion is the nuclear area, which overlaps
many of the things that your agencies are involved with. You
know, there is a lot going on in Europe in terms of small
modular reactors, but, you know, China, Pakistan, South Korea,
Japan, Taiwan, Bangladesh, among others, all have nuclear
programs. What are we doing through your particular agencies to
deal with really very challenging issues of, No. 1, maintaining
our competitiveness economically; our security, something that
former Secretary Moniz addressed recently in terms of a
collective approach, a multilateral approach, that has to deal
with security issues around nuclear power and nonproliferation.
It seems like the U.S. is, you know, lagging many of the other
countries in many other regions of the world, and I am
concerned in the Indo-Pacific, if their programs begin to
expand into things like SMRs or other areas or continue to
grow, we might continue to have a greater gap.
Mr. Kang. I think I'm the nuclear person in the panel.
Actually, sir, we have good news. It is a combination of
nuclear accidents, Three Mile Island, Fukushima, not to mention
Chernobyl, has really stymied development of nuclear energy and
energy technology development in the West and also in the
United States. But everybody recognizes that energy security is
critical to our strategic strength, and nuclear is part of that
picture. And also those who care about climate change, nuclear
has to play a role as a bridging capability.
And, fortunately, this is playing for our strength, our
innovation. And among the small modular reactors that are out
in the market today, those who are most advanced and have
passed the certification of the NRC, a regulatory authority in
the United States that is looked upon by everybody as the gold
standard with tremendous respect from abroad, some of these
reactor designs have passed muster and ready to deploy. And we
are making tremendous progress in Europe, particularly among
our Eastern European NATO allies. And with the situation with
regard to Ukraine, the whole region is seized and they
recognize that SMR is the answer to energy independence and
security.
There are also great opportunities in East Asia. We have
partnerships with Japan and Korea. They have invested in some
of our SMR technologies, and we are working together to provide
collectively those funds that are necessary to create the
foundation in recipient countries, particularly in Southeast
Asia, so they could proceed with nuclear pursuits safely,
securely, and nonproliferation guaranteed.
So we are pouring all of our resources, particularly with
ISN has its own tranche of capacity-building capabilities. We
have this program called FIRST, and we are heavily investing in
the region.
Mr. Keating. And are we, at the same time, dealing with
security issues as part of those discussions?
Mr. Kang. Absolutely. Security, safety, has to be part of
it, not just nonproliferation.
Mr. Keating. Quickly, I just wanted to touch on one other
area that overlaps, I think, some of the Transatlantic areas.
You know, the Iranian drones that we found, there were
components of that from our allies that were found in the
actual drones that were being given to Russia to brutally
assault Ukraine. How are we dealing with the disparities that
do exist between our country and our own allies on many of
these fronts? What are we doing to close that gap so there is
no loophole there?
Mr. Kang. So one of the things we are doing is, of course,
threat awareness. A lot of these countries do not realize they
are the source, the companies, whether they are front companies
or actually production companies where they are producing
products that end up in these drones. I have seen these drones
and touched them, these drones that were deployed in Ukraine
and also in the Middle East. And they are Iranian origin. But
when you look at them, they use very basic technologies. These
are difficult to control. A lot of it are commodity items in a
sense. They are not quantum computing devices.
So awareness is absolutely critical. And, recently, at the
department, I cannot discuss it in further detail, we gathered
together last week a group of countries to strategize together
what we could do in terms of interjection, better export
control, and apply national sanctions.
Mr. Keating. This has to be done multilaterally, not----
Mr. Kang. Absolutely.
Mr. Keating [continuing]. By ourselves. Thank you. I yield
back.
Mrs. Kim of California. Let me now recognize Representative
Radewagen for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Radewagen. (Foreign language spoken.) Good afternoon.
Thank you, Chairwoman Kim and Ranking Member Bera for holding
this hearing. The modern globalized world is one of wonder.
Modern telecommunications make it so I can speak to my family
at home in American Samoa from here in Washington, DC, almost
10,000 miles away, without any issue. That technology that
allows this instant communication is mainly off-the-shelf
products. Now, an issue that many Pacific Island countries have
is monitoring our EEZs. These off-the-shelf technologies have
helped many of my neighbors in monitoring their EEZs to counter
illegal activities.
I have quick questions for all of you. Ambassador Fick,
would you agree that advances in software and data management
are creating opportunities for U.S. diplomacy to support both
domestic industry and national security and foreign policy
missions?
Mr. Fick. I agree very much with that.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you. Secretary Kendler, if these
types of items are wholly comprised of EAR99 technology and do
not touch military systems in most cases, would BIS require a
license for the transfer of the time to an ally or defense
treaty partner?
Ms. Kendler. We do not require licenses for low-level
technologies classified under EAR99 to allies and partners
unless there is an activity or an end user of concern in those
countries.
Mrs. Radewagen. So my last question is for you, Secretary
Kang. Is this an area in which ISN can play a supportive role,
including through export control cooperation, to build a
unified, cohesive approach to the transfer of these types of
systems?
Mr. Kang. Absolutely. Working multilaterally is the key. We
cannot go it alone, so we have to create a community of
interest and we have to have common values, as well. This is
where human rights also comes into play in export controls, so
we have created in the auspices of Summit for Democracy
something called ECHRI, Export Control and Human Rights
Initiative. So all of these things come in, but all of these
things have to be with the like-minded and those who share our
values and common interests.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mrs. Kim of California. Let me now recognize Representative
Connolly for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Welcome to our panel. Ms. Kendler,
you are at the Department of Commerce. Presumably, it is a
concern to the Department of Commerce, as it is to the
Department of State, that something like 90 percent of the
memory chip manufacturing capacity in the world is in one place
with one company in Taiwan. What concerns do we have, given
Chinese saber-rattling, about Taiwan with respect to the
security of that critical manufactured product?
Ms. Kendler. Congressman, Taiwan----
Mr. Connolly. Can you get closer to the mike? It's hard to
hear you.
Ms. Kendler. Sorry, sir. Is this better?
Mr. Connolly. Yes, great. Thank you.
Ms. Kendler. Sure. Taiwan is a very close export controls
partner, and we certainly want to do what we can through export
controls to make sure that Taiwan has the technology it needs.
Mr. Connolly. No, that's not my question. My question is
that technology is at risk because of Chinese aggression. If
China crosses the Taiwan Strait, the manufacturing capacity, 90
percent of it, in terms of memory chips, is now in Chinese
hands, not Taiwanese hands.
Ms. Kendler. Congressman, through our efforts to protect
national security and our foreign policy interests, we are
cutting China off from the technologies it can use to wage war,
and that includes our measures last fall on artificial----
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Kendler, I'm sorry. Again, that does not
address my question. My question has to do with the security of
what is already there in Taiwan. What are we doing in terms of
building redundancies, off-shoring Taiwanese manufacturing
capacity, bringing it home if necessary, to ensure that we
aren't so heavily reliant on one source with one company in one
place?
Ms. Kendler. Congressman, this is an important issue for
the Commerce Department. I have been trying to give you export
controls answers, and I do not think that is suitable to the
question.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Ms. Kendler. So perhaps we can take this back and get you
additional information from other parties at the Commerce
Department who are looking at this question with a different
lens.
Mr. Connolly. OK. Mr. Kang.
Mr. Kang. Perhaps I can----
Mr. Connolly. I must say, I am really, I cannot believe, at
this point, that that's the answer of the Commerce Department
of the U.S. Government, but, if that's what it is, that's what
it is. It is not like this is a new issue.
Mr. Kang. I think this is where----
Mr. Connolly. It is a huge security concern. Mr. Kang.
Mr. Kang. Yes, absolutely. So I think this is where
congressional leadership is paying out. This is, of course, the
CHIPS Act. The whole idea is to diversify the supply chain. So
if we are not bringing it back home and we, of course, have a
Taiwan company investing in the United States, a foundry. Also,
in Japan, that's the case, as well. But also with regard to
packaging and other even legacy chips, we are trying to have
them in hands of our friends and allies. So this is, again,
because of the foresight bipartisan support of Congress, I
think that is the answer. But that will have to play out.
Mr. Connolly. But I think, like so many other supply chain
issues, we need to better understand how did this happen. I
mean, this is American-invented technology that migrates to
Taiwan because we weren't willing to put the resources into it
the way they were. And, yet, the moment it is in friendly
hands, may it ever be thus. But we have to plan for the what-
ifs, and China is making no secret of its designs. What is
point of view, Ambassador Fick, of the State Department from a
policy point of view with respect to this?
Mr. Fick. I think an aspect of this that falls within my
remit, Congressman, is working closely with my Taiwanese
counterparts in an unofficial capacity to ensure that we are
transferring to them lessons that we have learned in other
places, like Ukraine, in order to strengthen deterrence and
ensure that Taiwan, we maintain the status quo.
Mr. Connolly. Really? So you think negotiating with Taiwan
or advising Taiwan on deterrence protects this 90-percent
worldwide manufacturing capability unique to Taiwan?
Mr. Fick. I think we recognize the importance of Taiwan's
unique role in the global economy because of the concentration
of semiconductor manufacturing. I think we are taking
comprehensive steps to diversify that supply chain outside
Taiwan, part of it in the United States, part of it in friendly
countries. And we are clearly trying to buy as much time as we
can in order to develop and mature those alternatives, and that
involves strengthening deterrence.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. Well, I want to thank
the witnesses for your valuable testimony and the members for
asking your questions. The members of the committee may have
some additional questions, and I do, too, for your witness
responses, and I will ask you to respond to those in writing.
We cannot allow the Chinese Communist Party to dictate how
critical and emerging technologies are developed and used. Xi
Jinping cannot be trusted, and all technology developed under
his regime can and will be used for human rights abuses and
military aggression. It is, therefore, of the upmost importance
that we invest in our own technological base, that we ensure
all U.S.-developed technology is protected, that the U.S. and
like-minded allies and partners are setting the rules of the
road for the use of technology worldwide, and that we are able
to jointly develop and manufacture critical technologies
efficiently.
It is important to recall that the United States
established NATO after the end of World War II. It also created
CoCom, the Coordination Committee for Multilateral Export
Controls. The concept was simple: if the United States is going
to guarantee the security of our allies, then our allies would
help deny the export of strategic technology to an adversary.
And fast forward, today, an adversary is inside our export
control regimes. In some respects, we do not need novel
solutions to our technology transfer problems. Instead, we need
to go back to what worked: small groups of partners and allies
denying our adversaries access to strategic technology.
I want to thank all of you for joining us today. It is
clear that we have much more work to do to be able to
seamlessly develop critical and emerging technologies with our
allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific and to protect these
technologies from authoritarian adversaries. So I look forward
to continuing our work with each of you to fill these gaps and
maintain our U.S. technological superiority.
In closing, pursuant to committee rules, all members may
have 5 days to submit statements, questions, and extraneous
materials for the record, subject to the length limitation.
So without objection, the committee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:32 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
