- IRAN'S PROXY IN YEMEN: THE HOUTHI THREAT TO MIDDLE EAST STABILITY, GLOBAL SHIPPING, AND U.S. SERVICE MEMBERS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

IRAN'S PROXY IN YEMEN:
THE HOUTHI THREAT TO MIDDLE
EAST STABILITY, GLOBAL SHIPPING,
AND U.S. SERVICE MEMBERS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA, AND CENTRAL ASIA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

February 14, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-85

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-229PDF               WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  AMI BERA, California
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             TED LIEU, California
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
YOUNG KIM, California                COLIN ALLRED, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        ANDY KIM, New Jersey
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              SARA JACOBS, California
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
American Samoa                   SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
FRENCH HILL, Arkansa                       Florida
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                GREG STANTON, Arizona
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JIM COSTA, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JASON CROW, Colorado
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               GABE AMO, Rhode Island
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Majority Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Minority Staff Director
------

The Subcommittee on the Middle East, North Africa, and Central Asia

JOE WILSON, Chair
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota, Ranking
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee                  Member
RONNY JACKSON, Texas
JIM BAIRD, Indiana
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia

BRAD SHERMAN, California
GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina

Gabriella Zach, Subcommittee Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Ledeen, Simone A., Former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
for the Middle East............................................     9
Pollack, Kenneth, PhD, Former CIA Analyst and National Security
Council Director for the Persian Gulf..........................    19
Alterman, Jon, PhD, Senior Vice President, Zbigniew Brzezinski
Chair in Global Security and Geostrategy, and Director, Middle
East Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies...    30

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    51
Hearing Minutes..................................................    53
Hearing Attendance...............................................    54

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    55

IRAN'S PROXY IN YEMEN: THE HOUTHI

THREAT TO MIDDLE EAST STABILITY,

GLOBAL SHIPPING, AND U.S. SERVICE MEMBERS

Wednesday, February 14, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Middle East, North
Africa and Central Asia,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:03 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Wilson
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Wilson. Ladies and gentlemen, and guests, we're so
grateful to have so many of you here, all of you here. The
Subcommittee on Middle East, North Africa and Central Asia will
come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to address the Iran-backed
Houthis threat to Yemen, the Middle East, and the United States
national security interest, including through their many
significant attacks on international shipping in the Red Sea
and the Gulf of Aden since October 2023.
We will discuss the threat posed by the Houthis and the
Biden Administration's response to the dramatic uptick in
Iran's malign activity across the region.
I now ask consent unanimously, the gentleman from North
Carolina, Dr. Murphy, be allowed to sit on the dais and
participate following all members in today's hearing. Without
objection, so ordered.
I also ask consent that the statement for the record by
Behnam Ben Taleblu and related report be entered into the
record. Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
And, ladies and gentlemen, I am Joe Wilson, chairman of the
Middle East, North Africa, and Central Asia Subcommittee of the
Foreign Affair Committee and a grateful Member of Congress from
South Carolina.
Since the fall of Sana'a when Houthi terrorists violently
overthrew the internationally recognized government of Yemen,
the Hamas puppet Houthis, along with the Iranian other puppets,
have made territory gains and have expanded their capacity to
carry out mass murder directed by the regime in Tehran.
The Iranian regime terrorist puppets in Yemen, the Houthis,
have launched over 30 attacks on commercial and naval vessels
in the Red Sea since November. Their capacity to field such
attacks is a commentary on the Iranian regime's direct support
for its network of terrorist puppets and their growth in the
region.
The Houthis and other puppet terrorist groups funded,
trained, and supplied by the regime in Tehran are operating
with sophisticated weapons, including precision-guided missiles
and long range drones.
The Houthis have conducted hundreds of attacks on our
valued allies and partners in the region and have directly
targeted U.S. targets, disrupting world shipping, fueling
inflation for household products worldwide, and interrupting
the delivery of grain around the world to countries that are
need.
They receive material and political support from the
world's foremost State sponsor of terrorism and have
coordinated with at least two foreign terrorist organizations,
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and Hezbollah, but were
foolishly delisted as a foreign terrorist organization by the
Biden Administration in February 2021 only to be redesignated
as a specially designated global terrorist. Sadly, this is
severely inadequate and does nothing to hold the regime in
Tehran accountable for the direct support for the Houthi
terrorist puppets.
The Houthis have paraded identical copies of Iranian
ballistic missiles, land attack cruise missiles, and anti-ship
cruise missiles and suicide drones. We have seen some of these
projectiles launched after October 7 toward or ally in the
region, Israel, and formerly they had attacked Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates.
And more recently, at least 30 plus instances toward
international commercial shipping in the Red Sea, spiking
insurance premiums and costs for goods on vessels moving across
a body of water where between 10 to 15 percent of global trade
passes daily.
The Houthis' ability to disrupt shipping gives the regime
in Tehran a significant boost in legitimacy and is a key to
their goal of death to American, death to Israel.
Proxies of their regime in Tehran have benefited from
Biden's hands-off policies and have conveniently attached
themselves to the claims of the Palestinians. This is about
fealty to Iranian regime and its agenda.
The Biden Administration, in diplomatic pursuit of a
disastrous nuclear deal has completely ignored the mass
proliferation and development of missiles in terrorism by the
regime, arming its proxies and dictator allies. The Iranian
regime's missile program is the cornerstone of its nuclear
program.
President Trump was correct in canceling the deal, which
did nothing to address intercontinental ballistic program or
proliferation of terrorism as he successfully built deterrence
to protect Israel and America with indeed the Abraham Accords.
This Administration sadly has completely failed to respond
to and deter future attacks, striking an ammunition depot in
Yemen after providing advance warning is not a sufficient
deterrence.
There is sincere and bipartisan outrage over the conditions
of extreme poverty in Yemen. Houthi terrorists have engaged in
massive aid diversion to immerse themselves in their loyalists
while the people of Yemen continue suffering the consequences
of the Iran-backed civil war.
The people of Yemen deserve better than constant civil war
due to Iranian regime-backed terrorism.
We also understand the interconnection of the dictators
with rule of gun invading democracies with rule of law. We see
this sadly as we respect the courageous people of Ukraine, the
courageous people of Israel who are resisting the access of
evil, war criminal Putin, the regime in Tehran and its puppets
and the Chinese Communist Party.
This Administration must reverse course and restore
credible deterrence to avoid further attacks and
destabilization. And I believe, if they did, it would be
bipartisan.
I want to again thank you for the witnesses being here
today and your expertise. And I look forward to hearing now
from the ranking member, Gerry Connolly, also known as past
president of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly. Mr. President?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Since
November 19, the Houthis and Iranian-backed militia
organization in Yemen have attacked over 40 commercial ships
and multiple U.S. Naval vessels in the Red Sea with no signs of
stopping.
They have attacked commercial vessels indiscriminately,
wreaking havoc on international shipping and the global
economy. Just in the last 3 months, Houthi threats to ships,
crews and goods crossing the Red Sea have forced major shipping
companies to spend millions of dollars, more fuel, and add an
additional 10 days of traveling around the Horn of Africa that
so far has cost $200 billion.
The costly delay will ultimately be felt most significantly
by many in the developing world who have already seen rising
prices due to inflation caused by Putin's War in Ukraine, the
COVID-19 pandemic, and other disruptions in the global supply
chain.
It is important that this subcommittee articulate that
there is absolute clarity on a bipartisan basis when it comes
to Houthi targeting of American service members or core
American interests.
Arbitrary Houthis attacks on commercial shipping have
already disrupted a key pillar of the international order that
has an impact on all nations, freedom of navigation.
At its core, freedom of navigation entitles all countries'
vessels to transit around the world in peace, free form
interference. The protection and promotion of this longstanding
international principal warrants an international response, not
to mention how Houthi attacks impact the global economy.
The Biden Administration has crafted a response that
defends U.S. interest and deters further aggression while
preventing regional escalation, which I believe we must be very
mindful of, a strategy that some of my friends on the other
side of the aisle, including your, Mr. Chairman, have
criticized.
A successful strategy is one that utilizes all the tools in
our toolbox, diplomatic, economic and if needed, and only as a
last resort, military action.
Some of my colleagues would like to see an Administration
that acts unilaterally to impose great costs on Iran and its
proxies, committing American blood and treasure to another
analyst's war in the Middle East, all while neglecting the
devastating humanitarian situation in Yemen.
Let's be clear. Calls for direct strikes on Iran are
dangerous and undermine the Administration's efforts to prevent
and expand the conflict. A restart to civil war in Yemen will
not achieve American objectives. And the Biden Administration
rightly sought to prevent wide-scale famine for Yemen civilians
while degrading Houthi military capabilities and defending U.S.
servicemen and facilities in the region.
Such a strategy is critical for the millions of Yemenis who
remain dependent on outside humanitarian aid for even the most
basic of necessities.
According to the United Nations, 18.2 million people in
Yemen, more than half of its populations depend on such
humanitarian assistance, 4.5 million Yemenis are considered
internally displaced, and 17.6 million are food insecure.
Years of bombing, ground combat, destruction, and
impoverishment from the brutal war that had preceded this set
of events forced millions of Yemeni civilians to suffer
persistent food scarcity resulting in near famine conditions
and widespread malnutrition, especially among children,
recurring disease, medical goods shortages and extreme economic
hardship. A rupture of the tenuous cease-fire brokered in Yemen
would mean another hot conflict in a region that can ill afford
it.
Since before the Houthis started attacking commercial
shipping in November, the Biden Administration clearly stated
it is not interested in a broader conflict in the region.
The Administration has made clear that the United States
will not hesitate, however, to protect our personnel, both
through action at the U.N. and direct military strikes. And it
has followed through on that commitment.
The United States supported a Security Council resolution
condemning the Houthi attacks and urging against regional
escalation in the days leading up to the military action,
making the case to the international community on the knee to
hold the Houthis accountable for their action.
The Administration also imposed additional powerful
sanctions on the Houthis by designating the group as a
specially designated global terrorist group.
This powerful measure sanctions the facilitation and
support networks coordinated by Iran, which helped keep the
Houthi militants armed and equipped.
The Biden Administration also administered over 55 separate
Iran sanction rollouts targeting more than 550 individuals and
entities. And just this week, the DOJ announced the indictments
of IRGC leadership in Iran and others for terrorist sanction of
Asia, fraud and money laundering offenses in connection with
the trafficking and selling of Iranian oil sanctioned as well
as the seizure of more than 500,000 barrels sanctioned oil.
By all accounts, the Administration's pressure on Iran is
working. Just last week, the rial hit an all-time low and the
12 month inflation rate is now at 46.7 percent, a record high
in Iran since the U.S. imposed meaningful sanctions in 1996.
Militarily, the United States has moved in concert with
partners and allies to expand interdiction operations to
prevent illegal Iranian weapons from reaching the Houthis in
Yemen and has established a 22 nation security operation to
protect maritime vessels from Houthi attacks in the Red Sea.
It is not just an issue that impacts the United States, but
the entire international community. With the leadership of our
country and the Biden Administration, we have put together a
broad coalition of partners to defend, share an interest in the
region to secure the freedom of navigation and open sea lanes
of communication.
I look forward to hearing from our distinguished panel and
will very much appreciate a lively conversation. Thank you, and
I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much Congressman Connolly. As an
indication of how important this hearing is, we are very
grateful to welcome the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs
Committee. And we now recognize Chairman Mike McCaul from Texas
for his opening statement.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Connolly. Since Hamas' brutal October 7 attack on Israel,
Iran's proxies throughout the Middle East have launched assault
after assault on the United States and our partners.
The Houthis in Yemen have launched dozens of attacks
against international shipping in the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden.
These ongoing Iran-backed attacks threaten a wide array of
international interest. They are driving up shipping costs,
increasing insurance rates, and disrupting global supply
chains.
The Houthis' latest escalation is a symptom of the
international community's failure to address the Houthi threat.
For years the Houthis have benefited from support provided by
Iran and Hezbollah, which transformed this group of rag-tag
gorillas into a fighting force with the capacity to destabilize
the entire region and disrupt global trade.
But the world has consistently downplayed this threat and
Iran's role in enabling it. The Biden Administration's policies
have emboldened the Houthis at the expense of our regional
partners. And by projecting weakness on the world stage, this
Administration has invited aggression.
While Iran was smuggling weapons to the Houthis, this
Administration was busy lifting terror designations and cutting
off support to Saudi Arabia and amid Houthi cross-border fire.
Appeasement has no place in U.S. foreign policy, but that
is exactly what has occurred in Yemen and beyond. Even now this
Administration continues to treat the Houthis with kid gloves.
They are promoting a U.N. peace deal that would legitimize the
Houthis' violent autocratic rule over millions of innocent
Yemenis and secure Iran's foothold in Yemen.
And despite redesignating the Houthis as a specially
designated global terrorist organization, President Biden has
refused to use the strongest tool at his disposal, and that is
the foreign terrorist organization designation that they had
prior to this Administration.
I think it's time to recognize them for who they are and
redesignate them as a foreign terrorist organization. There can
be no denying that the Houthis are terrorists and present a
real threat.
As attacks by the Houthis continue, urgent action is
clearly needed to deter them and defend U.S. national interest.
I look forward to this hearing and hearing how we can work
with our allies and partners to protect our service members and
the global economy as well as steps to promote stability in the
region for nobody wants war. Nobody wants an escalation. Nobody
wants war with Iran. But history teaches us that if we do not
act in strength but rather weakness, we will invite aggression,
conflict, and war.
It is as old as Neville Chamberlain and Hitler. Churchill
talked about appeasement. Reagan talked about peace through
strength. If we do not project strength, we will get conflict
and war. One hundred sixty attacks on our soldiers in Iraq and
Syria and then Tower 22 in Jordan with little response. It only
begets more violence.
Deterrence is necessary to promote peace in the region. And
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for holding this very
important hearing and with that, I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Chairman Mike McCaul. And
we are pleased to have distinguished witnesses with us today.
Ms. Simone A. Ledeen, the Former Deputy Assistant Secretary
of Defense for the Middle East. We are grateful to have also
Dr. Kenneth M. Pollack, a former CIA analyst and NSC Security
Counsel Director for the Persian Gulf. Finally, we have Dr. Jon
Alterman, Senior Vice President/Director of the Middle East
Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
We want to thank you all for being here today. Your full
statements will be made part of the record. And I will ask each
of you to keep your spoken remarks to 5 minutes in order to
allow time for member questions. I now recognize Secretary
Ledeen for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SIMONE LEDEEN, FORMER DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF DEFENSE FOR THE MIDDLE EAST

Ms. Ledeen. Chairman McCaul, Chairman Wilson, Ranking
Member Connolly, and distinguished members of the subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Simone Ledeen, and I previously served as Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for the Middle East.
The Middle East is at a pivotal moment. The region is
currently embroiled in a high-stakes, multidimensional conflict
fueled by Iran's calculated aggression against the United
States, Israel, and other.
The evidence is clear. The Iranian regime is sowing this
discord, which threatens international peace and stability.
From the shadows, the regime is advancing its agenda by
planning and funding attacks by its proxies.
My focus today will be on one of these Iranian-backed
proxies, the Houthis in Yemen, and how the U.S. should respond
to accelerating Iranian aggression,
The Biden Administration's timid approach toward Iran has
placed U.S. service members and crucial global trade routes at
grave risk. The Administration's policy of appeasement toward
the Iranian regime has proven to be a dangerous fantasy,
setting the post-Abraham Accords Middle East on fire. Urgent
action is required to change course and re-establish
deterrence.
The Iranian-backed Houthis have escalated their attacks on
commercial shipping and U.S. Naval war ships in the Red Sea
since November 2023. The Houthis have used drones, missiles,
and small boats to target both commercial and naval vessels
across the Southern Red Sea, the Bab al-Mandab Strait, the Gulf
of Aden, and the Arabian Sea.
Companies have had to reroute ships around Africa,
increasing shipping costs and travel times. Normally an
estimated 12 percent of the international trade, amounting to
over $1 trillion in goods annually, navigates through the Red
Sea and the Suez Canal annually.
Since the Houthi attacks began, freight rates from East
Asia to Europe have surged over 200 percent. Since October
2023, the Houthis have used an alarming array of increasingly
sophisticated weapons, including cruise missiles and land
attack cruise missiles, unmanned aerial vehicles, unmanned
surface vessels, essentially remote controlled bomb boats, and
anti-ship ballistic missiles, or ASBMs, making the Houthis the
first in the world to deploy ballistic missiles against ships,
signaling a sophisticated leap in their military capabilities,
which now align with those of only a very few nations.
At the same time, Iran and its allies have been exploiting
maritime navigation systems to conduct operations with relative
impunity in the Red Sea, often disguising their activities
under the flags of China, Iran, or Russia. The Dark Fleet, as
these ships have been called, enjoys a particular immunity from
Houthi attacks, navigating with relative impunity, a fact which
points to a level of coordination, which should concern us all.
The Houthis post a multifaceted threat to Yemen, the
broader Middle East and U.S. service members. The Houthi
movement begun as a Shiite insurgency against Yemen Sunni
government has, with Iranian support, become a key military
player in the Middle East, devastating Yemen, creating a vast
humanitarian crisis, and complicating U.S. and allied strategic
interests in a broader Middle East proxy conflict.
Additionally, the Iranian-backed Houthi chaos in Yemen has
given Al Qaeda and the Arabian Peninsula a favorable
environment for training and attack planning.
This is the same terrorist organization responsible for the
USS Cole bombing and the Charlie Hebdo attack. The Houthi
movement, central to Iran's strategy to increase its influence
and disrupt the Middle East status quo has escalated Gulf
Region tensions through missile and drone attacks on Saudi
Arabia, endangering global oil supplies.
Additionally, by targeting Red Sea routes, they
significantly threaten Israel's supply chain, underscoring
their role in Iran's broader ambitions to reshape regional
geopolitical dynamics.
The Houthis also threaten U.S. service members stationed in
the region. The group's access to drones, missiles, and naval
mines enables them to target U.S. forces, which they are
currently doing in attacks in U.S. Navy and Merchant Marine
vessels.
In the face of this threat, the United States must re-
evaluate its regional strategy. The contrast between the
optimism fostered by the Abraham Accords in 2020 and the
current reality could not be more stark.
The disillusionment with the Biden Administration's
regional policy is palpable among our partners and allies. The
Biden Administration's early diplomatic efforts in the region,
including pressuring Saudi Arabia to cease hostilities against
the Houthis, delisting the Houthis as a foreign terrorist
organization in February 2021, and attempting to revive the
joint comprehensive plan of action with Iran has instead only
emboldened them.
According to the Foundation for Defense of Democracy, since
the start of the Biden Administration, Iran has successfully
exported oil worth more than $100 billion. This dramatic
increase in oil revenue explains how Iran is funding its
terrorist proxies externally and domestic oppression
internally.
To effectively counter Iran and its proxies, the United
States must take several steps. First, we must rigorously
enforce sanctions, targeting Iran's vital economic sectors,
such as oil exports and banking, which could significantly cut
its available funds for proxy terrorism.
Second, the U.S. must establish deterrence and protect
freedom of navigation by decisively targeting the Houthis and
their IRGC sponsors, moving beyond the current ineffective
defense-only strategy.
By disrupting their operational networks and reducing
Houthis territorial control in Yemen, along with deploying
additional U.S. military assets for rapid regional response,
the U.S. will be in a much stronger position to restore global
commerce routes through the Red Sea and Bab al-Mandab.
Third, the U.S. must enhance cooperation with regional
allies to secure necessary access basing and overflight rates.
This entails deepening strategic partnerships and expanding
intelligent sharing mechanisms to effectively counteract
Iranian influence.
Fourth, the U.S. should reinvigorate the Saudi-led
coalition's efforts to neutralize the Houthi threat in Yemen by
providing comprehensive military support, including advanced
weaponry, intelligence assistance, logistical support, and
training to Saudi forces. This should also include working with
the Northern Tribes.
Fifth, the U.S. must provide unwavering support to Israel,
both to safeguard its security but also to demonstrate our
reliability as a partner and ally.
Finally, the U.S. needs to support the protest movement
within Iran. We could be issuing official statements
recognizing the legitimacy of the protester's grievances and
offer tangible support, such as facilitating secure
communications channels for activities.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ledeen follows:]

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Wilson. Madam Secretary, to keep within time, and we
need to continue to Director Pollack, but I want to thank
because I agree with everything you have said. So I'm not
disagreeing with you. But your multi-points are very good. I
look forward to working with Congressman Connolly to try to see
what we can agree. But we now need to proceed to Director
Pollack. And, again, we need to stick to the 5-minutes so that
we can get to the floor.

STATEMENT OF KENNETH POLLACK, PhD, FORMER CIA ANALYST AND
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL DIRECTOR FOR THE PERSIAN GULF

Mr. Pollack. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Connolly, distinguished members, it's a great
honor to be able to talk to you on this important subject.
In the 5-minutes you've given me, I would like to make five
simple points to the subcommittee.
First, I want to start by saying that I have been impressed
with the Administration's response to the Houthi attacks so
far. It has been larger, more powerful, and more sustained than
I had expected. It probably has rocked the Houthis and the
Iranians, and it is undoubtedly a major element in the
diminution of Houthi attacks we have seen in recent days.
However, I am skeptical that it will achieve our ultimate
objectives.
Second point, it is certainly the case that the attacks on
Red Sea shipping are serving Iranian goals in a variety of
different ways. But we need to recognize that they are serving
Houthi goals brilliantly, independent of whatever Iran is
getting from them.
This military campaign by the Houthis distracts from
problems in governance and economic affairs in the Yemeni areas
under oppressive Houthi control. It allows them to ingratiate
themselves with the wider Arab and Muslim worlds where they
were strongly disliked, even hated before October 7. It allows
them to play on the world stage as well where their ultimate
ambitions lie.
Third, what we are attempting with the Houthis is
ultimately a strategy of coercion. And coercion requires
threatening something that the other side values more than
whatever it is you want them to do or to stop doing.
I am hopeful, but I am skeptical, that merely destroying
their anti-shipping capability will constitute such a threat to
them. I think that that requires us to consider instead that
which the Houthis clearly would value more than what they are
getting from their anti-shipping attacks and that is their
control of Yemeni territory. That is their first priority.
Moreover, the only times that we have seen the Houthis
willing to negotiate and to make compromises, let alone
concessions, have been when their control of territory has been
threatened as it was in 2018 at Hudaydah and in 2022 at Ma'rib.
That, in turn, suggests that the only way to convince the
Houthis to cease and desist from these attacks will be to
threaten them on the ground.
Now I want to be very, very clear about this. I am not
suggesting American boots on the ground in Yemen. That is
unnecessary. That would be entirely counterproductive. However,
I do believe that it will ultimately require the United States
to arm, equip, and train the anti-Houthi coalition that is
operating under the umbrella of the government of Yemen. It
could mean deploying American air power as well as we did in
support of Iraqi forces against ISIS in 2014 to 2018.
Finally, when this latest civil war broke out in Yemen, and
we should recognize Yemen has been in various states of civil
war for decades if not centuries. But when this latest round
broke out, we staunchly believed that we had no interest in
this conflict other than to shut down the fighting as soon as
possible to limit civilian casualties.
That was understandable, but it turns out it was also
mistaken. The Houthis have proven themselves to be belligerent,
aggressive, and convinced that violence is the best way to get
what they want. They also share Iran's goals of driving the
United States out of the region, destroying Israel, and
overturning the governments of American allies. They are forces
of oppression inside Yemen and forces of aggression beyond it.
Yemen, the United States, the Middle East, and the entire
world would be better off without them in power in Sana'a.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pollack:]

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Director Pollack.
We now recognize Dr. Alterman for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JON ALTERMAN, PhD, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, ZBIGNIEW
BRZEZINSKI CHAIR IN GLOBAL SECURITY AND GEOSTRATEGY, AND
DIRECTOR, MIDDLE EAST PROGRAM, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES

Mr. Alterman. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Connolly, it is an honor to appear before the committee once
again.
The Houthis are a paradox, a rag-tag military operating on
a shoestring budget that does not even represent a State should
not be a difficult adversary for the most powerful military in
the world.
Similarly, it should be easy for the United States to build
a broad military coalition to protect freedom of navigation
through seas that carry about 20 percent of global container
trade and is a key conduit of both energy and manufactured
goods to Europe. And yet here we are with Houthi forces
continually threatening global hipping and the United States
working principally with UK partners to strike at Houthi
targets while our regional allies and NATO partners keep their
distance.
Some call for robust U.S. military strikes in Iran to
punish the Iranian government for all of its destabilizing
regional actions. Some call for crushing the Houthis
completely.
I understand the attraction of decisively asserting U.S.
military power, yet doing so without clear forethought would
actually advance Iranian goals rather than U.S. ones and would
not do much to stabilize Yemen.
As I outlined in my written remarks, the United States
faces at least five threats in Yemen. The first is that the
United States actually boosts the Houthis when they demonstrate
resilience after comprehensive U.S. effort to destroy their
capabilities.
This plays into a narrative that their mere survival
represents a victory. We do not want the Houthis to present
themselves as among the fiercest and most resilient fighters in
the Middle East.
The second is that the United States glides down a slippery
slope of increased military engagement in Yemen divorced from
the scale of U.S. interests there.
I worry that this moment would be part of a long cycle of
U.S. engagement in, and disengagement from Yemen, which has
often been linked to counterterrorism and which has helped
nurture greater violence in Yemen.
The third danger is that the United States precipitates an
even greater humanitarian disaster in Yemen or is perceived to
do so. I can see circumstances in which the United States is
accused of instigating the spread of famine and disease in
Yemen with Iran, Russia, China, and some regional media
amplifying that message.
The fourth is that we fall into an Iranian trap, sucked
into a grinding, open-ended conflict in the region that
continues to put U.S. troops at risk without increasing
regional security. This will ultimately undermine both the
region's and the American public's willingness to sustain a
military presence.
The fifth is that the battle in Yemen deepens the rift
between the United States and partner militaries. It is both
remarkable and worrying that key NATO allies and key regional
allies want nothing to do with any military operations in
Yemen.
No one can consider it sustainable when the U.S. is one of
only a handful of countries willing to fight to defend public
goods. And when close partners seek to benefit from U.S.
actions without contributing to them, that is, of course, the
world that many of our adversaries in the Middle East and
around the world would like to see. And I could imagine U.S.
military action in Yemen hastening its realization.
The Iranians and the Houthis do not fight fair. They feel
their relative weakness and the virtue of their cause justifies
breaking the rules of war. They are skilled at using
asymmetrical tactics, and they position themselves to portray
their mere survival as victory.
We do not fight that way. But we are overwhelmingly the
stronger power, and we have things that each side believes it
needs. There is a role for our military strength, but we should
not forget that it is just a tool. Our ambition isn't military
victory. It is using military instruments to provoke our
adversaries to make a political decision to change. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Alterman follows:]

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much. And I thank each of you
for your testimony and to show extraordinary bipartisanship,
Congressman Connolly and I agree on something, that we all
limit it to 5 minutes, even Congresswoman Manning.
So 5 minutes, Congressman Bair. And I know he always
follows through. With that in mind, again, I want to thank all
of you for being here. Please begin the 5-minutes.
I've had a long time interest sadly visiting 4 years ago an
exhibit of downed drones that have been taken by Saudi Arabia
by the United Arab Emirates. And these drones, some had a--we
are not talking about ones you see at the grocery store,
$39.95. These have a wing span of 30 feet. And they were to
deliver munitions for indiscriminate killing of civilians.
And indeed, it was also quite clear, in English, virtually
every one of them had been made in Iran. So there was no
question where they came from. And so to me, we have got to
address this for benefit of freedom of navigation in our
country.
Additionally, I am very grateful, too, that we need to
stand together for freedom to have peace through strength, and
we need to address and know that freedom is not free. And I,
particularly, sympathize sadly with the three Georgia Army
Reservists who were killed. And I have had sons serve in Iraq,
Egypt, and Afghanistan. All four of my sons have served in the
global war on terrorism, which is not over. The terrorists have
many plans for us, which is really clear, of death to America,
death to Israel.
With all of that in mind, and I do want to congratulate
Secretary Ledeen, you do have clear forethought. So you all
should get together with the different points that you have.
And we need to be clear. And in particular the providing of
funding by oil sales is just totally out of what should be done
to actually promote peace through strength in the world.
With that in mind, Secretary Ledeen, why did the Biden
Administration choose not to apply the stronger of two
designations given on the foreign terrorist organization
designation which criminalizes providing materials, support,
and resources, which is so desperately needed to control the
Iran puppets?
Ms. Ledeen. Chairman Wilson, thanks for the opportunity to
respond.
I think first and foremost, it is clear that the Biden
Administration from the beginning of this conflict has done the
bare minimum. I think they realize that there is a political
outcry because global shipping has been put at risk.
So to continue to do nothing was not acceptable. So instead
the decision clearly has been made to do in terms of putting
new sanctions, the bare minimum. So redesignating the Houthis
as a specially designated under a Treasury Department
designation rather than the stronger foreign terrorist
organization designation, so in order to say we have done
something.
But I would compare that, sir, to the responses that we are
seeing militarily, defensive in nature only, so in order to say
they are doing something. But the reality is our partners and
allies, and unfortunately the IRGC and their Houthis proxies,
see very clearly that we are not taking real action. And so the
attacks are continuing, and they will continue until a more
forceful response is initiated.
Mr. Wilson. And Director Pollack, indeed, the lack of
response to me is very troubling because we have had attacks by
the puppets of Iran that affect 40 different countries. This is
not just America, not just the United Kingdom. And the effect
of delivering grain to countries, causing potential starvation
around the world, this is a defensive action on our part. What
more can we do to degrade the Iranian capabilities in the Red
Sea?
Mr. Pollack. I think we need to recognize that Iran is
trying to wage war against the United States and its allies all
across the region. The Red Sea is one theater. And the Houthis
are one actor in that.
And I think that what we need to recognize is that we need
to push back on the Iranians everywhere. The best way that we
can push back on the Iranians everywhere is by helping our
allies everywhere. And unfortunately for the last, at least 15
years, and let's recognize it has been under the last two
Administrations, including this one, that our allies have felt
time and again that the United States has not been there to
support them. That they have been forced to take on the
Iranians on their own.
And as a result, we have seen our allies make compromises
with the Iranians, mostly recently, and I think most
flagrantly, the agreement between the Saudis and the Iranians
brokered by the Chinese. Again, too much has been made of that,
but nonetheless, it is a clear sign that these are all
countries, allies of ours, that simply do not believe that the
United States is supporting them and that therefore they have
to make compromises which they did not want to make.
Mr. Wilson. Director, thank you. I thank each of you. And
now I proceed to Congressman Gerry Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. I am going to defer to Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. If there ever was a foreign
terrorist organization, it is the Houthi. We have not
designated them. We are not designating them because that could
possibly interfere with feeding the people they rule.
This would come as a shock to General Douglas MacArthur if
in the day after Pearl Harbor he had been informed that his No.
1 objective was to feed the civilians of Japan.
Those who cheer the Houthi, who shout their praises, claim
to be progressives. They should take responsibility for the
death that the Houthi have caused not just in Yemen but
elsewhere.
You see 20 percent of Ukraine's grain exports go through
the Red Sea, similar amounts from other countries. When that
grain price goes up, people in East Africa and Ethiopia and
Tigray and poor parts of South Asia do not eat as much. They
cannot afford it. And they die. Not wasting disease that you
can capture on a video, but rather they are eating two meals
instead of three, and that increases their susceptibility to
death.
I would like without objection to put in the record an
article from The Advocate, perhaps the leading LGBTQ+
publication in America, which is headlined, Houthi Court
Sentences 13 Men to Public Execution for Gay Sex.
Now that is just one court in one province at one time. How
many members of the LGBTQ+ are brutally killed by the Houthi
year in and year out? So there is blood on the hands of the
Houthi. There is blood on the hands of those who prevent us
from taking effective action against them and shout their
praises. And I see that blood is actually on the hands of
people visible to me right now.
OK. I would ask for some additional time. I think Dr.
Pollack, you had it exactly right. We cannot limit ourselves to
just trying to prevent the Houthi--reduce the amount by which
the Houthi intercept shipping. We have to provide weapons to
the legitimate government of Yemen and its allies.
Dr. Pollack, Iran benefits from freedom of navigation
around the world. Is it morally right that not a single Iranian
ship has been stopped by the U.S. Navy, even for a day, when
Iran interferes with the Commerce of the entire world?
Mr. Pollack. The morality of it I simply am not qualified
to comment on. Strategically, what I will say is that the
United States has chosen not to do so repeatedly for a wide
variety of reasons.
But I think that it is important. I think that the question
that you are asking, Congressman, is a very important one. And
it should be on the table.
As my dear friend, Dr. Alterman, has pointed out, the
Iranians do not fight by the rules. They do not play by the
rules. And we have handcuffed ourselves time and again in
trying to respond effectively by doing so when they choose not
to.
We are confronted all across the region by a very
determined, wile and unscrupulous adversary. We owe it to put
all of the options on the table and consider them.
Mr. Sherman. So if a ship taking luxury goods to Iran was
delayed for a day or two, would Tehran get the message?
Mr. Pollack. They might very well. We have seen that in the
past, the Iranians are incredibly cautious and respectful of
American military power. When they believe that there is no
threat that we will employ it, they do whatever they can. When
they believe that there is a chance we will employ it, they
suddenly become much more cautious and respectful.
Mr. Sherman. I would finally point out that they have a
durable cease-fire in Gaza. We need to see Hamas leave Gaza
just as we saw in 1982 when a terrorist left Lebanon. And a
durable cease-fire cannot exist if Hamas is there because they
have already declared.
They want to repeat October 7 again and again until the
blood of Israelis flows again and again. That is the goal of
Hamas, and that is the goal of those who support Hamas.
Mr. Wilson. I would like to remind the audience that
disruption of committee proceedings is against the law. Holding
up signs or making verbal, ignorant outbursts during the
proceedings is disruptive, the ignorant outbursts,
particularly.
Any disruptions will result in a suspension of proceedings
until the Capitol Police can restore order. And indeed there
should be understanding there are people here who want peace
through strength. With that, I now recognize the Congressman
from Georgia, Congressman Dr. Veteran Rich McCormick.
Mr. McCormick. I believe there is more people to remove,
Mr. Chair, but I will start for now.
I appreciate the witnesses' willingness to be here and to
point out some very important things to us, both strategically
and morally that I think will affect the future of the United
States and global peace, which is ultimately what every warrior
wants.
Anybody who has ever put their life on the line to go
overseas for their nation does not want war. I do not want my
sons to go serve overseas and die. I want them to live. I want
them to live in peace.
With that, I think it is very important to recognize what
we have done and what the consequences are. In February 2021,
the Biden Administration removed the Houthis, which were on the
foreign terrorist organization designation and their specially
designated terrorist group designation when the Trump
Administration had put it in place.
At the time, Secretary Blinken cited humanitarian concerns
as the reasons for these decisions, saying that the
humanitarian aid could not reach the Yemen people if these
designations remain in place.
I want to make a few points I went on the fire freshman
CODEL to Bangladesh, the largest refugee camp in the world, a
million people have been displaced through violence who are
living off of now $8 per person per month.
There is people all over--we have a record number of
refugees all over the world right now starving, displaced,
being raped, being killed constantly. And yet we are more
worried about idealism than realism when it comes to who we aid
and who we abet.
And this is the problem. When we talk about worrying about
designations so that we can help a people that the money is not
even getting to, that the help is not even getting to when you
have an evil regime that is keeping the food from getting to
the people who need it most.
And instead, we have created an environment where the
Iranians. When we are talking about realism and who we are
trying to assist and who we are trying to claim as our
friends--I think it goes without saying that I will reclaim my
time.
OK. Very good. Thank you. Ms. Ledeen, do you believe that
the Biden Administration's reasoning for removing the Houthis
from the FTO designation was accurate and the correct step in
addressing the humanitarian crisis in Yemen?
Ms. Ledeen. No, I do not.
Mr. McCormick. Do you think that the aid that has been
forthcoming goes to the right people?
Ms. Ledeen. No, I do not.
Mr. McCormick. Exactly my point. I think we need to be more
concerned in supporting the resistance in Iran, for example,
those people who would stand up against the injustices against
women and children, against education, against rights.
And there we go with the absolute understanding of realism
versus idealism. Iran is an evil regime. It is a theocracy that
oppresses its people. It has kept women from their natural God
given rights.
And yet we are more concerned with not getting food to the
people that when we give aid to these corrupt agencies than we
are with a resistance to a regime that is actually supporting
all of our enemies, all around the world, and actually trying
to kill Americans to the hundreds and thousands of efforts with
armed aggression toward our troops overseas.
We have lost Navy SEALs. We have lost Army National Guard.
We have lost American lives. And we have put them in jeopardy
every single day for the last, not just several months, but
several years because of our policy.
Dr. Pollack, how would you explain the Biden
Administration's seemingly timid defensive response to the
Houthi aggression? Is it fair to speculate that it is due in
part to the Administration's desire to revive the Iran nuclear
deal?
Mr. Pollack. Congressman, first I would encourage you to
have the Administration come and defend its own policies. But
since you have asked me to speculate, I can certainly do so. I
do suspect that that is part of what is going on. I think that
they are hoping that at some point they can get back to it. And
I think that just broadly speaking their approach has been to
assume that negotiations are most likely when you start by
making concessions to the other side.
I understand the logic behind that, but historically, I do
not think that it is ever proven to be accurate. People come to
the table when they have a reason to do so. If you remove that
reason for coming to the table, they either do not come or they
show up not believing that they have to actually make
concessions.
Mr. McCormick. Well put, sir. It has been my experience in
my over 20 years of Marine Corps and Navy experience around the
world, whether it be in Africa, or the Middle East, or the Far
East, or anywhere else we are in combatant zones, that evil
people only understand one thing, and that's strength, and
that's what creates peace, not weakness, not concessions.
And I think whether it be President Carter, President
Obama, or President Biden, what I have seen is that every time
we give concessions, bad things are the result. And therefore,
I would encourage my allies on both sides of the aisle, and I
think we have made really good points from both sides of the
aisle, to recognize evil and to deal with it accordingly. And
with that, I yield.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Dr. McCormick. And we now
proceed to Congressman Gerry Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Alterman,
welcome back. Good to see you again. Ms. Ledeen and others have
characterized the Biden Administration response to the Houthi
threat as timid. Do you share that view?
Mr. Alterman. I would describe it as cautious rather than
timid. But I would argue the Trump Administration was rather
timid about the Houthis as well. After all----
Mr. Connolly. The one that Ms. Ledeen worked for?
Mr. Alterman. I am not, sir. Actually, I am a historian.
And I am sorry, I am a historian.
Mr. Connolly. I was just saying the pot calling the kettle
black just needs to be called out.
Mr. Alterman. Exactly.
Mr. Connolly. So go ahead.
Mr. Alterman. The gentleman from Virginia and I worked
together when he was a young man, and I was a very young man.
So we go back a little while.
The Trump Administration did not designate the Houthis as a
foreign terrorist organization until the last days, the last 2
days of the Trump Administration.
There are excruciatingly difficult problems involved with
characterizing the Houthis as a foreign terrorist organization,
in particular well-meaning people attempting to save lives----
Mr. Connolly. I know, I have got to interrupt you. I only
have 5 minutes.
Mr. Alterman. OK.
Mr. Connolly. So got it. So part of this timid
characterization apparently seems to be we are not willing to
go in more forcefully militarily to address the Houthi threat
in the Red Sea and elsewhere.
Remind us, was there not a pretty forceful military
intervention by the Saudis in Yemen against the Houthi for some
period of time?
Mr. Alterman. There has been an almost 9-year effort by the
Saudis. The Saudis are now trying to negotiate their way out
of----
Mr. Connolly. Dr. Alterman, please, answer the question. I
did not ask that part. I am getting there. I am getting there.
Mr. Alterman. Sorry, sir.
Mr. Connolly. So how did that work out for the Saudis? Nine
years of kinetic involvement that apparently others want the
United States to emulate?
Mr. Alterman. In fact it was only 2 years into the Saudi
engagement in Yemen that the Iranians got deeply involved with
providing precisely the weapons that the chairman referred to.
That did not start at the beginning.
Mr. Connolly. But Dr. Pollack made the point----
Mr. Alterman. That was already 2 years into the Saudi War.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. But Dr. Pollack made the point,
a good one, I thought, that the Houthis, what they care about
is territory. Did the Houthis expand or contract territory
during this 9 year interval of Saudi aggression?
Mr. Alterman. My recollection it was mostly a stalemate.
There was an initial period where they lost some territory, and
things have been----
Mr. Connolly. So if one of the goals of the Saudis was to
restrict the Houthis and to regain territory, it apparently did
not work, is that correct?
Mr. Alterman. Correct.
Mr. Connolly. Right, it did not work. So it isn't timidity
for the Saudis now to look at other options, one of which is
engagement. Is that fair?
Mr. Alterman. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. And would it be fair to say and the United
States is encouraging that because of the lack of results of
the alternative that was indeed tried over a 9-year period?
Mr. Alterman. As well as the concern that there could be an
open-ended regional conflict with no obvious endpoint.
Mr. Connolly. Again, you are going far afield.
Mr. Alterman. Sorry, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Your brilliance precedes you, but you are
answering questions not yet asked. But OK, that was my next
one. What are the risks of the United States now with the best
of intentions, deciding to expand its military response to the
Houthi attacks? What are the risks of that? What could go
wrong?
Mr. Alterman. Well, one risk is that the Houthis keep doing
it, and we look ineffectual. One risk is that we end up in an
open-ended conflict defending soft targets all over the world
that are hard to defend. The problem is we have to be
successful 100 percent of the time. And if we are successful 99
percent of the time, our adversaries point to the 1 percent,
and our people point to the 1 percent, and we look like we are
failing instead of succeeding.
Mr. Connolly. Is there a reason to believe that the
engagement that the Administration and the Saudis are involved
in with the Houthis has promise of any kind of success?
Mr. Alterman. I think it has promise of some success. I
agree very much with Ken that you have to come into
negotiations strong. But I also think that you have to be
willing to let bad people get something, not because you like
them but because they are a reality.
Mr. Connolly. And that something for the Houthis is
ultimately a participation in governance of Yemen.
Mr. Alterman. I think participation, not control.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Mr. Alterman. Participation in governance.
Mr. Connolly. I thank you. And I thank you, Chairman. I
yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman Connolly, for abiding by
the 5-minute rule. We now proceed to Congressman Jim Baird of
Indiana.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank our witnesses
for being here today. You know, on Monday, the terrorist
organization, the Houthis we have been talking a lot about
here, I will call them terrorist because that is what they
really are. But they launched an attack on an Iran bound grain
cargo ship.
And as you know, Iran is a major Houthi ally. And this
attack makes it clear that they were just widely targeting
ships without a direct motive. And they claim that their
strikes have been a response to the situation in Gaza. However,
they have been targeting the ships that have absolutely no
links to Israel.
So are the Houthis using the war on Israel as an excuse to
organize these inconsistent attacks? And can you explain the
actual impact that these attacks have had on agricultural goods
through the Bab al-Mandab? So Secretary Ledeen, would you want
to start that discussion?
Ms. Ledeen. Yes, thank you. I think it is important to look
at the Houthi decisionmaking in the framework of being
effectively and actually a proxy of Iran. So they are part of
this regional escalation that Iran has underway right now. And
they are one--you know, the analogy has been made frequently
that the Iranian regime is like an octopus, the head of the
octopus, and there are many different tentacles, the Houthis
being one.
So as we consider the decisionmaking of the Houthis, I
think it is important to note Iran plays a very large role in
that decisionmaking, especially as they provide a lot of the
weapons that the Houthis are using. So I would characterize is
that way.
In terms of the disruption of shipping, specifically of
agricultural products, that is clearly one of their primary
intents. They want to disrupt global shipping. They want to
increase the prices. They want to hurt us.
In a way, we would think about it as effectively an Iranian
sanction against us because they are raising the price of
goods. And the longer this goes on, the higher these prices
will become.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. Dr. Pollack, do you have any thoughts
on that?
Mr. Pollack. Absolutely. I think that you are absolutely
correct, Mr. Congressman, in that initially the Houthis did
begin these attacks in hope of showing solidarity with the
Palestinians because, as I mentioned, they were deeply, deeply
unpopular in both the Arab and Muslim world beforehand. And
this was a perfect opportunity for them to ingratiate
themselves with both communities.
But I think you are exactly right that the Houthis are
getting a tremendous amount from these attacks. This is exactly
what they wanted. And what we've seen as the Administration has
pointed out, they are attacking ships that have no connection
to Israel whatsoever.
It is very useful for them. It is terrific for them to
demonstrate their importance, their power in the world by
shutting down or threatening to shut down one of the world's
most important shipping routes.
Mr. Baird. Dr. Alterman, do you----
Mr. Alterman. And, Congressman, the other important thing
is the Houthis are really bad at governance. They are really
bad at governance. They are very unpopular. But being at war
means that they bring people together. There is solidarity that
comes from being at a war footing. Yemen has been at war. A lot
of people like using weapons in Yemen. And the weapons are on
display.
There is a way in which being at war is much better for the
Houthis because it means that people aren't criticizing them
for being so bad at running Yemen.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. I am about to run out of time so I
think--I have got more questions, but I appreciate your
answers. And I am going to yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman Jim Baird. We now
proceed to Congressman Brad Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
you for calling this meeting. I want to thank the witnesses for
being here. It is good to see you guys as always. Maybe I will
start with Dr. Pollack.
When did the U.S. designate Hezbollah and Hamas as
terrorist organizations? Do you remember?
Mr. Pollack. I cannot answer that. I am sorry, Congressman.
Mr. Schneider. I can. I looked it up. But it was October 8,
1997. Was the U.S. right to designate Hezbollah and Hamas as
terrorist organizations?
Mr. Pollack. Absolutely.
Mr. Schneider. You do not want to disagree with that? Was
the U.S. right to designate the Houthis as a terrorist
organization, Dr. Pollack?
Mr. Pollack. Yes, I would say they would. They certainly
meet the definition.
Mr. Schneider. I think where we find ourselves--I am just
going to tell my wife I cannot take her call right now--where
we find ourselves, we face an immediate crisis with global
implications. The Houthis are threatening global trade. They
are citing excuses, but I think as you guys noted, they are
achieving their own goals, covering up their inability to
govern. And we need to address that crisis with great urgency.
But there is also a longer term crisis that has more local
implications, regional implications, which is the crisis facing
Yemen and the governance of Yemen, creating one of the largest,
not the largest, humanitarian crisis in the world.
And the victims of this are the people of Yemen. And, you
know, the Houthis have their own agenda, but it is certainly
not to lift up the people of Yemen.
I mention Hezbollah, Hamas, the Houthis, is there a common
thread to those three organizations, Dr. Pollack?
Mr. Pollack. Well, let's see, they all start with H in
English.
Mr. Schneider. That's not what I had in mind, and you know
that.
Mr. Pollack. They are all backed by Iran.
Mr. Schneider. Right.
Mr. Pollack. They are all anti-American groups. They are
all anti-Israel groups. They all employ violence against
civilians to achieve their ends.
Mr. Schneider. And I am going to quote from your prepared
comments, but Iran is our enemy not because we want them to be,
but because the government of Iran wants us to be. Would the
same be true of the Houthis?
Mr. Pollack. Absolutely. I think as you know well, their
slogan is God is great, death to America, death to Israel,
curse the Jews, victory to Islam.
Mr. Schneider. Right. In fact as they cheer that and chant
that cheer, they are saluting. Their salute is not the typical
salute we think of, but it's the Nazi salute.
The Houthis are anti-American, anti-Israel, and anti-
Semitic. And they are a threat, as I mentioned, to the region
but also a threat to the people of Yemen.
Dr. Alterman, one of the things we have to do is not just
interdict Iran from supporting the Houthis, but find a way to
end that support. Any suggestions on what we can do in Congress
to try to address that and change that support?
Mr. Alterman. I think partly it is important to recall that
the Houthis aren't really strategic for the Iranians. The
Houthis are a little bit of a freebie. The Houthis only cost
the Iranians maybe about $100 million a year, which is about
twice what it costs to run a think tank in Washington, but very
impactful, as you have said.
And I think we have to persuade the Iranians that the
Houthis aren't worth it. And I worry that instead, we are
persuading the Iranians the Houthis are totally worth it
because we are getting wrapped around the axle in talking about
a whole regional program.
And they are a regional threat as you say, but I think we
have to right size the nature of the Houthi threat. I think
degrading their military capabilities is the right thing. But
getting into a war of wills over the Houthis, I worry, is going
to leave them victorious and looking strong, and us looking
weak.
Mr. Schneider. And I am running out of time, but I forget
which of you said it, but you used the term coercion, and
coercion is convincing, whether it is the Houthis or the
Iranians, that the cost of the actions they are taking are far
less--no the benefits of the actions they are taking are far
less than the cost.
And we have to work to ratchet up the consequences and the
cost for both the Houthis and the Iranians to change their
course because we cannot allow the Houthis to disrupt global
trade. And that is an interest not just for the United States
but for all of our allies. And we cannot allow what is
happening today to end hope for the people of Yemen who are
suffering and deserve the right to govern themselves.
I am over my time with that. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman Brad
Schneider. We now proceed to Congressman Michael Lawler of New
York.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When President Biden
took office, he made a lot of ill thought out, and frankly
foolish foreign policy decisions but at the top of the list was
delisting the Houthis.
While the Houthis were a designated foreign terrorist
organization under the Trump Administration for clear reasons,
President Biden almost immediately took them off the list. He
did this apparently in an attempt to encourage the Houthis to
reduce hostilities, enter into talks, and improve the
conditions for the Yemeni people, but shockingly just the
opposite happened. The Houthis did not reduce hostilities, and
instead renewed efforts to expand territorial control inside of
Yemen.
We have also been unable to negotiate a meaningful
resolution with the Houthis. And, of course, the Yemeni people
are still living under oppression.
Dr. Pollack, can you go into some detail about the
conditions and abuses the Yemeni people living under Houthi
control have been living in for the past few years?
Mr. Pollack. Briefly, Dr. Alterman began this. Houthis have
terrible governance. They do not understand how to run a
country. They never were particularly interested in doing so. I
think they were surprised when they had the opportunity to do
so.
The economy is Yemen is stalled badly. As we all know,
there are enormous problems in terms of food distribution. Oil
production--well, the Houthis have very little control over it.
But in their area, there is very little going on.
And we also need to recognize that the international
community has been very rightly concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Yemen for many years. The Houthis
have not. Very famously in 2018, a joint Yemen government and
Emirati force was threatening to take the last Houthi
controlled seaport of Hudaydah.
The world was terrified that there would be slaughter in
Hudaydah. We descended upon the Emiratis. And the Yemeni
government begged them to stop. They agreed to do so. The
Houthis were forced to sign an agreement because they were
about to lose Hudaydah. And the idea was they would leave
Hudaydah to enable humanitarian supplies. They, of course,
immediately reneged.
Mr. Lawler. So that we are clear here, delisting the
Houthis did nothing to help the Yemeni people and worsened
regional security. In light of this Administration's failed
policy and the Houthis continued aggression against the U.S.,
Ms. Ledeen, do you think the group should be relisted as an
FTO?
Ms. Ledeen. As soon as possible, yes.
Mr. Lawler. Ms. Ledeen, do the Houthis meet all of the
qualifications to be listed as an FTO?
Ms. Ledeen. Absolutely, they do, yes.
Mr. Lawler. And we passed a bill through this committee
last week to require the relisting of the Houthis as an FTO. So
from that bill and from this conversation and from my
absolutely clear picture of what is happening in the Gulf
region, it is my hope that the Administration does the right
thing and relists them immediately as an FTO.
One of the bills that I passed through the House Foreign
Affairs Committee was the SHIP Act, which I led with my friend
and colleague, Jared Moskowitz.
This bill would establish new sanctions on entities that
process illicit Iranian petroleum. Ports and refineries that
facilitate Iran's oil trade are effectively financing the
Iranian regime and its terrorist proxies.
It is no secret that Iran sends financial and material
assistance to Hamas, Hezbollah, and the Houthis just to name a
few. Can you all confirm that Iran provides funding to
terrorist groups in the region?
Ms. Ledeen. Yes, they do.
Mr. Pollack. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Alterman. Yes.
Mr. Lawler. Do you all believe that the President and his
Administration, State Department, and Defense Department know,
just like all of you, that Iran funds these terrorist groups?
Ms. Ledeen. There is no doubt, yes.
Mr. Pollack. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Alterman. Yes.
Mr. Lawler. How have Iran's proxy activities changed since
the Biden Administration came into office and relaxed
enforcement of sanctions. Has it gotten better?
Ms. Ledeen. Far from it. They have become much more violent
and aggressive. And they have caused many deaths and
destruction across the region, yes.
Mr. Alterman. Mr. Lawler, I think after the assassination
of Qasem Soleimani, the head of the Quds Force of the Islamic
Republican Guard, many of these proxy groups have had more
autonomy.
And I think the Iranians have enjoyed the fact that they
have had less responsibility and less control and that in many
ways they have reaped more benefits from the misbehavior of
these groups, but they have less control over these groups than
they had under Qasem Soleimani.
Mr. Lawler. So is your argument that Soleimani should have
been left alone?
Mr. Alterman. My argument is that assassinating Qasem
Soleimani has not ended the threat from the Iranian proxy
groups. And in many ways, the way it has morphed----
Mr. Lawler. Did you oppose his assassination?
Mr. Alterman. Nobody asked--do I oppose it now? I am saying
it did not have the desired effect because----
Mr. Lawler. Well, it does not have the desired effect
because this Administration has weakened its sanctions. When
you allow oil revenues to increase $80 billion, nearly 60
percent since this Administration took office, and these funds
are being used to fund Hamas, to fund Hezbollah, to fund the
Houthis, then, yes, you are right.
There is not a good consequence of that. But that has
nothing to do with assassinating Soleimani. That has everything
to do with this Administration's policy position to be weak on
Iran. That is a policy choice that this Administration has
made. And that is a function of relaxing sanctions on the sale
of Iranian petroleum.
That is why I introduced the SHIP Act. China is the biggest
purchaser of Iranian petroleum.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, you asked us to abide by 5
minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressperson Lawler. So
we need to proceed.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wilson. And I was trying to be respectful to the
Congressman from Tennessee to get him back over here to sit
quietly so he could ask his questions. And now I refer to the
Congressperson from Tennessee Tim Burchett, the former mayor of
Knoxville.
Mr. Burchett. Knox County. But it is a little bigger than
Knoxville City, but still thank you. Thank you, Mr. Baird.
Ms. Ledeen--is it Ledeen or Layden? Ms.----
Ms. Ledeen. Ledeen, yes.
Mr. Burchett. Ledeen, I'm sorry. Nobody gets my name right,
either, ma'am. So we're good.
What have the recent strikes in Yemen achieved?
Ms. Ledeen. There has been no demonstrable change since the
strikes in Yemen.
Mr. Burchett. In your opinion, what needs to be targeted so
that these strikes will be more effective and that we do not
keep hitting the same dadgum targets?
Ms. Ledeen. I think we can, as a benchmark, use the
insurance prices and shipping companies' decisions to reroute
around the Horn of Africa as a sort of guide for this.
But the recommendations that I have made in my oral and
written testimony are really focused on empowering our partners
and allies. But, yes, we should also be taking strikes against
Houthi targets and IRGC targets that are training and equipping
the Houthis as well.
And that is--we know where those are. And we should be
taking more aggressive action not simply defensive actions.
Mr. Burchett. It seems to me also that we keep hitting the
targets. I mean, we are not doing anything effective. Yes, we
are showing them our capabilities. But to me, that does not--it
is just a waste of resources.
Dr. Pollack, did I get that name right? All right. Good
deal.
Mr. Pollack. Yes. And talk about a name that gets
mispronounced frequently. Well done.
Mr. Burchett. Yes, sir. Should we be concerned about any
attempts to legitimize the Houthis as a government?
Mr. Pollack. I think that we should. We need to recognize
that this is not the government that the people of Yemen would
choose if they ever had the opportunity to do so.
Mr. Burchett. Right.
Mr. Pollack. I agree with Dr. Alterman that they represent,
or they may represent a portion of the Yemeni population, but
they do not come close to representing the majority of the
people of Yemen.
Mr. Burchett. Do you feel like the Saudis would be willing
to accept the Houthis de facto government in order to end their
involvement in Yemen?
Mr. Pollack. I think that what we have seen from the
Saudis, especially since 2019, is that they probably would
simply because they do not feel like they have any better
alternative. But I think that they very much would regard it as
their least bad option.
Mr. Burchett. OK. And I would like to ask this question,
but maybe the rest of you all could answer it as well. Can you
speak to the human rights abuses committed by the Houthi
rebels?
Ms. Ledeen. I can start. I can talk about their pervasive
use of child soldiers. That is an absolute disgrace and----
Mr. Burchett. Did you say child tortures?
Ms. Ledeen. Child soldiers.
Mr. Burchett. Soldiers, OK. I'm sorry. I did not hear that
right.
Ms. Ledeen. That is a heavily documented phenomenon that if
you are not familiar, I sincerely recommend looking into it. It
has been a problem for quite a while. And in the wake of these
recent attacks, there has actually been a surge of people
sending their children, you know, to join the Houthis.
And it is truly a humanitarian catastrophe when you
consider the coming generation in Yemen and what they may be
like, and what we might be dealing with, you know, in the next
generation. They are already building that.
So I think that is one point. Obviously, there is a
complete breakdown in medical care. There is pervasive
starvation. My colleagues here can talk about that, I think, in
further detail.
Mr. Burchett. Dr. Alterman?
Mr. Alterman. There are issues of women's rights, LGBTQ
rights as the gentleman from California talked about, basic
rule of law. This is government of thugs. It resembles in many
ways a place run by organized crime. And the misery of the
people of Yemen is pervasive and continues every day.
Mr. Burchett. All right. Women are just basically
possessions, and gay folks are thrown off of buildings, that
type of scenario, is that what you are telling me?
Mr. Alterman. This is both a repressive government and a
government that believes it is asserting traditional values,
which is anathema to our understanding of individual freedoms
and human rights.
Mr. Burchett. Dr. Pollack?
Mr. Pollack. I will just add to that, Congressman. It is
worth recognizing that the Zaidis are a very important old
community of Yemen. Before 1962, it was a Zaidi Imamate that
ruled Yemen.
But the Houthis are a fundamentalist element within the
Zaidi community. And they are, again, oppressive, totalitarian
in their behavior, fundamentalist in their outlook. And I do
not think that we have a very good handle on even how many
Zaidis support the Houthi rule.
I think that there is--I will put this as considerable
anecdotal information that suggests that there are plenty of
Zaidis who look at the Houthis and say these are not the people
we would want telling us how to live our lives.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Thank you. I have gone over. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your indulgence.
Mr. Wilson. Hear, hear. Thank you very much, Congressman
Burchett, all the way from Knox County, Tennessee.
With this in mind, I would like to thank the witnesses for
their valuable testimony and the members for their questions.
The members of the subcommittee may have additional questions
for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to these in
writing.
Pursuant to committee rules, all the members may have 5
days to submit statements, questions and extraneous materials
for the record, subject to length limitations.
And I would also like to thank the committee staff for
their dedication and, again, this is bipartisan. Congressman
Connolly and I frequently work on issues together, remarkably
enough. And so we can work together with a very capable staff
of the Foreign Affairs Committee and of the subcommittee.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:25 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT
