- CHINA'S POLITICAL PRISONERS: WHERE'S GAO ZHISHENG?

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CHINA'S POLITICAL PRISONERS: WHERE'S GAO ZHISHENG?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GLOBAL HEALTH, GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS AND INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS

of

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 20, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-21

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-648PDF           WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California             GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida                  DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   AMI BERA, California
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee              JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee             DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  TED LIEU, California
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
YOUNG KIM, California                DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        COLIN ALLRED, Texas
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              ANDY KIM, New Jersey
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       SARA JACOBS, California
American Samoa                   KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                SHEILA CHERFILUS-McCORMICK,
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                       Florida
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   GREG STANTON, Arizona
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey         JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York             JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
CORY MILLS, Florida                  SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, TexaS               JASON CROW, Colorado
JOHN JAMES, Michigan                 BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Global Health, Global Human Rights and International
Organizations

CHRISTOPHER SMITH, New Jersey, Chair
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida        SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania, Ranking
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,           Member
American Samoa                   AMI BERA, California
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                SARA JACOBS, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
JOHN JAMES, Michigan

Mary Vigil, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Bremberg, Andrew, President, Victims of Communism Memorial
Foundation.....................................................    10
Fu, Bob, President, China Aid Association........................    20
He, Geng, Wife of Mr. Gao Zhisheng...............................    29
Luo, Sophie,Wife of Mr. Ding Jiaxi...............................    33
Wang, Yaqiu, Senior China Researcher, Human Right Watch..........    43
Kellogg, Thomas, Executive Director, Georgetown University Center
for Asian Law..................................................    52

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    77
Hearing Minutes..................................................    79
Hearing Attendance...............................................    80

ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Additional materials submitted for the record....................    81

CHINA'S POLITICAL PRISONERS: WHERE'S GAO ZHISHENG?

Thursday, April 20, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Global Health, Global
Human Rights, and International
Organizations,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:11 a.m., in
room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Christopher H.
Smith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Smith. The committee will come to order, and welcome to
all of you.
This is I think a very, very important hearing on political
prisoners in China and we have an amazing group of presenters--
of witnesses, people who can tell the story like perhaps no one
else can.
So thank you all in advance for being here and greatly
looking forward to your testimoneys and your answers to the
question.
Gao Zhisheng is a smart, tenacious, compassionate,
brilliant lawyer and writer, an absolutely courageous human
rights defender who has been cruelly and unjustly detained by
the Chinese Communist Party beginning in 2006, in and out of
prison, constantly being harassed and tortured with absolute
impunity.
Today is Gao Zhisheng's 59th birthday and we are honored to
welcome his wife Geng He back to testify. And this is her third
time coming before the committee to present on behalf of her
husband and all the other political prisoners.
Geng He is an extraordinarily brave and pioneering and
perserverer in her own right and articulates to the world the
urgent message of freeing her husband and all political and
religious prisoners.
In 2012 Geng He testified at a hearing that I chaired of
the congressional Executive China Commission and told us how
Gao Zhisheng was first convicted in 2006, the beginning of a
never-ending nightmare of torture and abuse. At the hearing she
told us that she had asked to meet with Vice President Joe
Biden; sadly it did not happen, and for him to at least raise
her husband's case on the same day as our hearing. We timed it
because guess who was in town? Xi Jinping, who was then the
vice president of the People's Republic of China. Unfortunately
it was not raised either.
She testified again in 2013 and began this all-out effort
to get both the House and the Senate and the White House to
speak out. And of course all the human rights groups spoke out
on his behalf and we have continued to do so today.
When I chaired yet another hearing in 2013; we called it
Let Our Fathers Go, it included five daughters of prisoners of
conscience. Gao's daughter Grace told us of her and her
family's unspeakable agony knowing that her father was being
subjected to torture and how she and her family were harassed
unceasingly. She went into great detail that even in her
classroom the police would sit there intimidating and maligning
her in front of her students, following her even into the
bathroom, never leaving her alone for a moment. Thankfully she
and the rest of the family were able to escape to the United
States.
At the hearing Grace and the other four daughters made a
special plea and asked President Obama to meet with them. The
daughters said that President Obama has two daughters that he
loved so much and would empathize with their plight and would
advocate for their fathers if they could only see him face to
face. I tried for a year to make that happen. The White House
told me that the President simply did not have the time to meet
with them.
But the Washington Post editorial page editor Fred Hiatt,
however, wrote an excellent piece about the five daughters, an
op-ed, signed op-ed that he did on the editorial pages of the
Washington Post. And he wrote many, many excellent editorials
about human rights in China as well. And he called it ``The
Five Daughters Speak Up for Their Fathers.'' And he made so
many great points about all five of the daughters including
Grace. And I without objection, would like to include this as
part of the record.
[The information referred to follows:]

*********INFORMATION NOT AVAILABLE AT PRESS
RELEASE**********

Mr. Smith. Today we renew our efforts once again to free
Gao Zhisheng. Today we appeal to Xi Jinping to free other
political prisoners as well.
On April 10 two of China's leading human rights defenders:
Ding Jiaxi whose wife is also here with us today as a witness;
and Xu Zhiyoung were sentenced to more than a decade in prison.
They were convicted on fabricated charges of subversion, just
like Gao Zhisheng and so many others, because they bravely
urged Chinese citizens to exercise their fundamental human
rights.
The Chinese Communist Party finds these men so threatening;
and there are many women as well that have been incarcerated
for their heartfelt beliefs, that it is trying to silence their
voices, but it cannot silence their hopes and dreams of
democracy and respect for universally recognized human rights.
So we thank Geng He and Sophie Luo for being here today to
speak about their experience of oppression under the CCP rule.
They speak on behalf of their husbands. And we need to listen,
both in the House and the Senate, and the White House. And the
world needs to listen as well.
We all know what tyranny is. We know that China has
excelled in it, especially more recently under Xi Jinping,
however in 1989 the world watched in horror as the Chinese
Communist Party brutally crushed peaceful protestors in
Tiananmen Square. China lost an entire generation of idealists
to the tanks that rolled in that day and the savage hunt for
human rights offenders that followed. And in Congress, we in a
bipartisan way remember that massacre each and every year to
honor the victims who have never received justice.
I actually visited Beijing Prison No. 1 in 1991 along with
Congressman Frank Wolf in a gulag that was terrible to see, and
we saw 40 Tiananmen Square activists with shaved heads. They
looked gaunt, they looked sickly. And they were making shoes,
jelly shoes which were much in vogue with the young girls in
this country at that time, and socks for export.
Well, Frank and I got samples while we were there because
it is in violation of the Smoot-Hawley Act. And we went to the
commissioner of Customs and we got an import ban on them. And
they closed down that gulag, only to open it up somewhere else,
as we all know. But it showed that when people get onsite and
take a look at what is going on and take with them what they
are actually producing we have an opportunity to try to stop
the importation of that.
China is today blatantly and repeatedly violating its
obligations under international law. China has ratified major
international human rights conventions like the U.N. Convention
Against Torture, the U.N. Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the Refugee Convention,
which they do not follow.
They re-foul so many people; and they may do it again very
soon, to North Korea where they will face some 2,000
individuals, a horrible, horrible--they have been there and
there is real talk now sending them back. They will go right to
the gulag and some of them right to execution, which is
absolutely contrary--and I hope the U.N. stands up and speaks
out as well as all of the democracies around the world.
Where is the accountability for Xi Jinping? The United
States must stand up to the Chinese Communist Party and make
clear that we will not ignore or trivialize these crimes
against humanity. So with respect and a deep sense of urgency I
again--once again call on the Biden Administration to please
step and lead a global effort to free China's prisoners of
conscience.
It has to be in every talking point, not on page 5, but on
page 1 of every one of the contacts that we have with the
Chinese Communist Party starting at the very top. When the
President talks to Xi Jinping on the phone there needs to be a
list of people that he is advocating for. When you talk
generically about political prisoners, right off--they pay no
attention to it and they think it is just filler for the dialog
to satisfy an X in the box, if you will.
In my years in Congress including in my role as Chairman of
the congressional Executive Commission on China and Chairman of
the Foreign Affairs Human Rights Committee I have fought to
ensure that human rights are kept at the forefront of U.S.-
China relations, and it started with me back in 1984 when I
offered my first amendment on the horrific practice of forced
abortion and forced sterilization pursuant to the one child per
couple policy. And it continued through the years especially on
the issue of religious freedom.
We cannot separate human rights from other interests
especially trade, sacrificing both Chinese victims and American
values in the process. That is why I have sponsored the Hong
Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act, which passed the House.
Marco Rubio got it passed in the Senate. His version identical
to ours finally went over to the President. It has had some
impact, but it was a day late and a dollar short, sorry to say,
because we could have done it in 2014 when I first introduced
it.
I have also done the Global Magnitsky Act; we added that as
an amendment to the NDAA, and authored the Stop Forced Organ
Harvesting Act of 2023. I want to thank Ambassador Bremberg for
the great insights he provided us in writing that legislation.
That passed the House on March 23 and hopefully the Senate will
take that up very shortly. The Chinese Communist Party,
including their embassy, is just deny, deny, deny that any of
this is happening. And my hope is that, OK--and Charles Lee
knows because we have done this for many, many years--it has
got to stop and there need to be penalties. And that is what is
imbedded in our bill.
I also wrote the Frank Wolf International Religious Freedom
Act and was part of Frank Wolf's original 1998 act. He was the
prime sponsor of that one. And one of the prime focuses on that
is CPC designation for China.
I am also the prime author of the Traffic Victim Protection
Act of 2000 and four subsequent reauthorizations and iterations
of it. And who is the tier 3 country each and every year?
China. Forced labor and the horrific practice of sex-selection
abortion in which they excel it.
I also did a bill that never became law; it really bothered
me big time at the time, and that was the Laogai Slave Labor
Products Act of 1997. Passed the House; never got through the
Senate.
And I was the lead Republican sponsor along with my friend
and colleague from Massachusetts called the Uyghur Forced Labor
Prevention Act. He was the prime; I was the chief Republican.
And that now is in the process of being implemented.
So we are trying to get more serious. It is bipartisan. And
I would note even on the issue of FMN back in the day,
especially right after Tiananmen Square, there was a coalition
of Frank Wolf, Nancy Pelosi, David Bonior of Michigan, and me,
and others, but we were the four that kept pushing to say you
have got to link human rights and trade or there will be no
progress. There will only deterioration. And sure enough that
is exactly what happened.
When the President de-linked; and this is President
Clinton, on May 26, 1994 human rights and trade, that is when
the Chinese looked us in the eye and said all they care about
is profits. And so we have got to reclaim that.
So I have introduced a bill called the China Trade
Relations Act of 2023 to withdraw normal trade relations from
China unless a list of human rights protections are guaranteed
in China including the release of political prisoners and an
end to torture.
Finally, in his statement prepared before sentencing Ding
Jiaxi courageously wrote, and I quote him here, ``We are
witnessing an unfolding battle between the forces of democracy
and authoritarianism. The megalomania of dictatorship in the
eternal one-party State is fast becoming--coming to an end and
the social transformation of China is growing closer day by
day. China is on the cusp of great change. Even from within my
prison walls I can feel it clearly. The advancing footsteps of
civilization come like the awakening thunder of spring.'' What
an amazing statement for a man who is incarcerated, suffering
because of his core beliefs for which we all agree with.
I would like to now yield to my good friend and colleague
Ms. Wild for any opening comments.
Ms. Wild. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for being here for this very
important hearing.
I want to thank you, Chairman Smith, for calling this
important hearing and to all of the witnesses for their
commitment and in some cases great personal sacrifice in
calling attention to the issue of human rights and political
repression in the People's Republic of China.
As we convene this morning the Chinese Communist Party
continues its systematic persecution of individuals and groups
who challenge the CCP's authoritarian rule or do not fit its
vision for a homogeneous traditional and obedient Chinese
society.
Just last week the PRC unjustly detained and sentenced
human rights defenders Xu Zhiyong and Ding Jiaxi; I hope I said
that somewhat correctly, to 14 years and 12 years in prison for
``subversion of the State;'' I put quotes around that, when
what they were doing was simply defending the fundamental
freedoms in the country.
This campaign to silence dissent and suffocate diversity
has resulted in egregious violations of the basic human rights
of the Chinese people across Mainland China, the dissemination
of Hong Kong's autonomy, and most horrifically a genocide
characterized by mass detention, torture, and forced labor in
Xinjiang. This campaign has targeted ethnic, religious, and
cultural minorities from the Uyghurs to the Tibetans, to
members of the LGBTQ community. It has also targeted anyone who
challenges the CCP's authority from journalists to lawyers to
human rights defenders.
On a daily basis the leaders in Beijing not only betray the
principles of freedom and human rights that are enshrined in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. They also violate
China's own constitution and the international laws that it has
ratified.
The record of the United States in protecting civil and
political rights is not perfect, but we should shine a light on
those who are fighting for equality and freedom in China and in
other countries and we must hold the PRC and other countries
around the world, big and small, to the same standard to which
we hold ourselves. The world is watching as the PRC government
continues to crack down on Chinese citizens who seek simply to
exercise their basic human rights. For their sake we cannot and
must not be silent.
Today we have the opportunity to hear from experts who have
dedicated their lives to studying human rights in China and the
region as well as from individuals who represent the human toll
of China's repression on brave prisoners of conscience. And I
look forward to this discussion and I thank you all.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much.
Then without objection, a statement by Dr. McCormick will
be made a part of the record, and he may be returning short.
[The prepared statement of Dr. McCormick follows:]

*********INFORMATION NOT AVAILABLE AT PRESS
RELEASE**********

Mr. Smith. I would like to now introduce our very
distinguished panel beginning first with Ambassador Andrew
Bremberg, who is the president of the Victims of Communism
Memorial Foundation.
Previously Ambassador Bremberg served as the representative
of the United States to the Office of the United Nations and
other international organizations in Geneva. Ambassador
Bremberg has a long history of public service. Prior to his
work at the U.N. he served as Assistant to the President and
Director of the Domestic Policy Council for the Executive
Office of the President. He previously served as policy advisor
and counsel on nominations for the Office of Senate Majority
Leader. He also worked for the non-profit MITRE Corporation as
a senior health policy analyst and department manager and for
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
He has earned his B.A. from Franciscan University in
Steubenville in Ohio and his J.D. from Catholic University of
America in Washington. He and his wife Maria have four children
and live in Virginia.
We will then hear from Pastor Bob Fu, who was a former
student leader during the Tiananmen Square Democracy Movement
in 1989. He did get imprisoned and had a tremendous story of
escape. And I want to thank him for--he has never stopped
advocating on behalf of religious freedom for all in China.
In 1993 he graduated with a law degree on international
relations from Renmin University in China in Beijing. He was a
faculty member at the Beijing Party School of the CCP from 1993
to 1996. He was also a house church leader in Beijing until he
and his wife Heidi were imprisoned in 1996. In 1997 he was
exiled to the U.S. In 2002 he founded China Aid to promote
religious freedom and the rule of law in China. He graduated
with a Ph.D. from St. John's College at the University of
Durham in the U.K. in the field of religious freedom.
His autobiography; and I have read it, ``God's Double
Agent,'' was published in 2013. And he also has an academic
book called, ``The Politics of Inclusive Pluralism.''
He regularly testifies and briefs foreign policymakers on
religious freedom. And I would just say when we were trying to
effectuate the release of Chen Guangcheng, who he and his wife
Weijing are actually here with a blind activist lawyer who
saved so many people and that himself was incarcerated, made a
daring escape to the United States Embassy, which to this day
is almost unfathomable how he was able to do it.
While he was at the embassy and then in a hospital it was
Bob Fu who made the contacts for our committee. We had four
hearings of calling for Chen Guangcheng release and at the
fourth one within about 6 hours the Chinese Communist Party
said let them go; get him out of here. Our fear was that they
would keep him there and do terrible things; an accident as
they often describe it. Some of the people who tried to visit
Chen--and I thank him again for being here and his equally
brave wife. I remember one of the lawyers who we actually have
had here in Washington tried to visit him in the hospital. And
he was beaten horribly by the Chinese Communist Party thugs.
So, Bob, thank you for that and so many other things that
you have done.
We also have obviously Geng He, who will be testifying on
behalf of her husband. And I have a fuller bio on her which I
will put into the record, but as I said this is the third time
she has come before us. She has been at many other fora, both
here and elsewhere in other countries, never ceasing to try to
effectuate the release of her husband and always all the
others, too, because all the political prisoners--there is
never a good day.
And one of the things that she and her daughter brought out
so clearly in previous testimony was how everybody goes to
prison, everybody goes to the Laogai when that political
prisoner goes. It is an all-in for the Chinese Communist Party
thugs to make life absolutely miserable for everyone else in
the family as well.
So we also then will hear from Sophie Luo, a full-time
product line quality director of a global railway company, a
mother of two daughters, and started human rights activities in
April 2013 with her husband, a human rights lawyer who is the
other subject of this hearing, obviously.
Ding was first detained and then imprisoned for three-and-
a-half years. He was forcibly disappeared for attending a
gathering in--with like-minded lawyers and friends. He was
severely tortured for 6 months being held in a detention center
and terrible living conditions as of today.
So we are looking forward to her testimony obviously very,
very much.
Then we are very, very happy to welcome Yaqui Wang, who is
a senior researcher at Human Rights Watch working on issues
including internet censorship, freedom of expression for
protection of civil society and human rights defenders and
women's rights in China. She has also written extensively on
the Chinese government's role in undefining human rights
globally and global corporations' complicity in human rights
violations in China.
Wang has testified before the U.S. Congress before. Her
articles have appeared in foreign policy: The Atlantic, the
Washington Post, and elsewhere. She has been quoted by news
analysts such as the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, the
Guardian, BBC, CNN, and so many, many others.
Prior to joining Human Rights Watch she was a researcher
for the Committee to Protect Journalists working on press
freedom issues in China and other Asian countries. She grew up
in China and has an M.A. degree in international affairs from
Georgetown University.
Finally, we will hear from Mr. Thomas E. Kellogg, who is
Executive Director of the Central--Center for Asian Law where
he oversees various programs related to law and government--
governance in Asia. He is a leading scholar of legal reform in
China, Chinese constitutionalism, and civil society movements
in China.
Prior to joining Georgetown Professor Kellogg was director
of the East Asia Program at the Open Society Foundation. At OSF
he oversaw the expansion of the foundation's work in China and
also launched its work in Taiwan and North and South Korea.
Professor Kellogg has written widely on law and politics in
China, U.S.-China relations, and Asian geopolitics. He has
lectured on Chinese law in a number of universities in the
U.S., Europe, and China. He has also taught course on Chinese
law at Columbia, Fordham, and Yale.
He was a senior fellow at China's Law Center at Yale Law
School. Prior to that he worked in the Asian Division of Human
Rights Watch. He holds degrees from Harvard Law School and is--
was Editor in Chief of the Harvard Human Rights Journal and
Hamilton College.
Ambassador Bremberg, the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW BREMBERG, VICTIMS OF COMMUNISM MEMORIAL
FOUNDATION

Mr. Bremberg. Thank you, Chairman Smith, Ranking Member
Wild, and members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify at this important hearing today.
I'd like to ask that my written record statement be
submitted as part of the record.
Mr. Smith. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Bremberg. The Chinese Communist Party is a self-
proclaimed Marxist-Leninist organization that governs according
to a communist ideology that holds that all aspects of society
should be controlled by the party and especially through its
leader. Sadly for too long the United States failed to
understand the reality of the communist nature of the CCP which
resulted in a misguided policy of engagement.
The premise of this policy was that if the West opened our
markets to China that the Chinese economy and society would
liberalize and that the CCP's leaders would come to see the
world as the way the West does, valuing democracy, rule of law,
and critically human rights. Sadly we were wrong.
In the cases of Gao Zhisheng and other human rights
champions that we will highlight today clearly demonstrate this
fact.
Chinese human rights lawyer Gao Zhisheng whose plight is
the focus of today's hearing is a clear case of the CCP
targeting those who stand for human rights. I know my fellow
panelists will highlight details of his heroic struggle.
Last year to mark the 5-year anniversary of Gao's forced
disappearance the Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation in
partnership with the China Aid Association led by Bob Fu hosted
an event at the Victims of Communism Museum to highlight his
case and to urge the U.S. Government to call for his
unconditional release. We were honored to also have Gao's wife
Geng He, who is also on the panel today, speak at this event
and display a stunning portrait that she had lovingly made of
her husband.
Just recently as we've heard other outrageous affronts to
human rights have taken place. The CCP's conviction of legal
scholar Xu Zhiyong and human rights lawyer Ding Jiaxi, whose
wife Sophie Luo is also here, of the crime of subverting State
power and they were sentenced with the harshest sentences
handed down to anyone from the legal profession in the last 10
years.
In addition to human rights lawyers, religious leaders who
do not conform to the CCP's mandates regarding the control of
religion have been targeted for persecution and imprisonment.
There are many examples I would highlight. Last year the arrest
of 90-year-old Catholic Cardinal Joseph Zen, a true champion of
human rights and dignity for the people of both Hong Kong and
Mainland China, clearly demonstrates this pattern. Tragically
while there are literally thousands of known political
prisoners across China today, this does not receive attention.
At the same time we know that China is committing a
genocide against Uyghur Muslims and other ethnic minorities in
Xinjiang. I'd refer the subcommittee to the extensive work by
VOC Senior Fellow and Director of China Studies Dr. Adrian Zenz
on Beijing's genocidal population control strategy in Xinjiang
including most recently the Xinjiang police files which
contained the first images the world had seen of crimes being
committed inside the camps including thousands of images of
detained Uyghurs as well as classified speeches by CCP
officials.
Thankfully while the ongoing genocide in Xinjiang has
finally begin--begun to receive attention around the world the
CCP's long practice of forced organ harvesting that frequently
targets political prisoners and prisoners of conscience
continues without condemnation.
I'd like to commend the near-unanimous passage by the House
in March of the Stop Forced Organ Harvesting Act led by
Representative Smith and urge the Senate to quickly take up
this bill, pass it, and send it to the President. Much needs to
be said about the connection between forced organ harvesting
and the plight of political prisoners.
In conclusion, what can the U.S. do in the face of these
horrible human rights abuses? And the simplest answer is more.
The U.S. has an incredible capacity to press the CCP on--to
respect human rights using both our extensive economic
relationship between our two countries as well as our
incredible diplomatic resources that exist around the world.
From the highest levels in our government the United States
must publicly and consistently call for the unconditional
release of all political prisoners in China and do so by name.
It is also important to raise these abuses in multilateral
organizations like the U.N. and other international bodies. The
CCP has become increasingly sensitive to international
criticism in these fora and by working with other countries we
can use international human rights mechanisms to draw attention
to the CCP's abuses and critically hold them accountable for
their treatment of political prisoners. There must be
consequences for the CCP's actions.
Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Wild, let me thank you again
on behalf of the Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation for
inviting me here to this important hearing on the plight of
China's political prisoners. I look forward to answering your
questions and discussing practical actions that we can take.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bremberg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much for your testimony, for
your leadership, both at the U.N. when you were Ambassador,
because obviously that is where the rubber meets the road
particularly in the Human Rights Council. So thank you for all
of that great work.
I would like to now yield to Mr. Bob Fu.

STATEMENT OF BOB FU, PRESIDENT, CHINA AID ASSOCIATION

Mr. Fu. Thank you, Chairman Smith and Ranking Member Ms.
Wild. I am very honored to be testifying again and with our
fellow panelists, the distinguished panelists who are either
victims or the experts on the CCP's persecution.
It's very timely I think to hold this hearing showing the
deep plight of the victims of Xi Jinping's human rights
violations. It is no exaggeration. I think this is the darkest,
worst time human rights, religious freedom and rule of law in
China since the Cultural Revolution of Chairman Mao.
I remembered before my good friend Gao Zhisheng was forced
to disappeared in 2017. He and I had multiple phone calls. In
one of the conversations he told me--he said, Brother Fu, I'm
not afraid to be imprisoned again. I know what it meant because
he had suffered already. He said sufficient torture that the
CCP ran out of creativity on how to torture him. But we cannot
allow his 6 years of being forced disappearance without a
voice. So today I am so thankful you still provide a platform
for him to be heard.
While Gao Zhisheng's case should be highlighted and
addressed extensively; Ms. Geng He and others will share more,
I want to highlight other prisoners of conscience who are
suffering in different fields.
The Communist Party has taken a war basically against
faith. Those who even preach on the pulpit based on John 3:16
calling for President Xi to repent, offering the salvation of
the Gospel to him, sentenced to 9 years imprisonment. That's
Pastor Wang Yi, a pastor and a constitutional law scholar.
And how much you will be punished for just establishing 16
schools for 2,000 children in China and Burma area for minority
group called Kachin like Chinese-American pastor John Cao, 7
years imprisonment, He is still there, from North Carolina.
How much punishment after you were found in possession of a
copy of ``Pilgrim's Progress,'' reading John Calvin's
``Institute of Christian Religion,'' or own multiple copies of
``The Streams in the Desert,'' a popular devotional book for
the Christians in the world? Our dear sister Ju Dianhong
received 13 years. 13 years for being labeled as evil cult. Her
coworker Ms. Liang Qin received 10 years imprisonment.
Furthermore, 12 house church leaders from Golden
Lampstand's church in Linfen, Shanxi province, were arrested
and charged with business fraud. What is a business fraud? The
prosecutor said they were setting up offering box in their
church collecting tithing and offering. That's called business
fraud. The lawyer--attorney said they are facing up to 15 years
imprisonment. Very soon we will hear the verdict. Previously a
senior pastor of the 12 of the church leaders, Pastor Wang
Xiaoguang and his wife Yang Rongli already suffered three and 7
years imprisonment in 2009.
The CCP also tried to eliminate all forms of dissent like
24-year old Niu Tengyu. He received 14 years imprisonment for
allegedly posting a photo of Xi Jinping's daughter. Fourteen
years. A professor from Nankai University, Ms. Wu Yanan, was
also sent to the psychiatric hospital by force for simply
raising a different voice during the white paper movement in
the midst of a pandemic. She still has not been since that
time.
What's the price for just whistleblowing and revealing
COVID-19 like the former mayor, Mr. Li Chuanliang from Jixi
City? Six members of his family including his pregnant
daughter, his sisters, his brother, son-in-law, plus 34 of his
close friends, they had been all arrested for simply doing
that.
Of course we have already been aware of those like Dr. Wang
Bingzhang, the modern--the father of democracy movement for
overseas Chinese. Still suffering life imprisonment after being
kidnapped from Vietnam by the Chinese special agents.
Citizen journalist Zhang Haitao was sentenced to 19 years
for what? Forwarding 205 Twitter tweets, 205, in Xinjiang.
Nineteen years imprisonment. The list is on and on. We do not
have even time to read all of them and their price.
I only have--I totally agree with Ambassador Bremberg's
recommendation for highlighting these cases and in every
bilateral or multilateral meetings by the administration, but I
want to call for one recommendation in particular. That is, the
President, Vice President and Secretary of State should
publicly meet with family of prisoners of conscience beginning
with Ms. Geng He, beginning with Sophie Luo.
They're in the United States. The White House does not have
any like legal and any other hurdles from scheduling a meeting
with these two ladies and their daughters. They're all U.S.
soil. I think leaders' actions matter; the CCP is watching; Xi
Jinping himself is watching, whether those human rights and
prisoner of conscience matter to our foreign policy and to the
mind of our leaders. That's my No. 1 recommendation. Thank you,
Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Pastor Fu, thank you so very much. And we will
followup on that and make an official request of the White
House to meet with them and maybe a few others that could tell
the story.
And I think nothing since--before George W. Bush and others
went to the 2008 Olympics--which I was totally against. And
Frank Wolf and I went over right before they happened and did
press conferences about how awful it was that they were
rounding up all the dissidents so they couldn't talk to the
journalists and doing other terrible things. But that said, we
said you at least have to meet with dissidents. So we arranged
it, and he did.
And I know it was a very meaningful back and forth. It went
far beyond the amount of time that had been allocated because
once the people who have suffered so much start talking, the
people in power who can make a difference can really empathize
with that plight and then do something about it.
And so we will--it is a great idea. We will followup on it
officially and God willing it will happen.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fu follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Geng He?

STATEMENT OF GENG HE, WIFE OF MR. GAO ZHISHENG

Ms. He. Thank you very much, Congressman Chris Smith, all
members of the House Affairs Committee. Thank you for holding
this special hearing today, April 20, on Gao Zhisheng's
birthday, 59th birthday. It's also a honor to wish him to live
on his birthday, is a noble and request to USA Congress.
First, I would like to talk about Gao Zhisheng and the
United States. Growing in a poor rural village in West China.
Gao Zhisheng has never set foot on America soil. Mr. James
Madison through his minutes of the Constitution conversation of
the United State of the America a debate has been read many
times by Gao Zhisheng. He hopes that his country China will 1
day become a free democratic and the constitution country like
the United State.
This dream has motivate him to struggle for 20 years. In
2007 Gao Zhisheng published a open letter to the U.S. Congress
in which Gao Zhisheng pointed out that Chinese Communist Party
was criminal gang in the guise of State and called on U.S.
President and the legislators to boycott the 2008 Olympic games
in China, just like a person that President Reagan boycotted
the Seoul Olympics.
Since the letter was issue Gao Zhisheng has been upgraded
from this disobedient lawyer to lap dog for the America and
there has--and has been kidnapped for more than 15 days without
any judicial positions and the subject to all kinds of
appalling torture. From that day on Gao Zhisheng was never free
again until August the 2017--no, no, no--2017, sorry, when he
was illegally kidnapped by the Chinese Communist Party and he
left and that there is were unknown for almost 6 years.
The United State is not Gao Zhisheng's home country, but
the U.S. Congress and the State Apartments have repeatedly
issued a statement to rescue Gao Zhisheng. And on April 27,
2006 the Congress voted to pass the Resolution 365 urging the
Chinese government to release the Gao Zhisheng and his law
firm's license. The United State also took in me and my two
children during our family's most difficult time and escaped
the tyrannical of Chinese Communist Party. Thank you, America.
And Gao Zhisheng's closest relative were also tormented by
the same strain as me. His sister unable to endure the
prolonged persecution and the local police security official
drop the--drop in the river in May 2020 to prevent his family
from searching for him. The local police not only took identity
document of his family members in the country, but also prevent
them for leave--leaving their home as well.
Even when my brother-in-law was serious ill and needed to
seek medical treatment that was not allowed have his identical
documents. That's making it difficult to prevent medical
treatment in May 2016 due to serious ills. Brother-in-law jump
to his death. We are just a normal family. And Gao Zhisheng did
not break any Chinese communist law, but he was the so
persecute as a CCP--as such suffered will continue today as a
innocent Chinese citizen.
Gao Zhisheng has been connect without trial for nearly 6
years without any news, which is a rare evil in the world. Not
only is there no arrest, but no organization has been
responsible for Gao Zhisheng's abduction. No one has ever seen
him, no one has ever heard his voice, and no one has come from
that he is secure alive in this world.
My husband Gao Zhisheng was nominated for the Nobel Peace
Prize three times and he has received the various international
awards in the United State and the Europe, but could not get
fair trial or a phone call to his family.
Ladies and gentlemen, my children and I thank you very much
for giving me the opportunity to present Gao Zhisheng's story,
to show you our wounds and to tell you our despair. I am
implore you to help me, hold there a hope for Gao Zhisheng's
freedom.
First, I expect the U.S. embassy officials in China to
visit Gao Zhisheng, a husband and a father of the U.S. citizen.
Secondary, I would like to U.S. Congress to urgent China to
allow Gao Zhisheng to be tried in public like ordinary public--
political prisoner and to be granted to visitation rest that a
citizen and the entitle to. If this not can be achieved, is OK
to have Gao Zhisheng give me a call to tell me he's still
alive. Just knowing he are still alive is enough. I cannot see
in the awful Gao Zhisheng's around our family suffering yet. In
China there are many other families like ours and I hope that
people will pay attention to Wang Bingzhang, Xu Zhiyong, Din
Jiaxi, Wang Zang, Guo Geixiong, and other prisoners of
conscience. Thank you, all. Sorry.
[The prepared statement of Ms. He follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. No, thank you so very much. And we do have to
respond, we have to respond robustly. So thank you.
The. Translator. Let me elaborate to the last to her words.
Mr. Smith. Yes.
The. Translator. So the last two paragraphs is the appeal
from Ms. Geng He to the U.S. Government. They expect the U.S.
Embassy officials in China to visit Gao Zhisheng, the husband
and father of the U.S. citizens.
Second, she would like the U.S. Congress to urge China to
allow Gao Zhisheng to be tried in public like ordinary
political prisoners and to be granted the visitation rights
that citizens and are entitled to. If this cannot be achieved,
it's OK at least to have Gao Zhisheng give me a call and tell
me he's still alive. Just knowing he's alive is enough. I
cannot see the end of Gao Zhisheng's and our family's suffering
yet.
In China there are many other families like ours and I hope
that the peoples will pay attention to Wang Bingzhang, Guo
Feixiong, and other prisoners of conscience. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so much.
I now yield to Ms. Sophie Luo.

STATEMENT OF SOPHIE LUO, WIFE OF MR. DING JIAXI

Ms. Luo. I also want to offer my statement because the
written statement I included the two statement they send to the
court of Xu Zhiyong and Ding Jiaxi. And also due to the time
limitation I only read partial of my statement.
Congress----
Mr. Smith. Let me say do not feel too constrained about the
time.
Ms. Luo. OK.
Mr. Smith. We are done voting, so we won't have to--it is
more important that you tell your story.
Ms. Luo. Thank you. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Smith, and the distinguished members of the House Foreign
Affairs Committee. Thank you so much for inviting me today at
today's hearing.
I will be telling you about the case of my husband Ding
Jiaxi and the case of Xu Zhiyong to demonstrate that why the
spread of false disappearances, lengthy pretrial detention, and
the harsh prison sentences in China.
Ms. Geng He's husband Gao Zhisheng has been disappeared for
over 5 years but has been targeted by Chinese officials since
2006. I cannot imagine the suffering that Gao Zhisheng and his
family have had to bear these many years. When I hear the story
of their other family I just feel so much.
OK. Ten days ago my husband, a human rights lawyer and
activist, Ding Jiaxi and the leading law scholar Xu Zhiyong
were sentenced to 12 and 14 years, respectively on the charge
of subversion of State power, for organizing a private get-
together to discuss civil society topics for about 20 like-
minded friends in Xiamen, Fujian province in December 2019. The
sentences were announced by a court in Shandong province 9
months after being tried in a secret trial.
Ding Jiaxi and Xu Zhiyong met in Beijing in late 2011 and
led the New Citizens Movement, also called the China Citizen
Movement, together. Their ideas and activities centered on
getting Chinese people to take their rights as written in the
Chinese constitution seriously and to practice these rights in
everyday life, to become real citizens. Their peaceful and
lawful activities in 2012 and 2013 however resulted in
sentences of 4 years and three-and-a-half years in prison for
charges of gathering a crowd to disrupt public order.
After they were released from prison both Xu Zhiyong and
Ding Jiaxi resumed their activities to promote civil rights and
the growth of civil society. After the 2-day private gathering
in Xiamen Chinese police detained Ding Jiaxi on December 26,
2019, and Xu Zhiyong on February 15, 2020, and held them under
secret detention for six and 4 months, respectively, without
any document to families. In essence, they had disappeared.
Later I learned that during this time they were subjected
to torture and ill treatment including prolonged sleep
deprivation, loud noise harassment for--continually for 10
days, interrogation while being tightly tied to a tiger chair,
food and water restrictions, no exposure to sunlight at all,
and no showers.
Let's review each step of these two cases. First, the
disappearance, secret detention, torture, coerce the
confession, supplicating criminal evidence, close-door trial,
and secretly announce the sentence without even a sentence
document released to the families.
The authorities has been handling these two cases
completely against the Chinese constitution and the criminal
laws from the beginning to the end. It is very clear there is
no law in China at all.
There are many cases of Chinese citizens who are
disappeared or in detention for their criticism of Xi Jinping,
for their advocacy of human rights, teaching others to get
around the Chinese censorship, or also for their private
discussion of civil society. These individuals including Peng
Lifa, Ruan Xiaohuan, Huang Xueqin, and Wang Jianbing are
included the details of these cases in my written statement.
Before I end my speech I must mention my dear friend Ms. Li
Qiaochu. She has been in detention for over 2 years without a
trial as of today. The authorities also accused her of inciting
subversion just because she loves Xu Zhiyong dearly and speak
for--spoke for him tirelessly.
Based on my observation of all these cases and in the past
10 years my main recommendation for Members of Congress, the
Administration, and the American businesses, and the civil
society group is please clearly say not to Chinese Communist
Party. This is the only way to stop any more human rights
abuses in China. The CCP is a barbaric government that does not
respect any rule of law. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Luo follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much for your very powerful
statement. On behalf of your husband and your friends and
others, without objection, your full statement, and all of your
full statements will be part of the record.
Mr. Smith. And again this gives us as a committee and
hopefully as a Congress and hopefully the White House and State
Department a path forward to redouble our efforts. And so your
testimony, both of your testimoneys, all of your testimoneys,
but especially the two of you has to motivate us. Has to. And
so thank you so very much.
Ms. Luo. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. I would like to now ask Ms. Wang if she would
proceed.

STATEMENT OF YAQUI WANG, SENIOR CHINA RESEARCHER, HUMAN RIGHT
WATCH

Ms. Wang. Dear Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Wild, and
members of the committee, thank you for convening this hearing
to shine a spotlight on the most courageous and most righteous
people in China, political prisoners.
Human Rights Watch has documented and advocated on our
behalf for over three decades. It has been almost 34 years
since the Tiananmen Square massacre. Since then the Chinese
Communist Party's brutality has shocked the world but failed to
subdue veteran human rights activists like Gao Zhisheng and
Ding Jiaxi. The CCP has also failed to suppress the rights of a
new generation of human rights activists.
Late last year in an astounding display of courage people
across China, many of them young people, took to the streets to
demand an end to the government's draconian Covid Zero
restrictions and a call for freedom and democracy. Some even
shouted down with the CCP. A number of protestors had been
arrested and their whereabouts are still unclear today.
We're living in a grim period for human rights in China,
but there are reasons for hope. For one, many young people in
the country are waking up to the CCP's brutal repression and
are following the steps of towering figures like Xu Zhiyong and
the late-Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo.
Given how important China's development means for the rest
of the world and for the U.S.-China relation it is critical for
U.S. political leaders and the American public to learn about
and to show support for the younger generation activists in
China and in the diaspora.
To that end Human Rights Watch urges Members of Congress,
senior administration officials, and the relevant U.S.
authorities to, among other things, first, continue to hold
hearings like this and speak out against the Chinese
government's human rights abuses.
Second, increase scholarships and resources for students
and young activists from China to study at American
universities and to participate in exchange programs with their
counterparts in the U.S.
Last but not least, expand investigation and the
prosecution of individuals responsible for the CCP's
transnational repression including harassment, intimidation,
and cyber attacks of U.S.-based critics of the CCP.
I want to end with a quote by a 26-year-old White Paper
protestor. He said to his fellow countrymen, ``We need to
remember what Hong Kong people told us. It's not because
there's hope so we resist. It's only because only when we
resist there will be hope.''
We must stand up, bravely stand up. Young people in China
are standing up and I hope U.S. political leaders and the
American people will stand by them. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wang follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much.
Ms. Manning, I think you have to step out? Unfortunately,
we all have places we have to be, but thank you for joining us,
I say to my good friend, and I yield you such time.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you for your
indulgence of letting me go first.
I want to thank all of our witnesses here today for the
important work that you do, and particularly I want to thank
you for speaking out and telling your stories, because those
are the things that we will remember and keep with us. And
thank you for giving us some hope that there are brave people
and brave young people who are standing up. And that last quote
was particularly memorable, so thank you for sharing that with
us.
Ms. Wang, can you share more about how Chinese authorities
have cracked down on feminists and women's right activists,
including women speaking out against sexual harassment?
Ms. Wang. The Chinese government is harassing anybody who
criticize the government, and some of them are in prison for
doing it repeatedly, including human rights--women's rights
activists. Notable cases including 2015, a group of women went
into the public bus to disseminate leaflets advocating for--
reason went is about sexual harassment. Then five of them got
detained. And because of a public uproar inside China and
internationally they were released after detained for 31 days.
And that was a very well-known case.
After that the government keep harassing them and other
women's rights activists until this day. And despite that
people continue to speak up about this issue. Women's rights
activism really, really is a sentiment shared very widely among
the Chinese public about gender equality, given all the
censorship and surveillance against the activists.
So I mean, a very recent case concerns Huang Xueqin. She
was a journalist. She--I mean she is still a journalist. She
reported on the MeToo Movement. She interviewed over 100 people
who had the experiences with sexual harassment. So, and she
published his--her report. And she's a leading figure in the
MeToo Movement. Later she was detained for her article related
to Hong Kong for 31 days. And she was released. Then after few
months she got detain again. Now she's in--she's been detain
for over a year now. She's been charged with inciting
subversion of State power, as I remember--if I remember
correctly. And we have new--no new updates regarding her case
and she's still awaiting trial. So those are the two memorable
cases.
And as I said, besides the people who are imprisoned or
confined by the Chinese authorities there are many people who
are harassed, intimidated, and surveilling on a daily basis.
Ms. Manning. Thank you for sharing that with us.
I am also deeply concerned about the rise in transnational
repression. Just this week the FBI warned that China and Iran
and others are going to new lengths to go after dissidents and
pro-democracy activists the United States. What are some of the
trends and methods that China uses to target and surveil
activists and students abroad and how can governments work
together to push back and hold them accountable?
Ms. Wang. Well, I can give you example of myself. I'm from
China, so my parents are all in China. So for speaking here I
do not know what they're going to do to my parents, but my
parents are under surveillance and they are periodically
harassed by the government. So, you know, it weighs on me. I
choose to speak up, but their safety is always on the back of
my mind. And I know it's not just me and it happens a lot of
other people. And some choose to continue to speak up despite
the consequences and repercussions to their family members.
But I'm sure there are many more who chose to self-censor.
You know, you do not want your parents to suffer because of
what you do.
And then beyond the harassment and surveillance of your
member--family members in China there are cyber attacks against
you even for people who are in the U.S., constant shows on
Twitter, constant harassment messages to my email accounts. So
those are, you know, things--harassment not in a physical
world, but all online. You know, it does affect you
psychologically. I'm just giving example of myself. There are
many, many more people who are like me and many more people who
suffer more--even more severe harassment for their family
members in China. Even more severe are like online
intimidation, cyber attacks against them, even for them being
in the United States.
Ms. Manning. Thank you for your courage in speaking up, and
we certainly hope your family is OK.
Mr. Chairman, may I just ask one more question? Thank you.
Mr. Kellogg, you have documented how national security law
undermines Hong Kong's autonomy and has been deliberately used
to target activists and silence criticism and dissent. What if
any significant rights, protections, and freedoms do Hong
Kongers still maintain compared to the people of Mainland
China?
Mr. Kellogg. Thank you, Congresswoman Manning. That's an
excellent question. The situation in Hong Kong right now is
particularly serious. I've been traveling to and working on--
Hong Kong and engaging with Hong Kongers for something like 20
years, and this is the worst moment that I've seen over that
20-year time period.
It is true that the situation in Hong Kong is not as bad as
the situation on the mainland, but I hesitate to even guess
where we will be a year from now or 2 years from now if the
current trends continue.
As I had noted in my testimony for today, the national
security laws being used to crack down on the expression--on
the basic rights of Hong Kongers, including free expression,
including efforts to participate in the political process,
including criticism of the government even for a relatively
less-sensitive manners like--matters like the government's
COVID-19 policy--so we're seeing unfortunately an expansion of
the government's use of the national security law to crack down
on basic rights. And I'm not sure when that's going to end.
Ms. Manning. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your indulgence. I appreciate
it.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Manning. Mr. Kellog.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS KELLOGG, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, GEORGETOWN
UNIVERSITY CENTER FOR ASIAN LAW

Mr. Kellogg. Sir, thank you. I would also request, Chairman
Smith, that my written testimony be submitted for the record.
Wonderful, wonderful, thank you.
And I want to thank both Chairman Smith and all the members
of this very important panel, and I certainly want to thank all
of my esteemed co-panelists for their extremely powerful and
insightful remarks.
I actually would like to divert for a moment from my
testimony to just say a word or two about Xu Zhiyong, who is
someone I personally know and have worked with over my time as
a lawyer and, quote unquote, expert working on human rights and
rule of law in China.
Xu Zhiyong and I met as far as back as 2005, I believe it
was, and we happened to be at Yale Law School in the United
States at the same time in 2007 as, both as fellows at the
China Law Center there.
And I have to say, it is such an amazing experience to be
able to talk with such an insightful critic of the Chinese
legal system and the ways in which I learn from him about how
the Chinese Communist Party works, how it uses its own legal
system to subvert basic rights.
Those are lessons that I am still drawing on today as I
seek to understand exactly how the Communist Party, again, uses
its legal system to crack down the rights, on the rights of its
own citizens.
It was deeply saddening to me personally to see him
detained once again in 2020, as Ms. Luo described, obviously
along with her husband, Ding Jiaxi, who I have not met but who
is obviously a deeply impressive individual as well. And the
fact that just this past week we are learning that Xu and Ding
are sentenced to 14 and 12 years respectively, one can only
imagine the effect of that on those brave individuals
themselves and on their family members.
I personally was deeply saddened to learn that it is a 14-
year sentence for Xu Zhigong. As I mentioned to one of my
panelists as we were getting ready for this hearing to start,
Xu Zhiyong and I are actually roughly the same age. And I
hesitate to think about him spending the next 14 years in
prison, from the time of age 50 to being roughly 64, give or
take.
That simply cannot stand. And I do hope that the Biden
Administration will take up the recommendation of Chairman
Smith and other members of this panel to certainly speak out
about Xu Zhiyong's case and about the case of Ding Jiaxi as
well, and about the cases of the many individuals who--brave
individuals whose cases and whose prison sentences have been
mentioned by the other distinguished panelists here today.
I also met actually Huang Xueqin when she was a visiting
fellow at Hong Kong University back in 2018, and I learned
firsthand from her about how her feminist activism had brought
her very much to the attention of the authorities back in
China. And sadly it was no surprise that she was detained soon
after she left Hong Kong and returned to mainland China.
Now let me just say a word or two about the situation in
Hong Kong before I close, because I am anxious for all of you
to have a chance to present questions to Ms. Luo and Ms. Geng
He and the other experts. As I mentioned just a moment ago the
situation in Hong Kong is quite serious, and we are seeing the
National Security Law being used in all sorts of ways to crack
down on free speech and basic rights in a way that is truly
unprecedented in the Hong Kong context.
Hong Kong was a relatively open society for many years
after the 1997 handover. And here I would give Beijing some
degree of credit. They did abide by many, though by no means
all, of the promises that they made to the U.K. Government in
the return of Chinese sovereignty to Hong Kong in 1997.
And for many years after 1997, Hong Kong was a relatively
open society where you had a boisterous free press, where you
had an opposition political parties. Where you had brave
activists who were speaking out about both the situation in
Hong Kong and the situation in mainland China.
I think the squeeze really started to manifest itself in
2014 with the so-called Umbrella Movement, and that is when you
started to see a tightening, and a tightening of the space
inside Hong Kong and the tightening of the pressure on
activists, opposition politicians, journalists, and others.
And then the explosion of pro-democracy activism that of
course everyone in this room is well aware of with the 2019
pro-democracy movement.
I happened to be in Hong Kong in 2019, I interviewed many
of the activists who led that movement and took part, and they
too are brave souls, very much the brothers and sisters of some
of the activists like Xu Zhiyong and Ding Jiaxi. Now many of
them are either in prison or headed to prison, being prosecuted
under the National Security Law.
Let me just make two quick recommendations before I close
and we move to the Q&A. First, I would second the
recommendations made by others on this panel that this
committee and the CECC remain seized on the situation in Hong
Kong.
We have two important dates coming up, June 12 being the
fourth anniversary of the massive two-million-person protests
in Hong Kong in front of the Hong Kong Legislative Council.
That would be a good moment to have a hearing, either by this
subcommittee or by the CECC on the current situation in Hong
Kong.
Or July 1, being well of course the anniversary of the Hong
Kong handover and the third anniversary of the implementation
of the National Security Law. So I think continuing to raise
these issues in fora like this is very important.
Second, I would also suggest that this committee and the
CECC look at legislation what would increase the transparency
obligations on U.S. businesses operating in Hong Kong.
Of course, as this subcommittee is well aware, the National
Security Law does have extensive investigatory powers, and they
can request information from U.S. businesses operating in Hong
Kong on the cases that they are pursuing.
I would suggest that the U.S. Congress could place
obligations under these businesses to disclose any information
request that they get from the Hong Kong Government related to
National Security Law prosecutions.
I think that would stigmatize responding to those requests
from the Hong Kong Government and make it more difficult for
any U.S. businesses operating in Hong Kong to somehow
facilitate prosecution of human rights activists under the
National Security Law.
I will close there, and I look forward to the discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kellogg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Kellogg, for your
testimony and for your advocacy, particularly in Hong Kong and
elsewhere.
Let me just, a couple of questions. You know, in 1994, on
one of several trips to Beijing, I met with Wei Jingsheng, who
was let out briefly in order get Olympics 2000. We met in a
hotel at a restaurant. We had Chinese Communist Party leaders
within earshot, and we knew that would happen. And he preferred
that.
The point that he made to me that I will never forget was
that he said when you kowtow, this is a little bit of a
paraphrase but it is exactly what he conveyed, when you kowtow,
when you come in weakly with the Chinese Communist Party, when
you are hedging your bet, they beat us more in the prison. And
things worse.
In a like way, when you are tough, predictable, look them
in the eye and they know that they are dealing with strength,
they beat us less. I have never gotten that. And to hear two
very brave wives talk about their husbands in such a way, God
willing we will provide some additional protection for them as
we move ahead.
I will never forget the, you know, if we mince our words at
the State Department, at the White House, or in Congress
because we want the next deal, we want to sell some more, the
way the chamber of commerce so often shamelessly has done over
the many years.
I remember when we were fighting MFN and the de-linking of
human rights with MFN, the State Department and many others,
including the Clinton Administration, Clinton himself, our
Ambassador in Beijing, because I went over there during that
terrible time when we de-linked human rights and trade, they
all said oh, somehow China will matriculate from a dictatorship
to a democracy if we just trade more.
I mean, I will sell you the Brooklyn Bridge if you believe
that, and I know you know, all of you that that is just so
naive in the extreme and self-serving. And yet that was the
modus operandi, and it worked here on Capitol Hill when, you
know, went we from MFN annual review, which was feckless,
frankly, to PNTR, which got rid of all review and just it all,
the whole enchilada to the Chinese Communist Party.
So I never forgot--so I just want you to know that I think
the bolder the clarity that you bring, the honesty that is
absolute, I am speaking to the two wives especially, but all of
you, you know, the Chinese Communist Party knows we mean
business, and we need to accelerate not diminish our voices.
So thank you for doing that. And you know, after Hue met
with me, he was beaten. He finally got out under humanitarian
parole, and the first place he came was to my committee
hearing.
And that is when he reiterated in a forum just like this
the concern that so many people in Washington and other
capitals, particularly in Europe, are mealy mouthed and so
afraid to say anything.
I remember even with Liu Xiaobo, because I was the one who
led the congressional effort to put Che Guangcheng, Gao
Zhisheng, and Liu Xiaobo to ask the Olympic--not the Olympic,
the Nobel Peace Prize Committee to give them the prize. They
did give to Liu Xiaobo. I think they missed a great opportunity
with the other two.
But when I went over and met with a lot of the people,
including members of that commission, they were--it was almost
apologies, because China was railing against what they had
done. And it was very short-lived in terms of, you know, Europe
saying oh, this is really a problem.
I was shocked. I was in the room talking to members of the
nominating committee, and there was a sense of did we make a
mistake. And of course they did not.
So I--we need to be strong and stronger and realize that we
are in this for the short, intermediate, and long haul.
Now, a couple questions, because I do think, as Pastor Fu
said, that the religious freedom issue is getting far worse. I
know I remember one time on another trip with Frank Wolf, we
met with pastors in the House Church Movement, and every one of
them except one got arrested, and couldn't even meet with us
because the Chinese Communist Party precluded that.
And we called Bob Fu on the phone to get some additional
names. And we were in the embassy van, what were told was a
secure phone, and during the conversation we mentioned how we
were going to go to Tiananmen Square, and we weren't even--we
had no time for it.
We were going to unfurl and banner, and it said, ``Human
rights for China.'' And within 20 minutes or so, the U.S.
Embassy got a call that if we do that, we will be taken to the
airport and thrown out of the country.
So I mean, everything is porous, the ubiquitous
surveillance State is something that has only gotten worse. And
so I just, you know, we have got to pivot. I mean, China is an
existential threat to its neighbors.
Its bad governance model is being promoted all over the
world, including in Africa. But it is certainly by force. They
are doing it in Hong Kong, of course, and Taiwan is in the
cross-hairs.
So I do hope that there is a serious pivot on the part of
the Administration. And no matter who is in the White House,
because I had these conversations with the Trump Administration
as well, and with previous Republican administrations, we have
got to be bolder.
And you all are--I mean, I will, with unanimous consent put
in Gao Zhisheng's letter, open letter to Congress, September
27, 2007. I was amazed when I read, and you provided it to us
at our hearing in 2012, and I had read it before.
And here is a man who is in the clutches of torturers
writing the way he wrote, talking about how the Falun Gong were
being treated with tortures that were unspeakable. Their
genitals electrocuted, their under their arms and elsewhere.
And just unspeakable torture. And everybody is mute in
Washington, or semi-mute.
And you know, we all need to get our voices I think much
more focused on this. And again, so if you--any of you would
want to speak to the worsening of the religious freedom issue,
the Uyghurs are, obviously a genocide is being committed there,
and more political prisoners.
I remember we had, Marco Rubio and I had a hearing on the
China Commission. And we had this wonderful young mother of
three, who told the story about how she--they did things
sexually to her, including with electric prods. And she cried
out, she goes I want to die, I want to die, I want to die.
And she asked her torturer why are you doing this. And he
said two reasons: you are a Uyghur, and you're Muslim.
So the religious persecution is for all comers, Christians,
Falun Gong, Tibetan Buddhists, and of course the House Church
Movement, as well as the officially recognized churches. And it
has gone from bad to worse. So if you want to briefly speak to
that.
You called it a war against faith a moment ago. I wrote an
op-ed for the Washington Post a few years ago about the
sinicization under Xi Jinping, and how if world leaders do not
start speaking up about how they are just completely either
coopting or destroying all faiths, all faiths, all comers,
shame on us. You know, we cannot just say oh, let's trade a
little more, things will get better. It won't, it will go from
bad to worse.
So if you might want to speak to that. Second, Ambassador
Bremberg, you obviously were there in Geneva, and we know,
because I have gone to Geneva many times in Human Right
Commission, and we know how the Chinese Government tries to
bully other countries to minimize their--even when they have a
periodic review, you know, it is a slap on the wrist.
And it seems to me we have venues that are wide open with
treaty bodies, as well as with the U.N. Human Rights Commission
to really take it to them. I mean, Israel gets far more focus,
small, tiny Israel, in what I really believe is antisemitism,
but leave that for another day.
But, and China gets off almost scot-free. Maybe you could
speak to that from your experience.
And then I could ask our two wonderful wives if you could
tell us, has anybody from the U.S. Secretary of State's Office
or the White House been in contact with you about your
husbands, to ask how they could help so that they could
intervene? And that would go for our embassy as well. But the
State Department and the White House.
And I have other questions, but I will yield to my friend
before asking those questions.
Mr. Bremberg. Thank you, Chairman, I am happy to answer
your questions about, as you said, how China unfortunately
seems to get a free pass on human rights in multilateral or
particularly at the U.N.
The important thing to begin with is that for China, for
the CCP, everything is connected to everything else. Issues are
not separated and treated as distinctly different. And actions,
as we know, actions speak louder than words.
So, going back several decades, the United States and many
of our Western partners and allies mistakenly or naively taught
the CCP that our approach to human rights was largely about
words only. That we would speak out aggressively about human
rights, and we would compel or press them to make statements
claiming to respect and respond to human rights.
And that when they did, the action, you know, our actions
said, OK, that is good enough. And did not press them to
actually make any changes.
So this pattern over decades created what we see largely
'til today, although this is changing, in the international
human rights space that China will, you know, it does
everything it can to avoid public criticism, particularly when
the criticism is done by groups of countries, rather than
individuals. And I think that is an important tool that we
should be using more to work collaboratively with other
countries to draw attention to these human rights abuses.
But basically to say, the United States or the West, you do
not believe these things either. So why should we worry about
it and why should we care.
And there are--they make concerted attempts to even try to
draw false equivalencies between, you know, injustices that
take place, you know, in every country around the world,
including western democracies. But to draw these false
equivalencies that that is somehow in any way like the massive
genocide taking place in Xinjiang.
Two points I would like to make about those bodies. One,
American leadership matters, particularly when it comes to the
selection of individuals who lead U.N. organizations.
The previous High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle
Bachelet, was a horrible leader in that position. I met with
her repeatedly. I would demarche her on behalf of the U.S.
Government, begging her to care about human rights. And it was
clear she did not.
And the United States could have done more, you know, in
the years previous to my arrival in Geneva, to press her office
to do more.
Now, thankfully we saw at the literal last minute of her
tenure, her office finally released its report on the human
rights abuses taking place in Xinjiang. We knew that report,
versions of that report had been finished years previously and
had never been released. So the United States can do more to
press those actions.
A second point I would say, and this is one point of just
kind slight optimism that we are seeing, is that other
countries, particularly western and other democratic countries,
are beginning to see the importance of pushing back on
language.
There was a debate in 2018, this is when the United States
was still a member of the Human Rights Council before we had
withdrawn, and the United States alone could not get other, you
know, Europeans or other countries, to come along with the U.S.
in calling for a vote against--you know, calling for a vote, I
should add, is sometimes viewed diplomatically as kind of
aggressive act in and of itself and that is unfortunate.
But calling for a vote and voting against one of China's
human rights resolutions, where it was attempting to change the
narrative of human rights. Briefly, to move away from the
concept focused on individual human rights and more toward the
idea of collective rights.
And many of our partners were aghast and all were against
this activity. So for that and a number of reasons, the Trump
Administration, as we know, left the Human Rights Council.
What was encouraging to see, though, is that 2 years later,
in 2020, when the same resolution came up, this time the
Europeans had realized, I will say, that we were right.
And the Europeans called--came out and called a vote and
voted against this en masse. And that is an important sign that
we find opportunities to work with our partners from around the
world to show that we actually believe in these human rights.
But critically, not just what we say at these multi-lateral
organizations, because those are important, but those
statements have to be backed up by actions, by you know, other
bilateral diplomatic responses, and critically, the economic
relationship. And there is more we can discuss about the
incredible tools we have at our disposal.
Mr. Smith. Do either of you want to respond whether or not
the State Department or the White House had been in contact?
Then I'll go to Bob.
The Interpreter. Yes, Ms. Geng wanted to emphasize that
nobody has ever contacted her from the White House or State
Department since she arrived here. For 14 years, right? In the
last 14 years, nobody has contacted her.
Ms. Luo. My situation is better that Geng He because I,
also, I myself, maybe because of the language or whatever, I
reached out to U.S. State Department. I asked for some
communication about the cases of Xu Zhiyong and Ding Jiaxi for
a couple times with them.
And I believe U.S. Department of State right now are well
aware of the cases. And they released some statement when they
do the secret trial and do the secret sentence.
And also, U.S. Department, they award my husband as the
human rights--Human Rights Defense Award. So these recognitions
support a lot.
But what I want to say is this not really change the real
situation of what their sentence is. So the after the two cases
of the sentences, I asked the U.S. State Department, I request
to see Mr. Blinken.
Because I really, these two cases just shows to the outside
world Chinese Communist Party, they has already demonstrated
they are not going to respect any laws. How we can still seek
communication with this kind of country, this kind of
government.
Because, yes, I saw U.S. Department, they already changed
the way to treat China. But they still keep wanting to reach
out to them. I want to say the only way to stop to, how to say,
to stop CCP keep doing this is say no, we do not keep any
connection with this kind of government. We have to cut the
connection.
Everyone told me it is so difficult, it is not possible.
But why? So I ask for communication with U.S. Department of
State further. I haven't received a confirmation yet.
For White House, no one contacted. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Fu.
Mr. Fu. Just an illustration of the worst scenario that
recently happened, I think, shame to French President Macron.
After dining and wining with Xi Jinping, came back with the
idea that Taiwan is not a European issue. So let's not follow
American. Let's, you know, Americans handle that.
Twenty-three million live in Taiwan. Does that mean you
give a green light by playing geopolitics? I think that is, I
mean, if human rights really just free in rule of law, at least
equally important with those other economic, national security,
nuclear, or climate change, whatever. But you cannot play that
card.
I think, I mean, it reminded me like several President
Reagan's senior aides told this story that President Reagan
always in his pocket holds a card with those prisoners of
conscience from former Soviet Union. And even the former Soviet
Union leaders kept complaining to his Secretary of State.
But I think that, I hope other presidents, vice presidents,
secretaries of State, whoever, from whichever party is in the
White House, would share in the same kind of way like President
Reagan. Have Gao Zhisheng's name, Ding Jiaxi's name, have all
these prisoners of conscience names in his pocket whenever he
meet with his counterpart.
And whether it is virtually or in person, he can be
reminded. At least tell them he is serious, this is important.
I think I do not know. So far, we have not heard, you know,
this is happening. Many summers have come and passed. Where are
these names being raised? Are they being raised? At least we
have not heard anything.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, thank you all for
being here.
I have to just tell you that when I was first elected to
Congress, one of my very first meetings back home in my
district in Pennsylvania was with a young couple with three
daughters, one of whom had just been born in the United States,
the other two had been born in China. And they came to me
because both of them had parents, Uyghur Muslims, whom they had
not heard from for a very long time.
And I remember feeling very helpless about not being able
to do enough to really help them. At that point they weren't
even citizens. They were here legally but they weren't
citizens. It was not as though, they were, you know, voters or
anything.
But it was just such a tragic story that it really has
resonated with me. And quite honestly, has guided a lot of the
work that I have wanted to do in here in Congress in the area
of human rights. I am thrilled to be on, the ranking member on
this committee, and along with Chairman Smith.
But I agree, with you, sir, Mr. Fu, that often the exposure
of the rest of the world to what is happening in China is
restricted too much to a few Members of Congress or a few
foreign leaders, or whatever, and not enough people are widely
aware of it.
And of course to your point, Mr. Bramberg, the economics of
it is such that we do have powerful leverage that for many
reasons we have been reluctant to use, some of which has to do
with consumer prices and things as simple as that. Not so
simple, but you understand.
But at the same time, we really do need to make sure that
we are addressing this. I mean, we probably have more power vis
a vis China than any other nation in the world. In fact, I do
not think it is probably, we do.
So with that said, I also just have to comment yesterday
the House passed by a very large bipartisan margin my bill, the
Countering Untrusted Telecommunications Abroad Act, which was
designed primarily, in all candor, to secure United States
embassies abroad to make sure that the technologies that they
are using are secure from a point of view of national security.
But another very important motivation for me, which I
expressed on the House floor, was my concerns about the fact
that some of the Chinese telecoms companies, which have been
the major provider of our technologies in our embassies, are
engaging in some of the same human rights abuses and the same
repressive tactics that we have heard about from the CCP.
And so I just wanted to mention that because I do believe
that in so much of the work that we do, the human rights issues
come into play. And we are, many of us are trying very hard to
take some actions that will have a real effect.
While I am on that issue of technologies, I would like to
address these questions to Ms. Wang and Mr. Kellogg
specifically. One of the things I remember the people who came
to see me in my office talking about was the widespread use of
facial surveillance and facial recognition.
And quite honestly I have to tell you, I mean, I came out
of the private sector before Congress. This was not something
that I really had heard about or knew a lot about. I have done
a lot of studying since then.
But with surveillance being an ever-present part of life in
China, and I just have to stop and say I cannot even imagine
how American citizens would respond to the idea that our--I
mean, there's enough concerns that we all have about privacy
and that kind of thing in this country.
But if, imagine if Americans were being subjected to this
kind of facial recognition, surveillance--this young couple
came to me to tell me that their parents had literally been
taken off the street, and they believe that facial recognition
technology was used to identify them as Uyghur Muslims.
Anyway, so with that use of technology in China to control
populations, to stifle freedom of expression, how has the CCP's
practices and use of these technologies evolved, if it has? Who
is developing these technologies? Are these being exported
around the world?
And are there any kinds of counter-technologies that can be
used to protect individuals? I will just leave it at that, and
if you need me to run through those many questions again, I
will. But I open it to either one of you to respond.
Mr. Kellogg. I will just make a few brief comments on this
front, Congresswoman. And first of all I want to salute you for
your engagement with the Uyghur community here in the United
States.
I have also had the privilege of chatting with Uyghurs here
in the United States, particularly in, you know, in Virginia
coming into Washington to help those of us who are here in D.C.
understand the very serious and very grave situation in
Xinjiang and the cultural genocide that is taking place there.
And of course you are absolutely right that technology and
mass surveillance technology is a key part of that. Talking to
Uyghurs themselves who have managed to escape Xinjiang since
the opening the camps in 2017 or so talking about ubiquitous
surveillance cameras, right. Talking about the kinds of
checkpoint-type systems that are being set up across major
cities in Xinjiang.
Uyghurs who, even prior to 2017, Uyghurs who were able to
travel inside China would often be flagged when they tried to
do basic things like check into hotels, right. And somehow
their data is in a system such that they are flagged
immediately on arrival on trying to check into a hotel
somewhere in eastern China.
So the sort of, to come back to your question, the
evolution of electronic surveillance in China is absolutely
intensifying. And the roll-out has been quite significant. And
the ways in which Chinese companies are now in a strange way on
the cutting edge of development of facial technology is a very
real phenomenon that I think we are all grappling with.
I will have to do more thinking about sort of some of the
policy responses that Congress could look to. I look forward to
learning more about the bill that you mentioned, the Countering
Untrusted Telecommunications Abroad Act, and I am certainly
excited to hear that is has passed the House.
So I think there is more work to be done there. And if it
is OK, I would come back to you with some specifics----
Ms. Wild. Can I just ask you, if you know, who primarily is
developing these technologies that are being used, the
surveillance and otherwise?
Mr. Kellogg. Sure. It is the Chinese companies themselves,
Hikivision and some of the other domestic Chinese companies,
and they are obviously being given massive resources by the
Chinese Government to move forward with this work.
And one way you can look at the situation in Xinjiang is
that it is basically sort of a massive lab, right, that they
are rolling out these technologies. They are learning how to
perfect them. They are learning how to make them even more
accurate in terms of identifying individuals in a crowd. That
is very scary.
Ms. Wild. Just the idea that they are being used there and
that they could presumably, and I am sure have been or will be
exported elsewhere----
Mr. Kellogg. Absolutely.
Ms. Wild. For use around the world is terrifying. I am
going to switch gears, unless you wanted to comment on that.
Ms. Wang. Yes, can I just quickly add that I mean
surveillance is not just, you know, through cameras. Facial
recognition is also the phones. And as member of the Chinese
diaspora, you know, we use Chinese apps.
And for Chinese private companies, they are beholden to the
Chinese Government. If the Chinese Government asks the
companies to survey us, even we are living abroad, they can.
So I think--I urge the U.S. Congress to pass legislations
to force companies to be transparent about what kind of thing
they are collection, what kind of content they are suppressing,
especially for the apps that are used widely among the Chinese
diaspora.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, that is helpful. We will look at that
and my office may very reach out to you for some additional
detail, because I would like to followup on that.
Is it OK if I ask one more, or do you need----
Mr. Smith. Sure, I think Dr. McCormick has to go, but then
I'll come right back.
Ms. Wild. OK, great, thank you.
Mr. McCormick. If you do not mind.
Ms. Wild. No, that is fine, go ahead.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you. So if I might ask a personal
question, I notice that you are, Ms. Geng He, that you are
getting very emotional right now. I would love you to share, if
you feel comfortable, what is going through your mind right now
with your emotions?
And share with us, because I think that is how we connect
with you and what we are trying to find out right now, the
emotional content of this. Because I think most people have a
heart. And so by being emotionally vulnerable, I think you
would tell the best story of all.
Ms. He. Yes, I appreciate very much you guys holding this
hearing today at the birthday of Gao Zhisheng. Also I
appreciate the Catholic University--United States Catholic
University to hold the Gao Zhisheng's sculpture. And there was
a sculpture last year, was transferred to the university over
there.
Yes, even though we do not know if he is alive or dead, but
we really appreciate very much. Yes, we only hope that he is
still alive.
Mr. McCormick. So I just want to point out that this is
real life and death. That what we are dealing with isn't an
abstract thing, that is actually has people involved, people's
lives involved, an entire nation of people's lives, the most
populous nation in the world, or at least right up there.
There is a book that I read not that long ago called
``Gulag Archipelago,`` Solzhenitsyn. From about 1917 to about
1957, I believe, about 60 million people died, either directly
as physical violence or through starvation. As any great
college professor could probably tell you, one of the most
worrisome human atrocities of all time.
You are the next author of the next book of why this
matters and the real consequences of policy and the real
consequences of not stepping in and doing something when the
world should be paying attention. And actually not just talking
about what makes a dollar, but actually what makes lives.
I just wanted to point that out, that this is not
unprecedented, but it is important. And that we should be
developed as a world enough to the point where we should
actually be taking chances when it comes to standing up for
what is right, standing up for life, standing up for humanity,
standing up for people, rather than just making a business
deal.
So for that, I thank each and every one of you for being
here. I want to acknowledge that you are the next authors of
history, and that we should be there to help you author that
book as we step in and participate.
And with that, I yield.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. I too have read the book by
Solzhenitsyn, and I remember one of the biggest takeaways,
because my first trip on human rights was to Moscow-Leningrad
in 1982 on behalf of Soviet Jews.
And it rang so true. It is not that they do not disbelieve
God, it is not atheism. They hate God. And he made that so
clear. It is militant atheism.
So yes, and you are right, we have got the book right here
on what needs to be written, that was an excellent point. Thank
you, Dr. Carter.
The Interpreter. Ms. Geng has two requests. The first that
there are two CCP government officials who have been promoted
by their actions in persecuting Gao Zhisheng. She wants these
two government officials to be sanctioned under the Global
Magnitsky Act. And she wants to know how to do that.
And you know, we have two names here, that the first one is
Hu Minglang. He was promoted from the local government official
to the Provincial Director of Ministry of--Department of Public
Security.
Another guy is Tu Hongwei
[phonetic]. He was promoted from the local provincial
Communist Party Committee member to the Vice Director of the
Ministry of the Public Security at the central government
level.
So these two, and actually she hopes that----
Mr. Smith. There are a number of ways of doing it. One is
obviously for you to provide it to them. We will send it as
well as a committee, and I thank you for making us aware of
that.
The Interpreter. Yes, another----
Mr. Smith. And because obviously that act is useless if it
is not continually taking in egregious violators of human
rights for sanctioning. So thank you.
The Interpreter. Yes. The other request she has that Gao
Zhisheng has published, I mean, he has written a lot of things.
One of things is the 2016 Human Rights Reports, which has
160,000 captives. And also, he has experienced being tortured.
And he also wrote the constitution, in the draft of
constitution of the Federation of China, like for the future
China. And also the public letters.
So she hopes--and there is another book written by some
American author, or by him, by Gao Zhisheng himself. It is
called ``Unwavering Convictions.`` So she hopes that this can
be archived by the Congress where the public can search and
then read.
She wanted to know, you know, the address she can mail
these documents to.
Mr. Smith. We will followup with you on that.
The Interpreter. OK.
Mr. Smith. And great idea, thank you.
The Interpreter. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so much.
Now, just for the record, as a result of this hearing, I am
going to introduce a bill calling for the release of your two
husbands, and others. But obviously because you stand for the,
not their concern but the concerns of all of the others. And we
will ask that there would be a report by the Administration as
to what they are doing.
And I do not care who is in the White House, you know, we
all have an obligation, I think a moral duty that is not easily
satisfied to stand for the weakest and most vulnerable and the
oppressed.
And so we all have to redouble our efforts. It goes for
Congress, it goes for the White House, State Department, and
all others. So we will be introducing that, and I look forward
to your help in drafting it.
I will also say just a point of, as a direct result of our
bill that just passed a couple of weeks ago on forced organ
harvesting, the Chinese Government Embassy put out a rather
almost bizarre missive to us claiming that they are all lies.
That the Falun Gong are a cult. They are inhuman. They made the
point that there is no Uyghur genocide.
And in addition to that, the--so I wrote back to Xi
Jinping, especially since his foreign ministry said that people
can come and look themselves at what is going on in Xinjiang,
and I said I would like to lead the delegation there.
Our Chief of Staff on the China Commission, Piero Tozzi,
and I would put together a group, as well as our distinguished
leader of the Subcommittee, staff director, Mary Vigil, to go
there, spend at least a week. So that is pending before Xi
Jinping's people.
You are saying there is nothing to hide? Well, we want to
come, we want to look at it. And I am hoping that they will
take us up on it.
And I have been in many gulags all over the world, so there
is the possibility, you know, when you ask, and since they said
it is an engraved invitation, we want to come. And I think that
would be very helpful in the process.
I do get concerned, again, when they say there is nothing
but lies coming out of Congress. They said that our bill on
forced organ harvesting is one big lie.
And yet we have irrefutable evidence and first-person
eyewitness accounts. And again, I think you, Ambassador
Bremberg, for the tremendous work you have done in compiling
this. And Ethan Gutmann, who is, you know, we have had him
testify before. He remains an amazing source of credible
information.
And so you know, that bill I believe will pass the Senate
and will get to the White House. We have worked with the State
Department. It is a collaborative bill, and it is totally
bipartisan.
So my hope is that we can really take that next step and
say this cruelty that is reminiscent of the what the Nazis did.
Joseph Mengele, he did not have this ability, but if he did, he
would. So we need to stop this horrible practice.
And this big lie missive that we get from the Chinese
Government reminds me of when Chi Haotian, the Operational
Commander of Tiananmen Square, came to the White House during
the Clinton Administration. They have him an 19-gun salute,
which I thought was absurd. And he went to the Army War College
and said nobody died at Tiananmen Square, nobody.
Well, I put together a hearing within 2 days inviting the
Chinese Embassy, invited him to come and give an account. We
had all these survivors of Tiananmen. Even a People's Daily
editor who spoke truth and then all of a sudden found himself
in prison.
And we said, you know, you are lying. You may get away with
it in China, but you are not going to get away with it here. So
again, all of you speak truth to power in such a way that it
makes such a difference.
And if we are quiet or if we acquiesce, we enable gross
evil. And none of you believe that, because that is why you are
doing the great work you are doing.
I do have a little concern, any maybe you can answer this,
Ms. Wang, about you know, I believe in scholarships and
bringing people in. The question comes in terms of doing that
who vets who comes here. I had a number of hearings on
Confucius Centers, and one especially interesting hearing with
NYU, with the Chancellor. Very, very fine person.
But they have a campus in Shanghai, largely paid for by the
Chinese Communist Party. They charge about $45,000, or
thereabouts. And it just, you know, I asked him hard questions
about who gets in.
Who vets the, you know, does the Chinese Communist Party
have a corner on who the enrollees are? How free can they
speak? Can they mention the Dalai Lama, for example, on campus
and not be censured when they walk off the campus?
So I invited myself, and he was kind enough, because I was
barred from going to China up until that point because of the
2008 Olympics. So I got a visa and went and gave a speech on
human rights. And I am very grateful for that.
But I am concerned about the complicity of our higher
education. Confucius Centers, you know, the bloom is off the
rose big time about how complicit they are the soft power
efforts by the Chinese Communist Party. And it is also a way of
keeping, you know, an eye and ear on their Chinese students who
are going to those schools.
So if there is a way that that could be done so that, you
know, the true democrats, small D, get those scholarships, I am
all for it. But I am just not--maybe you have some insights on
that.
Ms. Wang. Well, Human Rights Watch approached the Confucius
Institutes because it is a Trojan Horse, and you know, or a
government-funded, Chinese Government-funded programs, or you
know, tasked by the Chinese Government's missions.
So I think it is a easy solution is the U.S. Government and
U.S. entities to find--fund a scholarship. So the U.S.
Government can choose who can come in terms of who can vet. I
mean, I am happy to help.
I have many, you know, human rights actors in China who ask
me that they want a sponsorship to come to the U.S. to meet
their counterpart to learn from other activists in the U.S. You
know, I can facilitate that. And many other civil society
organizations can facilitate that.
And I do think there is a tremendous need from the
activists that they want to be here and to learn so they can be
more empowered. And if the U.S. started to fund those programs,
then you have the power to select how come here. And there are
a lot of people who can help, you know, to make sure it is the
right people who get selected.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. I just note for the record that
Sophie Richardson testified at our hearing on Confucius Centers
and did a great job, so thank you.
Just for the record, and then any final comments any of you
would like to make, we have a hearing scheduled on the China
Commission on May 11. It will be on Hong Kong and with a focus
on Jimmy Lai. And we are hoping to have his son, Sebastian,
testify. So that is, you know, in the works, and we will
probably do another one.
And you know, even there, just you know, official
Washington, right after the Umbrella--and Mr. Kellogg, you made
a good point about 2014, and we immediately introduced the Hong
Kong Human Rights Democracy Act in 2014, believing if you
convey to Xi Jinping, who is really calling the shots, that
there will be dire consequences, we are not bluffing, we are
not fooling.
And I had official Washington, including the Committee,
tell me I am a solution in search of a problem. He will never
crack down, he will never, never, never. I got it from the
White House and from the State Department, and we couldn't move
the bill.
And finally in a bipartisan way, we did move the bill. And
we had some really, really great people come, Joshua Wong and
others, to a press conference and pushed it, got it passed. But
it was too late, it was just too late. And so hopefully we can
get, you know, we can learn from those mistakes.
I am going to push very hard. I have had meetings with the
Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, Jason Smith, who is
very focused on China and PNTR. And you know, he had a hearing
this week, and some of the--one of the witnesses said it is
time to re-look at that.
Well, I had that bill that would take it away, unless
serious and sustained progress is made in human rights and
includes release of all political prisoners and the end of all
torture.
So we missed it for a quarter of a century, more, long,
since May 26, 1996, when human rights was de-linked from trade.
Let's get it back. And I think it would have a--it would make a
huge difference, so we are going to push that bill very, very
hard. Your help on that would be very helpful.
Oh, we also have another bill, Piero just reminded me, the
Hong Kong Economic Trade Office Certification Act, which would
look to end the New York, DC, and San Francisco Trade Offices
that are--Marco Rubio introduced it on the set-aside, I
introduced it here.
So we are looking to get that passed as well. And I know
Mr. Kellogg, on Hong Kong, that would be something I know you
are very concerned about as well.
Any further comments or final comments? Mr. Fu?
Mr. Fu. I also recommend Congress to host a hearing on the
transnational repression effort. And I myself has experienced
some, multiple incidents, of course back to 2020.
My home in West Texas being besieged for 3 months, we were
exiled from our own home on American soil. The FBI, law
enforcement had to evacuat my whole family, plus our guest from
Taiwan and put us in a private jet, hiding in different
locations for 3 months.
Every day there was a group of communist thugs wearing
masks surrounding my house from 9 o'clock-4 every day,
sometimes as many one--over a hundred people from San
Francisco, from Los Angeles.
And now we know of course, this week I am glad to see that
FBI and the DOJ had taken action, taken action by shutting down
one of the overseas Chinese police station in Manhattan. But
according to the New York Post, there are six more Chinese
overseas police stations, one still in New York, one in
Houston, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and one in Minnesota, one
is in Nebraska.
So I think, I hope that law enforcement and Congress can
press the law enforcement to take action and not let them
continue.
And I recently was singled out just in recent months, all
of a sudden I got a phone call from LAPD, NYPD, Houston Police,
and even Washington, DC. Basically, they said I booked in
luxury hotels with a bomb threat under my name.
It is, I mean, everywhere. So, so far, of course I
explained to the law enforcement, the LAPD detectives, I said
this is a communist party's kind of new tactic of transnational
repression, you know, threats against me.
And even as recent as last week, they booked taxi services
from Washington, DC, to Midland, Texas. Book online taxi,
basically said. I got a phone call that said, we are supposed
to pick you up from the Chinese embassy. Someone booked a taxi
for me.
And so these are the kind of new ways of transnational
repressive tactics. I hope, you know, Congress can pay
attention, yes.
Mr. Smith. On that point, we are already planning another
hearing of the CSC--China Commission, I should say, on that,
probably in May.
And Co-Chairman Merkley and I are working on legislation,
he has already introduced his, that would advance that ball to
try to get more being done, more focus, more law enforcement
attention to the abuse of the diaspora.
Mr. Bremberg. Thank you for this important hearing. I just
wanted to mention, as I had said in my opening remarks, there
is so much that the United States can do, and we do not have
time to go through all of that today, but I just did want to
mention not just passing the STOP Act that I urge the Senate to
take up.
The United States, particularly the executive branch, has a
multitude of tools at its disposal right now in terms of
elevating sanctions, increasing pressures on U.S. capital
market investments in China. The ranking member mentioned some
of the economic concerns around importations, which are a
problem.
My personal opinion is that the bigger threat currently is
about western and U.S. investments in China. And it is quite
unconscionable that Americans, in fact most Americans through
passive investments are in fact funding human rights abuses and
genocide.
And following up that actions need to speak louder than
words, obviously the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act went
into effect. Unfortunately, the implementation on the Uyghur
Forced Labor Prevention Act has not been what it needs to be.
Since its effective date, I do not believe a single company
has been added to the list. Those are all companies that were
previously set before the bill went into effect. There are
thousands of companies that are clearly identified and need to
be put on that list.
And then just last, there's many that can be taken. Last,
in response to a comment that Bob and you made before about
speaking for the prisoners by name. The reference to President
Reagan having that list.
When I went to Geneva, I had never directly engaged with
officials from the PRC before. At one point, and I cannot go
into detail, the PRC Ambassador asked me to come meet on an
unrelated topic.
And I asked the State Department, and I had fantastic
Foreign Service officers working for me in the mission in
Geneva. I said where is my list? And I said to ask, I want a
list of political prisoners that I can--whatever they ask me
for, I want to turn around and say, well, I want these
prisoners released, or I want to know the status of these
prisoners.
And the frustrating thing to me was the list did not exist,
OK. So I made one up and brought a list and spoke with the
Chinese Ambassador about it at the time and raised it on
multiple occasions.
But this is an important point that I think Congress can
help put pressure on the executive branch on, that
understanding that, you know, the executive branch always wants
to keep quiet about certainly ongoing activities, but at least
looking back over some appropriate period of time.
It is really I think important for Congress to understand,
OK, over some period of time, what attempts did you make in
seeking to release prisoners, and what, you know, tools did you
use and what were the outcomes. Because I think shamefully
right now, if we looked at that record right now, we would see
very little has been done.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Ms. Luo. I want to support Mr. Bremberg's idea. How to say,
as a family I of course would like to be released, my family.
But the name of the political prisoner in China is really too
long. It is a long list.
I am not saying we shouldn't mention the name, it is great.
Actually, in my written statement, first I write if we are
doing any business or say American they want our business to go
to China, please release all these people. Well, how do you
explain you can respect a rule if you treat people like this?
If you do not respect your own laws, how can we expect you
respect international laws or basic rule of commercial doing
business? So I will say it is--the economic discussion with a
company, they want to go to China, do business. They always
forgot how terrible the situation in China.
I really wish these kind of terrible cases of Geng He's
husband, of my husband, and Xu Zhiyong, and the tons and tons
of the political prisoners, they should know China is very
dangerous to do business.
They can put an end of your employee. They can put an end
of your employee or your managers into prison without reason,
without any--they can lie to the world. They can do whatever
they want, this is one point.
Second point regarding the sanction of the companies.
Support the business in China, especially some forced labor
business, the list of company as for my knowledge from my
friend, they are doing--they use the forced labor product into
the American market. These kind of things should strictly
prohibited and not allow them to do it.
So that is my two points. The commercial is definitely
related with the human rights. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. I would just, Ambassador Bremberg, we did, I
chaired a hearing 2 days ago on enforcement of the Uyghur
Forced Labor Act, and some good things have happened. I think
CBP is very sincere. But there's huge gaps, huge gaps in terms
of the entities list. The fact that there are so few companies
on it.
The whole issue of transferring the goods to places like
Vietnam and Malaysia, solar panels and the like, where all of a
sudden it is made in Vietnam. No it is made in Xinjiang, what
are you doing? And so there has got to be a much more
aggressive thing.
And one of the things that jumped off the page 2 days ago
that I thought about, but not the way I did after the hearing,
was that the de minimis rule of anything $800 or less does not
get checked by anyone, and yet how do we even know?
And there's three million packages per day coming in from
Xinjiang. Per day. That is a lot of goods making their way into
our borders.
And I even asked our witnesses, you know, is anybody even
checking to see if the $800, you know, how do you calculate
that in that package it is $800 or less, and therefore it does
not have to be checked.
So those loopholes have to be closed quickly. It could be
done administratively, and that is what we are asking in
followup. And we are looking at legislation as well. So points
very well taken on that.
On the data base, you know, you make a very good point
about that as well, with the State Department. I remember, and
this is just a little anecdote, but Frank Wolf and I were there
before the 2008 Olympics. We asked what prisoners, and this is
Bush now, what prisoners are you raising to assist?
They had no data base. We had one at the China Commission,
an excellent one, very well vetted. So we gave them names and
said please, would you raise these names.
And to someone's point, I think maybe it was Bob's point
earlier, Bob Fu, about, you know, Schultz and the whole--we
should have learned so much from the cause of Soviet Jews.
Because every time somebody from the U.S. Government went over
there during the Reagan Administration, especially the
Secretary of State, he had a list.
And they would argue and advocate for them. When I went
there many times, I always had a list. And I always do that
with other places like China. But they do not. And you know, if
they think, you know, a trade mission is coming in or something
from the Commerce Department, they should have a list.
And every single time, it has to be an engagement. Because
as you pointed out so well, Sophie, just a moment ago, how do
you trust them on their laws, including intellectual property
rights infringement, if they cannot even treat their own people
with respect.
So, excellent point. And so we have got a lot to do.
Ms. Wang, did you have anything further you want to say?
OK.
Thank you so much. The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, the above-entitled matter went off the record
at 1:26 p.m.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
