- MARKUP OF VARIOUS MEASURES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MARKUP VARIOUS MEASURES

=======================================================================

MARKUP

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 6, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-81

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-878PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Chairman

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     GREGORY MEEKS, New York, Ranking
JOE WILSON, South Carolina               Member
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania      BRAD SHERMAN, California
DARRELL ISSA, California      GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
ANN WAGNER, Missouri      WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
BRIAN MAST, Florida      GABE AMO, Rhode Island
KEN BUCK, Colorado      AMI BERA, California
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee      JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee      DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANDY BARR, Kentucky      TED LIEU, California
RONNY JACKSON, Texas      SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
YOUNG KIM, California      DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida      COLIN ALLRED, Texas
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan      ANDY KIM, New Jersey
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,       SARA JACOBS, California
American Samoa      KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas      SHEILA CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK,
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio          Florida
JIM BAIRD, Indiana      GREG STANTON, Arizona
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida      MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
THOMAS KEAN, JR., New Jersey      JARED MOSKOWITZ, Florida
MICHAEL LAWLER, New York      JONATHAN JACKSON, Illinois
CORY MILLS, Florida      SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, California
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia      JIM COSTA, California
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas      JASON CROW, Colorado
JOHN JAMES, Michigan      BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
KEITH SELF, Texas      GABE AMO, Rhode Island

Brendan Shields, Staff Director

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

BILL EN BLOC

H.R. 6609, the Foreign Military Sales Technical, Industrial, and
Governmental Engagement for Readiness Act, or TIGER Act........     3
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
6609 offered by Mr. Waltz......................................    11
Information submitted for the record from Representative Waltz...    14
Information submitted for the record from Representative Waltz...    17
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
6609 offered by Mr. Davidson...................................    25
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 6609 offered by
Mr. Waltz......................................................    31
H.R. 7089, the Global Anti-Human Trafficking Enhancement Act.....    40
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 7089 offered by
Mr. James......................................................    42
H.Con.Res. 27, Condemning Russia's unjust and arbitrary detention
of Russian opposition leader Vladimir Kara-Murza, who has stood
up in defense of democracy, the rule of law, and free and fair
elections in Russia............................................    47
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to
H.Con.Res. 27 offered by Mr. Keating...........................    52
H.R. 6603, the No Technology for Terror Act......................    61
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
6603 offered by Mr. Moran......................................    68
H.Res. 82, Expressing the sense of Congress regarding the need to
designate Nigeria a Country of Particular Concern for engaging
in and tolerating systematic, ongoing, and egregious violations
of religious freedom, the need to appoint a Special Envoy for
Nigeria and the Lake Chad region, and for other purposes.......    76
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to
H.Res. 82 offered by Mr. Smith.................................    84
Information submitted for the record from Representative Waltz...    93
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to
H.Res. 82 offered by Mr. Self..................................    98
The Pacific Partnership Act, which is H.R. 7159..................   107
H.Res. 965, Calling for the immediate release of Ryan Corbett, a
United States citizen, who was wrongfully detained by the
Taliban on August 10th, 2022, and condemning the wrongful
detention of Americans by the Taliban..........................   120
H.R. 6046, the Standing Against Houthi Aggression Act............   126
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 6046 offered by
MR. McCaul.....................................................   130
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
6046 offered by Ms. Dean.......................................   145
H.R. 7122, H.R. 7122, the Stop Support for UNRWA Act of 2024.....   152
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
7122 offered by Mr. Smith......................................   155
Substitute for the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to
H.R. 7122 offered by Mr. Schneider.............................   166
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
7122 offered by Mr. Smith......................................   178
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
7122 offered by Mr. Meeks......................................   182
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
7122 offered by Ms. Manning....................................   192
H.R. 7152, the Divided Families National Registry Act............   197
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 7152 offered by
Mr. Meeks......................................................   202

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................   210
Hearing Minutes..................................................   212
Hearing Attendance...............................................   213

VOTES

Votes submitted for the record...................................   214

MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE MCCAUL

Materials submitted for the record from Representative McCaul....   226

MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE PHILLIPS

Materials submitted for the record from representative Phillips..   257

MARKUP SUMMARY

Markup summary...................................................   260

MARKUP OF VARIOUS MEASURES

Tuesday, February 6, 2024

House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:31 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitor Center, Hon. Michael McCaul (chairman
of the committee) presiding.
Chairman McCaul. A quorum being present, the Committee on
Foreign Affairs will come to order.
Mr. Meeks, his flight has been delayed. So, we will begin
and have Ms. Manning sit in the ranking member position. So,
it's her special day.
The committee is meeting today for consideration of H.R.
6609, the Foreign Military Sales Technical, Industrial, and
Governmental Engagement for Readiness Act, or TIGER Act; H.R.
7089, the Global Anti-Human Trafficking Enhancement Act;
H.Con.Res. 27, Condemning Russia's unjust and arbitrary
detention of Russian opposition leader Vladimir Kara-Murza, who
has stood up in defense of democracy, the rule of law, and free
and fair elections in Russia; H.R. 6603, the No Technology for
Terror Act; H.Res. 82, Expressing the sense of Congress
regarding the need to designate Nigeria a Country of Particular
Concern for engaging in and tolerating systematic, ongoing, and
egregious violations of religious freedom, the need to appoint
a Special Envoy for Nigeria and the Lake Chad region, and for
other purposes; the Pacific Partnership Act, which is H.R.
7159; H.Res. 965, Calling for the immediate release of Ryan
Corbett, a United States citizen, who was wrongfully detained
by the Taliban on August 10th, 2022, and condemning the
wrongful detention of Americans by the Taliban; H.R. 6046, the
Standing Against Houthi Aggression Act; H.R. 7122, H.R. 7122,
the Stop Support for UNRWA Act of 2024, and H.R. 7152, the
Divided Families National Registry Act.
The chair announces that any requests for recorded votes
may be rolled and he may recess the committee at any point.
Without objection, so ordered.
Pursuant to House rules, I request that members have the
opportunity to submit views for any committee report that may
be produced on any of today's measures. And without objection,
so ordered.
Pursuant to notice, I now call up H.R. 6609, the Foreign
Military Sales Technical, Industrial, and Governmental
Engagement for Readiness Act, or TIGER Act.
The bill was circulated in advance, and the clerk shall
designate the bill.
The Clerk. ``H.R. 6609, To amend the Arms Export Control
Act to increase the dollar amount threshold under sections 3
and 36 of that Act relating to proposed transfers or sales of
defense articles or services under that Act, and for other
purpose.''
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, the first reading is
dispensed with. The bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point.
[The bill H.R. 6609 follows:]

H.R. 6609

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. Without objection, the Waltz amendment in
the nature of a substitute, circulated to members in advance,
shall be considered as read and will be treated as original
text for purposes of amendment.
[The amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by Mr.
Waltz follows:]

AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 6609
OFFERED BY MR. WALTZ

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. Is there any discussion on the bill?
Mr. Waltz is recognized.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am pleased to introduce with Representative Seth Moulton,
as the lead co-sponsor, the first piece of our bipartisan
legislative recommendations from the TIGER Task Force on
Foreign Military Sales.
If it's OK with the chairman, I'd like to read a short
statement from Mr. Moulton.
``This TIGER Task Force has taken a close look at our FMS
process, and the bill before you today represents the first
step toward legislative improvements in the process. I have co-
sponsored the underlying bill as a sign of my support for the
amendment in the nature of a substitute, which includes my
inputs and is a product of good-faith negotiation over the past
several months.
Our FMS sales are a critical tool of foreign policy. The
legislation supports greater senior-level policy input into the
process, and it will enhance our ability to stockpile high-
demand defense items to accelerate how quickly we can get these
capabilities to our allies and partners. I support adjusting
the congressional notifications for inflation, but also
increasing congressional oversight by instituting cumulative
thresholds.''
Mr. Chairman, I'd like to enter that into the record.
I also want to thank Mr. Hill, Mr. Crow, Mr. Garcia, Mr.
Self, Mr. McCormick, and Mr. James for their participation from
the committee, as well as Chairwoman Kim, especially on the
Taiwan piece of this.
Chairman McCaul. And without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We've received support from outside groups, like the
Aerospace International Association, the National Defense
Industrial Association, which I enter in the record now.
Chairman McCaul. And without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Waltz. The issues revealed in our 6-month process of
reviewing FMS data fell into three buckets:
First are the thresholds themselves. For the first time
since Korea, the world is witness to a prolonged, conventional,
high-intensity modern war being fought in Ukraine. This bill
requires our arms sales process to grow. Along with that, the
thresholds we are raising in this bill simply reflect the 20-
year gap--two decades--since congressional notification
thresholds were adjusted, and it's indexed to DOD total
inflation of nearly 70 percent. I say again, these threshold
levels have not been adjusted in two decades, and we all know
how bad inflation has been.
I am also grateful to my colleague Mr. Moulton for further
expanding congressional oversight in this bill and helping to
design a cumulative threshold limit. Countries should not be
able to game the system and structure their purchases to avoid
congressional oversight. I am pleased that Mr. Moulton's
suggested language does this at a level of a billion over--or
excuse me--$5 billion over 3 years for NATO-Plus countries and
$1 billion for non-NATO Plus countries. And I'll State again,
this cumulative threshold structure does not currently exist at
all. So, this is additional congressional oversight.
There are also the issues regarding policy input into the
acquisitions community. One of the key takeaways from our Task
Force was that the acquisitions community is a highly
specialized, highly technical group of experts whose work is
not easily accessible to others in the departments. Holding
senior officials accountable for acquisitions decisions will
force greater involvement, their involvement, and act as a
forcing function to ensure the process reflects the policy.
We all know, and we've discussed on this committee many
times, nowhere is there more needed--is this more needed than
Taiwan foreign military sales. Chairman Xi said he intends to
be prepared for an invasion by 2027, or sooner than the $22
billion in backlogged sales will be ready. There are many
pressing priorities for the United States in the world, we
recognize. However, there should be a forcing function to
ensure the priority of Taiwan's defense is not lost, especially
for certain long-running, high-end demands.
And last, Mr. Chairman, it became very clear during our
Task Force meetings that the extended, and often opaque,
contracting phase of the foreign military sales process greatly
harms our planning and anticipation, lowering our overall
readiness. State has a tool to ensure that certain high-demand,
high-use items are available ahead of time, both for our own
use and our partners. Instituting a funding swap for the
Special Defense Acquisition Fund exactly similar to the funding
swap instituted for other centers in 2017 would allow State to
better resource this critical fund.
And finally, Mr. Chairman, there are our allies out there.
We should learn from Ukraine. We should arm our allies and
simplify this bureaucracy, so that they can do the fighting for
their interests and less involve the United States. And right
now, because this is such a bureaucratic process, we literally
have allies buying from other people in other countries, rather
than us. This is about jobs. This is about empowering our
allies to fight for themselves. And I encourage support for
this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Yes, and I thank the gentleman and Mr.
Moulton for your dedication and hard work on this Task Force
that I announced in June to help fix a broken system, not only
for the United States, but our allies around the world. And
I've said many times that, especially with respect to Taiwan,
I've approved over 20 weapons systems that have yet to go into
Taiwan, and that does not provide deterrence against a very
aggressive China.
So again, I want to thank Mr. Waltz for his hard work and
all the other members who participated on this Task Force.
Is there any further discussion on the bill?
Ms. Jacobs is recognized.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I rise in opposition to H.R. 6609, the TIGER Act, which
would decrease congressional oversight and transparency of arms
transfers to foreign governments.
Congress plays a key role in ensuring the weapons we send
to foreign militaries are in line with U.S. law, policy, and
values, and we have a responsibility to be thoughtful and
deliberate when we're using taxpayer dollars to arm foreign
governments. And this notification process gives us the
necessary time to do our due diligence, raise concerns, ask
questions, get answers, provide input.
Increasing the dollar threshold would, essentially,
eliminate congressional review for billions of dollars' worth
of arms transfers. This is exactly the wrong direction we
should be taking. We need to do more to increase congressional
oversight, to prioritize human rights in arms sales, and to
require unused monitoring mechanisms to track violations of
human rights--all reforms I've been proud to partner with
Ranking Member Meeks on in the SAFEGUARD Act.
And to my colleagues on the other side of the aisle who say
this bill is aimed at decreasing processing time, the State
Department is already approving 95 percent of foreign military
sales cases within 48 hours. As Chairman McCaul said, he has
approved of these sales that haven't gone through.
Congressional notification is not the holdup. This isn't an
unnecessary burden; it's a necessary check on arms sales to
ensure they are advancing our foreign policy goals and our
values.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields.
Any further discussion?
Mr. Mills is recognized.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to address what my colleague has talked about
because this does not lessen the actual DSP-5, DSP-83, and the
necessary process which has to go forward to the Directorate of
Defense Trade Controls--something I'm very knowledgeable on.
And so, I would ask if--and I'm happy to yield my time--can
you tell me how this bill would decrease DSP-5/DSP-83 approval
times?
Ms. Jacobs. My understanding is that this bill would not
give Congress adequate time to do the review, and also, would
increase the threshold of what we get to review, which I think
is really problematic.
Mr. Mills. Again, the reason that we have the United
States, the U.S. Department of State is so that they have the
availability and opportunity to review all exportation
approvals, to include, also, your ability to go forward, even
if you're brokering in an activity. That's why you have
brokering activity things, like DSP-83s; that's why you have
DSP-5s for exportation transportation--all signed off, however,
by the Department of State and by the Pentagon, and also,
reviewed and checked by Congress.
This does not lower the threshold; it only helps to
expedite, in fact, the $19-plus billion that Taiwan has been
waiting for the things that they have already paid, which would
also help with our Military Industrial Base, but it does not
dilute the actual authority, oversight, and provisions that the
U.S. Department of State, the Secretary of State, and Director
of the Directorate of Defense Trade Controls would, in fact,
have.
I yield back.
Ms. Jacobs. But, sorry, would the gentleman yield?
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman said he has yielded back his
time.
Ms. Jacobs. Oh, OK.
Chairman McCaul. Ms. Manning is recognized.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is extremely rare to see legislative efforts that seek
to reduce the oversight power of our chamber and our committee
over matters of national security, but this, unfortunately, is
one of those efforts.
This bill is based on the work of a Republican-led Task
Force which aimed to reform the U.S. arms transfers process. My
colleague Mr. Crow was one of two Democrats on the Task Force
and offered dissenting views for the final report, and I concur
with those views.
While the Task Force and billet produced consulted with
many defense industrial firms and military officials, it did
not take into account the views of civil society, human rights
groups, legal scholars, government transparency groups, or
others, nor was it inclusive of a broader set of Democratic
members from this very committee, which is charged with
debating and voting on its conclusions after just a few days of
review.
At its core, this bill mandates a number of significant
changes to the very congressional notification process that is
critical for effective oversight of arms transfers. More
specifically, this bill raises the congressional notification
thresholds for major arms sales to foreign countries by,
roughly, 66 percent. Any arms sales that fall below these
increased threshold levels, Congress will have zero visibility,
zero transparency, zero oversight.
We have seen examples of Administrations providing below-
threshold sales to avoid congressional scrutiny, even at the
current notification levels. Without this bill's increases, in
2020, the State Department Inspector General found that over a
4-year period the Trump Administration's State Department
provided more than $11 billion in below-threshold sales to
Saudi Arabia and the UAE, including weapons subject to
congressional holds due to concerns over egregious human rights
violations. I do not want to further enable that kind of
action.
And while I'm aware of the point related to inflation my
majority colleagues are making, the simple fact is the real
impact of the bill is to diminish our constitutional oversight
duty and our responsibility as legislators with the prospect of
less oversight. This is not simply an inflation fix. I'm of the
mind that the more transparency, the more information we have,
the better.
Finally, Mr. Waltz's ANS includes a provision which
provides a complicated and unnecessarily convoluted mechanism
via which certain countries--NATO members and certain other
significant purchasers--would not be covered under the raised
threshold levels, but, instead, would be subject to the
existing notification thresholds. While I recognize and
understand the intent, this does not address my more
fundamental concerns.
By raising the threshold amounts, as the bill proposes,
Congress will have even less knowledge of what arms are being
transferred to what countries and less ability to ensure that
transfers are consistent with U.S. law, policy, and interests.
Furthermore, any such approach must be holistic in nature
and include inputs from all relevant stakeholders, as well as
provisions that concurrently strengthen Congress' oversight of
violations, misuse, and harm resulting from U.S. arms
transfers. This bill does none of those things.
In sum, I object to the core of this bill and its
objectives, especially as they relate to the very oversight
functions of our committee and Congress. If we want to improve
the arms transfer process for U.S. allies and partners, many of
the most significant hurdles lie within the defense industry's
production constraints and inefficiencies and with the
executive branch. The congressional review process is not the
problem.
So, I must oppose this bill and encourage my colleagues to
do the same.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields back.
Any further discussion on the bill?
Mr. Castro is recognized.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman.
I speak in opposition to H.R. 6609, the TIGER Act, which
would undermine transparency on arms sales and congressional
oversight.
Whether it is to allies like Australia; countries facing an
ongoing invasion, like Ukraine, or countries with serious human
rights concerns, like Saudi Arabia, the Congress, and this
committee, has an important role to play in conducting
oversight over the export of arms.
This bill would raise the thresholds for when arms sales
would need to be notified to Congress, denying this committee
crucial information. It's an unnecessary attempt to undermine
the power of this committee and the U.S. Congress.
We know that delays in arms sales are not the fault of the
notification process. The vast majority of sales are approved
quickly, and those that take some time are usually due to
serious concerns, like human rights or end use.
This bill would also normalize the use of emergency and
drawdown authorities, which would be another attempt to
undermine congressional authority. We should not unilaterally
cede these powers to the executive branch.
I support a revision of the Arms Export Control Act to add
provisions supporting human rights, like the SAFEGUARD Act,
introduced by Ranking Member Meeks, of which I'm a co-sponsor.
I also believe that any revision of the Arms Export Control
Act should include provisions that prevent the executive branch
from going around Congress by splitting up arms sales into
smaller packages that fall under the threshold requiring
reporting to Congress. This loophole can easily be abused.
For example, a 2020 report by the State Department's
Inspector General showed how, between January 2017 and late
2019, the previous Administration made $11.2 billion in arms
sales to Saudi Arabia and the UAE without reporting it to
Congress by splitting them up into 4,221 separate arms sales. A
revision of the reporting thresholds of the Arms Export Control
Act must address this loophole.
With that, Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields.
Mr. James is recognized.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield my time to the
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. James.
Just a few additional points for clarity, for the record,
and for my colleagues.
And absolutely, adjusting the threshold issue which has not
been adjusted in 20 years is by no means a silver bullet for
the entire backlog and often bureaucratic FMS process. This is
a first step in the bipartisan Task Force to do that.
But I do want to address a few points that have been made.
No. 1, given these current threshold levels, which, again,
really is no change--it's an adjustment for inflation--in terms
of where Congress, the executive branch, and the legislative
branch have decided to draw the line for notification, the vast
majority are for parts. The vast majority are for sustainment
items of major weapons systems that have gone through an
extensive oversight process, No. 1.
No. 2, the vast majority of the recipients are our NATO
allies, and to the extent it's not NATO, which we have
discussed extensively in this committee, we want NATO
contributing to its own defense; we want NATO interoperable
with the United States; we want NATO to step up to fight
authoritarian States like the Russian aggression that we're
seeing through Putin, but we cannot make it so sclerotic and
bureaucratic that they cannot get the parts they need for the
systems they've already bought.
And further, just on a broader issue, we are not selling
U.S. arms in a vacuum. If we care about human rights, as Ms.
Jacobs and myself, and so many others, absolutely do, we want
them buying from the United States. We do not want countries
buying from China. We do not want countries buying from Russia.
We do not want even countries buying from--well, we'll just
leave it at that.
We want them buying from the United States, where we do
have appropriate oversight, but we cannot make it so
bureaucratic, so slow, so difficult, to even get a part, that
eventually they buy--and we see this on the international
market, where countries say, ``You know what? I'm going to buy
a lesser system, and the Chinese, the Russians, they're not
going to bother me about it at all.''
So, I would appreciate if any of my colleagues want to make
adjustments. We are working with the other side of the aisle on
this cumulative threshold and where that is, so that
countries--I do not think the executive branch is necessarily
gaming the system per se--but that cannot happen.
This is a new introduction of a new system into our FMS
process. And if we need to adjust that over time, then I'm
absolutely happy to work with my colleagues on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields.
Ms. Titus is recognized.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
At a time when U.S. weapons sales are reaching record
levels, for some reason, the Republicans on this committee have
decided that, instead of needing more oversight of arms sales,
Congress should surrender its already emaciated role and
conduct even less oversight.
We in Congress, and particularly on this committee, have a
critical role to play in matters of war and peace. And yet,
this bill is another example of the steady erosion of
legislative oversight. And this time, however, it's self-
inflicted.
The genesis of this misguided policy is rooted in a Task
Force that the bill's sponsor led that produced a report with
recommendations parroting the criticism of the defense industry
that U.S. sales processes take too long; they're too slow.
Well, in reality, 95 percent of FMS cases are approved within
48 hours--48 hours, that's not very slow.
This Task Force, furthermore, did not meet with any civil
society groups; did not solicit views from arms control
experts, and did not take into account the concerns of human
rights organizations, which has been mentioned. Instead, it
just focused its efforts on undermining the congressional
oversight mechanism--simply for the sake of expediency.
Since the Task Force work neglected to lay out the concerns
of experts on this issue, allow me to do that here.
First, congressional notification is critical for effective
oversight of arms sales. Without it, Congress would have almost
no knowledge of what weapons are being transferred to which
countries and would have even less ability to ensure that those
transfers are consistent with U.S. law, policy, and interests.
The executive branch routinely tries to erode our oversight
of security matters. You can go back to Nixon and the War
Powers Act. Similarly, the executive tries to circumvent
congressional review of security assistance, as you have heard,
by authorizing sub-threshold sales to move major military
transfers in a piecemeal fashion, as it did with Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates.
Second, notifications facilitate both public engagement and
interbranch negotiation on weighty security assistance
decisions that can hold tremendous consequences for human
rights. In the past, these reviews have sometimes resulted in
canceling sales to some entities over concerns that U.S.
weapons could be used to keep repressive governments in power.
Additionally, these reviews ensure that sales do not exacerbate
or perpetuate gross human rights abuses. By limiting Congress'
visibility when it comes to oversight of sales, it's nearly
impossible for us to know how they're being used.
Finally, the bill would limit U.S. interagency anti-
corruption checks on prospective buyers of U.S. weapons. The
State Department and Defense Department regularly engage in
greater vetting of proposed arms sales that require a
congressional check compared to the sales that do not. In cases
where congressional approval is required, the relevant regional
bureau at State would consult with its colleagues in the
International Narcotics and the Law Enforcement Bureau; the
Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor Bureau, et cetera. So, you
would have a more complete, unique insight into the status of
the country purchasing the arms. When we do not have to make
that, have that oversight or give that approval, those kinds of
sources of information aren't cited.
In the limited time I have left, I cannot delve into how
this bill would also prevent congressional scrutiny on defense
side deals that may be used to evade anti-bribery laws or how
this would complicate reviews of the U.S. defense companies'
political contributions to foreign policies, but I can conclude
this: for the Republicans on this committee to hold a hearing
this past September entitled, ``Reclaiming Congress' Article I
Powers,'' to now surrender those powers in this markup seems to
me totally contradictory and hypocritical and a bit on the
nose.
I thank you and yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields back.
Is there any further discussion on the bill?
There being no further discussion of the bill, the
committee will move to consideration of amendments.
Does any member wish to offer an amendment?
Mr. Davidson is recognized.
Mr. Davidson. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the
desk.
Chairman McCaul. The clerk shall report--distribute the
amendment.
OK, the clerk shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. ``Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
substitute to H.R. 6609 offered by Mr. Davidson of Ohio.
Page 3, strike line 20 and all that follows through line 9
on page 5, and insert the following:
ENHANCED CONGRESSIONAL NOTIFICATION.----
IN GENERAL.--On an ongoing basis in each fiscal year, the
Secretary of State shall identify those countries that have
purchased major defense equipment as described in sections
36(b) and 36(c) of the Arms Export Control Act''----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with.
[The amendment offered by Mr. Davidson follows:]

AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 6609
OFFERED BY MR. DAVIDSON

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The gentleman from Ohio is recognized for
5 minutes on his amendment.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the chairman. This amendment works to
improve H.R. 6609 by requiring the President to notify Congress
if cumulative arms sales to a single country in a given Fiscal
Year surpass the thresholds set in the Arms Export Control Act
as increased by the TIGER Act which particularly, I like the
logic of it and raising the thresholds makes sense to me, but
as we started looking into the policy, we found that what is
illegal in the private sector is somehow standard practice in
the Government. Structuring is illegal in the banking world. An
individual cannot intentionally split large transactions into
smaller transactions and avoid scrutiny from law enforcement or
compliance with reporting obligations. It is a basic concept,
yet when it comes to arms sales or transfers, Congress is
apparently allowing and now facilitating the President doing
just that. They can avoid transparency and accountability by
structuring their arms sales and transfers so that they do not
go over the thresholds in the Arms Export Control Act.
So while I applaud raising the standard for the reporting,
I think that makes sense. If you raise it from $14 million to
$23 million, and let's say every month you decide to sell $20
million, have you not violated the intent? And frankly, the
negotiation with Mr. Moulton and apparently some Democrats,
resulted in recognizing the problem was structuring, but they
set a $1 billion threshold for non-NATO countries over a period
of 3 years and the report on it isn't even due until the end of
the third year, so 4 years with no scrutiny from Congress. It
is, frankly, a complete abdication of our responsibility. And
it could be raised. The process is also very bureaucratic. In
fact, we have whole agencies devoted to scrutinizing this
process. In that sense, why not just repeal the Arms Export
Control Act and get Congress out of the business altogether.
And frankly, since all we seem to do is cut the checks and
provide no check on executive authority, particularly when it
comes to war making or spying on our citizens, why not just go
ahead and dissolve Article 1. We can amend the Constitution and
simply have a chief executive who could be very efficient.
CATO wrote a piece about this topic in 2022 stating many
sales--``many sales with small arms and light weapons are less
than $1 million skirting congressional oversight.'' The
executive branch and weapons manufacturers can put together
packages of sales for $9,999,999 and avoid notifying Congress.
As a result, many lethal weapons are sold in small packages
valued just below $1 million. Congress often does not know
about such sales, let alone have mechanisms to address it. So
this amendment aims to end that practice and require the
Administration to notify Congress once the cumulative sales in
a single country surpass the thresholds set by the underlying
bill.
Last, in 2020, the State Department's Office of Inspector
General reported, documented a serious case of this happening.
Over a 4-year period, the Department provided more than $11
billion in below-threshold sales to Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates. Congress had zero visibility into those sales at
the time. congressional notification is a critical tool. It is
necessary for this committee to fulfill its oversight
responsibilities effectively. That is why we have the Arms
Export Control Act and we have Congress scrutinizing it. We
should just perfect that oversight instead of effectively
eliminate it.
The TIGER Act raises the thresholds in the Arms Export
Control Act, so I think this amendment is more than fair,
giving these increases, and I would support a good dialog over
what those increases should be, but the idea that you can
violate the spirit of them just by doing one transaction a
month seems at odds with the Stated objective and I urge
support by all of our colleagues for this common-sense
amendment and I yield.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Any other member
seek recognition?
Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This amendment from
Mr. Davidson strikes all of the additional modifications to the
notification criteria in the Waltz ANS and creates a global,
congressional notification requirement for cumulative transfers
of major defense equipment, MDE sales to recipients if the
value of those multiple MDE below threshold sales in a year
totals more than the single case notification threshold that
all the MDE becomes notifiable within the next year, yes,
within the next year.
While I appreciate the intent of the amendment which, in
fact, increases oversight in terms of certain cumulative MDE
which would not ordinarily trigger notification, the amendment
does not strike the numerous raised threshold levels I have
just detailed in my previous concerns within the rest of the
underlying bill.
Therefore, while I will vote in support of Mr. Davidson's
amendment, out of recognition for his laudable interests in
increasing oversight and the passion with which he Stated his
argument, I cannot support the underlying bill it may be
attached to. Thank you and I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields. Any other member
seek recognition?
Mr. Mills is recognized.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While I find myself in
most cases always siding and agreeing with my good friend and
colleague from Ohio, this yet again is one more example of
where Congress talks about wanting less government regulation,
less scrutiny against the private sector, and creating other
departments that already exist like the Department of Defense
Trade Controls, allowing the U.S. Department of State, which we
fund through State and foreign ops which is done right here in
this body to be able to provide the necessary oversight. If we
want to talk about abdications for God's sake, let's start
talking about how we can repeal the AUMF which is an abdication
of Article 1 Section 8 Clause 11 or even the 1973 War Powers
Act that gives executive credence to Republican and Democrat
Presidents alike to do carte blanche warfare.
The reality is is that we have mechanisms in place already
and I think that continuing to try and over regulate which we
say that we want limited government, we want fewer taxes as the
Republican Party, perhaps we should start acting that way. With
that, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Any other members
seek recognition?
Mr. Castro is recognized.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman. I want to speak in strong
support of Mr. Davidson amendment. The way the Export Control
Act's reporting thresholds are set up lays out a significant
loophole that previous Administrations have exploited and
future Administrations will be able to exploit. By only
requiring congressional notifications of sales over a certain
dollar amount, a President can break up larger sales into
smaller ones and go around Congress. I do not see this
amendment as trying--as over regulating. The amendment is
simply trying to make sure that we get the information and the
notifications that we are supposed to get and that Presidents
do not evade Congress. Without it, there is no way for us to
know and the law that is on the books itself is just going to
be ineffective.
In fact, we know that this has been abused. A 2020 State
Department Inspector General report showed how a few years ago
the previous Administration made $11.2 billion in sales to
Saudi Arabia without reporting them to Congress by splitting up
those sales into 4,221 smaller sales, each below the threshold
that requires a report. That kind of conduct really makes a
mockery of the law. At that point, you really do not have any
law at all. So any member of this committee, whether Democrat
or Republican, should be concerned about any President,
Republican or Democrat's ability to do the same thing.
I support this amendment by Mr. Davidson which would
require the Administration to not notify all armed sales to
Congress if the total amount of sales in any Fiscal Year
exceeds the reporting thresholds. With that, I yield back,
Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Any other members
seek recognition? Mr. Waltz is recognized.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to say I find it
incredibly rich to hear the Democrats on the other side of the
aisle continually raising selling American arms to the UAE and
the Saudis that they were using to fight the terrorist group,
the Houthis, but now instead the Biden Administration is using
American equipment to bomb the Houthis.
But here nor there, Mr. Chairman, I also in support of my
colleague, Mr. Mills, on our side of the aisle, we hate
government over regulation in the private sector until it is a
regulation that some of my colleagues seem to like. Here nor
there, the point of the FMS Task Force and I hope that in a
bipartisan way we could agree that we want our allies, the
South Koreans, the Japanese, the Taiwans, we could go down the
list, our NATO allies, we want them buying American goods with
appropriate oversight. What this is seeking to do is the vast
majority of these lower threshold notifications are for the
sustainment of those systems, for the parts, for the ammunition
for them, what have you.
No one is suggesting that we remove Congress' role from the
oversight of those main weapon systems, but I will State again
and I must speak against my good friend Mr. Davidson's
amendment, this will make the bureaucratic process far worse.
This will go from bad to worse. This will drive our allies into
the arms of the Chinese arms market which continues to grow and
into the Russian arms market, even though their equipment is
horrible, they can get it far more easily and without any
oversight.
So we are trying to strike an appropriate balance.
Unfortunately, this amendment does not. We have worked with the
other side of the aisle on this cumulative issue which I agree
we should address, but unfortunately, I must speak in
opposition to this amendment.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Any further
discussion? There being no further discussion, the question now
occurs on the amendment offered by Representative Davidson, No.
104.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the noes have it and the
amendment is not agreed to.
A roll call vote has been requested. Pursuant to the
chair's previous announcement, this vote will be postponed. Are
there any further amendments?
Mr. Waltz is recognized.
Mr. Waltz. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Waltz follows:]

AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 6609 OFFERED BY MR.
WALTZ

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The Clerk shall distribute the amendment.
The Clerk shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
substitute to H.R. 6609 offered by Mr. Waltz of Florida. Page
1, line 16, strike $500000000 and insert 50 million dollars.
Page----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman from Florida is
recognized for 5 minutes on his amendment.
Mr. Waltz. Very quickly, Mr. Chairman, this is a technical
amendment. Unfortunately, we had a clerical error as the bill
was being drafted and this strikes importantly, but it strikes
the zero and clarifies the amount. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Any further
discussion on the amendment? There being no further discussion,
the question now occurs on the amendment offered by
Representative Waltz, No. 127.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it and the
amendment is agreed to.
Are there any further amendments? There being no further
amendments, further proceedings on this bill are postponed.
Pursuant to notice, I now call up H.R. 7089, the Global
Anti-Human Trafficking Enhancement Act.
[The Bill H.R. 7089 follows:]

H.R. 7089

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 7089 OFFERED BY MR.
JAMES

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The bill was circulated in advance and the
Clerk shall designate the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 7089, to authorize the Diplomatic Security
Services of the Department of State to investigate allegations
of violations of conduct constituting offenses under Chapter 77
of Title 18, United States Code and for other purposes.
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, the first reading is
dispensed with. The bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point. Without objection, the James Amendment
in the nature of a substitute, circulated to members in
advance, shall be considered as read and will be treated as
text--in original text for purposes of amendment.
Is there any discussion on the bill? Mr. James is
recognized.
Mr. James. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have been talking a
lot about export and sales and I am a businessman. I am a
capitalist, but there are certain things that are not for sale.
To quote the Sound of Freedom, ``God's children are not for
sale.''
I want to speak in support of my bill H.R. 7089, the Global
Anti-Human Trafficking Enhancement Act. Mr. Chairman, first I
want to say thank you for your staff helped me out, put this
bill together, and getting it to markup is of critical
importance to not only our duty as Americans, but our duty as
humans and children of God.
My bill is simple. It allows the Diplomatic Security
Service under the State Department to investigate instances of
transnational human trafficking directly. Currently, diplomatic
security must account for document fraud to be the reason, the
proximate cause it can initiate any investigation.
Now I am sure we can agree human trafficking must be
eradicated everywhere, everywhere. Modern day slavery is a
major stain on humanity and decency. It is a sin.
Just recently, in my district, I was pleased to hear the
Macomb County sheriffs and prosecutors were successful in
stopping a trafficking ring happening right in Macomb County. I
often hear people ask why is America involved everywhere and in
these different parts of the world? When it comes to the safety
of children and young adults, the most vulnerable on our
planet, I know that American leadership can do more to help
bring justice for these victims.
According to the State Department, ``there are about 27.6
million victims worldwide at any given time. This evil and
depraved industry preys on people of all ages, backgrounds, and
nationalities for their own profit.'' God's rule is clear, Luke
4:18 and 19 reads, ``The spirit of the Lord is upon because he
has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent
me to proclaim liberty to the captives and recovering of sight
to the blind, to set at liberty those who are oppressed to
proclaim the year of the Lord's favor.'' We have a duty to all,
particularly those who are being trafficked into slavery.
My bill empowers our law enforcement to liberate the
oppressed and the captive and I beseech my colleagues to
support my bill, H.R. 7089, and I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. I appreciate the spirit of his
presentation. It was very moving and I support this bill very
strongly.
Any further discussion? Ms. Manning is recognized.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support this
measure and appreciate Chairman McCaul and Representative James
for working with Ranking Member Meeks on this bill. Diplomatic
security officers are uniquely placed to investigate human
trafficking crimes around the world due to their global
posture, their understanding of local governments, and threat
environments and experience in investigating these horrific
crimes. By broadening their authority to investigate these
crimes in more situations, while also requiring reporting to
ensure that the authority is as effective as it can be, this
legislation advances U.S. efforts to combat and eliminate the
scourge of human trafficking around the world. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields. Is there any
further discussion? There being no further discussion, does
anybody have an amendment?
There being no amendments, I move the committee report H.R.
7089, as amended to the House with a favorable recommendation.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it and the
motion is agreed to.
Mr. James. Mr. Chairman, I would like to call for the yeas
and nays.
Chairman McCaul. The roll call vote has been requested.
Pursuant to the chair's previous announcement, this vote will
be postponed.
Pursuant to notice, I now call up, H.Con.Res. 27,
Condemning Russia's Unjust and Arbitrary Detention of Russian
Opposition Leader, Vladimir Kara-Murza, who has stood up in
defense of democracy, rule of law, and free and fair elections
in Russia.
[The Bill H.Con.Res. 27 follows:]

H.CON.RES. 27

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H. CON. RES. 27 OFFERED BY
MR. KEATING

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The resolution was circulated in advance.
The Clerk shall designate the resolution.
The Clerk. H.Con.Res. 27, Condemning Russia's Unjust and
Arbitrary Detention of Russian Opposition Leader, Vladimir----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, the first reading is
dispensed with. The resolution is considered read and open to
amendment at any point.
Without objection, the Keating Amendment in the nature of a
substitute, circulated to members in advance, shall be
considered as read and will be treated as original text for
purposes of amendment. Is there any discussion on the
resolution?
Mr. Keating is recognized.
Mr. Keating. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And as we bid
adieu to this temporary committee chamber, I look forward to
going back to our old committee chamber, renovated----
Chairman McCaul. Will the gentleman yield? I have been told
it is going to be on Valentine's Day actually, February 14th.
Mr. Keating. My God, what a surprise. How delightful. But
thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, and I want to thank
Ranking Member Meeks for holding the markup today and taking up
and taking care of House congressional Resolution 27.
This resolution condemns Russia's unjust and arbitrary
detention of Russian opposition leader Vladimir Kara-Murza who
stood up in defense of democracy and the rule of law in Russia.
Vladimir has been a friend of my office and a friend to many in
this institution for years as he stood up in the face of
authoritarian repression from Putin's regime. When I served as
chairman of the European Committee in the 116th Congress,
Vladimir testified before this committee to expose the crimes
of Putin's regime and unmask the methods used by the Kremlin to
mask their malign influence. His numerous testimoneys before
Congress are just one example of his work to advocate for his
belief in Russian democracy which he says must be undertaken
``by Russians and for Russians.''
As he continued his fight against the Putin regime,
Vladimir made a landmark speech before the Arizona House of
Representatives in March 2022 where he unequivocally condemned
Vladimir Putin's illegal war of aggression against Ukraine, as
well as Putin's corrupt leadership and malign intentions.
Understanding the threats he faced inside Russia, Mr. Kara-
Murza then made the brave and defiant decision to return to
Russia to continue to advocate for democratic representation.
Upon his return to Russia in April 2022, Vladimir was promptly
arrested by the Kremlin on charges related to his March 2022
speech in front of the Arizona House of Representatives.
Unfortunately, he is no stranger to being targeted by the
Kremlin for his work. Before this most recent arrest, Vladimir
was twice poisoned by Russian authorities in 2015 and again in
2017. But his defiance continued. Even as the Kremlin brought
more unjust charges in August and October 2022 and a 25-year
prison sentence in April 2023, he continued to advocate from
inside his cell for the democratic Russia he dreamed of.
Vladimir's story is not only one of courageous defiance,
but one of Kremlin weakness. His story, his words, and his
vision scare and threaten the Putin regime and they undermine
the fictitious Kremlin narrative regarding Putin's invasion of
Ukraine. That fact shows the true strength of Mr. Kara-Murza's
conviction.
As we consider this resolution, we also must redouble our
efforts to ensure the release of all wrongly held individuals
in Russia, Belarus, and around the world who suffer at the
hands of repression. This includes wrongfully detained
Americans such as the journalist, Evan Gershkovich; and former
U.S. Marine, Paul Whelan, whose sister I know well and has
advocated along with the rest of the family tirelessly for his
freedom. At the same time, American citizen in Radio Free
Europe, Radio Free Liberty journalist, Elsu Kurmasheva remains
in Russian cell and I firmly believe she should receive
wrongfully detained status as well.
Last, this committee is also considering a measure to
release the wrongfully detained American Ryan Corbett, who has
been held by the Taliban for over a year and a half. I thank my
colleagues for introducing that measure and I hope for Ryan's
expeditious return.
While Russia plays politics with the lives of Americans,
there are also thousands of Russians and Belarusian citizens
who are held being bars simply for their beliefs that we hold
dear to us. We acknowledge their suffering as well as demand
their immediate and unconditional release.
I again want to thank the committee for taking this
important legislation up and I urge my colleagues to vote in
favor of the resolution and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Is there any further
discussion on the resolution?
Ms. Manning is recognized.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am proud to support
this measure offered by my colleague, Representative Keating,
the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Europe. This
resolution highlights the plight of Vladimir Kara-Murza, a
brave Russian civil society leader who is now in a Russian
prison serving a 25-year sentence. Vladimir was a frequent
guest here in Congress and in this committee, having
consistently warned us of the brutal domestic repression and
external aggression woven into Putin's regime. Vladimir was
always against Russia's war in Ukraine, thereby making him an
enemy of the Kremlin. If Vladimir were sitting here today and
not in a Russian prison, I imagine he would remind us that this
resolution should not be about his story, but rather about the
story of a free Russia of fellow activists, journalists, and
freedom fighters like Boris Nemtsov, Sergei Magnitsky and Anna
Politkovskaya.
Today, Russia's future is being shaped on the battlefields
of Ukraine. Russia's war machine is spinning up and much of its
society and economy is geared toward its brutal war of
aggression. Once again, Russian repression at home is linked
directly to aggression abroad.
My colleague, Ranking Member Meeks, and I support this
resolution whole heartedly, but let me close with some broader
remarks on behalf of Mr. Meeks. Mr. Meeks has legislation that
would sanction any person or company that builds a tunnel from
Crimea to the Russian mainland. We have clear public reporting
the Chinese are considering helping on this project. We must
deter any construction with the threat of sanctions. So Ranking
Member Meeks looks forward to moving a bipartisan bill through
our committee on the next markup.
Finally, Mr. Meeks, and I must join him in this, must
implore that we find a way to support Ukraine and their
existential fight for freedom in their hour of need. Failing to
support Ukraine, failing to act now serves the Kremlin, serve
Beijing and hurts our standing in the world, our national
security, and our collective prosperous and peaceful future. I
urge my colleagues to vote yes on this bill and I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields. Any further
discussion on the resolution? There being no further discussion
on the resolution, the committee will move to consideration of
amendments. Does any--Mr. Wilson is recognized.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Mike McCaul and Ranking
Member Gregory Meeks for bringing these important measures
critical to national security to the committee today. I
appreciate, in particular, House congressional Concurrent
Resolution 27 condemning Russia's unjust and arbitrary
detention of Russian opposition leader Vladimir Kara-Murza. And
I am very grateful this is a bipartisan legislation with my
good friend, Congressman Bill Keating. We together have a bill
that recognizes--it has been nearly 2 years since war criminal
Putin thugs arrested pro-democracy activists and journalist
Vladimir Kara-Murza hours after he correctly referred to the
Kremlin as ``the regime of murderers.''
I was grateful to be an original cosponsor of H.Con.Res. 27
to condemn war criminal Putin's unjust and pathetic detention
of anyone who dares to call him what he is, a mass murderer,
victimizing the people of Russia. On my visits to Russia, I was
so impressed with the dynamic leaders that I met from
Chelyabinsk to St. Petersburg to Novosibirsk to Moscow. War
criminal Putin is oppressing to people of Russia and conducting
mass murder in Ukraine and illegally occupying additionally
parts of Moldova and Georgia.
Furthermore, I was grateful to cosponsor a bipartisan bill
to require a report on why Vladimir Putin has yet to be
designated--or Kara-Murza has been not recognized as a
wrongfully detained individual under the Levinson Act. The
patriot Vladimir Kara-Murza has made such a difference. The
world is fortunate to have Evgenia Kara-Murza, the courageous
wife of Vladimir Kara-Murza, to tirelessly work with her
incredible children to call attention to war criminal Putin
oppressing the people of Russia.
Additionally, author Bill Browder has been so clear for
freedom with his book, the Freezing Order, which provides
that--it exposes the corruption and money laundering by war
criminal Putin. I urge support for this resolution and I yield
back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back. Any further
discussion on the resolution? There being no further discussion
of the resolution, the committee will move to consideration of
amendments. Does any member wish to offer an amendment?
There being no amendments, I move that the committee report
H.Con.Res. 27 as amended to the House with a favorable
recommendation.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye?
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it and the
motion is agreed to.
Mr. Keating. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Keating. A roll call vote has been
requested. Pursuant to the chair's previous announcement, this
vote will be postponed.
Pursuant to notice, I now call up H.R. 6603, the No
Technology for Terror Act.
[The Bill H.R. 6603 follows:]

H.R. 6003

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The bill was circulated in advance. The
Clerk shall designate the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 6603, to apply foreign direct product rules
to Iran. Be it enacted by the Senate and the House of
Representatives of the United States of America and Congress
assembled. Section 1, short title. This act may be cited as
the----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, the first reading is
dispensed with. The bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point. I recognize myself for a statement.
There is no question that Iran is at the center of
instability in the Middle East. From the brutal and horrific
attack on Israel on October 7 by Hamas to the ongoing attacks
on international shipping and U.S. service members Iran has
been the State funding and supported terrorist proxy group to
attack America personnel. There are interests and allies in the
region.
As you all know, just the other week Iranian-backed proxies
killed three U.S. service members and injured 40 more. This
brazen attack requires a firm and decisive response against
Iran's interests. The fact that our forces are still coming
under fire even as recently as yesterday shows the
Administration's response has not been sufficient to restore
deterrence. We just project strength on the world stage and
embrace the Reagan doctrine of peace through strength.
Iran's longstanding financial and military support to its
proxies must not be tolerated. And that starts with supplying
robust export controls to limit the transfer of U.S. goods and
technologies to Iran including providing it to proxies.
This bill would codify recently expanded export control
sanctions on Iran restricting their ability to manufacture
missiles and drones using U.S. material and technology. These
Iranian weapons are the same missiles and drones being used by
Russia to target civilians and civilian infrastructure in
Ukraine. In fact, one assessment carried out by Ukraine
indicated that as many as 77 Iranian UAVs they analyzed were
made with U.S. component parts. We also note these weapons are
being used by Iran proxies to target U.S. Forces and interests
across the Middle East.
So I urge all my colleagues to support this bill as it
extends the foreign direct product rule to Iran. It restricts
the re-export or transfer of U.S.-originated items from one
foreign country to Iran. Iran and its terror proxies continue
to sow instability on the global stage and it is critical we
take urgent action to restrict Iran's access to technology it
needs to manufacture these lethal missiles and drones,
especially coming from the United States of America.
Is there any further discussion on the bill?
Ms. Manning is recognized?
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As this committee is keenly aware, Iran is the world's top
State sponsor of terrorism and their proxy activity in the
region recently resulted in the death of three American service
members, the disruption of shipping in the Red Sea and much,
much more. Not a day goes by when the United States or our
allies are free of Iran's malign behavior.
This is why the Biden Administration has prioritized
preventing Iran from developing drones and missiles. The
Administration has implemented numerous sanctions to this end
and the Bureau of Industry and Security, BIS, has even taken
the extraordinary step to impose a foreign direct product rule
to prevent the production and proliferation of Iranian drones
and missiles.
The foreign direct product rule is the most powerful tool
in BIS' arsenal. It allows the agency to regulate and prohibit
the export, re-export, or transfer of any item around the world
if that item relies upon or was manufactured using American
equipment or software. It is a powerful tool but if used too
often, it can become a double-edged sword.
Our allies and partners have some concerns about the
foreign direct product rule as it is a strict legal prohibition
on products that could have primarily foreign-designated--that
could have been primarily foreign-designated and manufactured.
It is important therefore to use the rule sparingly and only in
the most extreme cases, otherwise it gives foreign companies an
incentive to design out American components altogether so they
aren't vulnerable to the United States applying the rule in
other cases in the future.
This legislation would be a first-time codification of the
foreign direct product rule and an expansion of the Biden
Administration's current rule for Iran. The initial rule--
version of this legislation gave me some concern because it
would have narrowed the agency's flexibility and it would have
created complications in our ability to get our partners and
our allies to work with us.
For instance, it serves no one's interest to unilaterally
prohibit the life--the sale of life-saving European medical
equipment to Iran. There are innocent Iranian civilians who
have protested the brutality of the Iranian regime and we do
not want to deny them the humanitarian aid or medical equipment
they might need. That is why this ANS expands the exceptions in
the underlying bill to ensure that the sale of food, medicine,
and medical devices continues on humanitarian grounds.
The ANS also adds a national interest waiver so the
Administration has the flexibility to ensure that the rule is
being applied so as to minimize humanitarian impact and
maximize our leverage and coalition against Iran.
I thank the chairman and Representative Moran for working
in good faith with Chairman Meeks to reach this compromise so
that we could take the strong and historic steps laid out in
this bill while preserving American leadership and diplomacy. I
support the ANS and urge my colleagues to do the same, and I
yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields back.
Any further discussion?
There being no further discussion of the bill, the
committee will move to consideration of amendments. Does any
member wish to offer an amendment?
Mr. Moran is recognized.
Mr. Moran. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment in the nature
of a substitute at the desk and I ask for its consideration at
this time.
[The Amendment of Mr. Moran follows:]

AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 6603 OFFERED BY MR.
MORAN

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The clerk shall distribute the Moran
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute No. 40.
The clerk shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R.
6603 offered by Mr. Moran of Texas. Strike all after the
enacting clause and insert the following: Section 1, short
title. This act may be cited as the No Technology for Terror
Act.
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with.
The gentleman from Texas is recognized for 5 minutes on his
amendment.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I encourage all members of this committee to support my
legislation and this amendment in the nature of a substitute,
the No Technology for Terror Act, H.R. 6603 that extends the
foreign direct product rule to Iran, and I thank the chairman
and the ranking member for working in a bipartisan fashion to
carve a piece of legislation that is acceptable to both
Republicans and Democrats and achieves the goal that is very
important to our national security.
My bill would codify existing limitations on the export of
certain U.S.-origin goods or technology to Iran. Under this
legislation anyone seeking to transfer U.S.-origin items to
Iran would be required to first obtain a license from the
Commerce Department before doing so.
Iranian aggression is not new and in fact is amplifying. In
recent years we have seen a dramatic expansion in the Iranian
regime's support from malign proxy groups and are adversaries
like Russia. From multiple reports including the Defense
Intelligence Agency there are clear ties of Iran transferring
its unmanned aerial vehicles to Russia since the invasion of
Ukraine. Iran has transferred this same UAV model, the Shaded
136, to the Houthis as well as its other proxies across--as
well as its other proxies across the Middle East.
Reports have found that components recovered from Iranian-
made drones used against the people of Ukraine have been found
to include more than 50 American-made components. Other reports
have found that out of roughly 500 components identified in a
recovered Iranian-made UAV 82 percent were manufactured by U.S.
companies. That is 82 percent.
These reports are backed by a July 2023 report released by
the State Department where they acknowledged that Iran relies
on foreign procurement and even prefers American-made sourcing
to manufacture its lethal weapons.
Iran is evolving and using more advanced technologies to
manufacture their lethal fleet and circumvent current sanctions
and laws. This poses a direct threat to our service members in
the region and bold action is needed now.
The current Administration's foreign policy on Iran is not
producing effective deterrence. These three brave U.S. service
members lost their lives and dozens injured by a drone launched
by Iran proxies in Jordan. Meanwhile, the U.S. took 6 days to
respond and this retaliatory response is simply unacceptable.
Two Navy SEALs lost their lives attempting to seize Iranian
weapons on their way to their proxies.
We can and we must get ahead of the weapons and equipment
trade to Iran and we can use our export controls to ensure U.S.
goods are not being used by Iran to make lethal missiles and
drones. The No Technology for Terror Act will do just that. The
limitations set forth in my bill would make it harder for Iran
to produce missiles and drones that are used against American
troops and our allies and make it more difficult to transfer
these drones and missiles to proxies and Russia. American
equipment, technology, and other know-how under no
circumstances should be transferred to Iran.
The Iranian regime is relentlessly evil and seeks to become
the superpower in the Middle East, which means that they intend
to eliminate America and its allies at all costs. This bill
would inherently pressure other countries to enact their own
export controls against Iran and this time America must lead
and must make clear that we will not hesitate to use all means
necessary to defeat our adversaries.
In closing I want to thank again Chairman McCaul and
Congressman Moskowitz who are co-leading this important
legislation with me.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back. Do any other
members seek recognition?
Mr. Mills is recognized.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to speak up in
support of my colleague from Texas, Representative Moran's H.R.
6603, No Technology for Terror Act.
For far too long we have monitored the continual transfer
of kinetics which is utilized in many ways for munitions and
explosives and have ignored the simple facts that technology
and other types of key parts that are resulting in terrorist
attacks on bases like Outpost 22, Tower 22 in Jordan, as well
as for others by Iranian proxies are something that we need to
have better oversight of.
Stronger sanctions has proven to not only cripple the
ayatollah and his regime, but has also proven to reduce the
number of attacks that are being led by proxy militias, that by
the Houthis, that by Hezbollah, that by Hamas, and that by
Kata'ib Hezbolah and those in Iraq.
The simple fact is is that Representative Moran's H.R. 6603
will help us to limit the access and abilities of U.S. goods
and technologies to manufacture the very missiles and long-
range drones that are responsible for the death of service
members.
I stand in strong support of this bill and I hope that my
colleagues will join us in that. With that I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Any other members
seek recognition?
Ms. Manning is recognized.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me just say again I appreciate Mr. Moran's work with
Mr. Meeks on the ANS and I urge my colleagues to support the
ANS. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields.
Any other members seek recognition?
There being no further discussion, do any members wish to
offer an amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
substitute?
There being no further amendments, the question now occurs
on the amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by
Representative Moran, No. 40.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it and the
amendment is agreed to.
Mr. Moran. Mr. Chairman, I would ask for a recorded vote.
Chairman McCaul. There being no further amendments I move
the committee report H.R. 6603 as amended to the House with a
favorable recommendation.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it and the
motion is agreed to.
Mr. Moran is recognized.
Mr. Moran. On this vote, Mr. Chairman, I would ask for a
recorded vote.
Chairman McCaul. Roll call vote has been requested.
Pursuant to the chair's previous announcement, this vote will
be postponed.
Pursuant to notice I now call up H.Res. 82, Expressing the
sense of Congress regarding the need to designate Nigeria a
Country of Particular Concern for engaging in and tolerating
systematic, ongoing, and egregious violations of religious
freedom, the need to appoint a Special Envoy for Nigeria and
the Lake Chad region.
[The Bill H.R. 82 follows:]

H. RES. 82

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H. RES. 82 OFFERED BY MR.
SMITH

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. I also would like to recognize the
Nigerian religious leaders who are in the audience today at
this markup. They serve populations that have been devaStated
by these attacks. Bishop Wilfred Anagbe in the Diocese of
Makurdi and Pastor Akila Yusuf represent a network of 200
pastors and leaders.
I know I have met with you in my office personally and I
want to thank all of you for being here today and encourage you
to stay strong as Congress will stay strong with you.
The resolution was circulated in advance and the clerk
shall designate the resolution.
The Clerk. H.Res. 82, Expressing the sense of Congress
regarding the need to designate Nigeria a Country of Particular
Concern for engaging in and tolerating----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, the first reading is
dispensed with. The resolution is considered read and open to
amendment at any point.
Is there any discussion on the resolution?
Mr. Smith is recognized.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Chairman, I do have an amendment in the
nature of a substitute, and I'll speak to it then.
Chairman McCaul. OK.
Do any members seek recognition?
Mr. Self is recognized.
Mr. Self. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk.
Chairman McCaul. We are not at amendments right now. We are
just on discussion on the resolution.
There being no further discussion on the resolution, are
there any amendments to the resolution.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment in the nature
of a substitute at the desk and I ask for its consideration.
Chairman McCaul. The clerk shall circulate the amendment in
the nature of a substitute.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. The clerk shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H.Res. 82 offered by Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Strike the
preamble and insert the following: Whereas in 2020 the
Department of State designated Nigeria----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with.
The gentleman from New Jersey is recognized for 5 minutes
on his amendment.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, on Christmas Eve approximately 300 Christians
died in targeted attacks and none of the perpetrators of this
set of coordinated attacks in Nigeria's Plateau State have been
held to account.
It is unconscionable that President Tinubu sworn in May
2023 has not acknowledged the religious motivations for these
attacks and for attacks that have been ongoing and escalating.
Secretary of State Blinken has not either, even in his joint
press conference remarks; and I watched it, with the Nigerian
foreign minister. He did express our condolences; we are
grateful for that, but that is it. More needs to be done and we
need to do far more than we have done to date.
Earlier this year the secretary once again refused to
redesignate Nigeria as a Country of Particular Concern, or CPC,
prompting the chair--the vice chair of the U.S. Commission on
International Religious Freedom to say, quote, ``There is no
justification as to why the State Department did not designate
Nigeria as a Country of Particular Concern despite its own
reporting and statements.''
Mr. Chairman, Genocide Watch has called Nigeria, quote, ``a
killing field of defenseless Christians.'' Open Doors reported
that there were 5,014 Christians murdered in 2022, nearly 90
percent of the total number of Christians killed worldwide. And
Vatican News reported that over 52,250 Christians were
slaughtered in Nigeria since 2009.
I am convinced there is more the U.S. can do to protect
these believers, and that goes for Muslims as well, and promote
freedom of religion. That is why I authored the Frank Wolf
International Religious Freedom Act, which was enacted in 2016
and strengthened our government's hand against authorities and
non-State actors who violate religious freedom.
That is why I strongly supported and chaired all the
hearings backing Congressman Frank Wolf's heroic efforts to
enact the International Religious Freedom Act back in 1998.
Unfortunately the U.S. Department of State is not using all the
tools provided to hold guilty parties accountable and that is
why I have introduced this resolution.
On July 18, 2023, I did chair a hearing on the State
Department's failure to designate Countries of Particular
Concern including Nigeria in the International Religious
Freedom Report. At that hearing Abraham Cooper, Chairman of the
U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom, testified,
quote, ``In Nigeria religious freedom continues--conditions
have been remained abysmal with State and non-State actors
committing particularly severe violations against both
Christians and Muslims.'' It clearly meets the CPC standard
under IRFA as evidenced by the State Department's own report
released on May 5.
It also is why USCRF, U.S. Commission on Religious Freedom,
recommended the appointment of a special envoy for Nigeria in
the Lake Chad Basin to maximize U.S. diplomatic efforts to
address the atrocities that are occurring.
We have here today in our audience; you have already
introduced them, Mr. Chairman, men who have witnessed
unspeakable acts of harm. Bishop Wilfred Anagbe of the Diocese
of Makurdi. His people have been targeted for killings and
displaced with impunity. He has said when you go where they are
in the camps, ``You do not know what to preach. It's difficult
to console them, to support them, to share with them the fear
with them.'' And it is every day other people coming in, coming
into those camps. He said, ``The poor conditions make the
children especially vulnerable to human trafficking, child
labor, and organ harvesting.''
We also have Pastor Akila Yusuf who is with us today. He
represents a network of 200 pastors and he has talked about how
in the Middle Belt region of Nigeria they face violence and are
being ``slaughtered''--this is his words--``because of our
religion.'' ``This bill is very important,`` he goes on, ``It
will serve as legislation to hold our government,'' that's the
Nigerian government, of course, ``accountable for the millions
of lives facing existential threat from the extremists.''
Bishop Matthew Kukka has also said, ``traumatized persons
are tortured by the bandits. The nation has become a massive
killing field.'' And he goes on. And without objection, his
full statement will be put in the record, Mr. Chairman, I ask.
[The information referred to follows:]

WALTZ AIA

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

WALTZ NDIA

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. So ordered.
Mr. Smith. So let me just conclude--and there are other
statements made by so many people. It could not be more clear
that this is a CPC country. I would point out to my colleagues
that we also call for pushing back against Nigeria's blasphemy
laws. They are one of the seven--only seven countries in the
world with criminal blasphemy laws that carry the death
penalty. So we name some of those who have been so incited, or
put into jail I should say, and ask for their release and ask
that we double down on just trying to stand with the oppressed
and not with the oppressor. Yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
Any other members seek recognition?
Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Nigerians continue to suffer under the threat of violence
for how they practice their faith. Religious and intercommunal
violence remains a true impediment to peace and prosperity for
the people of Nigeria.
While I thank Representative Smith for his years of work on
advancing religious freedom, unfortunately I must oppose the
amendment and resolution before us today.
The International Religious Freedom Act of 1998 lays out a
clear process for making Countries of Particular Concern, or
CPC, designations. Congress authorizes the President to make
CPC designated, and the President delegates that authority to
the Secretary of State.
The statute makes clear that it is the Administration's
responsibility through the use of evidence gathering and on-
the-ground reporting to determine which countries should be
included on the CPC list.
In the case of Nigeria the Secretary of State followed that
process: examined the evidence and determined that Nigeria does
not meet that criteria to be designated as a CPC.
Now this does not mean that the State Department is not
concerned by the State of religious freedom in Nigeria. Just
this past December the secretary redesignated two non-State
armed groups: Boko Haram and ISIS-WA, as entities of particular
concern for their severe violations of religious freedom. And
we know that during the Administration's successive high-level
visits to the country American officials make a point to
regularly raise issues of human rights and religious freedom
with their government interlocutors.
The State Department has also made it clear it continues to
work with Nigeria's security services, civil society, and
religious leaders to address the drivers of communal violence,
drivers that are complex in nature and include competition for
resources and land use in addition to religious strife. And I
urge the State Department to continue to do that work.
It is important to note that violence against communities
based on religious belief unfortunately affects people of many
faiths in Nigeria. This resolution calls attention mainly to
the attacks on Christians who have suffered heinous attacks
including this past Christmas. Muslim communities have also
been subjected to terrible violence, and we must acknowledge
that suffering as well.
I call on the government of Nigeria to prioritize efforts
to prevent conflict before it starts and address it when it
arises including by ensuring that freedom of religion is both
recognized and respected. I know the State Department shares
this goal and is using its authority as Congress authorized to
advance religious freedom globally.
With that, Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Meeks, would you yield?
Mr. Meeks. I yield.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. I want to associate myself with
your remarks. I appreciate Mr. Smith's efforts, but look,
Congress cannot simple--simply say we are only concerned about
Christian persecution. We are concerned about anyone's human
rights being violated. And by the way, that includes the gay
and lesbian community which has suffered in Nigeria, among
other African countries, even at the hands of religious leaders
who have called for the death penalty for--because of
somebody's sexual orientation.
So if we are going to express ourselves with respect to
human rights abuses, as we should, it ought to be a
comprehensive statement, not a particular group we single out
and basically say that is the one we are concerned about. I do
not think that is a message Congress wants to send.
I thank my friend for yielding.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields.
Any other members seek recognition?
Ms. Jacobs?
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I oppose this resolution. While I am concerned about the
State of religious freedom in Nigeria and the horrific violence
we have seen in the country, we also need to recognize that the
role of religion in conflict in Nigeria is complex and it
affects both Christians and Muslims. Yet this resolution
suggests that Muslims do not also share a significant burden of
the violence. And while religion is a factor in various
conflict dynamics, there are other dynamics at play like
climate change, population pressures, and governance challenges
that lead to violence and conflict.
I would also point out that the department already followed
the process to consider Nigeria as a possible Country of
Particular Concern based on an assessment of the actions of the
Nigerian government and they determined that they did not meet
the criteria because much of the violence referenced in this
resolution was perpetrated by non-State actors like Boko Haram
and ISIS-West Africa, not the Nigerian government.
So I disagree with directing the department to designate
Nigeria as a Country of Particular Concern and I oppose this
resolution. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Any other members seek recognition?
There being no further discussion, does any member wish to
offer an amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
substitute?
Mr. Self is recognized.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have an amendment at
the desk.
[The information referred to follows:]

AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H. RES. 82
OFFERED BY MR. SELF

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The clerk shall distribute the amendment.
The clerk shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
substitute to H.Res. 82 offered by Mr. Self of Texas. Page 6,
line 6----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with.
The gentleman from Texas is recognized for 5 minutes on his
amendment.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me be clear, I support my colleague Mr. Smith in House
Res. 82. My amendment simply strikes the second paragraph of
the resolved text. I do not believe that the Department of
State needs another special envoy with the rank of Ambassador.
I will note that there is an ambassador pending in the Senate,
and frankly that would be sufficient in this case. It also
indicates that the Administration is not that interested in
Nigeria, unlike my colleagues across the aisle, suggesting or
he would push for that Ambassador to be confirmed.
As of May the State Department maintained 23 special
envoys, 13 special representatives, 11 coordinators, 8
advisors, 8 Ambassadors-at-large, and 7 similar officials with
like titles. That is 70 with the rank of Ambassador, similar
rank of Ambassador including a confirmed Ambassador-at-large
for international religious freedom.
Our Federal Government needs to shrink, not expand. I am
not interested in giving the State Department another
Ambassadorial position. It needs to become more efficient, not
more unwieldy. I am concerned that this proliferation of
special envoys leads to more bureaucracy, more duplication, and
less efficient government.
I fully agree with the substance of this resolution. As I
say, more Christians are killed, abducted, or attacked in their
home or business than any other country in Nigeria. I signed
the Huizenga letter on this issue, oh, a month or so ago, but I
agree that the Administration has turned a blind eye to the
crisis. The State Department inexplicably removed Nigeria from
its special watch list as a Country of Particular Concern in
2021. Specifically removed.
Nigeria receives over $1 billion in U.S. aid and the State
Department needs to reverse their course and begin pressuring
the government of Nigeria to end the persecution of Christians
regardless of who is doing the persecution. But this does not
require a special envoy. It requires a confirmed Ambassador in
Nigeria and a change of focus and priority in Washington.
I ask that my amendment be adopted. With that I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back. Do any other
members seek recognition? Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. I want to thank Representative Self for offering
this amendment, which I support, to strike the special envoy
position. The call for a special envoy for Nigeria and the Lake
Chad region is premature at this time especially as the
gentleman indicated we do not currently have a U.S. Ambassador
confirmed to Nigeria. We should first ensure we have full
diplomatic representation in Nigeria and empower our Ambassador
to address these issues with the government of Nigeria and
other stakeholders. So I support the gentleman's amendment.
But it does not address my underlying concern with the
resolution, which I will oppose in a final vote, and I yield
back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Any other members
seek recognition?
Mr. Smith?
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to thank Mr. Self for his support for
the CPC designation. And I would remind my colleagues that when
we--and it was Frank Wolf's law but I worked very hard on it--
we created two--a couple of important points: The CPC is the
first part based on the evidence designating a country every
year whether or not it is--violates international religious
freedom and the standards that are imbedded in the bill, or the
law.
The second is the sanctioning. And that is the exclusive
domain of the Administration. Once they put a country on it,
they now have 037 about 18 or so different action items that
they could implement starting with a simple demarche, but also
some very significant penalties. And that does get the
attention of a country and helps them to prioritize. Are they
going to do something or not?
The idea, and I--with all due respect to my good friend
from New York, that we have no Ambassador, and I--that is
unfortunate, but all the more reason why we need a special
envoy. We have a DCM, we got a No. 2, but we do not have a
person walking point in Abuja on this or any other issue
because there is no Ambassador. Whatever the fault is that is
not what we are talking about. We need a special envoy to
really take this issue and focus on it, bring all the disparate
elements together.
I have worked with special envoys over the years in many
places around the world. In Sudan, in South Sudan we worked
with Princeton Lyman, who did an outstanding job in bringing
all those warring efforts and personages together. Booth,
Donald Booth also did an amazing job as well. And that becomes
someone who--that is all they do.
One of the problems with our State Department, and you
could understand why, is that they have all--a huge portfolio
that they have to deal with. Huge. Religious freedom, maybe on
page 2 or 3 or 4. We saw that with trafficking. I wrote the
trafficking laws of the United States of America, Trafficking
Victims Protection Act, because we were not--I say again not
focusing on that in our embassies and as a government.
And now similar to the Religious Freedom Act we have
actionable items. We have put people on Tier 1, 2, or 3, 3
being the worst, and boy, does that sharpen the mind when a
country is put on Tier 3. And to get off it, yes, they got to
make changes. They have to do reforms, initiate prosecutions,
do protection and prevention efforts.
Same here. CPC is very similar. And again, when we created
the U.S. Commission on Religious Freedom, it was precisely
because other issues might interfere with the U.S. Department
of State calling balls and strikes correctly. And that is what
we have seen here. Other things take advantage of it.
The U.S. Commission on Religious Freedom is an independent
bipartisan watchdog that does an amazing job in pointing out
what is going on with the State of religious freedom in country
X, Y, and Z, including Nigeria, and then making
recommendations. We should hear their recommendations and
listen to them.
In terms of telling the Administration, we are admonishing
the Administration to do this. We have every right, I would say
every duty, knowing that Christians and Muslims are being
slaughtered to--and put into prison for blasphemy, to do just
that.
I visited churches that were fire bombed in Jos, Nigeria
along with Archbishop Kaigama some years ago. I met with the
Islamic leaders. They were amazing people. They get along. They
are friends, like so many other moderate Muslims in Nigeria
with the bishops and the clergy that are here today and others.
It is this radicalized group, whether it be ISIS-West Africa,
whether it be Boko Haram, or the Fulani. The Fulani have now
become a major--in the Middle Belt area a major, major killer
of Christians.
Two to three hundred--three hundred is probably the best
estimate murdered on Christmas Eve and then who died
thereafter. And we are not outraged? I am. And I am tired of us
saying oh, let's just allow normal diplomacy to take its
course. The president of Nigeria will not do--if he is told no
CPC--and I would say to the Secretary of State, when he went to
Abuja--because they had CPC designation, they being Nigeria--
when he went there he shocked everyone when he just
unilaterally said you do not have it anymore.
The church leaders issued strong statements of protest, as
did I, as did you, sir, and so many others. So we need to be
very clear. We really want to make a difference here. Special
envoys I do believe--you do not want 1,000 of them. YOU want
ones that are really, really focused. This could help bring
religious freedom to a better place and to stop the killing
fields as Genocide Watch has talked about in Nigeria. I yield
back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back.
Any other members seek recognition?
Mr. Connolly?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a question for my friend from New Jersey. I
certainly have always admired his passion and I hear his
outrage. So does that outrage extend to the rights of gay and
lesbian individuals in the country we are talking about?
Mr. Smith. In Nigeria, we are talking about people being
slaughtered by at least three or more radical Islamist
organizations. We are talking about Muslims being put into
prison.
We are dealing with those issues here right now. I do not
believe in violence against anyone, but this resolution is
about the violence that is being visited upon innocent people
in Nigeria.
Mr. Connolly. Well, if I could further ask. There have been
statements made by religious leaders, including in the
Christian community, who have called for the death penalty for
people----
Mr. Smith. I am not for it.
Mr. Connolly. What is that?
Mr. Smith. I am not for it, the death penalty. I am not for
the death penalty in this country.
Mr. Connolly. Right, you are a consistent Catholic.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. However, I just want to make the point that
if we are--we have to be consistent. If we are concerned about
the violation of the human rights and the right of human
autonomy and freedom, and we should be, that has to be
consistent. It cannot simply be one group but not another.
And I thank my friend, and I hope his outrage will extend
to other groups that need our consideration and protection.
I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Gentleman yields. Any other members seek
recognition? Mr. Perry is recognized.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am considering the Self Amendment, because I do not
think--look, I think it is the State Department's job to do
this work.
And while I applaud my friend from New Jersey on his
efforts here to draw attention to what is happening in Nigeria,
rightly so, the fact of the matter is is what has been unsaid
around here is, what is being unsaid in this markup, is the
fact that my friends on the other side of the aisle aren't
acknowledging the Christian slaughter that is happening in
Nigeria.
And trying to water it down and elevate other things that
have nothing to do with religious freedom. And trying to bring
them into this conversation. This is about religious freedom.
That is what the markup, that is what the bill is about.
Now, we might disagree. I might disagree on whether we need
a special envoy, because I do not want to pay for one because
the State Department should be doing this job.
But the fact remains that the conversation is being had
because this Administration is turning its back on Christians
all around the globe, particularly in Nigeria. And quite
honestly, in this country as well, in this country as well.
But that is not the conversation we are having today. The
State Department omitted Nigeria from the CPC list in 2021 and
2022. And then the U.S. Commission on International Religious
Freedom, as the gentleman from New Jersey pointed out,
recommended the State Department to redesignate Nigeria as a
CPC, finding the delist decision to be inexplicable. It could
not explain it.
Well, let me explain it to you, ladies and gentlemen. My
friends on the other side of the aisle are at war with
Christianity. They are at war with it, whether it happens in
this country or Nigeria. But they just do not want to say it.
And so they are going to be opposed to the bill for
numerous different reasons because it does not support this
group's right or that group's right that have absolutely
nothing to do with religious freedom. And they are going to try
to muddy the water and make you believe that they actually care
about this issue when they absolutely do not.
So I am going to ruminate on my decision about Mr. Self's
amendment because I do not think that we need a special envoy.
What we need, what this country should have, what Nigeria
should have, what the world should have is a United States of
America and an Administration that stands up for religious
freedom around the globe, including Christianity. That is what
is needed.
Now, this is a band-aid, this is a--this is the attempt
that we can make because none of us here are president. But
this does draw attention, rightly so, to the issue at hand,
which I have enumerated for you uncomfortably here today. But
it has to be said, somebody has to say it. And that is what is
really happening here.
And so you must also know that Christians in Nigeria are
7.6 times more likely to be targeted and killed.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield?
Mr. Perry. Negative, Mr. Connolly, my good friend from
Virginia. I think I have heard enough from you on this issue.
Six times more likely to----
Mr. Connolly. How dare you.
Mr. Perry. Be abducted than Muslims.
Mr. Connolly. You just smeared people on this side of the
aisle, and I at least----
Mr. Perry. Mr. Connolly, I have the microphone.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, and you are smearing, you are smearing
with it.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, sir, thank you, sir. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. Yes, the time is----
Mr. Perry. Well, if the time is expired.
Chairman McCaul. It is with you.
Mr. Perry. So I just want to continue the point here, that
this bill, that this legislation seeks to highlight the problem
that exists about religious freedom, and Christianity in
particular.
Don't allow yourselves to be swayed and to be duped by the
muddying of the waters and by the obfuscation of some, maybe
not in the room, maybe in the room. Maybe that will help. Who
seek to dupe everybody here about what is really, what is
truly, what is absolutely happening.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield the balance.
Chairman McCaul. Gentleman yields. Do any other members
seek recognition? Ms. Wild is recognized.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. I yield my time to Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend. And I am sorry my other
friend from Pennsylvania would not yield time.
When you make a charge that a group of colleagues do not
care about atrocities against Christians, I think you should
take great care. And I consider that a smear.
My colleague may not know. This Democrat studied for the
Roman Catholic priesthood. I was in the seminary for 6 years.
My wife was a former Roman Catholic nun. We grew up in the
social justice doctrine of the Catholic Church. We were imbued
with concern for Christian values that could have universality.
All of my life has been imbued and infused by those values
when I was a young man, and my wife the same. And I take great
exception to anybody who would actually question the motivation
and in fact judge it.
And I would have made this point had my friend yielded, but
I thank Ms. Wild for allowing me to make that point.
And I hope as we proceed we will take more care about
personally impugning the motives of colleagues on this
committee. We can disagree without having our motivation
questioned.
And that is a pretty profound and powerful dynamic with
this Member of Congress, given my background and my history and
my commitment, and I am not alone.
I thank Susan, Ms. Wild, for yielding, and yield back to
her.
Chairman McCaul. Gentleman yields. Any member seek
recognition?
Mrs. Radewagen. Mr. Chairman, I seek recognition. I would
like to yield my time----
Chairman McCaul. Mrs. Radewagen is recognized.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
yield my time to Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. I will take the full time, and I
thank my good friend for yielding.
I just want to remind my colleagues that special envoys and
special representatives have made a huge difference all over
the globe. I am not for, you know, just saying, oh, do it for
this, do it for that. There is a compelling need for such a
special envoy.
We would not have had an agreement on Northern Ireland, and
I worked very hard on that, chaired 16 hearings, I went there
many times to Belfast, had it not been for the special envoy.
And that was during the Clinton Administration. That cobbled
together, got the very, very warring factions together in
Northern Ireland to--that ended up with the peace agreement.
And so special envoys can play a serious and I think an
outsized, positive role, especially in this case when they are
focused on religious freedom.
We have an ambassador-at-large for religious freedom. He is
a very good man, Hussain, I meet with him all the time. He is
very--he was at our hearing too, along with the U.S. Commission
on Religious Freedom. And he is very sympathetic to everything
we are saying about Nigeria.
He did not say put CPC on. If he did, he would be fired.
But the independent commission, though, the Religious Freedom
Commission, has no such concerns about that.
They are independent, they are bipartisan, picked by the
House and Senate leadership as to who serves on that. And they
are unequivocal in their support for CPC for Nigeria.
Unequivocal that there needs to be a special envoy to really
work this issue.
And again to my good friend Mr. Meeks, not having an
ambassador in Abuja, a U.S. Ambassador, really makes it so that
we need it more than ever, you know, to really get that focus
24/7, 7 days a week working with all these factions.
You know, I am the one who wrote the law in 2016 that
finally put entities of particular concern, like Boko Haram, on
that list. But the government is responsible. The buck stops
there, and they are not doing what they could be doing, and
their indifference is numbing.
And so I do hope, I do hope that this amendment would be
rejected. I do think we need a special envoy. Again, look at
Northern Ireland, look at all these other issues. Look at South
Sudan and Sudan.
Yes, it is acting up again. There are problems there once
again. But the only reason we get peace agreements or cessation
of hostilities and murder and terrorism to some degree, they
are a major reason why that does happen.
So I thank my good friend for yielding and yield.
Chairman McCaul. Gentleman yields. Any other members seek
recognition? Mr. Moran is recognized.
Mr. Moran. Mr. Chairman, I seek recognition and yield my
time to the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Perry.
Mr. Perry. I thank the gentleman for yielding the time. And
I want to address my good friend from Virginia.
My intent is not to, and was not to, impugn your character.
But I would say this: the Secretary of State, the current
Secretary of State, under the Biden Administration, Stated in
his first few months that this Administration does not plan to
prioritize religious freedom. It does not plan to prioritize
religious freedom.
And you can say anything you want to, ladies and gentlemen.
Talk is cheap, as we say back at where I live. There was
something else that follows, I will leave that out. But talk is
cheap. It is your actions that matter. It is your actions.
And for goodness sake, this Administration has found a way,
has seen fit to have a special envoy for climate change, for
climate change.
Now, you would think, like I said, I got a problem with all
these special envoys. Just let the State Department do what it
is supposed to do. Let the Administration lead where it is
supposed to lead.
And that is OK. They have told us not by their words but by
their actions what is important to them and what is not
important to them. That is all I am doing, is pointing that
out. I do not mean to offend anybody. But if you are offended
by the facts, then be offended. Then be offended, I think.
So if we can have a special envoy for climate change, well,
again, I think that speaks volumes in terms of what we do not
have for religious freedom.
And I would just say this: where actions speak louder than
words, it is not my actions. But just yesterday, the President
of the United States issued a veto threat on support for the
funding package that he advocated for for the Nation of Israel.
Now, you can say whatever you want to. You can say, well, I
support Israel. But in this instance, it seems to me your
actions speak very loudly. And that is just another example.
Again, my intent is not to offend. My intent is to give you
the facts. And if they offend you, well, then I guess you
should be offended.
Religious freedom is an issue in Nigeria. It is an issue.
Now, maybe climate change is too. Maybe it is. But I guarantee
you, religious freedom is an issue. These folks traveled from
Nigeria to be here to let us know that, to let us know that.
And we on this side hear you loud and clear.
With that, I yield the balance back to the gentleman, Mr.
Moran.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mr. Perry. And I yield to the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Self.
Mr. Self. I will point out that a special envoy, the actual
text of the bill says ``Should promptly appoint a person of
recognized distinction in the fields of religious freedom and
human rights as the special envoy.''
We do not even have an ambassador in Nigeria. And this does
not say ``shall,'' it said ``should'' promptly appoint. I have
absolutely no confidence that even should this bill pass, that
the President will appoint a special envoy. Hence, I do not
think that we ought to be deluding ourselves.
We need to disabuse ourselves of the idea that this
President will do this. And I yield back.
Mr. Moran. Thank you, Mr. Self.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Gentleman yields. Any other member seek
recognition?
There being no further discussion, the question now occurs
on the amendment offered by Representative Self, No. 69, to the
amendment in the nature of a substitute.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the noes have it. The
amendment is not agreed to.
Mr. Moran. Mr. Chairman, I request the yeas and nays.
Chairman McCaul. A roll call vote has been requested.
Pursuant to the chair's previous announcement, this vote will
be postponed.
There being no further amendments, further proceeding on
this bill is postponed.
Pursuant to notice, I now call up H.R. 7159, the Pacific
Partnership Act.
[The Bill H.R. 7159 follows:]

H.R. 7159

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The bill was circulated in advance. The
clerk shall designate the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 7159, to bolster United States engagement
with the Pacific Islands Region and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the Senate and the House of
Representatives----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, the first reading is
dispensed with. The bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point.
Is there any discussion on the bill?
Mrs. Radewagen. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would like to speak in
support of this bill.
Chairman McCaul. Ms. Radewagen is recognized.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This bill that would greatly increase U.S. engagement in
the Pacific Islands. The U.S. is a Pacific Island nation. To
emphasize this, I am going to give my brief statement in
Samoan.
[Speaking foreign language.]
Mrs. Radewagen. My home is a Pacific island. We are
increasingly under threat, especially from China. China is
increasingly investing in the Pacific Islands, building
infrastructure projects in just 70 miles from my home in
independent Samoa.
Now is the time to act. We have to show an American
commitment to the Pacific. It codifies an American strategy for
the Pacific Islands and codifies the partners in the Blue
Pacific Initiative to de-conflict aid to the region and
encourage cooperation.
I want to thank Representative Case for his leadership on
this bill and for all the members who have showed their support
for the Pacific Islands. Thank you, and God bless.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
United States is an integral part of the Pacific Island
region, and we have a responsibility to remain engaged and to
strengthen the partnerships that have underpinned the Pacific's
security and prosperity for decades.
The Biden Administration has strengthened our diplomatic
footprint in the Pacific Islands and participated in high level
engagement with the Pacific Islands, both on a bilateral basis
and multilaterally.
Though the Pacific Island--through the Pacific Island
forum, we have concluded negotiations on amended compacts of
free association, which will secure our unique relationship
with the Federated States of Micronesia, Palau, and the
Republic of the Marshall Islands for the next 20 years.
I have attended some of those forums, and I have seen the
significance and the importance and the impact that the United
States has on our diplomatic footprint in and on the Pacific
Islands.
The measure before us today, what it does, it strengthens
our engagement with the Pacific Islands by requiring future
Administrations to develop and update a strategy for U.S.
engagement in the region.
And I should say, when I participated in some, they
welcomed the presence of the United States of America and said
they wanted us to be an integral and continue to be an integral
part.
And so therefore I strongly support this measure that was
put forward by my good friend Representative Case. And I urge
all of my colleagues to do the same.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Any further
discussion on the bill? There being no further discussion for
the bill, the committee will move to consideration of
amendments.
Does any member wish to offer an amendment? There being no
amendments, I move that the committee report H.R. 7159 to the
House with a favorable recommendation.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
motion is agreed to.
Without objection, the motion will be considered as laid on
the table. Staff is authorized to make any technical and
conforming changes.
Pursuant to notice, I now call up H.Res. 965, calling for
the immediate release of Ryan Corbett, a United States citizen
who was wrongfully detained by the Taliban on August 10, 2022,
and condemning the wrongful detention of Americans by the
Taliban.
[The text of H.Res. 965 follows:]

H. RES. 965

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The resolution was circulated in advance,
and the clerk shall designate the resolution.
The Clerk. H.Res. 965, calling for the immediate release of
Ryan Corbett, a United States citizen who was wrongfully
detained by the Taliban on August----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, the first reading is
dispensed with. The resolution is considered read and open to
amendment at any point.
I now recognize myself in support of this resolution.
Ryan Corbett is a loving husband and father who has
dedicated his life to helping others. But instead of being home
with his family right now, he is languishing away in a Taliban
prison.
His wife Anna testified before this very committee last
November about Ryan's imprisonment. His wonderful children,
Ketsia, Miriam, and Caleb.
What he is not is a criminal. Yet in August 2022, the
Taliban arrested Ryan without cause, and he has been held as
prisoner for over 17 months.
The Taliban has refused to allow Ryan the voice to advocate
for himself. He remains detained in a nine by nine foot cell
and is allowed outside once per month for just a few minutes.
He is fed only scraps to eat. And he has faced solitary
confinement for weeks on end.
Ryan is facing serious medical conditions, experiencing
seizures, and often fainting. I want to assure Ryan's family,
friends, and coworkers who are watching this that we will
continue our fight every day until we bring him home.
As a father of five children myself, I cannot begin to
imagine the pain and suffering Ryan's family is feeling right
now. Unfortunately, Ryan's family is not the only one suffering
through this horrific ordeal. There are several Americans
currently being held hostage by the Taliban.
This Congress and all Americans stand with Ryan. And that
is why I am proud to support this bipartisan resolution that
condemns the Taliban regime for its illegal imprisonment of
Ryan and demands his immediate release.
This will send a strong message to the Taliban that
America, both Republicans and Democrats alike, will not
tolerate illegitimate detention of American citizens. Our
message is clear: Congress will not rest until Ryan and every
American citizen wrongfully detained is brought home.
With that, I yield back. Is there any discussion on the
resolution? Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And first I want to thank Representative Tenney for her
work on this resolution to highlight the wrongful detention of
my fellow New Yorker, Ryan Corbett, who the Taliban detained in
the summer of 2022.
Ryan and his family made Kabul home for more than a decade.
And in 2017, he founded a business consultancy focused on
strengthening Afghanistan's private sector.
When Anna Corbett spoke in front of our committee this past
November, she shared the harrowing experiences she and her
family have been through, some of the insights she gained into
Ryan's conditions in the Taliban prison, and pleaded with her
government to continue to do all it can to bring him home.
And I know that the Biden Administration has made Ryan's
case a priority at the highest levels, particularly Special
Presidential Envoy for Hostage Affairs, Roger Carstens, and
Special Representative for Afghanistan, Tom West.
I thank them for their focus on bringing American citizens
wrongfully detained abroad home and pledge to continue to work
with them, to work with also Representative Tenney and any
others to bring Ryan home also.
Finally, I want to also thank our Qatari partners, who
serve both as our protecting power in Afghanistan and who have
been key partners in helping to secure the release of American
citizens in Afghanistan.
And while we are grateful for the Qatari's ability to
conduct occasional health and safety visits to Mr. Ryan, it is
my hope that the Taliban will release Mr. Ryan and allow him to
safely return home to his family.
So I ask all of my colleagues, let's all join hands in
supporting this very important measure. And I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Is there any further
discussion on the resolution?
There being no further discussion on the resolution, the
committee will move to consideration of amendments. Does any
member wish to offer an amendment?
There being no further, or no amendments, I move that the
committee report H.Res. 965 to the House with a favorable
recommendation.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it and the
motion is agreed to.
Without objection, the motion will be considered as laid on
the table. The staff is authorized to make any technical and
conforming changes.
Pursuant to notice, I now call up H.R. 6046, Standing
Against Houthi Aggression Act.
[The Bill H.R. 6046 follows:]

H.R. 6046

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The bill was circulated in advance, and
the clerk shall designate the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 6046, to designate Ansarallah as a foreign
terrorist organization and impose certain sanctions on
Ansarallah and other purposes. Be it enacted by the Senate and
the House of Representatives of the United States----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, first reading is
dispensed with. The bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point.
Without objection, the McCaul Amendment in the nature of a
substitute is circulated to members in advance and shall be
considered as read and will be treated as original text for
purposes of amendment.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. McCaul follows:]

AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 6046 OFFERED BY MR.
MCCAUL

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. I now recognize myself for an opening
statement.
Since October 7, the Houthis have launched over 40 attacks
on U.S. warships and commercial ships in the Red Sea. These
attacks have threatened a wide array of regional security and
international shipping interests.
Crews have been taken hostage, ships have faced near
misses, and our American sailors have been working overtime to
protect and defend America's interest in the Red Sea.
International shipping companies have been forced to
reroute their ships, disrupting the global supply chain and
driving up shipping costs by 450 percent. This is negatively
impacting supply chains and the global economy.
For almost 10 years, the Houthis have also waged a
devastating civil war in Yemen, while also attacking our
partners in the Middle East and destabilizing the region. Iran
is providing the Houthis an arsenal of weapons. And while Iran
was building a Houthi proxy army, this Administration sat idly
by pursuing a policy of appeasement.
With Iran's help, the Houthis are now able to manufacture
their own weapons, building up lethal stockpiles and arming
non-State actors who seek to spread terror across the globe.
Despite Iran and its proxies building this war machine, in
2021, the Biden Administration removed the Houthis' designation
as a foreign terrorist organization, or FTO.
This bill will fix that deadly mistake. With this
designation, it is unlawful for any person in the U.S. or
subject to U.S. jurisdiction to knowingly provide material or
resources to the Houthis. Houthi representatives and members
are no longer admissible to the United States.
And U.S. financial institutions must take control of known
Houthi funds within its possession and report them to the U.S.
Department of Treasury.
As a former Federal prosecutor, I know the importance of
addressing terrorist financing and giving law enforcement the
tools they need to do it. Despite the Administration's recent
announcement to redesignate the Houthis as a specially
designated--designation global terrorist, the Biden
Administration refused to use the strongest tool at its
disposal, an FTO designation.
After a recent attack by Iranian proxies that killed three
U.S. servicemembers, it is deeply concerning that this
Administration still refuses to utilize every tool in its
arsenal to deter Iran's proxies, such as the Houthis.
I applaud Representative Clyde from Georgia for authorizing
this important piece of legislation. And I also wanted to thank
Chairman Jordan for allowing this measure to be marked up so
quickly so we can use every tool in our toolbox to help stop
Houthi aggression.
We need to do everything we can to protect our
servicemembers, combat Houthi aggression in the Red Sea, and
defend our interests. And that starts with redesignating the
Houthis as an FTO.
With that, I yield back. Is there any discussion on the
bill?
Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, like many of my colleagues, I believe all of us, condemn
the violent Houthi militant movements provocative and
unwarranted rocket and missile attacks against the United
States Navy personnel in the Red Sea, commercial shipping, as
well as against Israel earlier this year.
In response to these actions, the Administration placed
additional sanctions on the Houthis, a move I strongly support.
In light of these recent sanctions and the continued
humanitarian crisis faced by millions of innocent Yemenis, I
must oppose the amendment.
The Houthis seized control of Yemen's capital in 2014 and
fought a prolonged war against a Saudi-led military coalition
that resulted in significant civilian death and destruction of
much of Yemen's infrastructure. And as a result of this war,
millions of Yemeni civilians suffer persistent food scarcity.
And with a staggering 17.6 million people expected to face
acute food insecurity in 2024, they suffer from preventable
diseases, including cholera, and face extreme economic
hardship.
Though a continuous truce between Houthi militants and the
Saudi military remains in place, Yemeni civilians have
experienced little respite from years of hardship, and remain
dependent on outside humanitarian aid for even the most basic
necessities to survive. Amidst all of this, Houthi militants
have cynically sought to exploit the current moment to launch
wave after wave of drone attacks on commercial ships and U.S.
naval vessels, and long-range missiles at Israel. But in
response, the Biden Administration has conducted numerous air
strikes against Houthi positions in Yemen, announced sanctions
with designations of Houthi leaders and facilitators, and
designated the Houthis as a Specially Designated Global
Terrorist group.
This measure further sanctions those facilitations and
support networks coordinated by Iran which help the Houthi
militants arm and equip.
The bill forces the Administration to designate the Houthis
a Foreign Terrorist Organization, or an FTO, a designation that
risks jeopardizing the very lifesaving assistance Yemeni
civilians are dependent on for their survival.
As a consequence of the sweeping legal implications of an
FTO designation, many commercial shippers and humanitarian
organizations would be unwilling to do any business in Yemen,
given their vulnerability to severe criminal liability. This
would trigger a significant dropoff in the imports on which
Yemen depends for nearly all of its basic goods and
humanitarian support.
While some may point to existing general licenses, the
additional legal implications of an FTO designation render the
general licenses moot without any new statutory organizations
or exemptions.
Finally, the Administration has made clear they oppose this
bill, given these concerns and the detrimental impact the
designations would have on millions of Yemeni civilians. While
there is no disagreement about the reprehensible nature of
Houthi violence, a mandatory FTO designation will trigger a
significant dropoff in aid imports that the Yemeni people are
relying upon for their survival.
Because of this, a broad coalition of NGO's and
humanitarian organizations publicly oppose such an FTO
designation without humanitarian provisos.
In light of these concerns, I must oppose this bill and I
encourage other members to do so as well.
And I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields.
Any further discussion on the bill?
Mr. Perry is recognized.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I almost cannot imagine that we are, that we are having
this conversation in this committee from the standpoint that
there really shouldn't be any argument or dispute whether the
Houthis should, should be designated a Foreign Terrorist
Organization.
And I remind my colleagues that it was the Administration
in 2021 that removed the Houthis from the Foreign Terrorist
Organization designation. And that, like other things, is
inexplicable from the sense that you would think, well, is this
good for America? Is this good for America's interests? Why?
Why would this happen? Why would anybody do this?
Well, let's just go through what Iran is. And the Houthis
are just a proxy for Iran, like many other proxies for Iran.
Iran's got proxies in Gaza, they have got proxies in Lebanon,
they have got proxies in Syria, Iran, the whole neighborhood,
doing Iran's bidding.
But I will tell you what appears to me, and I think what
appears to much of the country is that this Administration, the
Biden Administration in particular, is so desperate for a
nuclear deal with Iran that they are going to be on both sides
of this war. And they are on both sides of this war. Let there
be no doubt in your mind. And if you cannot think about it,
just follow the facts yourself.
I mean, being on both sides of the war goes like this:
We are going to approve aid to some of our allies in the
Middle East to fight the Iranian proxies because they need the
aid. They need the military assistance, they need the
munitions, they need to defend themselves.
At the same time, at the very same time we are going to
allow Iran to receive billions, maybe hundreds of billions of
dollars either directly from the United States or from sanction
money around the globe that has been unavailable to them
because of their malign activities.
And what do you think they do with it? You think they buy
ambulances, and construct schools and hospitals for all the
wanting people in the countries that they have proxies, like
Iraq, or like Syria? No, they do not do that.
Here's what they do, they supply missiles to Hezbollah.
They supply all kinds of armament to Hamas. And they do
everything they can to kill the Great Satan and the people that
represent the Great Satan, the poor servicemembers caught in
the middle of being on both sides of the war. And three of them
just lost their lives because we are on both sides of the war.
That is what is happening here, Ladies and Gentlemen. They
do not want to designate the Houthis as a Foreign Terrorist
Organization because it might offend the sensibilities of Iran,
the greatest terrorist super State on the planet. And they
would. And they will for the sake of the profits of those who
would make a lot of money on the JCPOA or some other version of
it, reinvited, reenvisioned, reincarnated. They would sacrifice
the safety and the security of all the world, and in particular
Israel, on the doorstep of Iran. But with ballistic missile
capabilities, the United States of America, too, within reach,
within reach of nuclear holocaust.
That is what is happening right now. And so it is important
that the United States of America pick a side. Pick a side. We
understand that it is diplomatically difficult. Iran exists.
The Mullahs in Iran, they are there. The Ayatollah, he is
there. Not at the will of the Iranian people. He leads by fear.
He leads by death, and torture, and torment.
But every time the Iranian people speak up and say, well,
we would like to be unburdening ourself from this, this
Administration and one previous to the last one abandoned those
folks. You know why? Because they want that nuclear agreement
because it is worth billions and billions of dollars. And they
had wed themselves to it. And they have been coopted by the
Iranian, the Ayatollah's, Ayatollah's Iranian lobby in the
United States of America, been coopted. And so we all, all
sacrifice.
Well, we must all not sacrifice. It is time now for
Americans and people on this committee to stand up and say we
are not going to stand with the Houthis, the terrorists, the
proxy of Iran, stopping shipping, and bombing, bombing
Americans and shipping interests in the region. We are not
going to stand with them. We are going to designate them a
Foreign Terrorist Organization because that is what they are.
And they should be sanctioned as such.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields.
Any further discussion on the bill.
Ms. Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I rise in opposition to H.R. 6046. The people of Yemen have
suffered extraordinary devastation since the beginning of the
war waged by the Saudi-led coalition: unprecedented levels of
hunger caused by an inhumane blockade on fuel and other
necessities of life, a cholera outbreak, hundreds of thousands
of deaths. This year alone 17.6 million people across Yemen are
expected to face acute food insecurity, and 4.5 million
children are unable to attend school.
We must deal with the attacks on ships in the Red Sea but
we need to do so in a way that does not exacerbate the already
staggering levels of suffering that the people of Yemen,
including disproportionate numbers of children, are
experiencing.
This legislation would criminalize the taxes, registration
fees, and customs duties that humanitarian organizations
operating in Houthi-controlled areas are required to pay. It
would have the practical effect of freezing aid delivery, and
would turn the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Yemen into a
catastrophe.
This is why we are seeing an enormous coalition of
humanitarian organizations speaking out against this bill. In
response to the attacks, I support the Administration's
decision to designate the Houthis as a specifically designated
global terrorist organization with carve-outs for critical
humanitarian and economic aid. And I support the fact that the
Administration has been very explicit in its message to the
Houthis. Our objective is de-escalation and the cessation of
these attacks, not escalation and punitive measures against
Yemeni civilians.
We should continue following this course. I urge my
colleagues to vote to protect humanitarian aid for the people
of Yemen by opposing H.R. 6046.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Moran [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back.
Are there any further members that would like to speak on
this issue?
The gentleman from Florida Mr. Mast is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let's lay out very literally this line in the sand that is
at stake right now for the American people. And it is very
literally a Republican/Democrat line as far as I am seeing it.
Republican/Democrat because this is about redesignating the
Houthis as a Foreign Terrorist Organization, not designating
them a watered-down version of the Foreign Terrorist
Organization designation like what the Biden Administration did
after they took them off the Foreign Terrorist Organization
list.
So, let's, you know, let's just outline this again.
President Trump puts them on the FTO list. Why? Because he
does not want Americans that wake up on a daily basis and go to
work and say, hey, let's take your tax dollars from America and
let's put them through the State Department and send them over
to Yemen into a country that wants to attack and destroy
Americans and our interests. He did that.
And then President Biden came in and he said, I am going to
take them off the FTO list that President Trump put them on.
And in the time since President Biden took them off the list,
Yemen has received somewhere between $3 to $3.5 billion of the
moneys of the American people.
And now that these Houthis, these Yemenis are attacking
America, and our interests, and our ships and that of our
allies President Biden is saying, oh, crap, what a mistake I
made to do that. But I do not want to have egg on my face, so
do not let me go back there and do exactly what President Trump
already did, which is make them a Foreign Terrorist
Organization. Let me go out there and do something watered
down, and know that the party will support it, and designated
them something less than a Foreign Terrorist Organization.
Why? And it was laid out very specifically here by my
Democrat colleagues one after another after another. And I
suspect we will hear more of them laid out, because they want
to continue to send American moneys to the very country and
people that are attacking Americans, our interests, our ships,
that of our allies, those things coming through the Suez Canal,
you name it. Go back to this Biden policy of paying those that
are attacking America instead of the Trump policy that says,
no, we are not going to be a part of that whatsoever.
It is moronic. And it is, in my opinion, the exact line in
the sand defining issue between Republicans and Democrats as
you could ever pick one because from what I have heard, very
specific differences on the directions that both sides want.
One sending American dollars to the Yemenis, one not. And one
designating them a Foreign Terrorist Organization, one not.
So, that's the issue that we have going on here. The
American people are going to see this play out in vote in this
committee, and probably even see this play out in vote on the
floor of the House of Representatives. And it will let you know
exactly the differences that exist here in the House.
And in that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the remainder of my
time.
Mr. Moran. The gentleman yields back.
Is there any further discussion?
The gentlelady from California Ms. Jacobs is recognized for
5 minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I oppose H.R. 6046, the Standing Against Houthi Aggression
Act. Houthi attacks in the Red Sea should be condemned and
require a response, but we cannot forget the innocent lives
impacted by the decisions made in this chamber. The FTO
designation is not just about Houthi action. It has limited
actual benefits and significant humanitarian drawbacks.
Yemen has a population of over 18 million people, half of
them children in desperate need of humanitarian assistance.
These children are not the ones sending these missiles.
Yemen also relies on imports for 85 percent of its food,
fuel supplies, and almost all medical supplies.
Yemen is already experiencing some of the highest
malnutrition rates already recorded.
The United States already designated the Ansarallah as a
Specially Designated Global Terrorist group, which will already
impede some humanitarian assistance to the region. And an FTO
designation would be even more devastating for the country as
17.6 million people face acute food insecurity this year, and
4.5 million people remain displaced.
It would effectively criminalize certain transactions
necessary to lifesaving humanitarian aid and exacerbate the
chilling effects on commercial imports, remittances, and
financial services.
Even worse, this legislation does not even take these
effects into account and includes no, none, no humanitarian
exemptions or waivers.
I encourage this chamber to think long and hard about the
repercussions of such designations. And if my colleague wants
to say that this is a defining line between Republicans and
Democrats, we will take it, because we understand that
addressing humanitarian needs around the world, we understand
that addressing root causes of conflict, is actually what makes
Americans safer, not bombast and FTO designations.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Moran. The gentlelady yields back.
Is there any further discussion.
The gentleman from Georgia Mr. McCormick is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am sure I have heard the NGO's oppose the FTO designation
to the Houthis. The problem is that, just like I see the NGO's
doing nefarious things in our own nation when it comes to
illegal immigration, they may have good intent but the results
often are consequential to the harmful effect to the United
States.
In February 2021, the Biden Administration removed the
Houthis' Foreign Terrorist Organization designation, as well as
their specifically designated global terrorist group
designation which the Trump Administration put in place. I have
no idea why they did that to begin with.
At the time, Secretary Blinken cited humanitarian concerns
as the reason for these decisions, saying the humanitarian aid
could not reach Yemeni people if the designator remained in
place. But I happen to know a lot of people care about others
that are in harm's way, and that is why we have non-
governmental agencies to do this sort of work.
Since October 7th we have seen the consequences of going
soft on terrorists in the Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea. And the
Houthis have launched attack after attack on commercial
shipping and the United States Navy. These attacks have
disrupted global supply chains, and two Navy SEALS recently
lost their lives while interdicting weapons shipments
designated to the Houthis. The Houthis, not the Yemenis by the
way.
This is a consistent pattern for the Biden Administration.
Whether the border with the cartels, in Gaza with Hamas, with
UNRWA, or in Yemen with the Houthis, this Administration
constantly uses short-term humanitarian concerns to justify
decisions that in the long term further deteriorate
humanitarian conditions and undermine United States nation
security.
This can even be seen in the manner that the Biden
Administration chooses to support Ukraine. They are more
interested in a feel good solution than in winning a war
against evil.
The State Department recently announced their redesignation
of the Houthis as a specifically designated global terrorist
group. But there is no logical reason to not have the Houthis
designated as an FTO. It begs the question, what is this
Administration afraid of?
It is not about humanitarian aid. We can get it to them
through other means. This is an excuse to be soft on Iran.
Are they afraid of being tough on Iran's regime? Are they
trying to keep the door open for further disastrous Iranian
deals?
H.R. 6046 would require the State Department to designate
the Houthis as an FTO for the President to impose property and
visa-blocking sanctions on members or affiliates of the
Houthis. And there is no other way to do that.
We must correct the grave missteps of the Biden
Administration. And that is why I am proud to be an original
cosponsor of H.R. 6046, and why I am asking my colleagues to
support this legislation.
And with that, I yield the remainder of my time.
Mr. Moran. The gentleman yields back.
Is there any further discussion?
The gentleman from Illinois Mr. Schneider is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I must confess, in the context of where we sit today
where in the Senate a comprehensive package to address, as my
colleague from Georgia just indicated, America's leadership in
what is, I agree, a battle against evil. And the fact that my
Republican colleagues are unwilling to stand up, I am a little
stunned by some of the things I am hearing.
But let me start with where we agree.
I agree that the Houthis are terrorists. There is no
question about that, that they are evil, that they are
principally responsible for the mass humanitarian crisis that
we have seen in Yemen over the years.
I agree that the Houthis are bankrolled by Iran, they are
supplied by Iran, they are a wholly owned subsidiary of Iran.
Houthis are a threat to vital American interests and U.S.
personnel in the region. No question about that.
I also think that Iran is a far greater threat to American
interests and American personnel than the Houthis. Houthis are
an arm of what is known as the octopus. The head of the octopus
sits in Tehran.
But it is not just Tehran. We know that Iran and Tehran are
supporting, are supplying Russia in the war in Ukraine.
Russia's invasion of Ukraine and the possibility that Ukraine
may fall is an existential threat not just to the U.S., but to
our allies in Europe. If Ukraine falls and Russian troops are
on the borders of several NATO allies, there is no question we
will see many more American men and women stationed facing
those troops.
What we need to be talking about here, I believe, is how do
we make sure that Ukraine has the resources, the weapons, and
the international support to defeat Russia; that Israel has
weapons, and the resources, and the international support to
defeat Hamas and the attacks from Yemen from the Houthis. This
is what we should be talking about. And we need to be doing it
in a way that is smart, that is considered, that reflects the
nuances of the challenges that stands up to the gravity of the
challenges that we face.
We shouldn't be here just talking about the Houthis, we
should be talking about a comprehensive strategy.
We shouldn't be here just debating a bill that is sending
funds to our ally Israel who desperately needs our support, we
should be talking about legislation to send support to Ukraine,
to Israel, to our allies in the Indo-Pacific, and securing our
border.
I wish that is what we are talking about but,
unfortunately, we are not.
Mr. Moran. Does the gentleman yield back?
The gentleman yields back.
Is there any further discussion?
There being no further discussion of the bill, the
committee will move to consideration of amendments.
Does any member wish to offer an amendment?
The gentlelady from Pennsylvania Ms. Dean is recognized.
Ms. Dean. Thank you, Chairman, for the recognition.
I have an amendment at the desk.
[The Amendment offered by Ms. Dean follows:]

AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 6046
OFFERED BY MS. DEAN

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Moran. The clerk shall distribute the amendment.
The clerk will report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
substitute to H.R. 6046 offered by Ms. Dean of Pennsylvania. At
the end of Section 3, add the following new paragraph.
Mr. Moran. Without further objection--without objection,
further reading of the amendment is dispensed with.
The gentlelady is recognized for 5 minutes on the
amendment.
Ms. Dean. I thank you, Chairman.
I offer this amendment, and it echoes the concerns of many
of my colleagues on this side of the aisle as were begun by the
ranking member so eloquently.
But as this amendment is being passed out, there are two
statements I would like to make in advance.
I want to call out the incorrect and irresponsible
statement made by the gentleman from Pennsylvania that the
current Administration is ``on both sides of this war.'' That
is incorrect. No matter how many times you say it does not make
it true. And it is dangerously irresponsible.
Second, I want to point out the fact that former President
Trump felt so strongly about designating the Houthis as an FTO
that he waited until January 19th, 2021, his last day in
office, to do it. It took him 4 years. But on his way out the
door he decided he would call them an FTO.
So, let's know what political things are going on here.
In terms of my amendment, I join my colleagues in
condemning the Houthis' malign actions, including the recent
direct attacks on the United States' ships. We cannot forget
the dire humanitarian situation in Yemen.
From CRS, according to the United Nations, 21.6 million
people in Yemen, two out of every three Yemenis, need
humanitarian assistance; 4.5 million are internally displaced;
and more than half the population is food insecure. They are
hungry.
Over 90 percent of food is imported, making the food supply
particularly susceptible to international shocks. U.N. appeals
remain underfunded. The U.N. humanitarian response plan appeal
for Yemeni--for Yemen, sought $4.3 billion for 2023. By January
2024 it was almost 40 percent funded.
Humanitarian access continues to be impaired by
bureaucratic impediments and movement restrictions, largely
Houthi-controlled areas.
In response to the recent attacks, the Biden Administration
has already designated the Houthis as a Specially Designated
Global Terrorist group and imposed sanctions on the Houthi
leaders. The designation, notably, was accompanied by general
licenses for the provision of humanitarian aid.
This bill, as written, provides no exceptions or waivers
for the provision of humanitarian aid at a time when the area
is in crisis. Numerous human rights organizations oppose this
bill because of the concerns over their ability to continue to
provide humanitarian aid.
As some of the groups said in a statement, ``The addition
of a further FTO designation could be devastating. It would
effectively criminalize certain transactions necessary to
facilitate lifesaving humanitarian aid, and almost certainly
exacerbate the chilling effect on commercial imports,
remittances, and financial services.''
This amendment, my amendment, would provide necessary
exceptions to allow further humanitarian aid to the people of
Yemen. Further, it includes a national interest waiver to allow
the President to waive these requirements, but requires
reporting to both House and Senate committees if the national--
if it is in the national interests of the United States.
The amendment also uses language similar to that which was
included with bipartisan support in the Senate bill to
designate the Wagner Group as an FTO.
I urge my colleagues to consider these grave concerns for
the citizens, the Yemeni citizens who are hungry, who are
without. It is not lost on me or anybody else that humanitarian
assistance is not considered in this bill because take a look
at what we will be considering later in terms of aid to Israel,
with an absolute absence of any humanitarian aid to Israel or
to the people suffering in Gaza.
So, I ask my colleagues to please consider these concerns,
reconsider and focus on humanitarian aid while holding Houthis
accountable for their, for their terrorist behavior.
And at this time, Mr. Chairman, I will withdraw my
amendment.
Mr. Moran. Without objection, the amendment is withdrawn.
The gentlelady yields back.
Do any other members wish to offer an amendment?
There being no further amendments, I move that the
committee report H.R. 6046, as amended, to the House with a
favorable recommendation.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those oppose, signify by no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it and the
motion is agreed to.
A roll call vote has been requested.
Pursuant to the chair's previous announcement, this vote
will be postponed.
Pursuant to notice, I now call up H.R. 7122, Stop Support
for UNRWA Act of 2024.
[The Bill H.R. 7122 follows:]

H.R. 7122

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Moran. The bill was circulated in advance.
The clerk shall designate the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 7122, To prohibit aid that will benefit
Hamas, and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives--
--
Mr. Moran. Without objection, the first reading is
dispensed with and the bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point.
Without objection, the Smith amendment in the nature of a
substitute, circulated to members in advance, shall be
considered as read, and will be treated as original text for
purposes of amendment.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Smith follows:]

AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 7122
OFFERED BY MR. SMITH

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 7122 OFFERED BY MR.
SMITH

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Moran. Is there any discussion on the bill?
Mr. Smith. Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Moran. Mr. Smith is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
H.R. 7122, The Stop Support for UNRWA Act, and I want to thank
Chairman Mast and Chairman Wilson for co-sponsoring. It
provides that the United States may not make any contributions
to UNRWA or to the regular budget of the U.N. for the support
of UNRWA.
It is a simple, clean bill that will go a long way to solve
a terrible problem, UNRWA, the most corrupt anti-Semitic terror
complicit agency perhaps ever, but certainly at the United
Nations. Last week, the Biden Administration paused funding for
UNRWA following revelations that UNRWA employees were involved
in anti-Semitic atrocities on October 7th. And it is a pause.
We do not know for how long and how much will be held back.
But to me, this is the point about UNRWA. Yes, that's like a
flashpoint. But it goes so far, far deeper than that.
UNRWA is really hate-filled anti-Semitic. That's the tip of
the iceberg. And it's an anti-Semitic organization from top to
bottom.
And that said, and frankly, it's also deplorable. In
reality, anti-Semitism and terrorist complicity of UNRWA has
been established beyond a doubt for decades. I would point out
to my colleagues that I and many others have raised the issue
of UNRWA for decades.
In 2003, I offered an amendment to the State Department
authorization bill to shift funds away from UNRWA, 2003, 20
years ago and with regards to its textbooks and all of the
terrible poisoning of Palestinian youth. The amendment was
adopted by the committee, and it passed the house with the
authorization bill. At the time, some of the language that I
had in the resolution talked about strongly encourage the
Secretary to consider shifting U.S. funding away from UNRWA.
It expresses outrage over credible reports that UNRWA
facilities have been used as warehouses for weapon storage and
for bomb making. It expresses deep concern over the teachings,
educational materials, and textbooks that are funded by UNRWA
that are filled with anti-Semitism. We noted at the time in the
resolution that the head of UNRWA said, oh, we cannot expect
the people under occupation who have textbooks which idolize,
praise, and express love for their occupiers.
Certainly not only a tacit but I think a very real embrace
of what was going on. We had a hearing, and I thank my good
friend, Chairman Mast. He and our committee had a hearing on
January 30th.
And one of those who testified, Marcus Sheff, said, the
world is asking how human beings reach such depths of depravity
on October 7th, and I'm here to provide a key answer. And then
he talked at great length about the textbooks profoundly
influencing millions of young impressionable minds. Time and
again, we have warned that today's Palestinian textbooks are
producing the terrorists of tomorrow.
Sadly and tragically on October 7th, our worst fears came
true. He also pointed out that for Hamas, the manual for the
hatred and incitement which they crave have been conveniently
provided for many years by schools and textbooks that they use.
I would point out to my colleagues that we need, without a
doubt, to shift the money.
Yes, there's humanitarian concerns. We all recognize it.
But it cannot go to UNRWA. Their time is up. There needs to be
a pivot, very real and very decisive.
I will be offering an amendment in a few moments to this
amendment in the nature of a substitute that makes clear that
nothing in this act may be construed to preclude the provision
of humanitarian assistance through any agency or entity other
than UNRWA to individuals or entities, and then it goes on from
there. And the Secretary of State would have to certify to
Congress that such an agency does not promote, espouse, or
affiliate with entities or individuals that promote violence,
terrorism, or anti-Semitism. As such as defined by the IHRA the
working definition of anti-Semitism and does not employ
individuals who promote, espouse, or affiliate with such
entities or individuals.
I ask my colleagues, really, if not now, when? We will be
getting more information, I'm sure, as research is done about
how many were involved. One of our witnesses the other day
provided us with a book about this terrorism, and it was Hillel
Neuer.
And he talked about how thousands of UNRWA individuals were
celebrating the massive genocide being committed against the
Israelis on October 7th. And they go through--they
painstakingly have the actual quotes. It is filled to
overflowing with hatred.
And why any American taxpayer should be supporting an
organization like UNRWA. Again, I'm been raising it for
decades. And I get very upset when people say, oh, now he needs
to take a look at what the U.N. Secretary General might say.
Yes, they've all enabled this, maybe unwittingly, but
enabled it for decades as well. And I find that very, very
disturbing in the extreme. So again, we're providing, or have
provided--Trump knocked off all the money when he was
President.
In 2021, the Biden Administration resumed lavish funding
for UNRWA. And we have donated more than a billion dollars to
UNRWA since 2021 and on track to provide 371 million during the
current fiscal year. We do not know what the pause means or for
how long.
Now there are agencies out there, I'm sure, WFP, UNICEF,
UNHCR and others that could provide humanitarian assistance.
But we got to make sure that UNRWA which, again, is a massive
entity that wants Israel utterly destroyed. I mean, no doubt
about that.
And those refugees would then take their place in Jerusalem
in a new Palestinian State and elsewhere that is currently
Israel. And they follow the Hamas dogma. Read the charter going
back to 1988.
It talks about slaughtering Jews. If you see a Jew, kill
him or her. I read it on the floor during a debate recently. It
is horrific with its hate. And again, UNRWA is very much part
and parcel of Hamas. I yield back.
Mr. Moran. The gentleman yields back. Is there any further
discussion? The gentleman from New York, Mr. Meeks, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meeks. I strongly oppose this measure. UNRWA is flawed.
But prohibiting U.S. funding of UNRWA while the people of Gaza
are suffering an acute humanitarian disaster undermines the
United States and Israel's interests.
It erodes the United States' moral authority and further
endangers the lives of more than two million Palestinians
residing in Gaza. Cutting funds to UNRWA, the only entity
currently able to deliver lifesaving humanitarian aid in Gaza
could rapidly result in the starvation of millions.
In fact, the government of Israel agrees which is why a
senior Israeli official announced just days ago, and I quote,
``If UNRWA ceases operating on the ground, this could cause a
humanitarian catastrophe that would force Israel to halt its
fighting against Hamas. This would not be in Israel's interest.
It would not be in the interest of Israel's allies either.''
UNRWA's collapse would further harm regional stability,
including in the West Bank, Lebanon, Jordan, and Syria, at a
time when the United States and Israel are seeing to de-
escalate and contain spillover from the war in Gaza. It would
be a gift to Iran and its allies Hamas, Hezbollah, and Bashar
al-Assad. A humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza may also threaten
Israel and our own relationship with the Abraham Accord
partners and others we hope would join the Abraham Accord
coalition.
Israel does not want the collapse of UNRWA to further
Gaza's humanitarian crises. Our regional allies and partners do
not want the collapse of UNRWA to further Gaza's humanitarian
crises, nor do our allies and partners in Europe and other
places around the world.
Let me be clear. I am concerned about the disturbing
allegations against the 12 UNRWA employees and I welcome
Secretary Blinken's decision to temporarily pause UNRWA's
funding while the United States investigates. However, without
UNRWA's staff and logistical support, the humanitarian
situation in Gaza would be significantly worse than the
disastrous conditions facing Gazans today.
This legislative effort is irresponsible. Despite major
flaws calling for its immediately elimination in attempting to
jettison UNRWA's funding with no realistic plan to replace it
would have dire consequences for the Palestinian people, the
State of Israel, and the United States and our allies. My
friends on the other side of the aisle, we must listen to our
partners in Israel.
We must listen to our own intelligence community, our own
defense community, and our diplomatic community who know how
harmful this cynical initiative really is. There are two
million lives at stake. Israel's future is at stake.
And this bill abruptly increases the risk to all. This
committee must support all efforts to advance U.S. interest and
the broader Middle East region, including peace and stability
in Gaza. This bill undermines our interest as well as the
interest of our allies which is why I encourage all of my
colleagues to reject this measure. And I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. Moran. The ranking member yields back. Is there any
further discussion? The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Perry,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And of course as you
might expect, I support this effort. I think that UNRWA
absolutely needs to be defunded by the United States.
I mean, I had an amendment on the floor less than a month
before the horrific October 7th attack. I had an amendment to
defund UNRWA. It failed. It failed.
We all saw what happened on October 7th. Those are the
consequences of failure. The Biden Administration has given
UNRWA 730 million dollars during its term here, 730 million
hard earned tax dollars of good Americans who wake up in the
morning, oftentimes leave their homes in the dark, lunch box in
hand, do not get to see their kids off on the school bus.
We're sending them money since 1949, ladies and gentlemen.
Since 1949, we've been sending this money to United Nations
Relief and Works Agency. Here's what they're doing.
They're relieving Israel of their sovereignty and they're
working on destroying Israel and the United States of America.
That's what they're doing. I mean, it's not just 12 people that
were in Hamas that work for UNRWA.
Ten percent, at least 10 percent of UNRWA's work force
we're told is closely tied to Hamas, a terrorist organization,
again, sponsored by Iran. I know my good friend and colleague
from Pennsylvania does not like the assertion that the
Administrations on both sides of the war. But 730 million
dollars has gone to the people that attacked Israel.
We're going to give Israel billions of dollars to defend
themselves. We're going to give billions of dollars to Israel
to attack Gaza and essentially level most of it. And then
they're going to ask for more money to fix Gaza.
Ladies and gentlemen, I do not know what the definition of
being on both sides of the conflict are. But it seems to me
that would qualify. It seems to me that would qualify.
Now since 1949, our American tax dollars have funded the
United Nations, United Nations Relief and Works Agency. This
isn't the United States going over there. Maybe it'd be
different.
Hopefully, it would be different. But it's the United
Nations. And I do not know if you're keeping up with current
events. United Nations seems a little hostile to our friends in
Israel, just a little hostile.
But we keep on giving them money. And then they send it to
UNRWA. And they tell you, oh, my goodness, it's for housing,
it's for milk for the little children, it's for clothing, all
those basic needs.
Meanwhile, the textbooks tell the little children in Gaza
to slit the throats of the Jews, and you pay for that. I do not
know how you feel about that. But I'm not really thrilled about
it.
And I wonder since 1949 whose responsibility is this? I
mean, my goodness. We've released the funds to Iran, hundreds
of billions of dollars. Maybe Iran wants to fund UNRWA, or the
money can just go direct to Hamas. It does not have to go
through UNRWA.
I'm not sure, but here's what I do know. The solution at
hand right now isn't working. Now my friends will say, well,
they're the only ones that can do it.
They're the only one son the planet that can do it. I do
not know who among you believe that. But it seems to me that
every Member of Congress must think that they're the only ones
that can be in the seat.
But miraculously when they decide to leave or their voters
determine that they've got to leave, somebody else can fill the
position. Ladies and gentlemen, somebody else can do this work
and somebody else needs to do this work. And we're talking
about humanitarian assistance.
Let's have it vetted and certified. And if we're vetting
and certifying it now, my goodness, are we a failure. I do not
know what kind of wake up call we need to get.
I do not know if the United Nations through UNRWA has to
send people with machine guns and machetes and whatever else on
paragliders into the United States to attach synagogues across
the--maybe they'll get it then. But this should happen. This
needs to happen.
It's a forcing function. Maybe somebody else will do it.
But they're not going to do it as long as UNRWA was there. And
as long as we keep funding them, they're going to keep doing
it.
The United States needs to take a leadership role to the
rest of the world that also pay into the United States--or
correction, the United Nations with their tax dollars to fund
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency and say, we've had
enough. Since 1949, I do not know what track record you need to
see is. But I will tell you this and I'll conclude with this.
People are asking for a two State solution, and the
Administration is now calling for the recognition of a
Palestinian State. What happened on October 7th is what you get
with an UNRWA provided two State solution. I yield the balance.
Mr. Moran. The gentleman yields back. Is there any further
discussion? The gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Ms. Dean, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Dean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too rise in opposition
to H.R. 7122. It is clear that UNRWA has serious challenges,
many of which were highlighted in last week's joint
subcommittee hearing.
But I want to be clear. We've heard misstatements here
today, and we heard them last week. It is Hamas who attacked
Israel on October the 7th. It is not UNRWA.
While there were bad actors allegedly within UNRWA, at
least 12 that we know of and maybe more, we cannot constantly
be repeating false claims. Hamas attacked Israel. UNRWA did not
attack Israel.
Nevertheless, it's also clear that UNRWA's continued
existence and ability to provide humanitarian assistance
remains essential for both the people of Gaza and for Israel,
at least for the time being. As Stated by Professor Rudman,
sustaining the current funding pause will result in starvation
for the people of Gaza, starvation for more than two million
people. UNRWA is currently the only organization present on the
ground and capable of providing for those immediate needs of
the people of Gaza.
I too want to call out the statement by a senior Israeli
official to The Times of Israel. Prime Minister Netanyahu's
government does not support the immediate discontinuation of
UNRWA. If this bill becomes law, the ability of UNRWA to
continue operating will be in question.
And they said, quote, ``If UNRWA ceases operating on the
ground, this could cause a humanitarian catastrophe that would
force Israel to halt its fighting against Hamas. This would not
be in Israel's interest and it would not be in the interest of
Israel's allies either.''
There is a need, an immediate need, for reform of UNRWA.
But it cannot be done in a manner that results in a greater
humanitarian crisis and in greater human suffering. That will
be even further destabilizing for the region. I urge my
colleagues to oppose this bill, and I yield back.
Mr. Moran. The gentlelady yields back. Is there any further
discussion? The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Mast, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to make a couple
statements, ask a few questions. So just No. 1, I would say
Israel is American's ally. Would anybody in this room like to
disagree that Israel is American's ally? Be on the record. Now
is your chance. Hearing nobody.
Palestinians are not our ally. Would anybody in this room
like to disagree with that and say that Palestinians are our
ally? The ranking member, top Democrat on the committee just
walked out as I was asking this.
Would anybody like to say that Palestinians are our ally? I
hear crickets. Nobody in here is willing to say that
Palestinians are our ally. Nobody wants to refute that Israel
is our ally.
Our ally, Israel, is at war with our non-ally. And UNRWA
exists, its whole existence is to support our non-ally. And
99.9 percent of their employees are Palestinians who are our
non-ally.
So if we support UNRWA, No. 1, we are paying literally the
salaries of our non-ally that is at war with our ally. Let that
sink in. We're paying the salaries if we support UNRWA of our
non-ally who is at war with our ally.
Does that make sense to anybody? I do not think so. It does
not make any sense to me. So I find it amazing that there is
disagreement about this in this committee, that there are
people in this Congress--and apparently this is very party
line, Democrat versus Republican on this issue.
Democrats want to fund an entity that is made up of and
exists to support our non-ally at war with our ally. Can't make
sense of it. I want to take the remaining couple minutes that I
have here and just ask one other question.
And this is an important question because we asked this in
a hearing last week, asked this question of somebody that was
referenced by one of my Democrat colleagues, Ms. Rudman,
Professor Rudman. And she was parroting the talking point for
the Democrats. And the talking point for the Democrats was we
cannot defend what UNRWA did, but we want to make sure that
they still get funding.
Let that sink in. That was the talking point, the point of
what they're saying. Can't defend what they did. Can't defend
the 12 individuals alleged to be in direct support of Hamas.
Can't defend that an estimate by them, 10 to 15 percent of
at least of UNRWA employees are probably in support of Hamas if
they are representative of the rest of the Palestinian
population. Can't defend what they did, but want to continue
supporting them. So the question that I would pose here for my
Democrat colleagues or my Republicans if they want to answer
this.
But we know that we have thresholds on the Republican side.
Is there any threshold for my Democrat colleagues for which
they would say that is a bridge too far? If UNRWA did that,
then that would be too far and we would not support funding
UNRWA.
If UNRWA went beyond the 12 people, went beyond the hiding
of rockets under UNRWA facilities, the hiding of bombs and
weapons under UNRWA facilities, went beyond the curriculum that
they're teaching in the schools to hate Jews, went beyond the
tunnels that are being built underneath UNRWA facilities.
Because that's not a threshold for my Democrat colleagues. But
if UNRWA went at this point beyond that, then yes, finally,
that would be a bridge too far.
So let's stop funding them. And I'll just sit here and wait
for the remaining 40 seconds of my time to see if any of my
Democrat colleagues want to rejoin the room and answer any of
those questions. And if my time runs out, then I'll yield back.
Mr. Moran. Chair seeing no responses, the gentleman yields
back.
Mr. Mast. No, I did not yield back yet, Mr. Chairman. I
still got 25 seconds that I'm going to give my colleagues to
answer. I would say, Mr. Chairman, let the record show nobody
disagreed that Israel is our ally. Nobody disagreed that
Palestinians are not our ally. And no Democrats placed a
threshold on eliminating support for UNRWA.
Mr. Moran. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
yields back. Is there any further discussion? The gentleman
from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Mr. Chairman, I move to strike the last word.
Mr. Moran. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I enjoyed my
colleague from Florida, Mr. Mast's very persuasive commentary
there. But I want to address another issue and thank the
chairman for including my bill, a bipartisan bill that I
introduced with Representative Ed Case, the Pacific Partnership
Act, in this markup.
And I want to thank my colleagues for passing this bill out
of the markup with a voice vote. This legislation builds off of
a successive Administration's actions to strengthen the United
States engagement in the Indo-Pacific. The 2017 national
security strategy and the 2019 Indo-Pacific strategy report
both recognize the region's critical role in the broader Indo-
Pacific.
During the Trump Administration through the leadership of
Secretary Pompeo, the United States invested hundreds of
millions of new dollars into the Pacific Islands through the
Pacific pledge of the Indo-Pacific strategy. I'm grateful that
the current Administration continued this important work
through the Pacific partnership strategy. While these executive
actions are welcome, it's essential that Congress assert its
authority in showing that we are not just interested but
invested in an enduring relationship with our Pacific Island
partners.
This important legislation codifies the Pacific Partnership
Act and ensures that it is updated every 4 years. The Pacific
partnership strategy points out that the Pacific region covers
15 percent of the globe. While this territory is vast, it is
comprised of many small communities across countless islands.
These are the same islands that Americans gave their lives
liberating in the Second World War. While our relationship with
these islands has developed over these past 80 years, it's
essential that the United States continues to look to the
future and establishes ever deeper ties with these islands.
This is personal to me. My grandfather fought in New Guinea
and the Philippines in World War II. My other grandfather was
on a destroyer in the South Pacific.
This legislation ensures that we are taking a whole of
government approach to efficiently and effectively engage with
our partners in the Pacific. We know these islands are facing
an ever more aggressive China which is all too happy to tempt
these communities with offers of infrastructure or bribery. And
when that does not stick, resort to intimidation or other
tactics.
Instead, this legislation helps to ensure that the United
States remains a partner of choice. Legislation like this shows
that these communities are very important and that we're
interested in a relationship with the Pacific Islands because
we see mutual benefit built upon decades of trust, not just
because a competitor like China is on the prowl. In addition to
this, the bill designates the Pacific Islands Forum as an
international organization with diplomatic privileges to
encourage the establishment of a PIF mission in the United
States.
It requires the President to report to Congress on the
implementation timeline for the Pacific partnership strategy
along with any staffing or funding required to implement the
strategy. It codifies the partners in the Blue Pacific
Initiative with Australia, Japan, New Zealand, and the United
Kingdom and others to deconflict aid to the region and
encourage coordination, expands regular reports on
transnational crime in the Indo-Pacific to include the Pacific
Islands, to ensure the region is integrated into our broader
work in the Indo-Pacific.
I am grateful to my many colleagues who have co-sponsored
this legislation. I'm grateful to this committee for passing
this legislation, this markup on a voice vote. And I am
particularly grateful to Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Meeks.
And I want to thank Krista in Congressman Ed Case's office
and also my staff, Hunt Vandertal, for leading the charge on
this and working together in a bipartisan way. I encourage the
committee to continue to push this legislation to the House
floor. This bill, the Pacific Partnership Act, deserves
favorable consideration by the entire Congress. And I yield
back the balance of my time.
Mr. Moran. The gentleman yields back. Is there any further
discussion? Seeing none, there being no further discussion on
the bill, the committee will move to consideration of
amendments. Does any member wish to offer an amendment? The
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Schneider, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have an amendment
at the desk.
Mr. Moran. The clerk shall distribute the amendment. The
clerk shall report the amendment in the nature of a substitute.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Schneider follows:]

SUBSTITUTE FOR THE AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 7122
OFFERED BY MR. SCHNEIDER

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Clerk. Substitute for the amendment in the nature of a
substitute to H.R. 7122 offered by Mr. Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Moran. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Smith. I reserve a point of order against the
amendment.
Mr. Moran. The gentleman from New Jersey reserves a point
of order. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Schneider, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. And I want to thank the chairman
for holding this markup. I'd also like to thank the staffs of
the minority and the majority for working to find compromise
where they could.
Unfortunately, this bill is not one of the measures where
we were able to achieve a compromised text. There's no question
that UNRWA is a big problem. And I've said that time and time
again not just in this committee but in public.
And I'm grateful to Mr. Smith for taking the issue
seriously, taking it seriously for years and raising it
repeatedly in hearings on a subcommittee. And we share a view
that UNRWA must be replaced. We know that at least a dozen
members of UNRWA were involved in the horrific attacks of
October 7th.
Far too many of its employees, estimates of reports of 10
percent or more are affiliated with Hamas. And many, many more
have family members who are involved with the terrorist
organization. That's why the U.S. Administration as well as
many of our allies decided to pause funds to the agency.
Even the United Nations, often the last to admit or
recognize its own problems, announced that it will reopen an
investigation. Everyone recognizes that UNRWA is a big, big
problem. But it's also a very complicated problem.
And that's why we should look askance at a bill that uses
but five lines of operational language to address what is a 75-
year challenge. The government has always been clear that it
does not want UNRWA to implode as was noted in the Wall Street
Journal just yesterday. There is a fear that if the critical
services provided by UNRWA are no longer provided by the
organization, it'll be left to Israel to step in or was as
noted earlier in the conversation today that Israel would have
to pause its operations to defeat Hamas.
Likewise, the pro-Israel community, including AIPAC, is not
coming out in support of this legislation. Why have UNRWA's
harshest critics including myself not gone on board with this
bill? We can get rid of UNRWA.
The World Health Organization's spokesperson Christian
Lindmeier said clearly that the WHO could scale up if needed as
have many NGO's at least in private. But UNRWA provides
essential services, including a distribution, management of
desalination of water, and the like. Ending these overnight,
ending these immediately would cause a humanitarian catastrophe
far greater than what we've already seen and would only serve
Hamas' goal of getting as many civilians killed on both sides
of the conflict as possible.
Again, UNRWA must be replaced. And that's hard and complex
work. We cannot just wish the complications away, and that's
why I'm proud to author legislation that would introduce a hard
deadline of a year to cutoff funding permanently and create a
congressional commission and interagency process that will get
the replacement part of the challenge correct as well as
instruct our mission to the U.N. to fight for lowering assessed
dues to the agency.
But as with so many initiatives regarding the sacrosanct
U.S.-Israel bilateral relationship often driven by Republican
leadership, the bill under consideration today puts politics
first and does not do the hard work of addressing the extremely
complicated nature of the problem at hand. The U.S.-Israel
relationship is not a game and it must not be about politics.
We need a supplemental to get 400 votes in the House, not one
that plays games with the IRS or goes against the Senate's hard
fought bipartisan compromise.
I'm begging my colleagues across the aisle to take this
issue seriously and to work with Democrats, to work with me,
and the longstanding pros and committed on this bill. So they
can get rid of UNRWA once and for all in a way that is
effective, permanent, centers the role of Congress, and does
not produce severe unintended consequences that nobody wants.
Recognizing that the chair is likely to rule that this bill is
non-germane, I'm willing to withdraw the amendment.
All I ask is that we continue to try to work together to
replace UNRWA with agencies that can provide humanitarian
services while also contributing to the prospects to a better
future, to better lives for both Israelis and Palestinians. If
we do this right, if we do this in a thoughtful way, we have a
far greater chance of success. And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Moran. Without objection, the amendment in a nature of
a substitute offered by Mr. Schneider is withdrawn. Does any
member which to offer an amendment? Mr. Smith?
Mr. Smith. I have an amendment at the desk.
Mr. Moran. The clerk shall distribute the amendment. The
clerk shall report the amendment.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Smith follows:]

AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 7122
OFFERED BY MR. SMITH

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 7122 OFFERED BY MR.
SMITH

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Clerk. Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
substitute to H.R. 7122 offered by Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Add
at the end of the following----
Mr. Moran. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman is recognized for 5
minutes on his amendment.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much, Mr. Chairman. Chairman,
this amendment makes very clear that nothing in the underlying
bill may be construed to preclude the provision of humanitarian
assistance to any agency or entity other than UNRWA. And the
Secretary of State would certify.
They would be required to certify that such an entity
receiving those funds does not promote, espouse, or affiliate
with entities or individuals that promote violence, terrorism,
or anti-Semitism. And it goes on from there. I would remind my
colleagues again over these many, many decades of trying to end
U.S. taxpayer funding for UNRWA and to give it to other
agencies that are not trying to create young people who quickly
become terrorists.
And I did read a moment ago from Marcus Sheff from IMPACT-
se. And he makes the point again that for Hamas the manual for
the hatred that is cited which they crave has been provided for
many years by UNRWA schools. There's no doubt about that.
And I mentioned earlier how in a bipartisan way I tried
repeatedly with amendments, legislation that even passed the
House going back 20 years to say let's find the alternative.
And what happens every time is that there's some mitigating
circumstance, there's some reason why, not now. And then not
now becomes not ever.
Delay becomes denial. And we will have denial in perpetuity
in my opinion if we do not. I read just recently again a GAO
report that was on UNRWA. And they made the point because our
appropriators were trying over the years to make sure that it
was good solid language in the appropriations.
Well, they found GAO that State requires UNRWA--this is
2003--to certify that accepting each contribution from the
U.S., UNRWA is taking all possible measures to assure that the
U.S. funds do not benefit terrorists or refugees receiving
military training from guerilla groups. Does anybody believe
that hasn't happened since then and then and before? So again,
we need to find an alternative.
There are alternatives out there. If we put a very long
time period on that, that will quickly morph into waivers in
perpetuity. And that's the last thing we need.
So let's stand up now for certain agencies to step up and
say, we'll take it from here. And there are others out there,
WFP, UNICEF, High Commissioner for Refugees. There are others
out there.
But UNRWA has proven itself to be not just a malign actor
but to cause unbelievable child abuse to these Palestinian
children who are taught to hate. And they believe it. Why do we
have young people, 13 to 14 year olds, toting AK-47s and be
willing, really trying, to think someday, I'll be a martyr for
Hamas and for a radical Islamic view.
That's absurd. Teach them to want to co-exist, to respect
other people, including Jewish men, women, and children.
They're taught to kill them and to hate them.
That's why there's almost no end to the number of
volunteers and people that go into Hamas because they've been
taught from the earliest stages to do so. So this says let's
get the humanitarian aid there. I hope the Administration would
work with us if we were to get this enacted into law, although
the President probably would veto. And I say that sadly.
And again, a year from now, 2 years from now, we'll say,
gee, we had an opportunity to shift those funds away and we did
not do it. We need to do it. This amendment makes clear we want
humanitarian aid to flow to those people in Gaza who are
suffering.
Mr. Moran. Does the gentleman yield back?
Mr. Smith. I yield back.
Mr. Moran. The gentleman yields back. Do any other members
seek recognition on this amendment?
There being no further discussion, the question now occurs
on the amendment offered by Representative Smith, Number 96.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it and the
amendment is agreed to.
The committee will recess because of floor votes and will
reconvene at approximately 4:30 p.m.
[Whereupon, at 1:46 p.m., the committee recessed, to
reconvene at 4:37 p.m., the same day.]
Mr. Smith [presiding]. The committee will come to order.
The committee will resume consideration of H.R. 7122. Are there
any further amendments? Mr. Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. I have an amendment at the desk.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Meeks follows:]

AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 7122
OFFERED BY MR. MEEKS

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. The clerk will distribute the amendment. The
clerk shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
substitute to H.R. 7122 offered by Mr. Meeks of New York. Add
at the end the following new section: Section certification,
certification required. The prohibition under Section 2 shall
not apply until the date on which the Secretary of State
certifies in writing----
Mr. Smith. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman from New York is
recognized for 5 minutes on his amendment.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. An immediate collapse
of UNRWA, which this underlying bill is attempting to achieve,
would have a devastating impact on the people of Gaza and the
State of Israel. That is exactly why Prime Minister Netanyahu's
government is not calling for UNRWA's immediate collapse. The
collapse of UNRWA would also devaState the United States'
ability to provide humanitarian assistance in Gaza.
But beyond that, an abrupt end to UNRWA would result in
serious regional stability issues. Let's briefly look beyond
Gaza to the West Bank where tensions are already
extraordinarily high. If UNRWA collapses, 266,000 West Bank
Palestinians lose access to primary health care, 100,000 lose
emergency food and cash assistance, and nearly 46,000 girls and
boys would no longer go to school. Such a situation does
nothing to help Israel or, for that matter, the United States.
In Jordan, where 2.4 million registered Palestinian
refugees reside, the loss of UNRWA would result in the loss of
primary health care to almost 900,000 patients. Food support
would be lost to nearly 60,000; and 20,219 Palestinian refugees
from Syria would lose their support. 108,000 girls and boys
would be out of school. This potential chaos in Jordan does not
help Israel or the United States.
In Lebanon, where we would hope to avoid a full-blown
Israel-Hezbollah war, the loss of UNRWA would create a
humanitarian, catastrophic, and civil unrest. 200,000 primarily
health care patients would lose access to services, 50,000 will
lose access to hospitals. 170,000 children, elderly, and
disabled persons would lose their sole source of income, and
38,000 schoolchildren would lose access to schools. None of
this is in the interest of Israel or the United States.
In Syria, the termination of funding will affect some
438,000 refugees, 90 percent of whom live below the poverty
line. Implications will include immigration from Syria to
Europe. There will be a halt to emergency food assistance
programs to supplement food and medicine needs and rent. Most
of the refugees would be evicted from their rental homes; and
schools will close, leaving 50,500 children with no alternative
education.
UNRWA should be retired and replaced, but at the right time
and in coordination with all of the regional partners. My
amendment simply does that. It retires UNRWA once the Secretary
of State certifies that a replacement is found. We should not
cause an immediate defunding. This approach is the responsible,
serious way to go about addressing this problem.
I encourage everyone to support this amendment because it
makes sense and it saves lives. It is for the benefit, also, of
the people in the State of Israel and the United States and for
the basic humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people. This, I
think, is consistent with our values and who we are and how we
can move forward so that we can change the paradigm of what is
happening in the Middle East and then, 1 day, have peace in a
two-State solution that will make it better for Israel, for the
States, for the countries, the Gulf States, and the United
States of America.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. The gentleman yields back his time,
and I rise in opposition to the amendment and I yield myself 5
minutes. I would say to my colleagues that this amendment would
nullify our bill, the one that Mr. Mast and I, Chairman Mast
and I have written. It would prevent further, our bill would
prevent further funding to UNRWA, but the amendment says that
the prohibition on funding would not apply until the Secretary
decides it should. The amendment literally provides that the
prohibition shall ``not apply until the date on which the
Secretary of State certifies in writing that there is a viable
replacement for UNRWA in respect of seven different factors.''
Yet, it provides no guidance on what constitutes viable
replacement, nor does it obligate the Secretary to certify. It
is left entirely up to the discretion of the Secretary to do
so. So a year from now, 6 months from now, 2 weeks from now he
could decide to do that, but there is nothing in the amendment
that says he has to.
Since the Biden Administration resumed UNRWA funding in
2021, after it was cutoff by the Trump Administration, after
its terrorist and antisemitic affiliations were notorious, it
only paused funding following the most shocking revelations
next week. We can assume that the Administration intends to
resume funding of UNRWA at some time. We do not know when, but
it could be any time now.
The amendment is written so as to permit the Administration
to resume unrestricted funding of UNRWA and it provides no
restraints. I would point out to my colleagues that the U.S.
Department of State said in its current pause in UNRWA funding
we're looking at what options exist for supporting civilians in
Gaza through partners like the World Food Program, UNICEF, and
other NGO's. We believe we can continue to do important work
through other NGO's and other partners.
And I remind colleagues that the amendment that I added to
the amendment in the nature of a substitute makes very clear
that it is UNRWA that we are defunding, not humanitarian
assistance. And those other partners, those other NGO's or
government agencies, or U.N. agencies at that, like the World
Food Program, are there; and we need to do everything we can to
get that money which is needed to them.
When my good friend, Mr. Meeks, talks about education, that
is one of the worst parts of what UNRWA does each and every day
to young people. They train them to be antisemitic. I mean, I
have seen the textbooks. I have had briefings on the textbooks.
As I mentioned earlier in this debate in 2003, I offered an
amendment on this, that is 20 years ago, that brought out all
of these issues about the textbooks and the teaching of hatred,
total intolerance toward Jewish people, and, I might add, a
close second, Americans, as well. And then we are supposed to
fund those teachers, those schools. We need to find a
replacement, we need to find it fast. And delay, as I mentioned
earlier today in the debate, absolutely is denial.
So, again, I ask members, with all due respect to my good
friend and colleague, to vote no to Mr. Meeks' amendment. We
have got to be serious. We have, for decades, not done what we
should do, and that goes through different Administrations.
Trump did cut it off, but, during the Bush Administration and
other Administrations where this was a serious, serious
problem, we would get talking points from UNRWA, we would get
talking points from those who felt they were doing a great job.
I would read those talking points and I would dissect them, and
I would raise issues. We have had three hearings, a joint
hearing with Chairman Mast just last week.
And, you know, you look at UNRWA's Terrorgram. This was a
book put out by U.N. Watch, Hillel Neuer. It is filled to
overflowing with hatred, hatred, let me say again, hatred for
Jews. Let me also point out that the Hamas charter of 1988
could not be clearer about slaughtering Jewish men, women, and
children and for destroying the Nation of Israel. It is right
there in their charter. It could not be clearer. And Hamas,
this is, as I said earlier during the debate, this is their way
of getting recruits that never end, in perpetuity, because the
young people are being told to hate Jewish men, women, and
children.
So, again, I ask members to vote no, and I yield back the
balance of my time. Would any other members like to speak? Mr.
Mast and then--yes.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. President Reagan once
said, well, the problem with our well-meaning liberal friends
is not that they are ignorant, it is just that they know so
much that isn't so. And I think this is something that really
plays right into that idea.
And I am going to give the 101 that I thought we went
through earlier about the math of supporting UNRWA,
Palestinians, Hamas, in general. You know, you look at this,
and you say, OK, I will ask the question again: is Israel our
ally? I'll make the statement that, yes, they are. Anybody care
to disagree? No. Everybody agrees Israel is our ally. Are
Palestinians our ally? I would say no. Anybody care to
disagree? Nobody in here, not the ranking member, not any of my
democrat colleagues right now, say that Gazans and Palestinians
are our allies.
So our ally is at war with our non-ally. UNRWA's sole
existence is to support our non-ally. UNRWA has 30,000 people,
roughly, that are non-ally working for them that we pay their
salaries. That makes no sense to pay the salary of our non-
allies that are at work with our allies. None of this makes
sense, not to do it yesterday, not to do it today, not to do it
tomorrow, and not to wait for 365 days or some time less
because, truthfully, Secretary of State Blinken will be gone
before then, but not to wait until even Secretary of State
Blinken continues out his term. It makes no sense to continue
funding an entity that supports the destruction of our ally.
That is an entity that supports our non-ally. The math just
does not simply add up.
And so, you know, I will just State one more time for the
record that nobody in here disagreed that Israel is our ally,
and nobody in here disagreed that Palestinians are not our
ally. I still do not see anybody disagree on that. So there
should be common ground on this. It is amazing to me that it is
not and that----
Mr. Schneider. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Mast. I did not hear who asked, but I usually do.
Mr. Schneider. Down here.
Mr. Mast. Absolutely, I will yield. I always enjoy a good--
--
Mr. Schneider. So not to debate you, but I will agree with
you Israel is our ally. In fact, Israel is our most important
ally in the Middle East, perhaps one of our most important or
most important allies in the world. The United States has no
better friend than Israel, and Israel has no better friend than
the United States.
That is why I am so frustrated, so angry that my colleagues
on the other side are using Israel as a stunt, as a tool, to
advance their own partisan politics, rather than standing up
and making sure we give Israel the support it needs and make
sure we protect not just Israel but work to help our Ukrainian
allies.
The Palestinians are neither an ally or an enemy.
Palestinians are a population. They are a population that have
been failed by their leadership for more than a hundred years.
As Abba----
Mr. Mast. I am going to give you about 30 more seconds to
make a point here before----
Mr. Schneider. Palestinians have been failed by the
leadership. Abba even said they have never missed an
opportunity to miss an opportunity. But it is important that
the people are not punished for their leadership by starvation
or by deprivation of that education. In fact, it is in the
United States' interests that we make sure that the
humanitarian needs for the Palestinians are addressed, so we
can get to a place where the Palestinians--I am not sure who
said that--so we can get to a place where the Palestinians will
recognize Israel, Israel can have the security it deserves----
Mr. Mast. I am going to regain my time.
Mr. Schneider. OK. You can have it back.
Mr. Mast. And I am always happy to engage in this because I
think it is important that we hear what anybody says on this.
But what was said by the ranking member is that, if we cut of
funding, well, we are cutting off funding for their health
care, we are cutting off funding for the sole source of income
for this many tens of thousands individuals. If we do that, we
are putting in jeopardy a two-State solution, which I think we
should absolutely have in jeopardy. It makes no sense to make a
State out of an entity that we would immediately have to
designate a foreign terrorist organization. That makes no
sense.
But, you know, I would beg the question, what
responsibility is it of the American people to pay for the
health care or the sole source of income for any Palestinian?
And it is not the responsibility, in my opinion, of any of us,
and they are absolutely.
I would disagree with you, they are absolutely either a
friend or an ally. You can very much say it is binary that an
entity or a group is one or another. Houthis are not
necessarily a nation, but we can say whether they are a friend
or an ally or whether they are an enemy; and they are
absolutely an enemy. Palestinians are enemies of Israel and
enemies of the United States of America. Nobody in here argued
if I asked if they were an ally. Nobody said that Palestinians
are an ally. Let's keep that for the record. Anybody who wants
to change that, I would encourage you to speak up.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Mast, Chairman Mast.
Anyone else like to be heard? Yes, Mr. Schneider.
Mr. Schneider. So I will continue what I was trying to say.
You asked why should the United States have an interest in the
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian population. United
States has an interest in peace. United States has an interest
in ensuring that Israel's security is guaranteed. Israel is a
Jewish democratic nation. It is protected. And to leave the
Palestinians in despair, to deprive them of humanitarian relief
and assistance, only feeds Hamas. You asked who is an enemy--he
is leaving. Let the record show he is not staying to hear.
But who is an enemy? Hamas is an enemy, an enemy of Israel,
an enemy of the United States, an enemy of peace-loving people,
Hezbollah is an enemy, Palestinian Islamic Jihad is an enemy,
all supported by Iran. What we should be doing in this body is
uniting, working across aisle, Democrats and Republicans, to
make sure that our interests are protected not just in the
Middle East and around the world. Protecting democracy,
protecting the sovereignty of nations like Ukraine, protecting
the security of allies like Israel. And we cannot turn a blind
eye to the humanity of Palestinians, and we cannot turn a blind
eye to the fact that Israel is fighting a war for its existence
against Hamas. We can do both. I yield back.
Mr. Mast. Will you yield since I----
Mr. Schneider. Happy to yield.
Mr. Mast. Thank you. You made the right point, in my
opinion, toward the end that Israel is in a fight for their
existence, and I would just go back to the point, for an ally
that is in a fight for its existence, why would we give funding
to the entity that is out there supporting who they are in a
fight for their existence against? Thank you for yielding me
time.
Mr. Schneider. I will reclaim the time. And I agree with
you. I want to replace UNRWA. UNRWA has been a problem for 75
years. We have to do it in a way that is smart, that does not
sacrifice the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people, and
does not put Israel in a place where they are responsible for a
civilization without the vehicles to deliver humanitarian aid
that it is desperately needed.
I yield back.
Mr. Smith. The chair recognizes Mr. Mills for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, a lot has
been said, and I first just want to start by saying that I have
a tremendous amount of respect for my colleague from New York,
Ranking Member Meeks. He has been tremendous in his ability to
work across the aisle in bipartisan agreements.
But I would say that I stand in strong opposition to the
Amendment 63. Many of the members who sit in this body, unlike
myself, have been here multiple terms. And throughout those
terms, we continue to talk about things like, well, we need to
work on the replacement of the AUMF, we need to work on the
replacement of UNRWA. And as the sitting chairman, Mr. Smith,
has said multiple times, who has proposed this for 20 years,
this is nothing more than kicking the can. And, meanwhile,
while we are kicking that can, as we did last year, we
contributed another $363 million to fund UNRWA so that, as was
recorded in the last hearing, 10 to 15 percent of the 13,000
employees were in support of Hamas; 12 members of UNRWA
actually took part in the horrific attacks on October 7th;
3,000 UNRWA teachers celebrated the attacks on Israel. So when
we talk about withdrawing UNRWA feeds Hamas, that is not
factual because right now, by continuing the funding of UNRWA,
we actually are feeding Hamas.
You know, this idea that we would deprive them of
education. Well, as the sitting chairman has talked about, as
well as for the members of our recent committee, the
radicalized education system is actually working to create
hate. And if any of us remember former Congressman Wilson, one
of the things that he used to talk about consistently after the
defeat of Russia was that we must ensure that education is put
in place so that we can make a guarantee that we will not have
the rise of further radical extremists.
I am sorry, but there are things, like UNHCR, UNHRC, who
can fill that gap, if need be, World Food Program, implementing
partners out of the United States Agency of International
Development. So this continuation, this desire to kick the can,
for those who have been in office here for two and three and
five and seven terms, it is unacceptable and just leads to show
that you are here to play politics and be a politician, not to
be a Statesman and representative to actually get things done.
And I happily welcome any member in this body to tell me
about standing with our allies because I did not see a single
face in this room with me on October 11th, as I was pulling
Americans out of Israel myself, or on August 26th of 2021 when
I was conducting the first overland rescue of Americans out of
Afghanistan. So I do not think my patriotism is going to be in
question here, but I do think your ability as officials to
actually get things done is in question.
And so I stand in opposition of this because it is time for
us to remove ourselves from UNRWA, to take actual actions to
defend the people of Israel. And I do not think that kicking
the can on this is actually going to serve the purpose which is
what we are wanting, which is for Israel to exist. For all of
us who swore an oath to our Constitution, let us not forget
that it is based on our Christian-Judeo beliefs, and I do not
think that our constitutional obligation is to worry about
supporting funding to an organization that continues to go
against the very people who is trying to destroy the people of
Israel.
With that, I yield.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much. I yield to Mr. Self, 5
minutes.
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of
questions. Why would it surprise us that 12 UNRWA employees
participated in October 7th? Why would it surprise us that
their locations have been used for storage spots when the vast
bulk, probably more than 90 percent, of the 30,000 UNRWA
employees that have already been referenced in this hearing are
Palestinian? Why would that surprise us? It should not. And
this is the ultimate case of the fox guarding the henhouse, and
I stand in strong support of this bill and against this
amendment.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman yields back. Thank you. Is there
any further discussion on the Meeks amendment? There being no
further discussion, the question now occurs on the amendment
offered by Ranking Member Meeks, No. 63. All those in favor,
signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the noes have it, and the
amendment is not agreed to.
Mr. Meeks. Roll call vote.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman has asked for a roll call vote.
Pursuant to the chair's previous announcement, this vote will
be postponed.
Are there any further amendments? The chair recognizes
Ms. Manning. I would like to thank my good friend and
colleague, Representative Chris Smith, for his leadership on
these issues, including the important hearings he has held in
our subcommittee on UNRWA. For years, many of us have been
concerned that UNRWA workers were fostering hatred against
Israel and against Jews with the textbooks they use in UNRWA
schools and lessons being taught by UNRWA teachers. We have
raised those concerns with UNRWA and more broadly with the U.N.
and the Secretary General to no avail.
Sadly, we recently learned that at least 12 of UNRWA's own
employees participated in or helped plan the barbaric October
7th terrorist attack against Israel, in which more than 1200
innocent civilians were brutalized, raped, murdered, and
hundreds, including Americans, were taken hostage. More than
100, including Americans, are still being held hostage. There
have even been reports that UNRWA employees harbored hostages
in their own homes. This is simply unacceptable. U.S. taxpayer
money should never be used to support terrorists who fight for
the destruction of our democratic ally, Israel.
We are, however, sensitive to the plight of innocent
Palestinians used by Hamas as human shields, and we know how
critical it is to get humanitarian support to innocent
Palestinians who are caught in Hamas' brutal war. And as we
heard in this committee room last week, there is currently no
aid group on the ground in Gaza with the broad ability of UNRWA
to get humanitarian assistance where it is needed. There are
some aid groups, but they do not have the ability to address
the crisis at hand.
It is in Israel's interests to have humanitarian aid
provided to innocent Palestinians. Israel has said as much.
Once this conflict is over and the rebuilding of Gaza begins,
we can evaluate whether UNRWA's very mandate is problematic, as
I believe it is, and whether different aid agencies should be
supported and replace UNRWA, which I believe is the right long-
term move.
But, in the meantime, we need UNRWA to provide much-needed
humanitarian aid to innocent Palestinians. However, we must
ensure that UNRWA does not continue to employ or use people who
are members of Hamas or who provide material support to Hamas.
That is why my amendment would require the Secretary of State
to first certify to Congress that no current UNRWA employees
participated in the brutal October 7th Hamas attacks on Israel
and that no UNRWA employees are knowingly providing material
support to Hamas. If the Secretary is unable to make that
determination, then the remaining provisions of the bill would
still apply.
This common sense amendment would increase our leverage and
our oversight of UNRWA, helping to make sure that our
international assistance can never be used to promote
terrorism. I believe this amendment would strengthen
accountability and oversight of UNRWA and make crystal clear
that we will not tolerate taxpayer dollars going to Hamas.
Thank you. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Smith. I would like to continue recognizing Ms. Manning
to offer her amendment at this point, if you would.
Ms. Manning. Chairman Smith, it has been a long day. I have
an amendment at the desk.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Manning follows:]

AMENDMENT TO THE AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 7122
OFFERED BY MS. MANNING

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smith. Without objection, the clerk will distribute the
amendment and shall report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
substitute to H.R. 7122 offered by Ms. Manning of North
Carolina. Add at the end the following new section: The
Secretary of State, by way of the prohibition under Section 2,
if the Secretary certifies to the Committee on Foreign Affairs
and the Committee on----
Mr. Smith. Without objection, the amendment will be
considered as read. The gentlelady----
Ms. Manning. Chairman Smith, I hope that the members who
were listening will apply all of the comments I made before my
amendment was read to my amendment, and I do not want to take
the committee's time in repeating my presentation.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back.
Any other members seek recognition?
Mr. Smith. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to my good
friend, we co-chair the Combating Antisemitism Caucus, I do
rise in opposition to this amendment. I just want to make very
clear to my colleagues that this will, again, gut the
underlying bill. It permits the Secretary of State to waive the
prohibition on funding for UNRWA so long as the Secretary
certifies that no one employed by UNRWA as of the date of
enactment of the bill participated in the October 7th attack or
knowingly provided financial or material support.
The problem is that what UNRWA has done systematically and
aggressively over the course of many, many decades is to train
up an entire generation of Palestinian youth. And I would argue
it is more than training, it is child abuse, causing them to
hate Jews, to be filled with virulence and false images of
Jewish people. I remember asking a group of Palestinian youth
on one trip right after 9/11, and they were very, very
intelligent, the best of the class. And they started telling me
how no Jews died in 9/11, and I begged to differ with them and
I said I know at least five widows in my district who are
Jewish and their husbands were Jewish. Then they said the Jews
caused 9/11.
There is so much misinformation and lies being proffered by
UNRWA, and it has been. And if you just look at the textbooks,
and I remind my colleagues that our three hearings that we have
had, they have put a real focus on what is taught, and what is
taught is to hate and hope that Jews are killed.
So we need to find an alternative. Our amendment, the
amendment that would be pending that I offered would say that
we need to find an alternative that is not, I say again, not
antisemitic, and UNRWA is not it.
So we need to pivot now. And believe me, there are
organizations, we have mustered and brought together forces in
the past to ensure that humanitarian crises are met and they
are met effectively. UNRWA has proven itself, has disqualified
itself over and over again in this regard, especially as it
relates to what they have done to generation after generation
of Palestinian youth.
So I really, with all due respect, rise up against it and
ask my colleagues to vote no.
Chairman McCaul. Any other members seek recognition? Mr.
Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Yes. I agree with my colleague, Representative
Manning, that no U.S. funding should support any entity that
supports terrorism or employs individuals who support terrorist
organizations, including in UNRWA. That is why I support this
amendment.
I would also say that, basically, I think, in a bipartisan
way, we had united in that we want to help and support Israel.
We all have seem to have said that the life span of UNRWA, you
know, moving forward, has to be reviewed and changed. But we
are in a particular moment of crises right now, and the deal is
whether or not right now, today, if we defund UNRWA, what would
happen to millions of people. The fact of the matter is no one
would be or should be more concerned about UNRWA than the
Israeli government itself, and we should listen to what the
Israeli government has said on this matter. The Israeli
government, the Israeli government. And I quote again, this
comes from a senior Israeli official, ``If UNRWA ceases
operating on the ground,'' he is talking about right now,
``this could cause a humanitarian catastrophe that would force
Israel to halt its fighting against Hamas. This would not be in
Israel's interest, and it would not be in the interest of
Israel's allies either.''
So at this moment of time in which we are in, what this
bill does undercuts what Israel thinks is in its best interest
as we move forward. And I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Does any other
member seek recognition? Mr. Mast.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have heard this point
made numerous times today, Mr. Ranking Member. Do you have a
name? I have never heard you reference a name to this.
Mr. Meeks. I can get you a name. I do not have the name.
Mr. Mast. Because I have heard it said in debate earlier
and debate now. I would think that that would be pretty
relevant.
Mr. Meeks. So I'm told that there was no name, but the
Israeli government gave the quote to the Times of Israel
directly.
Mr. Mast. A janitor or somebody important?
Mr. Meeks. The Israeli government, a high official in the
Israeli government, a senior Israeli----
Mr. Mast. How do we know that? Like I said, it has been----
Mr. Meeks. The Israeli government.
Mr. Mast. I would just say it has been referenced
irresponsibly I do not know how many times today to say, oh,
this person in the government, this person in the government
said this, and we, as the U.S. House of Representatives, the
American government, we should do what this unknown person in
the Israeli government tells us to. Pretty much every American
that I can think of back in my community would pretty much have
my head for saying that that should be the way that we operate.
But I appreciate you at least trying to get me an answer on
that, and the answer is we do not know who in the world the
person is at this moment.
I did have a question about the amendment, ma'am, if you
would oblige me. Would that prohibition on financial or
material support to Hamas, would that include anybody that
writes the UNRWA school curriculum, distributes the UNRWA
school curriculum, teaches the UNRWA school curriculum that all
teaches Jew hate?
Ms. Manning. I would consider that material support to
Hamas.
Mr. Mast. Thank you for answering that, and I think I have
had all of my questions answered. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Any other members
seek recognition? Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Having spared the committee my
pontifications up until this point, I will take 1 minute to
address the Houthi bill, and then I will come back to this one.
There are those--we should designate the Houthi in the highest
terms as a terrorist State. I know there are some in the aid
community who say, well, that will make it a little bit more
difficult for us to provide food to the Yemenis who live under
Houthi control.
What those aid agencies haven't focused on is the number of
people dying because of what the Houthi are doing. First, huge
grain exports come from the Black Sea. They come from Russia,
they come from Ukraine. The only way, the fastest way, the best
way for them to get to hungry people in Ethiopia and Sudan and
in India is through the Suez Canal. The Houthi have stopped
that. Now, that means that people who can barely afford food in
some of the poorest parts of the world are now barely affording
two meals instead of three.
Second, what the Houthi have done is lower the standard of
living in Europe to some degree by preventing exports from
coming to Asia to Europe. That will inevitably affect the
generosity of Europeans and their willingness to keep funding
the very aid agencies that are telling us do not mess with the
Houthi.
Now to this bill. I have had extensive conversations, as
have some others of this committee, with Israeli officials
focused on UNRWA and aid to the Palestinians. I have no doubts
how evil some elements of UNRWA are. I want to thank this
committee and the floor finally for passing a bill I have been
working on for half a dozen years to at least require a report
on UNRWA's schools. And as has been pointed out, you might be
able to say, well, they are at half a dozen, a dozen terrorists
identified who are UNRWA employees, do not blame the top
management. The top management has known for decades what is
being taught in those schools, and what is being taught is
terrorism.
So I have no love for UNRWA. I would have supported this
bill if it had been a bit more practical. But my discussions
with Israeli officials have illuminated me a bit. First, Israel
trusts the other agencies of the United Nations, UNICEF, World
Food Program, et cetera, which surprised, frankly, because I am
aware of the U.N. General Assembly and, as a Zionist, I am not
a fan. Second, Israel knows that the Palestinians have to be
fed for the coming months. They are not calling for us to pull
the plug immediately on UNRWA. So I think this bill would be a
much better bill if it gave the State Department until the end
of the year to pull the plug on UNRWA. I suggested that to the
author. We were not able to reach an agreement. But if this
bill became effective on December 31, I would be a yes vote.
Instead, I have to reluctantly oppose this, and I feel a little
odd because I am not a fan of UNRWA and worked for years on a
bill that is regarded, well, that shines a light on how they
educate for terrorism.
So I support the amendment, although I do not know how you
would certify that every one of thousands of employees was not
associated with Hamas. I support the objective of the bill,
which is to see that aid to Palestinians in the future goes
through organizations that are benign, rather than through
UNRWA. But I cannot support a bill that goes into effect
immediately or even with a couple of months' delay because
UNRWA is there on the ground, Palestinians are hungry, and it
is not in Israel's interests to see that food does not get
delivered.
So I hope that we, in the future, can deal with a practical
bill that cuts off UNRWA after a reasonable period of time to
start working with and staffing up these other agencies,
including U.N. agencies. And I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields. Let me just announce
for the committee we have votes called at 5:45. I certainly do
not want to do anything to stop this debate that we are having;
but, in the interest of members who would like to get the votes
done before that vote on the floor; otherwise, we will be
coming back after the votes on the floor to finish. But I just
say that as a point of reference. I do not want to have any
chilling effect.
Mr. Wilson. Well, Mr. Chairman, I was going to say----
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Wilson is recognized.
Mr. Wilson. I was going to say something nice about Kathy
Manning, but I will not. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. Do any other members seek recognition?
There being no further discussion, the question now occurs on
the amendment offered by Representative Manning, No. 48. All in
favor, signify by saying aye.
All opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the noes have it, and the
amendment is not agreed to. A very quick roll call vote has
been requested. Pursuant to the chair's previous announcement,
this vote will be postponed.
There being no further amendments, further proceedings on
this bill are postponed.
Pursuant to notice, I now call up H.R. 7152, the Divided
Families National Registry Act. The bill was circulated in
advance.
[The Bill H.R. 7152 follows:]

H.R. 7152

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The clerk shall designate the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 7152 to direct the Secretary of State to
establish a national registry of Korean American divided
families and for other purposes----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, first reading is
dispensed with. The bill is considered read and open to
amendment at any point. Is there any discussion on the bill?
Ms. Young Kim is recognized.
Ms. Young Kim. Thank you, Chairman McCaul, for recognizing
me and holding today's markup. I am a proud co-sponsor of H.R.
7152, Divided Families National Registry Act. This bill directs
the Special Envoy on North Korea Human Rights to identify
Korean American families who wish to be reunited with family
and their family members in North Korea and to establish a
registry of the names to help facilitate future reunions.
As a Korean American with family members who fled North
Korea, this is an issue that is deeply personal to me, and I
have great empathy for these families. And making these
reunifications happen has been a top priority of mine.
Last congress, I joined Representative Grace Meng to
introduce the Divided Families Reunification Act, which
requires the Secretary of State to consult with South Korean
officials on family reunion opportunities for the Korean
American families and their relatives in North Korea. And I
also introduced House Resolution 126, which is a bipartisan
resolution calling on the U.S. and North Korea to treat family
reunifications as a humanitarian issue and to reunite Korean
American divided families with immediate relatives.
Time is running out to make family reunification a reality,
so we must treat this issue with urgency. While I am pleased
that we are marking up this bill, there is still much more that
needs to be done. North Korea's behavior is getting only more
erratic, and the crimes against humanity he commits against his
own people will only worsen if we do not take him seriously.
The North Korean Human Rights Act, which authorizes
activities promoting the free flow of outside information into
North Korea and protecting North Korean defectors, expired last
year. So I join Senator Marco Rubio to introduce the North
Korean Human Rights Reauthorization Act, which reauthorizes and
makes improvements to U.S.-North Korean human rights policy by
stepping up efforts to get information not controlled by Kim
Jong Un inside of North Korea. I hope that the committee will
work with me on this legislation so that we can show Kim Jong
Un that we take his human rights abuses seriously and show the
innocent victims of his crimes that the United States supports
them.
I urge my colleagues to support H.R. 7152, and I yield the
balance of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentlelady yields. Any further
discussion on the bill? There being no further discussion, the
committee will move into consideration of amendments. Does any
member wish to offer an amendment? Mr. Meeks is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment in the nature
of a substitute at the desk.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Meeks follows:]

AMENDMENT IN THE NATURE OF A SUBSTITUTE TO H.R. 7152 OFFERD BY MR.
MEEKS

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. The clerk shall distribute the Meeks
amendment in the nature of a substitute. The clerk shall report
the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R.
7152 offered by Mr. Meeks of New York. Strike all after the
enacting clause and insert the following: Section 1 short
title. This act may be cited as the Divided Families National
Registry Act. Section 2----
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with. The gentleman from New York is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support this
legislation, and I want to especially thank Representative
Wexton, the author, for her work in reconnecting Korean
families that have long been separated from one another for
decades. The separation of Korean family members on either side
of the border remains one of the most painful legacies of the
Korean War. This is true not just for South Koreans but also
for Korean Americans and the United States who have been
separated from their family in North Korea. Over 100,000 Korean
Americans have been separated from their relatives, and many of
us have heard emotional stories from constituents about the
pain this causes them and how they yearn to see, to talk with,
and to hug their relatives once again.
Unfortunately, 70 years after the war, too many families
still remain divided. As that first generation of Korean
Americans reaches the autumn of their lives, it is important
that they be given an opportunity to reconnect with their loved
ones. It is time for the U.S. Government to actively work to
help Korean Americans reach and reunite with their relatives.
It is time to help Korean Americans finally gain some closure
by helping them track down information about relatives that may
have passed on.
H.R. 7152 does this by collating information about Korean
Americans that are interested in being reunited with their
families and working with them to help facilitate many
reunions, as well as information exchange, with and about their
family members in North Korea. This bill also calls on the
State Department to prioritize the issues of family reunions
and any dialog with the DPRK.
Though I would have preferred to see the authorization
numbers stay in the bill, I understand the majority asked for
that language to be removed to comply with their conference,
and wanting to move in a bipartisan spirit, we have come to
this agreement. And we will fight to make sure funds are
appropriated to accomplish the modest program set forth in this
legislation.
I hope you will join me in supporting this measure and
ensuring that our Korean American constituents have the ability
to stay connected to those taken from them as a result of war.
And I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield?
Mr. Meeks. I yield.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend. And I just want to thank
him for this A&S, and I think it is not only a tribute to the
Korean people but a tribute to our colleague, Jennifer Wexton.
This is an important legacy issue for her. It is something she
has worked on. We have a very large Korean American community
throughout Northern Virginia. Of course, it is not as big as
California, but it is maybe the second biggest in the country.
And so many first-generation Koreans affected by the issues,
Mr. Meeks, you just described, in terms of very painful
separation. People haven't seen relatives since the division of
Korea and are unlikely ever to see each other again, and it is
one of the cruel aftereffects of the division and of the
Korean-American war, and I am so glad we are addressing it
legislatively here today. And, again, I think it is also a
tribute to our colleague, Jennifer Wexton, and I am proud to
join you and thank you for introducing it. And I thank the
chair for putting it in the markup.
Mr. Meeks. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McCaul. The gentleman yields back. Any other
members seek recognition? There being no further recognition,
do any members wish to offer an amendment to the Meeks
amendment in the nature of a substitute? There being no further
amendments, the question now occurs on the amendment in the
nature of a substitute offered by Representative Meeks. All
those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it and the
amendment is agreed to. There being no further amendments, I
move that the committee report H.R. 7152, as amended, to the
House favorable recommendation. All those in favor, signify by
saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
motion is agreed to. Roll call vote has been requested.
Pursuant to the chair's previous announcement, this vote will
be postponed.
The committee will recess briefly to set up the electronic
voting system, and we plan to vote in approximately 10 minutes.
[Recess.]
Chairman McCaul. The committee postponed further
proceedings on the roll call vote on Amendment No. 104 offered
by Representative Davidson to H.R. 6609 on which the noes had
prevailed by voice vote. The question now occurs on agreeing to
the amendment. Members will vote using the electronic voting
system. The clerk will open the vote.
OK. Have all members voted? Come on, Mr. Issa. We are
trying to get this done before the floor votes, man.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to record or
change his or her vote. The clerk will close the vote and
report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 21, the noes are 25.
Chairman McCaul. That's it. The noes have it. The amendment
is not agreed to. There being no further amendments, I move
that the committee report H.R. 6609, the Tiger Act, as amended,
to the House with a favorable recommendation. All those in
favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
motion is agreed to. A recorded vote has been requested.
Members will vote using the electronic voting system. The clerk
will open the vote.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to change
their vote? The clerk will close the vote and report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 26, the noes are 20.
Chairman McCaul. The ayes have it. The amendment is agreed
to.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid on the
table. Measures were favorably reported, as amended, as a
single amendment in the nature of a substitute, and the staff
is authorized to make any technical and conforming changes.
The committee postponed further proceedings on reporting
H.R. 7089, the Global Anti-Human Trafficking Enhancement Act,
as amended, favorably to the House on which the ayes prevailed
by voice vote. The question now occurs on reporting the measure
to the House with a favorable recommendation. Members will use
the electronic voting system. The clerk will open the vote.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to change
their vote? The clerk will close the vote and report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 46, the noes are
zero.
Chairman McCaul. The ayes have it. The motion is agreed to.
Without objection, motion to reconsider is laid on the table.
The staff is authorized to make any technical or conforming
changes.
The committee postponed further proceedings on reporting H.
Con. Res. 27, Condemning Russia's Unjust and Arbitrary
Detention of Russian Opposition Leader Vladimir Kara-Murza, who
has stood up in defense of democracy, the rule of law, and free
and fair elections in Russia, as amended, favorably to the
House in which the ayes prevailed by voice vote. The question
now occurs on reporting the measure to the House with a
favorable recommendation. Members will vote using the
electronic voting system. The clerk will open the vote.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to change
their vote? The clerk will close the vote and report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 47, the noes are
zero.
Chairman McCaul. The ayes have it. The motion is agreed to.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid on the
table. Staff is authorized to make any technical and conforming
changes.
The committee postponed further proceedings on reporting
H.R. 6603, the No Technology for Terror Act, as amended,
favorably to the House in which the ayes prevailed by voice
vote. The question now occurs on reporting the measure to the
House with a favorable recommendation. Members will vote using
the electronic voting system. The clerk will open the vote.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to change
their vote? The clerk will close the vote and report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 45, the noes are two.
Chairman McCaul. The ayes have it. The motion is agreed to.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid on the
table.
The committee postponed further proceedings on the roll
call vote on Amendment No. 69 offered by Representative Self to
the Smith amendment in the nature of a substitute to H. Res. 82
on which the noes have prevailed by voice vote. The question
now occurs on agreeing to the amendment. Members will vote
using the electronic voting system. The clerk will open the
vote.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to change
their vote? The clerk will close the vote and report the tally.
Have all members voted? How is Mrs. Wagner recorded?
The Clerk. Mrs. Wagner is not recorded.
Chairman McCaul. OK. I will do this again. Have all members
voted? Does any member wish to change their vote? The clerk
will close the vote and report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 25, the noes are 22.
Chairman McCaul. The ayes have it, and the amendment is
agreed to.
There being no further amendments, the question now occurs
on the amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by
Representative Smith, No. 97. All those in favor, signify by
saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
amendment is agreed to.
There being no further amendments, I move the committee
report H. Res. 82, as amended, to the House with a favorable
recommendation. All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
motion is agreed to. A recorded vote has been requested.
Members will vote using the electronic voting system. The clerk
will open the vote.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to change
their vote? The clerk will close the vote and report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 26, the noes are 21.
Chairman McCaul. The ayes have it. Without objection, the
motion to reconsider is laid on the table. The measure is
ordered favorably reported, as amended, as a single amendment
in the nature of a substitute. The staff is authorized to make
any technical and conforming changes.
The committee postponed further proceedings on reporting
H.R. 6046, the Standing Against Houthi Aggression Act, as
amended, favorably to the House on which the ayes prevailed by
voice vote. The question now occurs on reporting the measure to
the House with a favorable recommendation. The members will
vote using the electronic voting system. The clerk will open
the vote.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to change
their vote? The clerk will close the vote and report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 34, the noes are 13.
Chairman McCaul. The ayes have it. The motion is agreed to.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid on the
table. The measure is ordered favorably reported, as amended,
as a single amendment in the nature of a substitute. Staff is
authorized to make any technical and conforming changes.
The committee postponed further proceedings on the roll
call vote on Amendment No. 63 offered by Representative Meeks
to H.R. 7122 on which the noes have prevailed by voice vote.
The question now occurs on agreeing to the amendment. Members
will vote using the electronic voting system. The clerk will
open the vote.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to change
their vote? The clerk will close the vote and report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 21, the noes are 26.
Chairman McCaul. The noes have it, and the amendment is not
agreed to.
The committee postponed further proceedings on the roll
call vote on Amendment No. 48 offered by Representative Manning
to H.R. 7122 on which the noes have prevailed by voice vote.
The question now occurs on agreeing to the amendment. Members
will vote using the electronic voting system. The clerk will
open the vote.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to change
their vote? The clerk will close the vote and report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 22, the noes are 27.
Chairman McCaul. The noes have it, and the amendment is not
agreed to.
There being no further amendments, I move that the
committee report H.R. 7122, as amended, to the House with a
favorable recommendation. All those in favor, signify by saying
aye.
All those opposed, signify by saying no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
motion is agreed to. A recorded vote has been requested.
Members will vote using the electronic voting system. The clerk
will open the vote.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to record or
change their vote? There being no further amendments, I move
the committee report H.R.--I'm sorry. The clerk will close the
vote and report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 30, the noes are 19.
Chairman McCaul. The ayes have it. Without objection, the
motion to reconsider is laid on the table. The motion is
ordered favorably reported, as amended, as a single amendment
in the nature of a substitute.
The committee postponed further proceedings on reporting
H.R. 7152, the Divided Families National Registry Act, as
amended, favorably to the House on which the ayes prevailed by
voice vote. The question now occurs on reporting the measure to
the House with a favorable recommendation. Members will vote
using the electronic voting system. The clerk will open the
vote.
Have all members voted? Does any member wish to change
their vote? The clerk will close the vote and report the tally.
The Clerk. On this vote, the ayes are 49, the noes are
zero.
Chairman McCaul. The ayes have it, and the motion is agreed
to. Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid on the
table. This concludes consideration of the measures noticed by
the committee for today. The committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:57 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

VOTES

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE MCCAUL

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

MATERIALS FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE PHILLIPS

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

MARKUP SUMMARY

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
